AN Earnest Call TO FAMILY-RELIGION: OR, A DISCOURSE CONCERNING FAMILY WORSHIP.
Being the Substance of Eighteen Sermons.

Preached by SAMVEL SLATER, A.M. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside; and John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1694.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. To that Church of Christ which Meets at Crosby-Square
in London.
Dearly Beloved in our Lord,
OUR Blessed God is what he was, and will be what he is, without variableness
or shadow of turning, Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, is the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever; Godliness also is the same in its Nature and Work, in
its Excellency and Glory. The Reward which follows after is the same
likewise, no less than an undisturbed rest, and joy unspeakable, a Crown of
Life, an exceeding weight of Glory, together with a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken. But alas! alas! there is a wonderful abatement and decay in the
Practical part of Religion, and an apparent vast difference between the
generality of Professors at this day, and those who lived in former times. The
Sun has gone ten degrees backward, we have quarrelled and, fought, disputed,
and wrangled the life and power of Godliness almost out of the Nation. There is
indeed something of an empty formal Religion abroad, but there is very little
or none of the Truth and Power at home. There is so little done for God in the
Houses of many who call themselves Christians, that one would take them not for
Christians, but Atheists, and conclude them without God in the World, yea, and
that altogether; for there is no Praying in their Families, no Reading of the
Scriptures, no Singing of Psalms, no Repeating of Sermons, no Catechizing of
young ones, who would not take these for Heathens, if they did not call
themselves something else?

It was certainly of God, and I hope in Love to this poor, but dear City (the
place of my Nativity) that there lately was such a ready and general agreement
among the Dissenting Ministers, at the same time in their several Congregations
to Preach up Family-Piety, and Worshipping of God. That very thing afforded to
me great matter of rejoicing, and no small ground of hope that God will not yet
break up House, nor deprive us of his Gospel-presence, which is far more
desirable, because incomparably more worth than all the World; for if the Ark
be lost, other things will go with it; but what ever else remains, we may well
write Ichabod upon London, and if there, then upon England, for the Glory is
departed from them. But amidst the bad Symptoms that are among us, there are
two of a benign and kind aspect, viz. the Magistrates encouraging the
suppression of Profaneness, and the Ministers endeavoring the advancement of
Godliness; among the rest of my Brethren I applied my self to the work, looking
up to the ever blessed God for assistance, without whom I know my self able to
do nothing; but he was not wanting to his poor unworthy Servant, but graciously
pleased to come in, and make his power known.

Before I had waded far and Preached often upon the Subject, I heard many were
much affected, and several of you signified your desire (wherein as you said,
you were not alone) that when this Discourse was finished it might be
published. I am not so foolish as to be ambitious of appearing in Print, that
indeed is Vainglory. I have also reason to know how difficult a a work it is
for him who has his full load already, to prepare so many Sermons for the
Press, and to be in daily expectation of Dunning by the Printer, yet could I
not find in my heart to deny you, from and for whom I have so great a dearness
of affection. Your desire could not but obtain being armed and backed with
powerful Considerations, for it could not but be very pleasant to me to hear
that wholesome Truths and Counsels dish'd in by me, though poorly dressed by so
mean a Cook, should as savoury Meat, find so great acceptance, and be so very
sweet to your taste; also it delighted me to argue and conclude thus. Surely
these my Friends that are so pleased with the Doctrine, are not strangers to
the Practice, but they and their Houses do serve the Lord. And there was a
third thing, which like a dead weight carried it, it perfectly conquered all my
aversness, gained my consent, and of unwilling rendered me free; viz. Your
confident persuasion that the good this Discourse will do, will abundantly
compensate the pains that I must necessarly take about it, not liking the
bitterness of Passive Obedience, and letting it alone as long as I can, I was
hereby brought to be at perfect peace with a Non-Resistance in the present case.

I have now done my Part, and the Printer his; your desire is accomplished, the
Book you see abroad, may your hope and expectation be accomplished too. May
these Sermons of mine, so far as they convey the truths of God, be as sweet to
all that shall read them, as they were to you in the hearing, though as I must
confess, that is too great a wish, a thing scarce to be looked for; since as a
late Worthy Writer observed, there is as much difference between Sermons
Preached, and Sermons Printed, as there is between Milk in the Breast, and Milk
in the Bottle. Yet I am sure of this, that they will be full out as sweet to
them that shall read them, as they were to you when you heard them, if the
Divine and All-quickning Spirit will graciously vouchsafe to take them and
Preach them to their hearts; and of this also I am no less sure, that they will
be found having in them a delicious sweetness, by all those upon whom they
shall fall with an overcoming power. And that is it, yea, that is it which I do
heartily beg, and gladly would obtain for you that are my Charge, viz. That all
those Scripture Truths, which being sent of my great and glorious Master I
bring you, and in which your precious Souls are most nearly and everlastingly
concerned, may come not in word only, but in power; you, like Metal cast into
the Mould, being delivered up to that form of Doctrine which is delivered unto
you, in order to your being informed by it, conformed to it, and transformed by
the renewing of the Spirit of your Mind, and so be able to say, this is true in
the Scripture, and it is so in me; this I hear, and this I feel, this God has
spoken, and this I believe; thus I am commanded, and thus I live, thus I do.
This, and that, and the other the Ministers of Christ tell me is my Duty, and
prove it such, and my Conscience bears me witness that it is my delight.

The good Lord hide Pride from every one of you, it is so odious a thing, that
it looks well in no body; may you be as knowing, as loving, and as well
accomplished a People as any in the World. May you have the dew of Heaven, and
the fatness of the Earth, may you be richly stored with grace, and come behind
in no gift, thoroughly furnished for every good work, yea, and filled with all
the fullness of God; but withal, be very humble, great in value and usefulness,
but little in your own eyes, that will not be to your loss, but much to your
advantage, for God gives grace to the Humble, and no less to your Honor;
Humility eclipseth and obscures no Man's glory, but sets a singular luster and
gloss upon it, making it shine with a greater brightness. Holy and Humble Paul
was one of the most Eminent Servants God ever had in the World, and his
speaking of himself as being less than the least of all Saints, detracted
nothing from his real worth, nor did it hinder his being equal with the chief
of the Apostles, if we may speak of a chief among them; among whom our Lord
appointed a Parity; at that time there was no such thing as a Pope.

I would not speak one word to swell or puff any of you up, if you study and
know your selves as you ought, you will soon find defects, infirmities,
corruptions enough to keep the best of you down, yet I cannot but say you are
my Joy, and Crown, and as I do every day make mention of you in my Prayers; so
I can, and frequently do bless and give thanks to my God upon my remembrance of
you, and that upon sundry accounts, which I speak of for your encouragement,
and the promoting your farther progress. I have reason to hope it is the true
grace of God in which you stand, and as you have a Name to live, so you have
been made partakers of the Life it self; for as you do all make a good and
excellent Profession; so I know none of you that stain and contradict it by a
scandalous walking. You have been steadfast in shaking and falling Times; some
did indeed go off in the Days of sore Persecution, not having on the whole
Armor of God, nor being able to endure Hardship as the good Soldiers of
Jesus, but they were few, so few that we did not miss them, we do not want
them; the Lord grant that they may find Mercy of the Lord at the great Day, I
shall be glad to meet them in Heaven. You have received and ow^^d me as an
Angel or Messenger of God, and the delight you take in my Ministry has
evidenced it self (and still does) by your constant attendance upon it. In this
Sceptick Age you have been Wise to Sobriety; in this Erroneous Age you have
been sound in the Faith, neither admiring the pretended new Lights, nor falling
in love with those old rotten Errors which some have dig'd out of their
Graves: In this dividing Age you have kept the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond
of Peace; you are not for taking up a Yoke of Bondage, but for standing fast in
that Liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, yet no Friends to
Licenciousness. While you flee to the Gospel for Relief and Comfort, you own
the Law for your Rule, you do not divide Christ, but take him just as God has
exalted him, and does offer him, Prince as well as Savior; and not only to be
an underling to pay your Debts, and bear your Burdens, and die for your
Offenses, but likewise to be a King upon his Throne Commanding and Ruling you.
And as you rely only upon him for Righteousness, so you desire to imitate and
follow him in his Holiness, and to show forth his Virtues, who has called you
out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. Am I mistaken in any of you as to
these things, I hope I am not, the Lord grant I may not; I know of no wild
Notions, nor loose Opinions among you, may there never be any, but all of you
have (as one said) Heads well-hearted and Hearts well-headed, and so a
soundness throughout. May you approve your selves to God and Men, being good
Christians, good Subjects, good Citizens, good Husbands and Wives, good Parents
and Children, good Masters, Mistresses and Servants, good Friends and
Neighbors, filled with the Holy Ghost and Goodness, and all the Fruits of
Righteousness; Love God, Father, Son, and Spirit with a supreme, entire, and
most intense love; think the most vehement flame of your love too cold here:
Love the Church of God, study, seek, and pray for her good: Love all that love
the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, though in some things they differ from you,
let not that cause any alienation in Affection so long as they hold the Head,
count them Brethren, and be dear over them as such; love one another, help one
another, quicken, strengthen, comfort one another, provoke one another to Love
and good Works; rejoice in one another Mercies, sympathize with one another
Afflictions, bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Most dearly Beloved, my Mouth is open to you, and my Heart enlarged. The great
God knows I do as really desire and pray for the Prosperity and Salvation of
you all, and of all yours as I do mine own; and in the following Sermons I have
commended no other things to you than what I believe and know to be both your
Duty and Interest, and would my self be found in the practice of; if we call
our selves Christians let us be Christians, Israelites, and Israelites indeed;
what signifies the Name without the thing? Gird up, I beseech you, gird up the
Loins of your Minds, make no trifling Objections, listen not, yield not to any
wicked Temptations, but apply to your Work; act for God in your Places to the
utmost; shine bright in your own Sphere, keep your Hearts continually in an
holy frame fit for Communion with God in Duty; be not now backward to it, nor
hereafter weary of it.

Though you have but a little stock of Knowledge and Parts, fall to Trading and
you will increase it. Be not discouraged because you cannot do what you would,
God accepts of the Will; when the Disciples were offended with a good Woman,
Christ's plea for her was, She has done what she could. The Lord told his
Servant, he had been faithful in his little, and thereupon gave him an entrance
into his Joy. Your little will find great acceptance, and be rewarded with
great Blessings, so it be your Best. In short, would you stem the Tide of
Profaneness which breaks in upon us with fury? Would you save the Life of
Practical Religion which is brought very low, and in a deep Consumption? Would
you be instrumental for the preserving of a Seed to serve the Lord? Would you
be able to give a good account of your selves in the Day when God shall come to
Reckon with you? And do you desire the present and future welfare of those
precious Souls which are committed to your Care, then observe the Rules, and
follow the Counsels of God which are given in this Book.

And the God of Heaven accept you in the Beloved, grant your Petitions, water
the Seed you sow, and bless both you and yours, and make you Blessings to one
another, and all of you Blessings to the City, and the Nation. I do heartily
pray for you; I need your Prayers too, and earnestly beg them; do not deny me,
do not forget me, in praying for me you pray for your selves. The gracious
Goodwill of him that dwelt in the Bush be upon you, let God compass you about
with his Favor as with a Shield, and make you Rich in Blessings of the Right
Hand, and of the Left: And Oh! that you and I may at last meet in Heaven, and
there, together with the Saints and Angels, Sing Eternal Allelujahs to God and
the Lamb; so prays

Your Souls Friend and Servant in our Dearest Lord; Samuel Slater.
From my Study, Mar. 23. 1694.
Family Worship.
Joshua 24, 15. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
THese are the words of Joshua, once the Servant, afterward the Successor of
Moses, a great Man, and good too, and this is an excellent pair, how sweet and
amiable in a conjunction, like pure White and Red, they make a curious
complexion, and render a person indeed Noble and Illustrious. Goodness with
Greatness is like a rich and sparkling Diamond set in a Ring of Gold. This
good and great Man had followed the Lord, not halting nor by halves, but fully;
and it pleased God, who takes special notice of his faithful Servants, to
reward him by exalting him; Moses having, as an Instrument in the Divine hand,
brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and carried them through a wast
and howling Wilderness to the very Borders of the promised Land: God called him
off, having no more for him to do, commanded him to go up to Mount Nebo, and
die there, in order to his happy Transportation to a better Country, the
Celestial Canaan, the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, and chose Joshua for
the Man that must complete that great and glorious work, and put that beloved
People into the actual possession of that good Land.

This being done, and Joshua now grown old, and finding himself after so many
tedious Journeys and hard Labors sit and ready to go to his Long home, to his
Everlasting Rest, He gathered all the Tribes of Israel, and the Chief Men among
them unto Sechem; if any ask why thither? I answer; it is by some conceived,
and not without an appearance of reason, because after that Abraham had in
obedience to the Divine Command, gone out of his own Country, and from his
Fathers house, God did there first appear to him, and gave him the Promise of
the Land of Canaan, and upon that he did there first build an Altar unto the
Lord, as you may read in Genesis 12.6, 7. And also because not long after their
entrance into the Promised Land Joshua himself had in Mount Ebal, which was
near unto Shechem, built an Altar unto the Lord God of Israel, and wrote upon
the Stones a Copy of the Law of Moses, and so renewed the Covenant between God
and them, as we find, Josh. 8.30, 31, 32. But that may suffice to be spoken as
to the reasons of his gathering them unto Shechem.

Having there assembled them, He began with giving them in the Name of the
Lord, a very short, but pithy Narrative of those great and wonderful things
which had been by God done for them all along from the mercy that had been
shown unto Abraham their Father to his giving them the Land of Canaan according
as he had promised. And then in his own Name He followed that Relation with a
very serious and warm Exhortation grounded thereupon; verse 14. Now therefore
fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and truth, and put away the Gods
which your Fathers served on the other side of the Flood, and in Egypt, and
serve ye the Lord. He knew what an uncertain and fickle People they were, and
so did endeavor to fix them; and if they had any ingenuity* any sense of
kindness, to bind them to God with these Silken Cords of Love and Goodness.

In this 15th verse He bids them choose, in case they did not like what he had
propounded, then think of one under whose Government and Protection they might
promise themselves a secure and comfortable Being. If it seem evil to you to
serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve, whether the Gods which
your Fathers served that were on the other side of the Flood, or the Gods of
the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell; which you must not look upon as a
permission or allowance, or leaving them to themselves, as in a matter
indifferent, whether they would worship the true God, or turn Idolaters: For in
the preceding Chapter he had earnestly persuaded and charged them, verse. 6. to
be very courageous to keep and do all that is written in the Book of the Law of
Moses, not turning aside therefrom, neither to the right hand nor to the left:
And verse. 7. That they come not among the Nations, that remain among them,
neither make mention of the Name of their Gods, nor cause to swear by them,
neither serve them, nor bow themselves to them. But verse. 8. cleave unto the
Lord Jehovah their God: And v. 11. to take good heed unto themselves, that they
lived the Lord their God. And again in this Chapter, v. 14. Fear the Lord, and
serve him in sincerity and truth. But in this way he endeavors sweetly to
insinuate, and to get within them, and by an holy Art prevail with them to
oblige and bind themselves to God: very well knowing that People care not for
doing what they are forced to do; but without a blush depart from that which
they were brought to by mere constraint; whereas they are pleased with their
own choice, and are most likely to stand firm to that unto which they have in
Judgment, and upon due deliberation engaged themselves. In order therefore to a
wise Election, which they may never have cause with sorrow and shame to reflect
upon, he does on the one hand set before them the greatness, excellency and
glory of God, together with those many and singular advantages that will accrue
to them who are his faithful Servants; and on the other hand he sets before
them the vanity and baseness of Idols, the folly of those that own and serve
them, and the mischiefs which do pursue them, and will for certain overtake
them; and hereupon after a due weighing and comparing of things he would have
them make their choice of one or the other, being guided therein by right
reason, and their true Interest. He knew, that God would have his People serve
him out of choice; as he chooses them, so he would be chosen by them. And for a
motive and inducement, he acquaints them with his own fixed and unalterable
resolution, whom they had by long experience found to be a gracious and holy
Man, a prudent and loving Governor, a valiant and successful Warrior. And we
may conceive him speaking thus to them; O ye seed of Abraham! if ye be given to
change, so am not I: If after all that God has been to you, and done for you,
you will be so ungrateful as to forget and forsake him, so will not I. He has
all along been so gracious a God to us all, that he shall be my God for ever
and ever: I am so well, so happy with him, that I cannot mend my self: I can be
no where better, no where so well, therefore I will abide with him; as in the
Text, I and my house will serve the Lord.


This was his holy resolve, and to this he would stand, there could be no
reason to the contrary; and as for the example of Apostates, it should wi^h
with him be of no significancy, nor would he be carried down by the stream. He
was, and would be for God, be they for whom they would. In the words there are
these things observable.

First, The thing he resolved upon, which he had in his heart and purpose; that
was, to serve, while others of towering and ambitious spirits are altogether for
commanding and Lording it, this good Man was for serving. Though he was a
Prince, a great General, yet did he not look upon it as a disparagement and
below him to be a Servant. No more did holy David afterward, the King of
Israel, even when he had been called from following the Sheep, and placed upon
the Throne, he knew how still to serve, and loved to do it; the King of Israel
thought it no dishonor to serve the God of Israel, and therefore he with joy
took upon him the name, Servant* reckoning it his highest and most honorable
Title, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant. This
service is made up of Acts of Worship performed to the Divine Majesty, and a
Life of Obedience to the Divine Will. In it there is Liberty, yea most perfect
Freedom; those that are strangers to it are the worst of Slaves; in it is the
highest honor. To be one of God's Servants, is more noble than to be one of
the World's Monarchs: And in it is the greatest comfort, Isa. 65.13, 14. Thus
says the Lord God, Behold, my Servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry;
behold, my Servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my Servants
shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; behold, my Servants shall sing for joy
of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of
spirit.

Secondly; Here is the Person to whom the Service is to be performed; not to
Idols, not to Devils, not to Sin, the wages of which is death; not to diverse
Lusts, which are tyrannical and cruel, but Jehovah, that is the word in the
Original, the Lord, the Lord of Lords, the Lord of Life and Glory, the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Lord God of Israel, whose Commandments are not
grievous, but his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light, his Yoke being lined
with his Love, and his Burden having Wings.

Thirdly; Here are the Persons, by whom this Service is to be performed unto
this God; We, i. e. I and my house; I my self, not only call others to the
work, but also set my own hand to it, lead them the way: I will serve the Lord,
and all that are mine shall do it together with me. Rather than not serve God
at all, he would serve him alone. Joshua would leave Israel if they would leave
God. But he would not serve God alone so long as he could have company, so long
as there were any that he could influence, any that he could rule and command;
they that will live in my house shall serve my God; they that would enjoy the
comfort of my house, shall join in the work and duty of my house; We will serve
the Lord. Exemplum proponitur Gubernandae Familiae, says Masius. Here is set
before us an excellent Pattern, or good Example for the ordering and governing
of a Family. Oh that it may be followed by all those who call themselves
Christians, and own Jehovah for the Lord their God! That a Christian Profession
and Practical Atheism may not meet in them. The Doctrine which I raise from
these words, and offer to your most serious consideration as the Truth of God,
to be believed by you, received in Love, and obeyed from the Heart, is this.

Doct. It is the great duty of all those whom God has made Heads or Governors
of Families, to set up Religious Duties and the Worship of God in their
respective Families.

Oh that God would so assist and succeed me in the handling hereof, and
accompany what shall delivered with such power upon your Consciences and
Hearts, as by that time I have finished these Discourses, there may not be one
Prayerless Family belonging to this numerous Congregation! How greatly then
would my Soul bless God, and with what comfort and joy should I look upon you!

It is both a wicked and miserable thing for any to be without God in the
World, Ephesians. 2.12. He is so great, so necessary a good, that nothing can
possibly supply the want of him. Notwithstanding Moon and all the Stars, it is
night with us when once the Sun is departed off our Horizon. God is absolutely
necessary for us, and our All is due to him. Single persons must know it to be
their duty and interest to serve and worship God in their Capacities, as
Publicly in the Gates of Sion, which God loves, in the Assemblies of the
Saints, unto which they ought to join themselves as followers of the same Lord,
and Members of the same Body; so singly and alone, let their Chambers and
Closets be Witnesses for them that they do not live in an ungrateful and wicked
unmindfulness of God. Let Children begin betimes with God. Let young Men and
Maids have early converses with God, waiting upon him, and walking with him:
And when they come to alter their condition, and to have Yoke-fellows and
Families, let them be careful to set up the Worship of God in them; though let
them still remember to keep up their retirements. It is not enough for them to
worship God in their Families, but they ought to do it in their Chambers too;
nor is it enough for them to worship God in their Chambers, but they ought to
do it in their Families too. Let not these jostle nor exclude one another, but
as Sister-duties live sweetly together under the same Roofs. In private Duties
the holy Soul has the greater liberty, from Family Duties God has the greater
Honor. Secret duties are plainer Evidences of Sincerity, Family and public
duties are of larger influence and usefulness. As for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord: We will unite in his Service, not only approve of it, or
consent to it, but join in it. Take here with you these two things.

First; The Service of God should begin as soon as the Family begins. This I
desire Young ones to consider of, who are entering into the World, and setting
upon Housekeeping; lay this down as an undeniable Maxim, that it is best
beginning with God; so to do is both duty and wisdom. That Man who does not
carry God along with him, is like to miscarry by the way, and at last lie down
in sorrow: He opens his door to the Devil (that will bring very bad company
along with him) who at his first entrance upon Housekeeping shuts God out, and
turns his back upon him, or at least does not invite him. It is not feasting,
not eating and drinking together (though that is lawful and friendly) but Prayer
that will prove the best House-warming.

Secondly; As it is good beginning with God, so it is as good holding on: To be
weary of well doing argues a bad temper of Soul; to throw up duty is sin, and
shows plainly that a person was never upright in it, never hearty to it, never
really tasted the sweetness of it, Job 27.10. Will the Hypocrite delight
himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God? No, neither; and because
not the former, therefore not the latter, because God is not his delight,
Prayer will not be his constant business; he has in his heart no suitableness
to God, and therefore no pleasure in his Service; but such as have been sincere
in it will be steadfast, and indeed they will never find any reason for the
giving of it over. God is as full and free as ever he was, the Trade of
Godliness as safe and sure, and the returns as considerable. God can with as
much cause and boldness appeal now to those that shall desert him, and throw up
Religious Exercises, as formerly he did to ungrateful Israel, Ier. 2.5. What
iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and
have followed after vanity, and are become vain? He well knew, though he could
charge vanity and folly upon them, and make good the charge, yet they could not
justly charge iniquity upon him. And so again, verse 37. Have I been a
Wilderness unto Israel, or a Land of Darkness? No, no, not a Wilderness, but a
fruitful Field; not a Land of Darkness, but a Goshen, a Sun of Righteousness;
and such as have been indeed his Servants, have continued firm and faithful,
liking him too well, and loving him too dearly to leave him. Will ye go away?
said Christ to his Disciples; Peter desired not time to consider of it, but had
his Answer ready, which he immediately returns in the names of them all, Ioh.
6.68. Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of Eternal Life. Joshua
had served and followed God for a great many years: He was now grown old, and
his Experiences of God's care and goodness had more multiplied and encreast to
a far greater number than his days, and thereupon he saw abundant reason for
resolving to continue in his Service. And so did holy Polycarp the Disciple of
St. John, for being tempted to deny Christ, and return to Heathen Idolatry, he
briskly replied, I have served my Master Christ now these fourscore years, and
all along found him a good Master to me, therefore I will not leave him now.
And if you will believe David, he assures you they are all of the same mind,
Psalm. 84.4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee; they are and will be so, always delighting in his Work, and
always commending and glorying in their Lord. But yet for the further opening
to you the duty it self, I must acquaint you with two things which are
incumbent upon the Governors of Families, and which they are bound carefully
to look after; viz. 1. That God be served in their Families. 2. That they and
their Families do together serve him.


First; It is the duty of Family-Governours to take care that there be the
Service and Worship of God in their Families; that they themselves do serve the
Lord, and that their Children do serve him, yea and that also their Servants do
serve him. That as the precious Ointment poured out upon the Head of Aaron ran
down to the skirts of his Garments; so Religion, and at least, the outward
practices of Piety, may sweetly descend from the Head of the House to the
inferior and meanest Members of it. You, Masters, Mistresses, and Parents,
ought to take care, not only that your Children be respective and obedient to
you, nor only that your Servants be faithful to you, and industrious in their
working for you; but likewise that both the one and the other do perform their
duty to God as well as to you, and be far more ready to pass by a failure in
them with respect to your selves, than to bear with a contempt and neglect of
God. Do not only see to the feeding and clothing of your Children and
Servants, but as they are capable of receiving it, do you feed their Minds with
Knowledge, and exercise them unto Godliness; and let it not be your desire only
or chiefly that they may live well and comfortably, but that they may live
holily; that they may live like Christians, as well as like Men. The Apostle's
charge is this, Romans 12.17. Provide things honest in the sight of all men. Now
I will appeal to your Consciences, wh^^her it be not so to fear and serve God,
to pray and seek God, to worship God, to perform duty to God; this cannot but
be honest, (...), good, very good, amiable and becoming in the sight and
account of all men, except those that are Atheists, and because of their being
Atheists, do not deserve the name of Men, but have forfeited the name, since
they contradict the very Light of Nature, and run counter to the dictates of
Reason, and are sit to herd only among the Beasts. And if that notion be true
(which some have embraced, and I do not reject) that it is not Reason so much
as Religion which is the specifical Difference, and does distinguish between a
Man and a Brute, because there is something of Reason to be found in Brutes, at
least, call it by what name you please, some shadow of Reason, some
Resemblance, something that may claim a little Kindred, whereas there is not to
be found in them any thing that looks like Religion, no appearance nor
footsteeps of it; then we may very well say, without being guilty of injustice,
or doing a real injury, That Atheists do deserve, with Nebuchadnezzar, to be
driven from among Men, until they have with him learnt to own, praise, extel
and honor the King of Heaven, all whose works are Truth, and his ways
Judgment, and those that walk in Pride he is able to abase; but at the present
they are degenerate, and no better than Beasts in the mapes of Men. For they
deny a Being to him by whom all things are, to him who is the Fountain of all
Being, and the Author of their own; they do not only cast off a Religious Life,
and live without all acts of Divine Worship, but also they do, as much as in
them is, take away the Object of it, in whom they live, and move, and have
their Being, and by this one thing open a wide and effectual door to Villainies
of all sorts.

But from the Scripture last named, it is evident to all those that do believe
the Scripture, that it is your duty to provide things honest; such things as
are good and lovely. See that all in your Families be honest, that they be
honest to you and to one another, and to the Great God; that they give unto
every one their due, unto God his due; that they do not rob God, nor withold
from him that which is meet, and that is, Worship. Honor is not so due to
Parents, nor Service to Masters as Worship is to God, Ier. 10.5. Who would not
fear thee, O King of Nations, for to thee it does appertain. The fear of God is
there put not only for the Holy Affection of fear, which we should keep up all
the day, and carry with us into every place; but likewise for all Divine
Worship, which upon all accounts he may challenge at our hands: It appertains
to him, he has an undoubted right to it. For God to crown Man at first with
Glory and Honor, and make him have Dominion over the works of his hands; was
an Act of Goodness: For God to spare fallen sinful Man, to keep him out of
Hell, and afford him any comforts of Life; is an Act of Mercy, Lam. 3. It is of
the Lords Mercies we are not consumed. But for Man to Own and Honor God, to
Fear, Seek, Serve and Worship God; is an Act of Justice. And let men provide
what they will for their Families, for their Wives, Children and Servants; let
them see to it that they have all things richly to enjoy: Yet if in this one
particular they be negligent and careless, if they do not see to it, that those
who Live with them do Serve and Worship God; they do not provide that which is
Honest.

Observe the Resolution of Holy David and imitate his Example, Psalm. 101.6.
Mine Eyes shall be upon the Faithful of the Land. i. e. Good Men, that will be
every way faithful to me, and to my God as well as to me. Men that do not only
profess him, but will be true to that Profession. Men that call him Master, and
will serve him as such, that they may dwell with me; he would delight in their
company, and count them the Ornaments of his House. He that walks in a
perfect way, he shall serve me. The perfect way is the way of God's
Commandments, the Scripture way, the way of Holiness and Duty, the way
Everlasting. He that walks in such a way is a Man for me, such an one I like,
and such an one I will choose; such an one shall serve me as will serve my God
as well as me. And he had said before, verse 4. that He would not know a wicked
person. You must not understand it of a common ordinary knowledge, a nuda
scientia, bare naked knowledge, for in that sense he did, and could not but
know many, too too many; but he would not know a wicked person so as to
countenance him, not so know him as to make him his choice, and have fellowship
with him. He that does not fear God, that will not mind, serve and worship God,
that is without God in the World, may well be branded for a wicked Man; in all
companies let him go for such an one: And, says David, I will have nothing to
do with that sort of men; such a person shall be none of my Familiars, none of
my intimate Acquaintance; he shall be none of my Family, none of my Court. And
it would be well for the World, if all Princes would say the same, and be as
good as their word; if they would not know wicked persons, fewer wicked persons
would be known: Were there no wicked men in Favor at Courts, there would be
fewer in the Cities, and fewer in the Countries. But when they swarm at a
Court, they fly about, and like Locusts overspread and cover the face of a
Land.

Secondly; It is the duty of those who are Governors of Families, to take
care, and so to order things, that they and their Families together do serve
and worship God; I say, that they do it together, that it be their joint act,
and that all concur to the making up of an holy Harmony. It is not enough that
there is some Worshipping of God in the Family, but besides, over and above
that there ought to be an holy Family Worship. David says, Psalm. 133.1.
Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to walk together in Unity.
It is a very commendable and lovely thing to see the same among Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Mistresses and Maids; it is
sweet dwelling together in Unity; but it is far more pleasant and delightful to
God and all good Men, to see them dwelling and walking together in Piety. As to
live together, and love together, and eat and drink together without any
quarrels or contentions; so to read the Sacred Scriptures, and other good Books
together, and pray together, and sing Psalms together, and put forth other Acts
of Religion. In short, how good and how pleasant is it to see them living
together, not only a natural and civil Life, in Love and mutual Kindness, but
likewise a gracious and holy Life in all goodness. So much may suffice for the
opening to you, what I mean by setting up the Worship of God in Family.

Now a person would think, that such as live in London, where there is so much
Light, and plenty of Gospel-means; specially such as own a God, and call
themselves Christians, should not need many Arguments either to convince them
that this is a Duty, or to persuade them to the performance of it; but they
would of themselves at the very mentioning of the thing assent to the goodness
and reasonableness of it; that all those who do profess their believing that
there is a God, and their own standing in Relation to him, and having an
Interest him as their God, should at their hearing of Family Worship cheerfully
acknowledge it to be his due. But, alas! alas! whatever the Light does plainly
discover, and whatever their well-informed and awakened Consciences do suggest
to them, how many are there among us that imprison the Truth, and hold it in
unrighteousness! and by consequence how great is the number of them who live in
the great, if not total neglect of this excellent work? And I do not now speak
of Atheists, nor of those who are scandalously wicked and profane; for it is
not to be wondered at in them, since they have no fear of God before their Eyes.
But I and others of my Brethren are greatly mis-inform'd, if the guilt hereof
does not cleave to some, yea to many of those who profess Religion, and have
joined themselves in Communion with those who do really desire and aim at the
greatest strictness and most exact holiness; so that there is apparent
necessity of doing what we can toward the reviving of this excellent practice,
which has been by so many so unkindly, so sinfully shut out of doors. And to
this end I shall do these two things.

First; I shall prove that the setting up of the Worship of God and Religious
Exercises in Families is a Duty.

Secondly; Lay down some Arguments by which this may appear your reasonable
Service. We begin with the former, That Family Worship is a Duty; and that I
prove by these three things: The Practice of the Heathen; The Precepts of the
Scripture; And the Practice of Saints.

I. This was the Practice amongst the Heathens; though they had no more than
the dim Light of Nature, yet by that they did see this to be their Duty; These
not having the Law written, were a Law to themselves; and have done by Nature
many of the things contained in the Law, Romans 2.14. And among others this. We
find they had their Lares their Penates, such as they counted and called their
Houshold-Gods, and unto them they did offer up Sacrifices in their Families,
and unto them they did together perform acts of Religious Worship. And
therefore Prayer to God in Families, is a part of Natural Worship, because
discovered by Natural Light; and for the shameful neglect thereof the poor
blind Heathen will rise up against multitudes of the Men and Women of this
untoward Generation. Shall they be more liberal to their Gods of Dung, than we
are to the Lord of Glory? Shall they do more for the Honoring of their false
Gods, than some of us do for the living and true God who made Heaven and Earth,
and who is the Author of your Being, the God of your Comforts, and the Father
of all your Mercies; by the Hand of whose Power ye were made, and upon whose
Cost ye spend. How sore and dreadful punishment will you deserve if the very
Heathen shall condemn you! If they were more observant of their Idols than you
are of God; it will be unspeakably more tolerable for them in the Day of
Judgment than for you. Think upon and apply to your selves what the Apostle
Paul said to the wicked Jew, Romans 2.27. Shall not Uncircumcision which is by
Nature if it fulfill the Law, Judge thee who by the Letter and Circumcision do
transgress the Law? The clearer that Light is which men do enjoy, if they rebel
against it, the greater is the Sin which they commit, the greater is the guilt
which they contract, and therefore the fiercer that wrath which they deserve.

II. Family-Worshiping of God is the matter of the Precept. It is a burden, if
any will be so vile as to think or call it so, which the great God, whose we
are, has bound upon us. Let me particularly instance in Family Prayer, which
sweet and precious Incense I would gladly have all your houses perfumed daily
with. It must be granted, that it is not expressly commanded in Scripture, not
totidem verbis, in so many words, but it is included in express commands, and
from those commands, by necessary consequence it will appear to any one that
does not shut his own Eyes, to be the Mind and Will of God concerning us. For
observe:

First; We are expressly commanded to make use of all Prayer. Take notice of
that word, All, all Prayer, i. e. all kinds of holy Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. The
Apostle had before told them, they must wrestle with Principalities and Powers,
and Spiritual Wickednesses in high places; and having thereupon counseled them
to make sure of a sufficient strength, being strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, and Armor of Proof, the whole Armor of God, he does here
in this Verse advise them to a wrestling with God; and indeed it is excellent
advice; for he that can like a Prince wrestle with God in a way of
Supplication, will come off a Conqueror, when he is called out to wrestle with
Devils in a way of Opposition. Observe the words, Praying always with all
prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, and supplication for all Saints. Mark that, with all prayer. Now
there are many sorts of Prayer, namely, Ejaculatory Prayer, in which the holy
Soul shoots out a Dart to Heaven, and on a sudden lifts a Request up to God;
which may be done at any time, and in any place, in Company, at Dinner, in the
Street as you are walking, in the Shop as you are working or trading; and in
this way you may sweeten and sanctify your worldly Affairs by mingling
spiritual and gracious thoughts with them. Thus, while good old Jacob had his
Sons before him, and was telling them what should befall them in the last days;
in the midst of it his Soul got on the wing and mounted up to Heaven in that
short, but sweet expression, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy Salvation, O
Lord! and there is stated, fixed prayer, when a person does at appointed times,
and in a solemn manner set it self to pour forth its Requests before God, and
make its desires known to him. There is Public Prayer, in the Congregations
and Assemblies of the Saints, when not only two or three, but scores, hundreds,
thousands are met together in the Name of Christ, and the Minister as the Mouth
speaks to God, and the hearts of the People go along with him by a real
consent, and to his Confessions, Petitions and Thanksgivings add their Amen.
And there is Secret Prayer, performed in the greatest retirement, when a person
has withdrawn himself from all company, and no body sees nor hears, but God
alone, and so it can be more free and open, not hiding its groans from him, but
spreading all its desires before him, and acquainting him with that which it
would not have any one in the World besides to know. And then there is
Family Prayer, wherein the Governor gets the Children, and Servants, and all
the Members thereof together, and goes with them to the Throne of Grace in
order to the paying of their Homage unto God, and the obtaining from God a
blessing upon himself, and upon them. Now this kind of Prayer is in that
Scripture required as well as any other. God does here by the Apostle require
our praying with all prayer, and if with all prayer, then with Family Prayer.

Secondly; We are commanded to pray every where, 1 Timothy 5.8. I will that men
pray every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath or doubting, (...), in
every place; not only in the Temple, and in the Synagogue, but every where, in
any place where it is convenient, and you may be safe. As God is no respecter
of Persons, so not of Places, as Beggars go up down scattering their Vermin in
all places, and at every door; so you should every where be scattering your
Treasure in gracious discourses, and pouring out your Souls to God in prayer.
Now, faith famous Mr. Perkins upon this very place; if it be the duty of men to
pray every where, then certainly in their Families, where God has set them in
so near a Relation one to another.

Thirdly; We are commanded to pray continually, or to pray always; as in that
forementioned, Ephesians. 6. Praying always, with all prayer. Which words of the
Apostle we are not to understand, as if praying must ingross and take up all
our time, and we had nothing else to do, but live Drones, like a company of
lazy Beggars that will not work though they are able. Prayer indeed is a very
considerable part of a Christians duty, yet it is but a part. There are various
duties which he has to perform, and much other work of the Lord, in which he
ought to abound. There is reading of the Scriptures, singing of Psalms, hearing
the Word, serious meditation and self-examination as well as prayer. There is
instructing of Youth, and Catechizing of Children, and exhorting one another,
and provoking one another to Love and to good works, as well as praying. Yea
and there is tending of the Shop, and working in the Trade, and looking to the
Children, and washing of the house, and providing for the Family, and several
other things, and must be done. We must have respect to all Gods Commandments,
and labor to fill up our places, and to stand complete in all the will of God
concerning us. Therefore when the Apostle speaks of our praying always;
understand it thus, pray in every thing; for so we are required to do in
another Scripture; Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, i. e. with a distrustful
care, with a solicitous and anxious care, with a distracting disquieting care;
But in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving make your
requests known unto God. Pray in great things, as believing the greatness of
God's Power; and pray in little things, as believing also the extensiveness of
his Care. Pray over thy Calling, because it is not the diligent hand alone, but
the Divine Blessing with it that makes rich. Pray over your Meat and Drink, and
go not to your Tables as Swine to their Trough, knowing that Creatures cannot
befriend or serve you any further than as they are commissioned and assisted by
God. When Ministers go to study, let them pray, because it is the Spirit of
Truth that must lead them into all Truth. They will make sad work of it if God
be not with their heads in studying their Sermons, and with their mouths in
delivering them. And when People come to hear, let them pray, under and after
all our Labors; they will learn nothing to purppose, they will not be wise to
Salvation, unless they are taught of God. Thus to pray always, is to pray in
every thing.

Again; To pray always, is to pray in every condition. When you are High, as
knowing you are neither out of the reach of Trouble, nor too good to serve and
wait upon God: And when you are Low, as knowing you are not out of the reach of
the Everlasting Arms, but still there is hope in Israel concerning you. Pray in
Sickness and in Health too, for it is God that must remove the former, preserve
and continue the latter. Pray in Advrrsity, for it is God that must support and
comfort under that, and Prosperity, for it is God that must sanctify that, and
give you an heart and wisdom to improve it. Pray in Trouble, that God would not
be a Terror to you, in Danger, that he would be a Defense to you, and the Rock
of your Refuge, and in Peace, that your Halcion days may neither be overcast
nor abused. By Prayer in Adversity show your trusting in God, and believing no
case to be desperate which he will please to undertake; and by Prayer in
Prosperity, show to others your dependence upon God, and your expectations
being wholly from him; and that you live more upon a Father in Heaven, than you
do upon any, or all the Creatures here below.

Once again; Pray always, that is, pray daily, pray every day. This is to be
not only a Sabbath- days work, as I am informed, some penurious strait-lac'd
Professors make it, no, no, it ought (...) to be your every day-work. Sure I
am, there is a great deal of reason for it. We do commit sin, and contract much
guilt every day, therefore it becomes us to repent and confess, and it concerns
us to sue out our pardon every day. We have our Dangers, visible and invisible
Dangers every day, therefore should be daily hiding our selves under our
Fathers gracious wing, and craving the Divine Protection. We have Mercies every
day, a continued succession of them, an innumerable number of them; they follow
us, they load us, they compass us about, therefore we should have our
Sacrifices of Praise, and as persons of ingenuity, pay our thankful
acknowledgments to God every day. Further, we have our Wants every day, we want
our daily Bread, and our daily Pardon; we want daily Supplies. Our Cistern
would soon be empty if God should cut off the stream of his goodness, we want
daily Supports, and should quickly drop into the Grave, yea into nothing, if
God should withdraw his hand, and let go his hold of us. And we want a daily
blessing, without which all our contrivances are vain, and all our endeavors
fruitless. If God do not say, go and prosper, we had as good sit still, and
therefore there is very great reason why we should have our daily prayers. We
are commanded by our Savior to pray and not to faint; for this end he spoke a
Parable, Luke 18.1. and by the Apostle, to continue instant in prayer, Romans
12.12. that is, to pray daily, which was signified and taught by the daily
Sacrifice under the Law; concerning which you may read in Exodus 29. It is said
in the 42 verse, This shall be a continual Burnt-Offering thorow-out your
Generations, at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation before the Lord,
where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee. This shall be a continual
Burnt-Offering, this, what? If you look back to the 38th and 39th verses, you
will see; This is that which thou shall offer upon the Altar, two Lambs of the
first year day by day continually, the one Lamb thou shall offer in the
morning, and the other Lamb shall thou offer at Even. Where you may take notice
of this that the offering up of these two Lambs every day is called a continual
Burnt-Offering. And Mr. Answorth upon the place tells us, that daily Sacrifice
signified the continual sanctification of the Church through Faith in Christ
the Lamb of God, by whose mediation we and our actions are accepted of God; and
likewise he there tells us, the Hebrew Doctors say, the continual Sacrifice of
the Morning did make atonement for the sins that were done in the night, and
the Evening Sacrifices made atonement for iniquities committed in the day. Now
by a parity of Reason we may affirm, that praying every day Morning and
Envening, is praying always, or, continuing instant in prayer.

And truly this is the least you can do if you would be grateful, if you would
bring glory to God, if you would be exemplary in your places; and to do this is
good. So the holy Prophet assures us in Psalm. 92. which he entitled, A Psalm
or Song for the Sabbath Day, verse. 1. It is a good thing to give thanks unto
the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most High. This is good, there
is all good in it, honest, and profitable, and pleasant good; it is a paying of
God what we owe to him, and it will bring over advantage to us, and it carries
a great deal of sweetness along with it. But when is it good to do this? upon a
Sabbath Day, the Lord's Day, yes, it is good then, it is very good then, it is
then specially in season, because that day is given us not so much for the
outward rest of the Body, as for the inward and spiritual refreshing of the
Soul, that being taken off and set at liberty from the Labors and Toils of the
World, we may be wholly taken up with, and employed about the Service and
Worship of God; but though this be good, singularly good upon our Sabbath Days,
yet it is not good only then, for it is always good at other times as well as
then; so the same Psalmist assures us in the next Verse; To show forth thy
loving kindness in the morning, and and thy faithfulness every night. Mark that
word, every, every night, and by consequence every morning, day by day; in the
morning, because then the mind is more fresh, and free, and lively, not yet
entangled with, nor deprest and fettered with secular Affairs, but more fit to
wait upon God, and engage to holy works, which call for, and deserve the best
and happiest frame. And in the night, the pleasant peace, stilness and silence
whereof does render it very accommodate to, and proper for the most sacred,
serious and solemn exercises. In the morning prayer should open the door to
business; give your first visit to God, who is your best Friend, and at Evening
let Prayer lock up the door and draw the Curtain. Before the Body lies down in
its Bed, let the Soul return unto its Rest. This is a most excellent way for
you to enjoy your selves and your God too; a most excellent way to bring down
from Heaven a Blessing upon your Labors in the day, and to put a sweetness and
refreshing into your sleep at night. In this way you commit your selves and
your all to God, and engage God for you.

III. Family-worshipping of God has been the practice of Holy men in all Ages.
Saints standing upon Record in the Scriptures have sough^ and served God in
their Families, and with them; and so have all others in succeeding
Generations, who have been sound both in Head and Heart, and acted by right
Principles. They have loved the work, and delighted in the performance of it,
out of Conscience and Choice. As for those Persons, whose Heads have been
Flie-blown, and their mnds corrupted with Error, they are to be the Objects of
our Compassion and Pity; and the good Lord cause his Light to shine into their
Minds in order to their better information, and the reducing them from the
Error of their way; but their practices are by no means to be made use of as
your Directory, or followed as your Pattern. For if any have imbibed false
notions, it is no wonder that their lives and actions are crooked and
irregular, shamefully deficient in some things, and no less extravagant in
others. Let us look to the precious and eminent Saints of God, those that lived
and died in the Faith, and obtained a good report. You are commanded to be
followers of them who through Faith and Patience have inherited the Promises,
who are now possessed of those great things which they before lived in the
belief and joyful expectation of, who were here graciously accepted of God, and
are now received and glorified by him. Let you and me, my dearly Beloved,
follow them, and tread in their steps. Keep the same way now, for it is the way
Everlasting, and turn not aside from that, neither to the right hand nor to the
left, and equal their pace; make as much haste as the best of them did,
considering that your time is as uncertain as theirs, and it may be shorter;
only walk with circumspection, not blindfold, avoiding those things which were
blameworthy in them, for even they were but Men, and that, imperfect Men,
compast about with infirmities, having in them flesh as well as spirit. Imitate
them therefore in that which was good in them, and will be so in you, and in
nothing else. I may very well apply that of Paul to the present case, and let
you and me mind it as our Rule, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, and were so in them, in all, or
in any of them, think of those things, and go you and do the like: so long as
they wrote fair imitate them, but beware of their blots. I am, and oh that all
professing Religion would be for the reviving of the old godliness. Primitive
Government in Churches, and Primitive Godliness in Christians are like old
Gold, the best; Ier. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand there in the ways and
see, and ask for the old paths where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest to your Souls. The old way is the good way, meddle not with new
upstart Doctrines and Practices, that is best which is eldest. Now then come we
to the Business before us, upon enquiry we shall find that the setting up of
Prayer and other Religious Exercises in the Family was the good old way, that
way in which those precious Saints walked here upon Earth, who at last got
safely to Heaven, and whose Prayers are changed for Eternal Allelujahs. I will
not multiply Instances, but bring three or four out of the Old and New
Testaments, and in the Mouth of so many Witnesses I hope you will look upon the
thing as evident and established.

First; I Appeal to you, Was not this the way in which this great and excellent
Person Joshua walked? He was a Person that God put great Honor upon, he was
the Man that must give Israel Possession of the Land of Promise, and this was
his way. He had walked in it, and he was not ashamed to own it before all
Israel, both the good and the bad, yea, to declare openly unto them his fixed
and immovable resolution of persevering therein. This is plain in the Text, As
for me and my house we will serve the Lord; not I alone, but I and they too, I
with them, whoever was or would be of his House should serve his God, and join
with him in Family Duties.

Secondly; Let us look some hundred of years before Joshua, and consider the
practice of Abraham, who was called the Friend of God, and the Father of the
Faithful. A most remarkable Person, whose Children we shall all of us be
willing and glad to be found at the last and great Day, in order to which we
are concerned to have and be expressive of his Spirit, and tread in his steps:
Now I desire that all of us who are Governors of Families would seriously
consider what God says of him, Genesis 18.19. The Lord said, shall I hide from
Abraham that thing which I do? I know him, that he will command his Children,
and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. I shall
have occasion to make use of this Scripture more than once for several
purposes. That which I do at present observe from it is, That there was
Government kept up in Abraham 's Family, and that the gracious Principles, by
which he was acted, led him thereunto, and that thing was very acceptable and
pleasing to God; God knew that he would do so, and he knew it with a knowledge
of approbation. Abraham knew his place, that God had made him Lord and King in
his own House, and he would use and exercise that power and aunhority, with
which as such he was invested. He would command his Children and his Household;
not only wish and desire it, nor only persuade and exhort to it, but command
it. Now I think we may from hence without the least suspicion of violence or
unfair dealing draw this as a good and necessary Consequence; That since
Abraham did command in his House as a King, he also would teach and instruct
them as a Prophet, though there be many in the World who love Domination, that
do not care to take the trouble and pains of Instruction; but doubtless Abraham
being so good a Man was none of them: He took care that those who were under
his Roof should know the way of the Lord. He would teach them that good way,
for it is certain, had there not been due means used for the making of them to
know it, it had been a vain and foolish absurd thing in him to command them to
keep it. Afterward we find that Moses did first teach, and then charge, Deuteronomy.
4.5, 6. Behold, I have taught you Statutes and Judgments even as the Lord my
God commanded me, that ye should so do in the Land whither ye go to possess it,
keep therefore and do them.

And I would ask whether we can rationally think that Abraham would command his
Children and Household to keep the way, and while he was so doing not keep it
himself. Our Lord Jesus does indeed charge the Scribes and Pharisees who sat in
Moses Seat, with binding heavy burdens, and grievous to be born; and laying
them on men's shoulders, when they themselves would not move them with one of
their fingers: But Abraham without doubt would not only move his Finger and
Hand toward this burden of Duty, but also with all his Heart put his Shoulder
under it, not counting it grievous, but pleasant and delightful; and as he
instructed them by his teaching, and obliged them by his command, so he would
sweetly allure and draw them by his example; for otherwise we may well think,
and he might well fear that his Counsels and Commands, though loving and
reasonable would be lost, and not have their desired effect; for they might in
such a case judge they had enough to excuse and warrant their not following his
Counsel, and not obeying his Command, because though their Father and Master
did order them to do so* yet he would not do it himself. There are indeed
Parents will teach their Children sobriety, but are drunk themselves; command
them chastity, but are filthy and unclean themselves, these pull down with one
hand what they seem to build with the other. Abraham, I doubt not, would
practice what he taught, and tread the way he would have them to go in.

Thirdly; Did not Queen Esther do the same. The Case of the Jews was very sad,
Haman being advanced by Aloashuerus, and set above all the Princes, Mordecai
knowing him an Amalekite, would not bow unto him, nor do him any reverence;
this Affront put the Man into a rage, and upon the study of Revenge, Mordecai
single and alone was too inconsiderable and mean a prey for him to stoop to,
therefore he laid a cursed Plot for the destroying all the Jews that were
thoroughout the whole Kingdom, and it was very like to take; an Order was
obtained for the destroying, killing and causing to perish all Jews both young
and old, little Children and Women in one day, this set them all upon fasting,
and weeping, and wailing, and many lay in Sackcloth and Ashes. Mordecai sent to
Esther word of this, charging her to go in unto the King, to make Supplication
unto him, and to make request before him for her people, threatening her that in
case she did altogether hold her peace, enlargement and deliverance should
arise unto the Jews from another place, but she and her Fathers House should be
destroyed. God would take care of his people, but her timerousness and neglect
would issue in her own ruin: Observe now the Answer which hereupon she returned
to him, Esther 4.16. Go gather together all the Jews that are present in
Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, day nor
night, I also and my Maidens will fast likewise, and so will I go in to the
King, which is not according to the Law, and if I perish I perish. Grotius
says, These were two Maidens that waited upon the Queen, one of them gave her
her Hand for a support when she went abroad, and the other held up her Train,
and there is no question to be made, but they were either natural Jews or
Proselytes, i. e. such as had been brought off from Gentilism and Converted to
the Jewish Religion, and she and they fasted together. I and my Maidens will
fast, not I alone, but I and they; and I am very confident, you all will
readily grant it was a Religious Fast which they then kept; they did not only
chasten their Bodies (as David phras'd it) by abstaining so long from all kinds
of Meat and Drink, but they did worship God together, and sought him together,
and joined their Hearts and Powers in a mighty wrestling with him for their own
Lives, and the Lives of their People which were in such eminent and imminent
danger, and which would certainly be cut off, unless God did by some wonderful
Providence interpose for the preventing it. But once more.

Fourthly; We have the precious Example of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom we are
bound to imitate, as he was in the world so should we be in the world, 1 John
4.17. and we should run the Race that is set before us looking to Jesus, Heb.
12.1, 2. not only for encouragement, but likewise for direction. Now he had a
Family, his Twelve Disciples were his Family, and he prayed and gave thanks at
his Meats, and also at other times, and he prayed not only for them, but with
them, Luke 9.16. As he was alone praying his Disciples were with him. Here is a
seeming contradiction, that Christ should be said to be alone, and yet his
Disciples with him, but there is no real one for that word, alone must be
understood, as intimating no more than the multitudes being departed from him;
when the Miracle of Feeding Five Thousand Men with Five Loaves and Two Fishes
had been wrought, they having what they came for, the filling of their Bellies,
and satisfying their Curiosity, withdrew themselves and went away, and they
being gone he went to Prayer, which was a work he greatly delighted in, and in
and at that Prayer his Disciples were with him.

I hope it may without vanity be said, That in what I have spoken to you upon
this Subject there is enough said for the satisfaction of any sober, serious
and conscientious Christian* that the setting and keeping up of the
Family Worship of God is the Duty of those that are the Masters or Governors
of Families. Wilful Cavillers against plain Truths are not worthy nor fit to be
dealt with; time and pains bestowed upon them is merely thrown away: Therefore
as for those wicked Persons, who are either of Atheistical Principles, not
believing, but denying the Being of a God, or of desperately Profane Spirits,
that value neither his Love nor his Wrath, and so have no fear of him before
their Eyes; I do not now in these Discourses go about to persuade them, another
course must be first taken with them, them I leave to the great and mighty God,
begging that he would have Mercy upon them in convincing them that he is, and
that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and that there is a day
coming when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. So we have done with the first thing propounded,
viz. That Family Worship is a Duty; the second part of the work before us is to
prove that there is very great and cogent reasons for our performance of this
Duty, and that it is (using the Apostle Paul's expression) no other than (...),
your reasonable service. That which is to be done by rational Creatures, and is
most consonant and agreeable to the Principles and Dictates of right Reason;
and I doubt not but this will appear evidently to you, if you will duly
consider and weigh the Arguments which we shall draw from these Four Topics.
1. From God. 2. From Governors of Families. 3. From the Families themselves.
4. From the Public.
You will find that there do Obligations rise from all these, many and strong
ones for the enaging and binding you hereunto; the good Lord grant we may study
the Obligations, and answer them by a suitable practice.

First; You are to set up Religious Worship in your Families upon the account
of the most great and glorious God, who alone is the proper Object of it, unto
whom it is to be performed. And here are three things which did immediately
occur to my thoughts, and which I do now offer to your Consideration.

I. God is the Author and Original of our Families: They had their Being from
God, and therefore they should pay Homage, and perform Service unto him; this
is that which does without all Controversy lay an Everlasting Engagement upon
particular Persons, high and low, young and old to serve God, to love him with
all their Hearts, to fear him all the day, and to worship him, because he made
them. Children are to honor their Father, and Mother, but God much more;
because God was the principal efficient of their Being, their Earthly Parents
no more than Instruments in his Hand. And if it be a good way of arguing in
David, and so in us, to say as he did, Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me; and
verse 73. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, give me understanding. It
cannot but be as strong, and if we be ingenuous, as forcible and taking an
Argument on God's side, for him to say to us, You are mine, you were
wonderfully made, formed and fashioned by my wisdom, and the hand of my power,
therefore do you serve me. It is full out as good an Argument for Duty, as it
can be a plea for Mercy; do not the Rivers send back their Waters to the Sea
from which they received them? And shall not Man return praise and service to
God from whom he received life and strength, all that he is, and has? I desire
you to take notice what a loud and earnest call there is, and how much
importunity the Prophet uses in Psalm. 100. 1, 2. Make a joyful noise unto the
Lord, all ye Lands. Be joyful, be cheerful, it is lawful for you to be so, it
is allowed you to be so, and if you be gracious, of all persons in the World,
you have the greatest right to Joy, only see that your Joy be directed to God,
and terminated in God. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord. Well, he goes on,
verse. 2. Serve the Lord with gladness, come before his presence with singing.
Do not go to his work as Bears to a Stake, nor merely as to a Task, but as to
your Recreation, as to your Meat and Drink, so Christ did; be sure that your
duty be your delight. And yet again he adds, Enter into his Gates with
thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise; be thankful unto him and bless
his Name. We should labor to have our hearts greatly raised and enlarged in
our serving of God; that we have such a God, so glorious, so good, and that he
is pleased to admit us into his Service, and employ us about it. But why all
this? what reason is there for it? does any one here ask that Question? let him
know, yea and let all men know. So says the Prophet, in verse 3. Know ye that
the Lord He is God. He alone is God. Let others be what they will, never so
great, and high, and good, there is not a God among them. Jehovah is God; of
whom, and through whom, and for whom are all things. It is He that has made us,
and not we our selves. The Hebrew reads it in the Margin, His we are. And Mr.
Ainsworth tells us the Chaldee keeps that reading. It is He that has made us,
and his we are. He has the best Title to us, the Supreme Sovereign Right; We
are his People, and the Sheep of his Pasture. And since we are his Creatures,
we should be his Servants; we should delight to do his work, because He gave us
Being.

Now if there be so much reason in God's making them, why every individual,
every particular single Person should serve and worship God, why they should
thus come before him with praises and thanksgivings, there is as great reason
why Families should do so too, nay there is the very same reason. For God made
Families too, Families have their Being from God. Nay, there is a double
reason, for he has put forth a double act of Mercy and Power: He did both make
the Persons and the Family, Psalm. 68.4.5. Sing unto God, sing praises to his
Name, extol him that rides upon the Heavens, by his Name IAH, and rejoice
before him. One well observes, that our thoughts of God should not be low and
mean, but high and heavenly, lifting up his Name above the most excellent and
glorious Creatures, because they all are his Servants, and he makes use of them
as he pleases, riding upon the Heavens as his Chariot, and because he only
has Being of himself, and gives Being to all those things that are. But what
other reason is to be given for this, read on, A Father of the Fatherless, and
a Judge of the Widow is God in his holy Habitation. So then, he is a God of
Bowels, his Compassions work and fail not; he is a good Friend to the Poor and
Helpless, Orphans and Widows, whose Tears, and the Cries of whose Necessities
sometimes, and among some persons, can hardly obtain the consideration of their
case; but God will be a careful Father of the Fatherless, and a righteous Judge
for the Widow. But what is this to the present purpose? though it be not, yet
I was willing to take notice of it as that which may be comfortable to some;
and now look into the next Verse, and we shall meet with something apposite to
our case. Sing unto God, and extol him that rides upon the Heavens, by his
Name IAH. But why so? God sets the solitary in Families. He sets them in an
House, those that were destitute; so some render it, poor* wretched, destitute,
were not worth a foot of Land, had not where to lay their head; he provides a
place for them, and an Habitation; others read it, those that were solitary,
and so do our Translators, such as are all Solitary, single Persons, and all
alone, and upon that account lead a melancholic and uncomfortable life; God
sets them in Families; they were once poor Servants in other men's Families,
where they were fain to labor and toil, and some of them were beaten
unmercifully, and pinched in their Diet, but since God has been graciously
pleased to raise them, and to give them Families of their own; they have now
Yoke-fellows to delight in, and Children to rejoice in, and Servants to work
for them, and wait upon them. Nay, it is God that does not only set in
Families, but does for many multiply and magnify them; they have numerous
Families, and plenty for them. Those that had but a small matter to begin with,
are now arrived at a very considerable Estate, and have not only wherewith to
answer their necessities, and to silence the lamentable, bitter, heart-piercing
Cries of hungry craving Children, but enough and to spare, and therefore these
should worship at his footstool, and both speak and live his praise; Psalm. 107.
The Prophet does in a pang and rapture, as it were, for several times one after
another, break out in this holy wish; Oh that men would praise the Lord! Oh
that men would praise the Lord! Oh that men would praise the Lord! verse. 8.15,
21, 31. But what is the matter? What, do you enquire? and would you indeed
know? There is matter enough, abundant matter; they that have hearts devoted to
the praising of God, will never want matter of praise. The Prophet in those
Verses wishes that men would praise him for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the Children of men. His works are so wonderful, that they
call for admirings, and there is such a goodness in them that they deserve
praises. And the Children of Men are greatly obliged to abound in these
praises, because they are no less concerned and interested in these works, they
being done to and for them. But this is only spoken in general, particulars are
more affecting; and if any one here has not taken notice of many, he has been
very heedless and unworthy. But the Prophet does multiply particulars in that
Psalm, as he will find that peruseth it. I shall take only one out of the heap,
as serving our occasion, verse. 41. He sets the poor on high from, or, after
affliction, and makes him Families like a Flock. The Man was poor before,
exceeding poor, possibly not worth a Groat, yea and he was in affliction too;
though Poverty is it self a sore affliction, there needs no other, yet it does
not go alone; the poor Man is slighted by his Friends, and trampled upon by his
Neighbors, and it is likely, afraid to stir out of his own door, lest a
Sergeant should clap an Arrest upon his back; but now after this affliction God
raises him up, and sets him on high: He is now grown a considerable Person, a
Man of Estate, a Gentleman in the Country, an Alderman in the City; it is
well, if he be humble now he is high, and does not forget himself, and that God
too, who advanced him, and has given him a Family like a Flock; and as a
considerable Flock, so a rich Pasture for him and it to feed in; there you see,
Families are of God's making. Have thou, O Woman! a careful Husband that minds
his business and provides well? thou had him from God. Have thou, O Man! a
prudent Wife that orders well? it was God laid her out for thee. Have you both
Children that are the Crown of your Conjugal Relation, it was God that bestowed
them upon you, they all are his Offspring. When Jacob was upon his Journey
toward the Land of his Kindred, Esau went out to meet him, and God having
conquered and influenced his Spirit, he embraced him and fell upon his Neck and
kissed him; and seeing the Women and the Children, he said, Who are those with
thee? Genesis 33.5. Jacob answered, The Children which God has graciously given
thy Servant. Children are God's gift, and they are a gracious gift, which
carries in it a great deal of goodness and mercy. That is the first thing, God
is the Author of Families, and since they had their Being from him, it is fit
he should have service and worship from them so long as they have a Being.

II. My second Reason shall be drawn from that Honor which we all should bring
to God. He that is the most excellent and glorious Being may challenge, for he
does deserve glory at the hands of all his Creatures. And they have wickedly
forfeited their Being, who do not make their contributions, and cast in
something, nay all they can into the Treasury of his Glory. Here I shall more
briefly touch upon these few things, but do you ponder them.

First; The Glory of God was the end he aimed at in all that he makes and does,
Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself: And well he might, for
there is none higher than himself, none better. He made all for himself, as
Heaven, for that is his Throne, so Earth, for that is his Footstool. And as
other Creatures, so intelligent rational Creatures, as Angels, so Men, and as
Persons, so Families; all of them for himself, all for his glory; and is there
not reason that they whom God has made should mind and pursue that which they
were made for? Those that do not live to that purpose, do not live to good
purpose; and if they do not live to that end for which God made them, will at
last miss of that Reward which they are now so forward to promise themselves.

Secondly; Other Creatures do in their kind honor God; not only the irrational
Creatures, but also the inanimate ones; the Heavens and the Firmament; Psalm.
19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork. So do the Day and the Night; verse. 2. Day unto day utters speech,
and night unto night shows knowledge; yea, and they go up and down doing it;
they compass Sea and Land doing it; verse. 3, 4. There is no Speech nor
Language, where their Voice is not heard; their Line is gone out through all
the Earth, and their Words to the end of the World. And it would certainly be a
shame and reproach to us if any of our Families should be mute and silent, and
bring him no glory.

Thirdly; God does expect glory from us. This is the Tribute he looks should be
paid him by us; Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master;
if I then be a Father, where is my honor? and if I be a Master, where is my
fear? says the Lord of Hosts. God has been graciously pleased to put himself
into all endearing Relations to his People. There you read of his being both a
Father and a Master; and those that desire to be his Children, must resolve to
be his Servants; and in order to an happy enjoyment of the Privileges, there
must be a cordial and cheerful performance of the duties. We must honor him as
a Father, and fear him as a Master. Now the fear of God does contain in it, as
that inward filial and holy affection of the Soul, so the outward Worship of
God; and they that do not so fear him, do not honor him: Nay, let your
Profession be never so great, and your pretenses to Religion never so high,
your not having his Worship in your Families is no other than so far a
practical disowning and renouncing him.

Fourthly; The Honor of God is to be dearer to us than our own Interest. This
should be laid at the foot of that. John the Baptist was most freely willing to
decrease, so that Christ might increase; to dwindle away, and vanish into a
worthless inconsiderable nothing, so that Christ might be exalted in the hearts
of Men; and it should be so with us, and with all upon whom his Name is called.
The design of honoring God, and lifting up of his Name, should be uppermost,
and run through our whole course, and be the main principal scope of all our
Actions, as is evident from that Scripture Precept, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye
eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. As all our
Affections should meet in God as the only Center, so all our Actions should be
directed to his glory as the supreme* ultimate and most noble end: But are they
obedient to this Command, do they walk according to this excellent Rule, who do
not set up the Worship of God in their Families? no, they are far from it, they
live in a direct contrariety. Instead of doing all to the glory of God, in
their Families they do nothing; they mind their own things, but mind not,
regard not the things of God and Jesus Christ; they do neither seek after God,
nor live unto him; and what is this but vile ingratitude, and most sordid
baseness? what is it but brutish selfishness? When men are confined to, and
wrapped up in themselves, do not look above nor beyond themselves; they eat and
drink, they wake and sleep for themselves, they dress and deck, and finifie
themselves; they labor, and toil, and trade for themselves; they scrape, and
hoard, and lay up for themselves, and in this they are unwearied and
unsatisfied, never think they are fine enough, nor rich enough, nor great
enough; but all this while the great God is most shamefully forgotten and
neglected, he is not in their thoughts, nor in their designs.

Fifthly; The Glory of God is to be sought and promoted by us to our utmost.
Our best is his due; therefore he calls for the Heart, the whole of it, and for
the Male of the Flock. Our All is his due; we have it from him, and we owe it
to him; Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and
with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. Where you have the Object of your
Love, the most proper and principal Object of it, God, and the Reasons, why we
should love him, the one is his own Nature, because He is the Lord, Jehovah,
who has his Being of himself, gives Being to all things that are, and
accomplishment to his Word and Promises; the other is his Relation to us, or
our Interest in him; He is thy God, thine in a Covenant of Grace. Again, there
you have the Manner of your Love, or the Degree of it, how high it must reach,
how far extend, to all, all thy Heart; to which the Scripture ascribes
Understanding, Wisdom and Faith; all thy Soul, which is the seat of the Will
and Affections, and with all thy Might; love him as well as we can, blow up our
Love to God unto the hottest and most vehement flame. Love him with all your
ability. Let your Love to God go as far as your Authority reaches, and the
Power of your Hand, and there let your Love express it self. Honor him in your
House, and with your Substance. By all these things it does evidently appear,
the Glory of God should be exceeding dear to us, and industriously served and
promoted by us.

Now I will appeal to you in the case, who are Heads of Houses, and ask this
one Question, What better way can you take? What course can you think of that
will be more proper and probably successful for the advancing of the Honor of
God, than the setting up of his Worship and Religious Exercises in your
Families? What can you do more toward it? what better? What is there within the
compass of your Power that has a fairer, a more promising aspect and tendency
to this great and noble End? How can you better serve the Interest of God and
Godliness? And I do earnestly desire you to spend now and then a little time in
thinking seriously with your selves, what sad, wretched, miserable Families
those are, in which there is a great many Creature Comforts, Epicurean
Provisions for the Table and the Belly; there is eating and drinking to excess,
if not to drunkenness; there is Cards and Dice, Chambering and Wantonness; a
great deal of Mirth and Jollity, Vanity and Folly; but there is no Praying
there, no Reading of the Scriptures; there is great dressing of Meat, and
decking of the Body, but in the midst of all this there is no duty done to God,
no Honor brought him, no care taken for precious and immortal Souls. I do pity
them, and oh that my Soul might weep* in secret for their sinful neglect! And I
do earnestly desire them to remember and lay to heart, that which God has
spoken, and will certainly stand to. He will make that word of his good, to the
comfort of his People, and confusion of his Enemies, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that
honor me, I will honor, but they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
From whence it is plain, that God takes special notice of Persons, their
Spirits and Actions, and as they carry toward him, so will he to them. That
Tree may expect to fall under a blasting withering Curse, from which the Lord
Jesus does gather no Fruit.

III. My third and last Reason shall be drawn from the equity of the thing:
Family Worship is God's due, as you heard before, the Prophet said, Who would
not fear thee, O King of Nations, for to thee it does appertain; it does of
right belong to him; Man cannot lay claim to any Comfort or Blessing as due to
him from God for any thing that he has done, for all is Mercy, than the least
of which Man is less, yea, the best of Men, but God may lay claim to fear, and
honor, and service, as due to him from Man, and I may say the same in the
present case; what Family is there that should not serve and worship thee, O
thou King of Nations, O thou King of Saints, for to thee it does appertain. It
is too true, and a sad truth it is, that too many Families in England, yea, and
in London do not do it, and I am afraid when all is said that can be said, will
not worship God, they are settled upon their Lees, but what Family is there that
should not do it. There is none, not the greatest, not the poorest, not those
that have most leisure, not those that have most business, not those that live
in the greatest fullness and splendour, nor those that are forced to earn their
Bread with their hard labor, and in the sweat of their Brows. The more any
have, the more abundant they should be in praises, and the more any want, the
more frequent and fervent they should be in prayers; whatever their case and
condition is, still they do owe this to God. I may very well call it and
House-^ent, which they are bound to be continually paying to their great
Landlord, and for a neglect or default therein he may justly turn them out of
Doors, cast them into the open Street, yea, bring them to a Dunghill and Morsel
of Bread. I am not censorious, nor do I charge any one, but this is apparent,
many that have been topping Men, yea, and made a great Profession, have come to
nothing, to a Goal, the Mint, the White-friers, they have broken scandalously,
and by that means have made Religion to stink in the Nostrils of those who are
no Friends to it; and I would advise them to reflect upon time past, and
consider whether they were not wanting to, or remiss in Family Duties, and if
they were, let them humble themselves and justify God, and say, Righteous art
thou, O Lord; why should they think that God would bless and prosper them, to
the enabling them to pay their Debts to Men, if they do not make any Conscience
of paying that Tribute which they owe to him? but that is only a serious and
seasonable hint by the way. I am to show you that Family Worship is due to God,
and it is so upon these accounts.

First; Upon the account of their Being. I before proved that they are of God;
he made you and them too: Now the Prophet says, Psalm. 145.10. All thy works
shall praise thee, O Lord; our Families are his work, and therefore they should
praise him.

Secondly; Family worship ought to be conscienciously and constantly performed
to God upon the account of those Mercies which they do receive from God. We
have personal Mercies, preservation and supply, health and strength, food and
raiment, and these do engage us to personal services. Jacob thought so when
Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. He vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will
keep me in the way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put
on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace, the Lord shall be my
God, and this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be God's house; and he
accordingly did afterward there Build an Altar, which was for the Service and
Worship of God. Now by a parity of Reason Family-mercies do oblige unto
Family Worship. Alas! what miserable Houses would ours be if God should not
look after them, and befriend them; how would they be exposed should he
withdraw his protection, and not cover them with his Wing? How would they be
straightened and pinched did not he reach out to them his Hand of Bounty, they
soon would turn into Houses of Mourning, and Places of Confusion; it is God
that by his shining upon our Tabernacles makes them comfortable and pleasant to
us, and does commend and sweeten our Communion together, so that we lie down,
and rise up, and live in peace, therefore it is fit and highly becoming that we
should serve and worship him together. Those that are drawn with the same Cords
of Kindness should draw in the same Yoke of Obedience. Methinks the Father
should of his own accord, without a Monitor, say to his Family as in Psalm.
34.3. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.

Thirdly; Family Worship is due to God upon the account of his continuing and
repeating his Mercies to our Families. How much does he do for them? And how
unwearied is he in doing? We deserve nothing, we have forfeited all, yet his
compassion does not fail, nor is the Stream of Mercy cut off: Must you not say,
have ye not reason to say, he daily loads you with his Benefits, and he causes
Mercy and Goodness to follow you? It is his Mercy that makes us dwell in
safety, and sets an Hedge about us and our Houses, and about all that we have
on every side, else we should become a prey to the Sons of Violence, or fuel to
the greedy devouring Flames. It is he that continues the peace of our
Families, else a perverse froward Spirit would be conjured up in one or other,
and give a disturbance to the whole: How great a matter may a little Fire
kindle? It is he that gives you the Comforts of your Families, spreads your
Tables, and fills your Cups, and gives you all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17.
Your Cisterns would quickly be empty, had they not recruits from the Eternal
Fountain. It is he that prevents breaches in your Families, sinful breaches
through anger and discontent, jarrs and fallings out, so that you would be
Wolves and Tigers one to another; afflictive breaches, that would be
Heart-breakings and cloth you in Sables, and fetch Rivers of Tears from your
Eyes, and such a Groan as was uttered by Naomi, Ruth 1.21, 22. Call me Marah,
for the Lord has dealt bitterly with me; I was full, and the Lord has made me
empty. How easily else might Death come with his Dart and stab one, and with
his Sithe mow down another, so that the Parents shall sit down lamenting, and
refuse to be comforted, and a numerous Family moulder away into nothing. It
has been thus in other Houses, why is it not so in yours? But because of God's
sparing Mercy he has not given Death a Commission: To instance in all that God
does for us, to give in the total Sum of his favors is beyond our power, we
have reason to say with holy David, Psalm. 139.17, 18. How precious are thy
thoughts unto me, O God, how great is the sum of them? if I should count them,
they are more in number than the sand; when I awake, I am still with thee.
Under thy careful watchful Eye, thy securing comforting Wing, and surely all
this does greatly oblige Families to own, serve and honor God; the Bonds of
God are upon us, there is the Bond of his Law, the Bond of his Covenant, and
the Bond of Kindness; let us not break these Bonds, lest he bind us in the
Bonds of Affliction, and Fetters of Wrath: As it would be a burning shame, so
an high provocation, if they who receive so much from God, should return little
or nothing to him.

Fourthly; Family Worship is due to God, because of that necessary and absolute
dependence which they have upon him for the future. He that gave particular
Persons their Being, does continue them in being, else they would drop into the
Grave. Thou hold our soul in life, and suffer not our feet to be moved,
Psalm. 66.9. God by his Word created the World, and the like Word of his Power
is required for its preservation, else it would return to its ancient Chaos,
Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power; so he that made our
Families must maintain them, he that raised them up must keep them up; how soon
would they sink if his Everlasting Arm were not underneath! In the Church, he
that planteth is nothing, and he that waters is nothing, but God that gives
the increase; so in the House, he that orders and commands is nothing, and
they that assist and labor are nothing, but God that gives the blessing and
the success. I desire you to bestow some thoughts upon that one Scripture, Job
8.6. He shall make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous; where I
desire you to take notice of these few things.

First; That it is God's work to make Habitations prosperous; yea, it is his
alone; all endeavors are vain and fruitless without his concurrence. The
diligent Hand indeed is said to make rich, but another place tells us, the
Blessing of the Lord makes rich. Man's diligence and God's blessing do
excellently together, then much good will come of it; but when Man works alone,
he does but beat the Air, and loses his labor, nothing will prosper, that God
does not command so to do; in Spirituals, the Spices will not flow forth unless
the North and South Wind blow upon the Garden: In Temporals, the Ship must lie
still and not reach its desired Haven, except the Divine Blessing fill the
Sails. God's Curse at the Root will blast Families, and make the greatest and
most flourishing of them fade and dwindle into nothing.

Secondly; Our Reason will tell us, and so does that Scripture, That righteous
Families stand fairest for God's Blessing; I will behave my self wisely in a
perfect way, said David, I will walk within my house with a perfect heart, O
when will thou come to me! Psalm. 101. A person of such an Heart and Way may
desire and wish for God, humbly invite him, and believingly expect him with
smiles and sweet manifestations of himself, and gracious favorable
Providence. It is most probable and most rational to conclude that God will
prosper Habitations of Righteousness; this looks most consonant to his Nature*
most agreeable to his Justice, and for this there is the greatest assurance in
his Promises. It is a righteous thing with God that Habitations of Wickedness
should be Instances of Divine Vengeance, that Habitations of Uncleanness should
be Habitations for Owls and Satyrs, that where the Tables are full of Vomit,
the Houses should spew them out; but righteous Persons and Habitations of
Righteousness are under the Blessing of Heaven, and so most like to flourish,
Psalm. 5.12. Thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass
him as with a shield. But then,

Thirdly; The great Question will be, What it is that does make or denominate
any House an Habitation of Righteousness; and to that I answer, the giving of
every one his due; the performing all righteous acts toward Men, and of all
holy acts toward God, that is an Habitation of Righteousness in which there is
the true fear and worship of God. There may be a righteous Person in a Family
that is wicked, there was a righteous Noah in a wicked World, a just Lot in a
wicked Sodom, a Diamond in a sink, a good Ahijah in the House of Iereboam who
made Israel to sin, Saints in the House of Nero, who was at that day the
Monster of Men, though there have been as bad since, and worse too, but this
did not make those Houses Habitations of Righteousness, notwithstanding that
they were Habitations of Devils; there must be the Families fearing, serving,
and worshipping of God, else it is not, it cannot truly be called an Habitation
of Righteousness: So much may well suffice to be spoken to the first set of
Arguments for the proving to you, that the setting up of the Worship of God in
our Families is no more than our reasonable service.

I proceed now, according to the method before propounded, to a second order or
company of Arguments for the setting up of Family Worship and Duty, and they
shall be drawn from the Heads and Governors of Families, and there will be
several of them, which I advise and earnestly desire every one of you seriously
to consider; for what will Arguments signify, if they be not duly weighed?
Prove. 24.32. Solomon tells us, that passing by the Field and Vineyard of the
slothful Man void of understanding, the Wall whereof was broken down, and it
was overgrown with Thorns, and Nettles covered the face thereof; He saw it, and
more than so, he looked upon it, wistly, curiously, again and again, and he
considered it, he laid it to his Heart, and he considered it well, and
thereupon he received instruction; Oh that you would do the like as to those
things which you do find in the Scriptures, and in the holy Discourses of your
Faithful Ministers against sin, and for duty, and in particular for
Family-duty, consider them well, that so you may receive instruction: And the
good Lord, without whom we poor Worms can do nothing, grant that what has
been, and shall be said to this purpose may be accompanied with his holy
Spirit, and so come with such a power upon your Souls, as that his glory may be
a gainer, and his worship may be carefully and constantly performed for the
future in those Families, (if there be any such in this numerous Congregation)
in which hitherto it has been shamefully neglected.

I. You that are Governors of Families, Masters or Mistresses, are charged
with them. Your Families are your Charge, God has committed them to your Care
and Government; as they are to act for you, so you are to care for them. Kings
have a great power, and that makes some of them Oppressive and Tyrannical.
They have great Honor, and that makes them Proud and Lofty; but all of them
have a great Trust, the whole Kingdom is committed to them; and they should not
only endeavor to secure their own Prerogative, but also public good, the
peace, welfare and prosperity of their people; this they are all of them bound
to do, and those that do it are great Blessings. Ministers also have a great
Charge; as it is an honorable, so it is a weighty thing to be a Minister of
Jesus Christ, for the Churches of which they be Pastors are committed to them;
they are to look to the Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made them
Overseers, and they are to watch for the Peoples Souls, that they may feed them
with understanding and sound knowledge, and also preserve them from those that
lie in wait to deceive, and from every path of the destroyer; and O that while
we do all, with the Apostle Paul, Magnify our Office; we may all be careful to
fulfill our Ministry, and do the work of our Office!

And so, that I may return to the business before us, Masters and Mistresses of
Families have no small Charge, no little Trust, for their Families are
committed to them; the Family is a Body, bigger or less, and the Master is the
Head of it, and he should rule, order and influence all the Members thereof;
they have both a power and a trust, a power, and so set over them; a trust, and
so charged with them; and as they would not be deprived of their power, so they
ought not to betray their trust; you that are Rulers of Families will be known
in your places, it is fit you should be so. I pray be good in your places; and
as you will maintain your Authority, and make use of your power, be true to
your trust too; some of you will say in some cases that you will not abate an
Ace, stand as much upon it, and be as exact here; you will be Kings in your own
Houses, you ought to be so, God has made you so, but be Prophets and Priests
also, in such a manner take, and keep, and use the Jurisdiction, as that
laboring in Prayer, in the Word and Doctrine, may not slip through your
Fingers. As Magistrates, so Ministers, and Parents, and Masters ought to rule
in the fear of God.

For you are to remember that you are entrusted with the Souls of your
Families, as well as with their Bodies; and you ought to seek and endeavor the
good of their Souls as well as the good of their Bodies; I mean, both of their
Children, and of their Servants, yea, and more too, because the Soul is best,
and the welfare and comfort of the Body depends upon the happiness of the Soul.
Indeed the Soul may be in a thriving condition Godward, but the Body crazy and
wasting; the Soul may be of an healthful Constitution, but the Body sickly and
weak, as is clear from that of Paul, 2 Cor. 4.16. Though the outward man
perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day; and that this was the case of
Gaius, I am very apt to conclude from that kind and friendly wish of John in
his third Epistle, I wish that thy body may prosper and be in health, even as
thy soul prospers. But if the Soul be void of Knowledge and Grace, if there
be not a saving Light in the Head, nor the Law of God in the Heart, the Body
will come to lie down at last in misery and sorrow; cocker and pamper it never
so much, care and cark for it as you will, the issue will at last be dreadful,
the compositum, i e. the whole Man will come to ruin, Hos. 4.6. My people are
destroyed for lack of knowledge, not only deformed as a Person is for want of
an Eye, but destroyed, cut off, utterly ruined and undone; and ought not the
greatest care be taken for the prevention of that?

We read in 1 Timothy 5.6. If any man provide not for his own, specially for those
of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.
Though he does not deny the Faith in words, yet he does in deeds; he has
practically renounced Christianity by his not living up to the Laws and Rules
thereof; and he is worse than an Infidel by his falling short of them. He is
defective and wanting in that which they perform, though he lives in a Valley
of Vision, though he sits under the bright and glorious Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness displayed in the Everlasting Gospel, yet he is outdone by the
very Heathen, who have no more than the dark glimmering Light of Nature, which
is like a Candle burnt down to the Socket; so that it is the Duty of all
Parents and Masters to provide for their own Houses.

But here the Question will be, What are they to provide? What? All that is
convenient for them; according to that Prayer of Holy and Wise Agur, in Prove.
30.8. feed me with food convenient for me. To be sure they must provide things
necessary, if it be in their power, but necessary for what? only for the Body?
Meat, and Drink, and Clothes, and Lodging, Money, and Wages? are these all the
things that are necessary and convenient for them? is this the supplying of all
their need? is this all that the Lord requires and expects at their hands?
surely no, it is true, this is a part of their duty, but it is the least, and
lowest part; this he provides for the Brute, but not for the Man; for the
Cabinet, but not for the Jewel; they should so provide for them, as that it may
be well with them every way, to all intents and purposes; their Families have
precious Souls, as well as comely Bodies, craving Souls as well as hungry
Bodies, and they should so provide for their Souls, as that it may not be their
fault if it be not well with their Souls, and that both in time, and to
Eternity. in the 2 d of Peter* 1, 2 ver. the Apostle Peter speaking of God,
says, His Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain unto Life,
and Godliness. O let us learn to admire and endear this God who is so gracious
and liberal unto us! now let us be followers of him as dear Children; this is
an excellent Copy for us to write after who are House holders; let us provide
for ours, all that is necessary for this their Temporal Life, yea, and all that
is necessary for Godliness.

But now, can any one tell how they provide for the Souls of their Families,
which are under their Government, and committed to their care, who do not set
up the Worship of God in their Families? who do nothing toward their
instruction and sanctification, nothing toward the making of them
understanding, gracious, and holy? Are those Families well provided for in
which there is no serving of God, no religious exercises, no Praying, no
Catechizing, nor reading of the Scriptures, no Repeating of Sermons, no Singing
of Psalms, no holy Discourses about God, and Jesus Christ, and the things of
God; no Holy Instructions, nor good Councils, nor provoking one another to love
and good works? we shall indeed sometimes hear people say of such or such a
Man, O, he is a Man of a generous Spirit, a brave Housekeeper; but ask them
wherein, how does that appear? the Answer is, by his keeping a good Table, a
great Table, he buyeth the best Meat the Market does afford, and a great deal
of it, so that the Servants have enough, and to spare, and you may see many
poor lying at his door, who are relieved there; and this is indeed good and
commendable, and it is to be desired, that all whose Estates will reach it were
such, they would be no losers by it; it is one way to bring down a blessing
upon their Callings, and the works of their hands; but give me leave to tell
that Man, if this be all, if he stop here, and his brave Housekeeping amount
to no more than this, in a word, if he does not set up the Worship of God in
his Family, he is a pitiful, a miserable Housekeeper, his House is the way to
Hell; though he keeps a Great Table, yet he keeps a wicked House, a godless,
graceless House, he fills Bodies, and starves Souls, his Dogs have as much
reason to commend him, as his Wife, and Children, and Servants. Well, that is
the first thing; and oh that it may abide with you who are Governors of
Families; sit down and think seriously upon it, that your Families are your
charge, you are charged with the Souls of your Families, God has put them into
your hand, and committed them to your care, and therefore you are obliged to
look after them; and as God has given them to you, so it is your duty to train
and bring them up for God: But this will meet us again in the way of this
Discourse, and then I shall speak something more to it.

II. You are accountable for your Families* as charged with them, so
responsible for them. We read in the 25th of Matthew, 14, etc. of a Man
Traveling into a far Country, who called unto him his Servants, and delivered
unto them his goods, to one five Talents, to another two, and to a third but
one; after a time he returned, and reckoned with them. God has committed to
every one of us some Talents, to some more, to some fewer, and he will reckon
with us all for them, and enquire what we have done with them; one has a
Talent of Parts, another of Power, another of Interest, a fourth of Riches; do
not you let them lie dead upon your hands, but be good Husbands, Trade with
them, my Friends, trade with them for God, and know as God will reckon with you
for your Talents, so for Persons that are committed to your Charge; and as God
said to Cain, Genesis 4.9. Where is Abel thy Brother? so he will say to thee,
where is thy Wife, where thy Son, where thy Daughter, where is thy Man Servant,
where thy Maid? Masters of Families are accountable both for the Bodies and the
Souls under their roofs.

First, they are accountable for the bodies that are in their Families; you
know they are so, not only to God, but likewise to the Magistrate, and to the
Law. So that if any of them does miscarry, and dies a violent death, there is a
very strict search made into it, the Coroners Inquest sits upon the body, all
suspected Persons are called and examined, and the great Question is, How did
this Person come by his death? though it be the meanest Servant in the House,
the Scullion, or Kitchin-Boy, yet it is not past by, nor is it fit it should:
No Murderer ought to be Pardoned, that is a standing Law which binds in all
Ages, and Places, Genesis 9.6. who so sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood
be shed; let the man destroyed have been never so poor, and mean, and
despicable for his outward Condition, and let the Murderer be what he will,
though a person of never so great Quality, as they Phrase it, yet he must die for
it. God has said, by Man shall his blood be shed. If the Master himself was
the cause of his Servants death, he shall answer for it, and life shall go for
life, blood, for blood; if he Poisoned the meanest Servant he had, or if he
starved him, it must be so; and that Scripture tells you the reason of the
thing lies in this, because Man was made in the Image of God; and there was
afterward another Law made, Numb. 35.31. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the
life of a Murderer, which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to
death; so that as the Jewish Doctors say, though he could give all the Riches
of the World, and the Avenger of Blood were persuaded into a willingness to
pass it by, yet it could not be done. Let Magistrates therefore consider what
they do, when they Pardon Murderers, whom God himself has devoted to
destruction. But

Secondly, they are accountable for the Souls that are in their Families; for
God does highly value the Souls which he has Created, and as carefully and
curiously looks after Souls, as his Law enjoins and requires Men in place of
Power and Authority to look after the Bodies of Men, and to judge and avenge
their blood, when it has been shed by wicked and cruel hands, and when they do
miscarry, as too many do, thousands, myriads, millions do, he will make
inquisition for their blood, and see how it came to pass; and if their Parents,
or Masters be guilty of it, he will require it at their hands; and there are
too many that will be one day found with their hands full of blood; there are
some Men among us, that do corrupt and taint the Judgments of their Children,
and Servants, and Poison their Minds with their Cursed Doctrines, and Damnable
Heresies, (I ask no pardon for that expression, as too harsh and severe, for it
is Scripture Language) and by their sinful practices, and vile debaucheries,
which are as bad as Rats-bane, and they shall be sure to answer for it. Others
there are that do starve their Souls by not teaching them the way and fear of
the Lord, not instilling good Principles into them, by not setting holy
Examples before them, which they should imitate; not taking them by the hand,
and leading them in the ways of Righteousness, the midst of those Paths of
Judgments in which they ought to go; by living themselves like so many
Heathens, and Brutes, and teaching others to do the same, bringing them up for
Hell, and fitting them for destruction; as if they had taken up a resolution
that they would not serve the Lord, nor go to Heaven, no, nor any that belong
to them, if they can prevent it; and these Men likewise shall answer it to God.
Such shall be dealt with in the same manner as God threatened he would do with
the Prophet, in case of his being false to his trust, and unfaithful to those
unto whom he was sent. You may see it in Ezekiel. 3.17, 18* Son of Man, I have
made thee a Watchman to the house of Israel, therefore hear the word at my
mouth, and give them warning from me.

People are in eminent danger of being seduced by False Teachers, of being
prevailed against by Temptations of Satan, and his instruments; Ministers must
watch over them, they must go themselves to God for light, teaching
instruction, and be faithful in teaching, when taught, and in giving out what
they have received. Now mark, when I say unto the Wicked, thou shall surely
die, and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
evil way to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but
his blood will I require at thy hands; which, says Erasmus, is fulmen non
verbum, not a word but a Thunderbolt. Duty is safe, as long as that is done by
Ministers, they are out of danger, out of harms way, they shall be accepted and
rewarded by God, whatever the issue be as to the people among whom they labor,
Isa. 49.5. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorius in the eyes of
the Lord, and my God shall be my strength; but neglect and carelessness is
damnable, it brings upon Ministers the guilt of other men's blood, and the loss
of their own Lives and Souls; and believe it, so it will upon you who are
Parents, and Masters of Families.

Oh, consider it, my dear Friends, Beloved and longed for, seriously consider
it, you are, as I formerly said, and without doubt you your selves know,
Prophets in your own Houses, there you are to Teach and Rule. God has made you
Watchmen to your own Houses, and it is your business to study their peace and
safety, and to seek their good; it is your business to acquaint them with their
Duty, that they may do it, and to warn them of their danger, that they may
avoid it; you are to cause your light to shine before them, that so in your
light, they may see light; you are to instruct them, that they may not be
naught for lack of knowledge; you are to show them, and go before them in the
way that they should go, that they may not wander and go directly to Hell,
because they had none to direct them; in a word, you are to make use of all
means possible, that both you and yours may prove and approve what is the good,
acceptable, and perfect will of God, and so be, and at last found to be wise
unto Salvation. But if you, if any of you have been and will continue to be
slothful, careless, negligent, and wanting to your duty herein, your Children
and Servants may die in their ignorance, and iniquity; but verily you shall not
escape unpunished, for their blood shall be required at your hands, the holy
and righteous God will require it, who is the great avenger of blood. And here
are two things that I lay before you.

First, Your wretched neglect of Family Duties may bring upon you the Curse of
your Children and Servants. I have known some, when they have for their
flagitious Lives been Condemned to the Gallows, and not far from Execution,
laid their ill life at the Parents door, crying out of the fondness of their
Mothers for winking at and concealing of their faults, and of the neglect of
their Fathers giving them no better Education, and setting before them such
wicked and abominable examples; and what do you think they and others in the
same case with them are and will be doing for ever in the other World, in the
anguish of their Souls, and the midst of intolerable Torments, when such poor
Creatures come to be cast upon a bed of flames, and in the Lake which burns
with Fire and Brimstone? when they come to feel the sinking weight, and
scorching heat of the wrath and indignation of a provoked God, they will
certainly curse themselves for their former follies and wicked courses, and
they will curse their Old Companions, whom now they take so much pleasure in,
and will wish they had never seen their faces, yea, and they will curse you
too; and we may rationally conclude their passionate breaking out into such
expressions as these, I might have done better had I been Educated and brought
up better; I might have done my duty to God, had my Parents or my Master done
their duty to me; I might have been kept from the path of the Destroyer, and
cleansed my way, and come to a Blessed Eternity, had I been taught to take heed
unto my self, and to my way, according to the word. Had my Father and my Master
instructed me, I might have known as much, and done as well as those that are
now saved, and in Heaven. But instead of taking pains to make me good, their
great desire and design was to make me Rich, and Great in the World, and so
they have made me miserable. I have all my days taken wicked Courses, because
they never took any care to instill into me right and holy Principles. Had I
but seen or heard them reading the Holy Scriptures, and other good books
themselves, or to their Families, I might have taken them up, and read them
too, and got the knowledge of God, and my self, and my duty; but they were for
Romances, and Plays, and Cards, the Devils Books, and so we spent and lost our
time and our selves too. Had I heard them Praying in their Families, seeking
the face and favor of God, begging his Spirit and Grace, I might have prayed
too, and sought God too, and begged the life of my precious Soul, and who knows
but I might have obtained mercy. But instead of Praying, there was Swearing and
Cursing, foolish and wicked talk, and I learnt their ways; they set bad
examples, and I was ready to follow them; they struck the Spark, and I was like
Tinder catching immediately, their examples were very vicious, and my Nature
was as bad, and now my eternal ruin follows upon it; they were Worldly, and so
was I, they wicked, and so was I, they minded earthly things, and so did I;
they lived without God in the World, and so did I; they carried themselves like
so many Heathen, and so did I, and now I am in the place of endless misery, out
of which there is no possibility of being delivered, nor making an escape, and
in which there is no hope of any comfort, ease, alleviation or abatement of
trouble and sorrow, infinite mercy it self will not grant the least drop of
Water for the cooling and refreshment of any that are here, therefore cursed,
yea for ever cursed be the day that I descended of such Parents, and cursed be
the day on which I was bound an Apprentice to such a Master, and that ever my
Lines were cast in such Families.

Secondly; As this will bring upon you the Curse of those poor miserable and
eternally Lost Creatures, so it may justly expose you to the Wrath and Fury of
a Righteous God, who for your neglect of him, and unfaithfulness to your Trust,
and wicked Cruelty to those poor Souls, may justly punish you with everlasting
Destruction from his presence, and from the glory of his Power, for their Blood
cries loud for Vengeance to be executed upon you.

III. Your present safety, and the safety of your Houses does very much depend
upon this. By an holy care herein your confidence in God may be strengthened,
and your comfortable expectations from him raised. On the other side, by your
neglect hereof, both will be lessened and enfeebled. You see there are two
Branches in this Assertion, I shall speak distinctly unto them, and by
Instances prove and manifest the truth of them.

First; Your being wanting to the Worship of God and Religious Exercises in
your Families, is the way to expose you and them to present Judgments; and
while you continue so, you cannot rationally hope it should be otherwise, but
may have a dreadful sound always in your Ears, and that in Prosperity the
destroyer will come upon you; Job 15.21. You may spend your day, yea day and
night too in a fearful expectation of being devoured, but have nothing to
warrant your hoping that God will be either a Sun for your comfort, or a Shield
for your defense; for the case is evident, that your neglect of God may justly
provoke him to a neglect of you; and what shadow of reason can you show
another, or please your selves with, why God should do any thing for the
promoting or securing your welfare, when you will do nothing for the keeping up
and advancing of his Honor? Why should you walk safely when you will not walk
uprightly and in your integrity? Why should he make your Families prosperous*
if notwithstanding all that is or can be said, you will not make them
religious? You may find in Isa. 5. that when the Vineyard brought forth nothing
but wild Grapes, after great cost bestowed upon it, and no less pains taken
with it, the Hedge was to be taken away, and the Wall to be broken down, and
the Clouds commanded to Rain no more upon it. Nay, not only a total neglect of
Family-duty, but an omission in one point may, yea has awakened and armed
Divine Justice to the ruin of an house, as is plain in the case of Eli. He was
a good and holy Man, in a time of public danger, his heart trembled for the
Ark of God, by which we know that it lay very near it; and therefore I do not
at all question but there was the Worship of God in his House, and that he had
made Conscience of teaching and instructing his Children and Servants, but his
Sons were Sons of Belial, that knew not the Lord so as to fear him; vile and
wicked wretches they were, openly abominably profane: The good old Man heard of
it, and upon the hearing was grieved at his very heart, and for it he reproved
them too: But he was wanting in one thing; he spoke to them in too soft and
silken words; he was too mild with his Sons, how angry soever he was with their
sins: He did not exercise all his Authority and Power, nor draw against them
the Sword of Justice; he blamed them, but he did not punish them, he did not
use that severity toward them, which for their notorious Crimes they had
deserved. Now do but read, how severe upon this account God threatened to be
both upon him, and his whole House. He said, He would do that, at which both
the Ears of every one that heard it should tingle. And indeed so they well
might, because it was so terrible; 1 Samuel 2 31, 32, 33. Behold the days come
that I will cut off thine Arm, and the Arm of thy Fathers House, that there
shall not be an Old Man in thine House, and thou shall see an Enemy in my
Habitation, in all the Wealth which God shall give Israel, and there shall not
be an Old Man in thine House for ever; and the Man of thine which I shall not
cut off from mine Altar, shall be to consume thine Eyes, and to grieve thy
Heart, and all the increase of thine House shall die in the flower of their
Age. I beseech every one to believe, before your own sad and dismal experience
be the cutting Argument to convince you, that all sin is of a ruining and
destructive nature; not only sins of commission, but sins of omission are so;
not only acts of Hostility against God, and open Rebellion, but contempt and
neglect of him; not only downright affronts, but the nonpayment of that Homage
which is his due; it will make the Root of a Family rottenness, and the
Blossoms to come up like Dust; it will blast and wither the Offspring of an
House; it will utter consume the Timber of it, though it were all heart of Oak;
it would pull down the Walls of it, though as thick as those of a Castle. So
History tells us in the voice said to that wicked and bloody Emperor Phocas,
though thou raise thy Walls as high as Heaven* the sin within will spoil all.
Sin will undermine the Foundation of an House, and shake the whole Fabric, and
like Gunpowder, blow it up, and bury it in its own Ruins. Now consider this all
ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver;
Psalm. 50.22. As he will not always strive, so he will not always bear. Some
years he came to the barren Tree, expecting fruit, and finding none, he
exercised much patience under frequent disappointments, but at length patience
gave place to prudent Justice, and he said, Cut it down, why cumbers it the
ground? But all this may be prevented if men would be Friends to themselves,
and study and practice those things which belong to, and make for their peace,
before they are hidden from their Eyes. But now,

Secondly; Your worshipping of God in your Families, and keeping up Religious
Exercises there, may be a means of preserving their peace, and keeping off
those Judgments which otherwise might break in upon them, Wisdom is a defense,
and Money is a defense, but Wisdom is the better of the two, for it gives life
to them that have it, Eccles. 7.12. There may be other things used for our
safety, Locks, Bolts, Bars, etc. but that Wisdom which consists in the Fear of
God, in the Love and Service of God, is the best. He that walks in
Righteousness shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munition
of Rocks, where Ruin cannot come at him; Isa. 33.16. I shall for the evidencing
of this produce two great Instances.

The former Instance shall be holy Job: And in him we will take notice of two
things; his care of Duty, and God's care of him. We will begin with his care of
Duty, and God himself, who is the faithful and true Witness, and cannot lie,
did testify thus of him, That he was a perfect and upright man, one that
feared God and eschewed evil. He was indeed a singular eminent Saint, one by
himself, not a Man like him in all the Earth, not one that had grown up to that
stature, attained that pitch of Holiness which he had done: So much is said of
him in general; Job 1.1. Yea and in verse. 8. God himself gave this very report
and character of him to the Devil, his mortal Enemy. Now let us take notice of
what is more particularly recorded concerning him, in verse. 4, 5. of that
Chapter. His Sons had been lovingly, and like Brethren, feasting at one
another Houses, and, as became them, invited their Sisters also. Job now could
not but be greatly pleased with that Brotherly Love which was among his
Children, yet he was jealous over them with a godly Jealousy, and had his
fears, lest in their feasting they should forget themselves, and do something
that might offend God, grieve his Spirit, and provoke his Displeasure against
them, and therefore he offered Burnt-Offerings according to the number of them
all. He did not offer one single Sacrifice for them all, and so make short work
of it, but he offered for each one a Sacrifice. Neither did he do this alone by
himself, but with them, together with them, therefore it is said, that be sent
and sanctified them; but what are we to understand by that expression, what may
be the meaning thereof? I answer negatively; he did not sanctify them by
working Grace in them, and infusing into them holy Habits. There is never a
gracious Parent but would do it for all his Children if he could He that is
holy himself, would have others so too. I wish, said Paul to Agrippa, that not
only thou, but all that hear me this day were as I am, saving these Bonds. But
it is not in their power, none can make saving impressions upon the Adamantine
Heart, but he that has an Arm of Omnipotency; none can give the least Grace to
Man but he that has all Grace in himself; therefore affirmatively, by Job's
sanctifying them some understand his praying to God that he would sanctify
them; and doubtless he did so; while some altogether seek the World, Greatness,
Riches for their Children, a good Man does above all seek Grace for himself,
and for his Children; he will go a begging to God for his Children, begging of
Grace, Lord, whatever thou deniest my Children, do thou give them Grace; though
thou will not make them great, yet do thou make them good; thus Abraham, Genesis
17.18. O that Ishmael may live before thee, that his Soul might live, that he
might live in thy favor, and according to thy command, so live as to please
and obey thee; and certainly this is an excellent way for the sanctifying of
our own Hearts, and the Hearts of others. The effectual servent Prayer of a
righteous Man avails much in this case. Prayer that comes from Grace in him
that puts it up may obtain Grace from him, on whose behalf he is a Suitor. But
there is a late Learned and Holy Commentator, viz. Mr. Caryl, understands it
thus, He sent and sanctified them, i. e. He sent them good Instructions, holy
Counsels, and wholesome advice; gave them notice of the Sacrifice that was to
be, and ordered them to prepare themselves that they might be in a due frame to
wait upon God in such an Ordinance, so that he did not perform this Duty alone,
but they were to join with him in it; and it is said, He did this continually,
i. e. frequently, as often as occasion for the doing of it offered it self, so
often he thus worshipped God himself, and called his Children to bear their
part with him in it.

We have seen the Piety of this Holy Man, now let us see his Safety; if any ask
what he was the better for this, I answer, a great deal; though Job did not
serve God for his Hire, yet he did not serve God for Naught; he did not make
any temporal worldly advantages his end of serving God, yet he found and felt
that it was not in vain for him to serve God, who is not wont to be behind-hand
with the Children of Men; he richly pays those that do but a Jobb of work for
him; so he did Cyrus* much more those who are steadfast and immovable abounding
in his work. Job here takes care of his Family that they should serve and
worship God, and God took care of his substance, Job 1.10 The Devil that was no
Friend to God, nor to his Honor, took notice thereof, and could not but own
it; Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he has on every side? God has two sorts of Hedges, there is an hedge of
thorns, and this God speaks of, Hos. 2.6. I will hedge up thy way with thorns;
that was to keep her from Idolatry, from running after the Gods of the Heathen,
whom she called her Lovers; she should have little heart to go after them, by
reason of those sorrows and troubles that would meet her; it is a great mercy
when God orders out difficulties, and pains, and vexation in a sinful course,
when he hedgeth them about with Thorns, so that they cannot wander from God,
and turn aside to crooked paths, with the workers of iniquity without pricking
their Fingers, and piercing themselves thorough with many sorrows; this speaks
the Love of God, and is one of his special favors* But this Hedge which God
had set about Job was of another nature, an hedge of gracious and powerful
protection; a strong hedge, sufficient to reach its end; an hedge that was no
where thin and weak, there was no gap to be found in it, which an Enemy could
enter in at, till God afterward for wise and holy ends gave leave. This must of
necessity be a good Hedge, because it was of God's own making; thou have set
it: and it also was a large Hedge, fetching a great compass, for it took in
all; it was about him, his person, thou have set it about him, about his Soul
and his Body, about his Graces and his inward Comforts, his Life, and Health,
and Strength; and about his House, the Habitation it self, and all within
Doors, Wife, and Children, and Servants, and all his Goods; yea, and about all
that he had, though at never so great a distance from home, his Fields, and his
Cattle, his Grass, and Hay, and Corn, his great things, and his little things
too; his Camels and Oxen, yea, and his Asses, and Sheep, and Lambs, all that he
had; and the Scripture adds, it was on every side. He could look no way but he
might see Salvation, so that neither Devil could come at him, nor any other
Enemy, without Divine permission: Indeed afterward as that Chapter tells us,
when the Devil, that inveterate and implacable Enemy falsely accused and charged
that good Man, telling God that he had all along been no better than a
Mercenary, and that a change of Providence would make a change in him; if
Providence did but frown upon him, he would quickly fall a Cursing of God, a
very touch would turn him. God did for the glory of his own Grace, and the
vindication of his Servants honor, give the Devil leave to try what he could
do by himself and his Instruments, at the same instant resolving to allay the
bitterness of the Cup, to support him under the burden* and at last to bring
him off with honor and without loss, or any cause of complaint, which was at
last done; for Job 42.12. God blessed the latter end of Job more than his
beginning; yet he then had a Blessing and that a great one; there was not only
protection, but likewise a benediction; for Satan could not but acknowledge,
that God had blessed the work of Job 's hands, and that he experienced the
power of that blessing, and reaped the fruit of it, for his substance was
increased in the Land; by all which you may plainly see that the Father of Lies
(though his design was to bespatter Job) did yet speak truth when he said, Job
did not serve God for naught; and as he did not, so no body else ever did, nor
ever shall; God is too good and gracious to suffer that, such a reproach shall
never cleave to his glorious Majesty.

The other Instance which I told you I would bring for the proving of this,
that Family-worshipping of God may be a singular means to keep off present
Judgments is a tremendous and very remarkable Providence which while I was
studying upon this Subject I happily met with in Polanus his Syntagma; liber 5.
cap. 22. de terrae motu. And it is this, In the Year of our Lord 1584. there
was an Earthquake in Switzerland, in the Territory of Bern, in which one Hill
being removed out of its place, and violently carried and dashed against
another, did overwhelm and bury an whole Village that consisted of fourscore
and ten Houses, not any of them being spared and escaping, save only the part
of one House, in which the Master of the Family, with his Wife and Children
were together at that very time upon their bended Knees praying and seeking of
God.

IV. Setting up the Worship of God in Families is the way to promote your own
Interest in them; for God has made a most sweet and gracious connection of his
own glory and Men's good, so that in seeking the former they find the latter; in
keeping God's Commandments there is great reward; upon seeking first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, other things shall be added, cast in as
an overplus. Folly, Sin makes Men and Women cheap and contemptible. Godliness
puts a Beauty upon them, makes their Faces shine, and renders them amiable,
considerable, truly great in the Eyes of those that know them.

But it may be, some of you do think your selves not at all concerned here, and
that you need not take any care nor bestow any thoughts upon this, for your
Interest is great and safe enough, and you can well enough secure and maintain
it with the greatest ease; are not you the Master and the Mistress, and have
not you the Purse and the whole power in your hands? And are not all under your
Roof under you? so that if any of them will not know their places, nor keep
their distance; If they will not be observant of your orders, obedient to your
commands, nor carry toward you with a due respect, you can make them smart for
it, by pinching them in their comforts, making them feel the weight of your
hand, and if that will not do, by turning them out of Doors. Let them affront
or slight you if they dare. Very well, my Friends, this is great, and you are
somebody, at least in your own Eyes; and it must be granted that all this you
may do, and being done it may turn to account; but all this does not, will not
make things so sure, nor strengthen your interest so much as you may imagine;
no, no, be assured of this, that when all is done, your having the Power and
the Purse in your hands, will not befriend you at so great a rate, nor so
effectually secure to you the love, and fear, and awe of those with whom you
have to do, as exemplary Piety, a Religious Life, and putting the Duties of
Godliness in practice; I well know, some Spirits are very rugged and
boisterous, not easily drawn and bowed to their Duty* all means must be used,
and all little enough; but this is certain, it is no prudence, when others are
applied, to omit the best. The Smith would show much folly in spending his
time, and tiring himself in beating and knocking of cold Iron, when by putting
it into the Fire till it be red hot, he may form and fashion it as he pleases.
It is a gross Error in Men proceeding much from Pride and Brutish Passion, and
plainly discovers their Ignorance to conceive, that their huffing and
hectoring, their ranting and raging at their Children and Servants will procure
them such a respect and esteem among them, as Holiness will do, and Prayer, and
living in a conscientious discharge of the Duties of their Places, and that
upon a Threefold Account.

First; It is the way to engage God on your side; who has said, He will honor
those that honor him: Do Men study to exalt God, they themselves shall be
exalted; if his Name be precious to them; theirs shall be so to him, I will
honor them, says God, he will do it himself, and that by taking them up at
last to Heaven, and clothing them there with everlasting glory; yea, and he
will make others honor them too. God speaking in Psalm. 91. of one that loves
him, that loves his Name, and Interest, speaks of many things that he will do
for him, and among the rest he promises to honor him, and he will be as good
as his word; it shall be done both in Time, and to Eternity.

Secondly; This is the way to instill into your Families right Principles; that
fear and respect which you have with them upon the other account is altogether
forced, you do by mere violence extort it from them, and so it is not kindly,
nor will it be lasting: they will reverence you before your Face, but what will
they do behind your Back? Multiply very hard thoughts of you, and speak as hard
words against you where they safely may; but in this way of holy Duty you take
a course to rectify their Spirits, and sow in them those Seeds that may, and
in all likelihood will spring up to your own comfort and advantage, for while
you do endeavor to teach them the good will of God concerning them, and to
instill into their Hearts the love and fear of his holy Name, they will at the
same time, and with the same pains and labor be taught to pay that reverence
and fear which they owe to you; show them the way to honor God, and they will
thereby learn to give that honor which is due to you; and it is to be hoped
that what they do now, will proceed from an inward Principle, and what does so
is of all things the most durable and like to hold.

Thirdly; Religion acted to the Life carries a Majesty along with it. It was
the Image of God instampt upon Man at first that did so excellently fit and
qualify him for the Government of this inferior World; it was this shining in
his Countenance that struck an awe upon the other Creatures, and made them
submit to him. As soon as Sin had defaced that Image, and he fallen short of the
glory of God, they threw off the Yoke, and grew stubborn and rebellious; the
more this Image is restored to Men, the more there is of God appearing in them,
the more they live to God, and walk with him, the more will they recover their
lost honor; a Crown upon the Head, a Sword, a Scepter in the Hand will not
render a Person so truly honorable as Religion will. This strikes an awe even
upon carnal Men, when in the Company of such, and often restrains them, and
keeps them from those exorbitances into which their own cursed Lusts would
hurry them; if this does not gain you their Hearts, so that they shall be knit
to you, it will commend you to their Consciences. Let Men think, and say, and
act as they please, there is no such probable, no such effectual way for the
working in the minds of people a real and permanent goodness, for the making of
Children loving and dutiful, and of Servants industrious and faithful, as is an
instilling into them the Principles of Religion, and teaching them the good
fear of the Lord; when this is once done, your Hearts may trust in them, and
you will find them devoted to the pleasing of you, and set for the promoting
your Interest, that will preserve them from running into such sins as others do
not stick at; it will make them tremble at that which others will commit with
greediness; they shall not be supinely careless and negligent in your business,
nor shall they be Companions of Fools, running with them into excess of Riot;
they shall not pilfer and steal from you, that they may have wherewith to
gratify and fulfill a Lust; they shall not embezzle your Goods, nor betray the
Trust you repose in them; they dare not do these things; there is a Conscience
within that restrains them, an Eye above which awes them. You have two famous
instances in Scripture for the proof of this, which I shall mention, the one of
a great Man, the other of a poor Servant.

The former is that of good Nehemiah: What made him so excellent a Governor,
and so tender over the people, studying their ease and comfort? he had
precedents enough to justify him in another manner of Carriage toward them,
Neh. 5.14, 15. For twelve years I and my brethren had not eaten the bread of
the Governors. He made not use of that which was his just allowance; The
former Governors which had been before me were chargeable to the people, and
had taken of them bread and wine, besides forty pieces of silver, yea, even
their Servants bare rule over the people; so that this Oppression was grown to
be a custom; Why did not he keep it up? The people having been accustomed to
such a load would not have kicked now, that was not it; he did not fear the
people, but he feared God, who alone was more than they, and that was it that
kept him from such practices, as he tells us in the same Verse, So did not I
because of the fear of God.

The other instance is that of Joseph, who was indeed of a most Noble Descent,
the best Family in all the World, but having fallen under the heavy displeasure
of his envious Brethren they sold him; and at this time he was a poor Servant,
nay, of the worst sort, a Slave, and what would not such an one do to recover
his liberty, or to enlarge his comforts? His Mistress burnt in Love to him, and
was earnestly set for an unlawful Enjoyment, and thereupon tempted him to a
compliance with her Lust. Carnal Reason now might have suggested; here is a
fair opportunity offered for advantaging your self, a refusal will inrage her,
if you do not yield to her Love you kindle her Wrath, and that will make the
House too hot for you; but if you do comply with the motion, and accept her
tendered kindness, you may be sure of a Friend, you engage her favor, and who
knows but by having that you may recover your liberty; however you may promise
your self much from it; but this would not take, Joseph had been taught better
in his Fathers House, and he had not forgot all, he had brought from home with
him such a Principle as was his preservation from t his fiery Dart, an
excellent Antidote against this insinuating Posyon, and that was a Spirit of
ingenuous gratitude, and holy fear, Genesis 39.8, 9. My Master has committed all
that he has to my hand, there is none greater in his house than I, neither
has he kept back any thing from me, but thee, because thou wast his Wife, how
then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God! You see here the power
of good Principles, and the blessed effect of Family Religion.

Whereas the neglect of this is of as malevolent influence, and pernicious
consequence. An House where there is not holy instructions and exercises, is
like a Field or Garden not cultivated that will be overrun with Weeds: When
Masters of Families neglect their Duty to God, they set their Children and
Servants a wretched Example, and teach them to neglect their Duty to them, by
their not owning and honoring of God, they teach them to disesteem and
disrespect themselves; for it is but just, a righteous thing with God, that
what measure they meet out should be meeted out to them again; by their
Irreligion they teach their Children and Servants Atheism, by their Looseness
they teach them Profaneness, by their playing at Cards at home they teach them
Gaming abroad, by which the Estates they labored for are brought to nothing,
and their Children to a Morsel of Bread, if not to the Gallows at last. This is
no more than what such Masters and Parents do deserve, no more than what they
bring upon themselves, and no more than what God has threatened, for he has
said, They that despise him shall be lightly esteemed; where observe, it is not
said, God himself will lightly esteem them, though that is certain he will do
so, for they shall not stand in his presence, he will put them away like dross,
and say, cast them out of my sight; but he will likewise so order it, that they
shall be lightly esteemed by others. God will expose them to the contempt of
others, yea, to the contempt of their own Families, their own Relations, their
own Children and Servants. Take an instance of this; Nabal was a very rich Man,
and very great, but a very bad walker, and of an ugly temper, and though all
feared him none loved him, he was a burden to his own House, what did one of
his Men think of him, and say too behind his back, 1 Samuel 25.17. He is such a
son of Belial that a man cannot speak to him; yea, and Abigail his prudent
Wife, though she would have covered his shame, yet she could not, no, nor give
him a good word, verse. 25. Let not my Lord regard the men of Belial, for as his
name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him. He both is a Fool,
and acts like one.

Whereas your setting and keeping up the Worship of God in your Families, your
Exemplary and Gospel-conversation your close and humble walking with God will
put a singular beauty and luster upon you, and make your Faces shine in the
Eyes of others, and commend you to their Consciences; so that they who are
under your Government, and do understand themselves, will freely submit to your
conduct and order, obeying not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake;
such thoughts as these will at sometimes be making their way into their minds*
and repeating themselves. It was the great goodness of God, and tender love of
our Parents, that cast our Lines in such a Family, where our Master is a good
Man, and our Mistress a gracious Woman, both of them Persons fearing God, they
seek our good, taking care not only for our Bodies, providing Food for them
when well, and Physic when sick, and teaching us the Mystery of our Calling;
but they look after the welfare of our Souls too, that we may be holy here, and
happy hereafter, know and serve God in time, and enjoy him to Eternity; how
much are we obliged by this to take care of their business, to lay our selves
out in their Service, and be good in our Places, and study to please them well
in all things; if they have in them any spark of ingenuity, if any sense of
kindness, if any love to themselves they cannot but now and then, yea,
frequently have such workings in their Minds.

Object. But here some may be ready to step in and say, Does not experience
prove the contrary, have not others, nay, have not you your self seen it
otherwise? Rebellious Children, and unfaithful wicked Servants in those Houses
where there is constant praying and reading, and other Religious Exercises. To
this I answer,

First, By granting it is so, too too often so, it is most certain, and no less
sad than certain, and worthy to be matter of great Lamentation, that there are
some very bad Persons to be found in very good Families. There was a Bloody
Cain in Adam's Family, whom his immediate Parents loss and ruin could not make
wise; and an unnatural Ham in Noah's, whom a Deluge of Waters could not wash
from his filthiness; a scoffing Ishmael in Abraham's, notwithstanding all the
care and pains he took in teaching and commanding his Children; there was Judas
a Traitor, an Incarnate Devil in the Family of Christ himself, who spoke and
lived as never Man did. A Weed may be found in the choicest Garden, a Serpent
was in Paradise, which may become relief to those gracious Parents that have
degenerate, and graceless Children. Pity them, bemoan them, weep over them, do
your utmost to reclaim them, and to turn them to the wisdom of the Just; but
consider, this is not your case alone; David was a Man after God's own Heart,
yet what a dismal company of Children had he? Of whom I do not remember one
good, except Solomon, who notwithstanding all his wisdom was none of the best:
But,

Secondly, This I may lay down, as I believe, without fear of a contradiction,
that for the greater part, those Families which the Rulers of them are careful
to make Bethel 's houses of God thorough practices of Piety, and actions of
Religious Worship, are the Seminaries of Virtue and true Religion. These are
the Gardens in which Christ has his precious Plants; these the little
enclosures where he reaps his richest Crops; I do not indeed deny, but as the
Wind blows where it lists, so does the Divine Spirit, who is a most free
Agent, and chooses what Objects he pleases to work upon. Lepers in Israel may
have their loathsome Disease continuing upon them when Naaman a Syrian shall
meet with a Cure. There was in the House of wicked Jeroboam, who made Israel to
sin, a good Abijah, in whom there was some good thing found toward the Lord God
of Israel. God had his Saints in the House of a Monster, Bloody Nero; but it
was to an Abraham that he promised he would be a God, and to his Seed. It is in
such Houses there is found the Seed to serve him, which shall be accounted to
him for a Generation. It is these that travel in birth for their Children and
Servants, that they might be brought forth to God, and have Christ formed in
their Hearts, and unto these God grants the seeing of the travel of their Souls
to their satisfaction. That precious Seed which they sow in holy Discourses,
prudent and pious Counsels, and Religious Examples, God is pleased to water
with his Blessing, so that it shall root, and spring up, and bring forth fruit.
But,

Thirdly; Let us cast our Eye again upon, and take another view of that
Scripture which we have already made use of, Genesis 18.19. where you have God
speaking thus, I know Abraham that he will command his Children, and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. Observe the
phrases or words as they lie in our Translation; he will command, and they
shall keep: I must acknowledge my self to be singular and alone in the Notion,
having consulted some Learned Expositors upon the place, and found none that
take any notice of it; but, as those that repair to them know that is no
strange nor unusual case, therefore I will with humble modesty communicate my
thoughts to you, and submit them to the judgment of such as are able; I look
upon these latter words not only as Predictory, foretelling what the Event
would be, what his command would produce, and how it would work, but also
Promissory, and so securing that good and desirable issue. Abraham will teach
his Children, and his Household after him, and says God, they shall keep the
way of the Lord, since Abraham will do his Duty, I will succeed and prosper him
in the doing of it; he shall not lose his labor, nor take pains to no purpose.
The truth is, God will not suffer his faithful Servants to be totally
disappointed, and lie down in their shame at last; let things issue how they
will they shall not lose their reward; in their Duty they shall have peace,
their endeavors shall be accepted, and themselves shall be admitted into their
Masters joy. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes
of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength, Isa. 49.5. but very often God
gives them to see the desires of their hearts, so that they attain the end
which they propounded to themselves, as here, since Abraham will see to it that
his Children and his Household be taught, God would see to it, that they should
learn and practice what they were taught. He would set up the worship of God in
his Family, and maintain it there as long as he lived; and God would so
influence and order their Spirits, that they should keep it up after him, they
should love and honor and serve God after his example, and after he was dead
and gone, godliness should be posteritiz'd in his Family.

V. This one thing is the Highway to a Blessing, to have the favor of God,
together with the pleasant fruits of that favor, do but you in the sincerity
of your hearts, and from a gracious Principle perform your Family duties, and
set up the worship of God there, and you may comfortably expect that God in his
great goodness and mercy will pour down his blessing upon your Families, and
make your Family a blessing unto you.

First, The Blessing of God shall be upon your Family, it shall be upon you who
are the Parents, and Masters, and upon yours as well as you, like that precious
Ointment, which being poured out upon the head of Aaron, from thence descended
to the Skirts of his Garment; there is a notable place to this purpose, a place
which has a double aspect, a terrible frowning one upon the wicked, but a
smiling and comfortable one to the godly, Prove. 3.33. The Curse of the Lord is
in the House of the Wicked, but he blesses the Habitation of the Just. Let us
well consider this Scripture, The Curse of the Lord is in the House of the
Wicked; he does not say the Curse is impendent, and hangs over it, nor that it
is at the door, ready to draw the latch, but it is already in, it has made its
entry, and taken possession: and as it is in it, it spreads and goes all over
it, it goes into every room, and mingles it self with every thing there, it
lights and abides upon the man, and upon all that he has; if you go into the
Man's House, you may possibly see what will dazzle your eyes, there is costly
Furniture, Rich Hangings, Great Cupboard-Heads of Plate, Garments of Silk,
Satin, and Velvet wrought with Gold, Tables spread with variety of the
greatest Dainties, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 73. They have more than heart
can wish, but there is no fear of God there, instead of that, there is a great
deal of debauchery, and profaneness, ranting, roaring, gaming, healthing,
cursing, swearing, obscene filthy talk, and as foul actions; Hell it self is
broke out, there is the smoke, the fumes of that bottomless pit, and there is
the curse of God too; that Flying-Roul mentioned Ezekiel. 5.2. the length whereof
is twenty Cubits, and the breadth thereof ten, and says that Text, it shall
enter into the house, and remain there, it takes up its abode, and it is not
idle and unactive, works indeed gradually, and oftentimes insensibly, no body
perceives it, but it works effectually, it shall consume the House with the
Timber and Stones thereof; it has strong and sharp teeth, that can bite stones
in pieces, Psalm. 37.35, 36. I have seen the Wicked in great power, spreading
himself like a green Bay Tree, yet he passed away, and lo! he was not* yea, I
sought him, but lo! he could not be found.

But let us go to the other part of the Text, and see what report that makes
us, He blesses the Habitation of the Righteous. Observe now, there is
righteousness in the habitation, a good man dwells there, and out of the good
Treasure of his heart he brings forth good things, there has been a gracious
Principle Divinely inspired into him, and it is his desire and endeavor to act
suitably to that Principle; in his House you may see not only sobriety, but
also righteousness toward Man; and yet more than so, there is godliness, a
making conscience of performing all that duty which they owe to God; now as
there is righteousness, there is a blessing there too, God has blessed that
man, and his house, in turning them from their iniquities, in giving them such
a Spirit, and that blessing does abide, it shall never be revoked, nor
reversed. God will say in this case, as Isaac did with respect to Jacob, Genesis
27.33. I have blessed him, yea, and he shall be blessed; and that is not all
neither, the Text says, He blesses his habitation; he has not only done it,
but he goes on still to do it, the old blessing remains firm and valid, and
God is pleased to add new ones to it, and will continue doing so, till he at
last be what Moses said of Nepthali, Deuteronomy. 33.23. satisfied with favor, and
full of the blessing of the Lord, what may we not say of such an House,
Godliness is there, and God himself will be there too, for he is nigh unto all
that call upon him, that call upon him in truth. He looks upon others afar off,
and keeps his distance, but he is near these, he stands at their right hand, he
dwells in them, and with them in their heart and house, and where ever he
dwells, the house is the better for him, he always brings enough with him to
make him welcome. He says peace be to this house, and mercy be to this house,
yea, and salvation be to this house; he will quiet this house when there is a
storm, and comfort it when there is trouble, and uphold it when it is sinking,
and repair it when under decays, and shine upon it, and prosper it. Seeing it
is a Religious house, God will make it a comfortable house, seeing the incense
of Prayer goes up from the house to Heaven; a shower of blessing shall come
down from Heaven upon the house, a variety of duties shall be accompanied with
a variety of mercies, and a succession of duties crowned with a succession of
blessings; as day unto day shows mindfulness and night unto night gratitude, so
day unto day on Gods part, shall show his love, and night unto night his
faithfulness. Not but that in those very Families where there are most holy
exercises, there may be many afflictive exercises. David's house was not as the
clear Sunshine, or a Morning without Clouds; there are among his dearest
Children Iniquities and Transgressions; and notwithstanding the everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure, into which God has entered with
them; he has reserved to himself the liberty of visiting those iniquities with
the Rod, and those Transgressions with Stripes, yet this does not hinder their
blessedness. Though afflictions may and do come in, yet they cannot crowd or
shut the blessing out. Jacob met with a great deal of trouble, nevertheless the
blessing remained upon him. Nay, God will take such special care of his People,
as that the very Rod shall blossom with Love, and their afflictions shall be
turned into advantages, out of the Eater shall come Meat; that which devours
their comforts, shall feed their graces, the gains shall make a full, yea
abundant amends for the loss; and whatever their apprehensions for the present
may be, while they smart and are in pain, yet the day shall come wherein they
shall be reconciled to the darkest and most severe dispensations. when they
shall see, yea and feel cause with thankfulness to own that Gods smitings were
a kindness, and that his rebukes were an excellent Oil, that instead of
breaking the head, did better the heart.

Secondly, This is the way to have the Covenant made good to you, and an
accomplishment of the Promises, which are more worth than all the gold of
Ophir, or the riches of both the Indies. To this purpose that calls for our
consideration, which God spoke concerning Abraham in that place, to which we
have twice already had occasion to have our recourse, Genesis 18.19 I know him
that he will command his Children and his Servants after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment; and if he and they do so,
they will do well, but what then? what will he get by it? read the very next
words, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him;
if Abraham would be careful of his duty, God would magnify his mercy upon him.
Obedience to Precepts is followed with the performance of promises: but what
was it that God had spoken of him? it was good, much, considerable, very great
and admirable things which God had spoken. That he would make of him a great
Nation, that he would make his name great, that he would bless him, and make
him a blessing; that he would bless them that blessed him, and curse them that
cursed him, and that in him all the Families of the Earth should be blessed,
Genesis 12.2, 3. in thee, i. e. in thy Seed, in Christ who shall come of that
according to the flesh, shall all be blessed, for Christ came to bless them in
turning them from their iniquities, in making peace for them with God, and
bringing them back to God. Now, says God, Abraham in this way will make all
these my promises sure to him, he will prevent any obstacles and rubs from
being in their way, Abraham will be dear over my interest, and name, and glory,
he will exalt and honor me in his family, he will breed and train them up for
me, he will use his Authority for me, and lay his command upon them to fear me,
and to keep my way, and therefore I will be as good as my word to him, of all
that which I have spoken concerning him, not one tittle shall fail. I beseech
you take notice and remember it, that a care to promote the interest and honor
of God, the setting up the service and worship of God in your Families, is the
way to bring over to you the good of the Promises. The Apostle Peter tells us
that the Promises are exceeding great and precious, so great that we cannot
measure them, we cannot grasp them in our understandings; they are so great,
that they contain Heaven and Earth in them, and all good things, and they are
so precious, that you cannot rate them according to their worth; we may easily
overvalue our selves, and the enjoyments here below, that is done everyday, but
we cannot overvalue promises; and would you not, my dear Friends, be heartily
glad of an interest in them, and being able to lay a just claim to them, would
you not be glad to go to the whole heap of promises, and with the arms of faith
sweep them up, and say these are all mine own, these are the good things my God
has given me, these are those pleasant places in which my lines are fallen? In
a word, would you not be glad at heart if all these exceeding great and
precious promises should empty themselves and unlade all their treasures into
your bosoms? I doubt not but you would, am sure you have reason, and if you
would, your best and only way is to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and to
serve and honor God in your personal and domestic Capacities, and then,

Thirdly; As this is the way to bring down a blessing from God upon you and
upon your Families, so it is the way to make your Families a blessing to you,
and your Children a blessing to you. Oh, how sweet and desirable a thing is
this! What a comfort is it to Prarents to have such Children as are their
Comfolts, their Joy and Crown? such Children as are blessed themselves, and
blessings unto them, when so many are their poor Parents grief and sorrow,
their curse and shame, of whom them cannot think without a sigh, on whom they
cannot look without indignation? Children, who fill their Parents lives with
bitterness, and make them a lamentation thoroughout, and at last bring down
their gray Hairs with sorrow to the Grave? Children, that while young, were
their Parents hope and joy, but when they were grown up, became first the
Companions of Fools, and then foolish themselves, and so prove Thorns in the
sides of their Parents, and Pricks in their Eyes. I know, you that are Parents
would not have your Children such; it is your duty to love them, and unless you
have cast off all good nature, you do love them, and would rejoice in them and
over them to do them good. Now this is one special way for the bringing it to
pass; Prove. 20.3. The just man walks his integrity; his Children are blessed
after him. Here is a good Man, and he chooses to walk in a good way. Dr. Iermin
in his Paraphrastical Meditations upon the place has these words; There are
several Walks of Men in this World, one walks in his pleasure as it were in
the walks of a Garden, another walks in his profit, and he walks as it were
up and down the Exchange, another walks in his trouble, and he walks as it
were in a Wood; another walks in his poverty, and he walks as it were in a
Desert; another walks in his beastly lusts of drunkenness and uncleannness,
and he delights to walk as it were in mire and dirt; but the just man walks
in his integrity, and he walks as it were in the holy Temple, but that his
walk is to walk still on, and not to turn back till he come to the end of his
Life. Much care is taken and many means are used that men may leave their
Children in an happy condition, but he that walks in his integrity takes the
most proper, compendious and effectual course to bring himself to blessedness,
and his Posterity too; so says the wisest of men in this Text; His Children
are blessed after him. Supposing that they tread in his steps, and walk in
their integrity, as he had done in his before them. And Children blessed of God
are their Parents blessings, and will be the joy of their hearts, and the staff
of their Age; yea and Servants may be blessings also to the Families in which
they live; and therefore are not to be slighted, nor oppressed, nor abused. You
read in the word of Truth, that the house of Laban was blessed for the sake of
Jacob, and the Master how bad and unjust soever he had been in other things,
was ingenuous in acknowledging he had by experience found it so. And the like
is recorded of the House of Potiphar; Genesis 39.5. It came to pass, from the time
that he had made him Overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the
Lord blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph' s sake, and the Lords's blessing
was upon all that he had both in the house and in the field. Now teaching them
the knowledge and fear of God by your instructions, and alluring them to the
practice of Godliness by your Religious Examples, together with prayer, is the
way to make yours such.

VI. To set up the Worship and Service of God in your Families, is an excellent
way to get and maintain peace in your own bosoms while you live; and how sweet
that is those do very well know, and being consulted, will tell you, who have
felt the Lashes of an enraged Conscience, and a Worm within gnawing and tearing
them day and night. What would not such poor Creatures give? what would they
not do to be delivered from the frights it puts them in, and the pain it
causes? And I must needs say, it is in my account just matter of wonder how
any body can, and that any one of those do enjoy themselves a day, an hour, who
live in the constant and shameful neglect of God their Maker, and of their duty
this way. Methinks there should be always Nemesis a tergo, a dreadful sound in
their Ears, they should be ashamed and blush to think of God, or lift up their
faces toward Heaven, ashamed to look Man in the face, since they have so far
put off Man, as to neglect the great Work of Man; ashamed to show their heads
in their own houses, where they live like so many brutes, contrary to the
dictates of Nature, and where the very stones and timber may be swift and loud
witness against them. Methinks they should never see Wife, nor Child, nor
Servant, without such bitter reflections as these, these poor creatures have a
love for me, but they have a cause to hate me: now they show me respect, but
the day will come when they will curse me, for they are like to be undone by
me. I bring them up in Ignorance, Irreligion, and Atheism, I live without God
in the World, and so do they, through my means they are not like to come at
last to Heaven, because they do not walk in the way that leads thither, and it
is my fault, who do not teach them that way, nor go before them in it. I am a
bloody Husband to my Wife, an unnatural Father to my Children, a cruel Master
to my Servants; when their Parents bound them to me, they did little think what
a wretch I am, I do not take any care of their precious and immortal Souls; and
indeed, how can it be thought that they should be kind and compassionate
toward the Souls of others, who are cruel to their own; it is not likely
Charity should be active abroad, when it does not begin at home.

Methinks such Persons as these should every day feel a tormenting sting within
them, and go up and down in pain, and that their Consciences should be very
uneasy, and often in a day reproaching them, and flinging dirt in their faces,
yea flashing Hell Fire in them. I do not wonder that many of these Men do not
care to be alone, not much at home but love to be abroad with their boon
Companions as bad as themselves, among whom they may lay their Trouble with
their Liquor; but they will get but little by this, this is but casting
Conscience into a sleep for a time, that will awake again and rouse and roar;
when they come to themselves Conscience will return to its work, and strike up
again. Is this thy Love to her that lies in thy bosom? do thou dwell with her
as a Man of knowledge, or an Heir of the Grace of Life? are these thy bowels to
thy Children which came out of thy Loins? have thou a mind to bring them up for
the destroyer, and to be fuel for everlasting burnings? And is this thy mercy
to thy Servants? did thou take them to corrupt them? if they had any good
thing in them toward the Lord God of Hosts, would thou utterly quench it? and
if they were bad, thou take a course to make them seven times more the
Children of the Devil than before. Thou would have them, O Man! please thee,
and will thou not show them how they may walk so as to please God? Thou
would have them to mind thy Shop, and wilt not thou mind their Souls? Thou
would have them take pains in thy House, but thou will take none for their
Welfare and Salvation. It is far better to be such persons Horses and Dogs,
than to be their Children and Servants, for then they would be better looked
after. And this I doubt not but I may safely affirm, if such Men as these have
any peace in such a way as this, they are either grossly ignorant, and know not
the Judgment of the Lord, nothing of Religion to purpose; or they are very
Atheists, such in Judgment as well as in Practice, or their Consciences are
feared as with an hot Iron, or wholly benumbed, are cast into a profound sleep,
and have no fear of God before their Eyes. And let them know, that sooner or
latter, the present Calm will be followed with a most terrible Storm; the Wrath
of God, and the Rage of Conscience will cause it, and that will blow away all
your comforts, and throw down all your hopes, and who can tell but it may carry
you to Hell with the People that forget God?

But on the other side, an hearty Love to the Name, Honor and Interest of God,
and the setting up of his Worship and Service in your Families, from such an
excellent and holy Principle is the direct and ready way to a sweet inward
peace, the way to have a Calm, and Serenity in your Souls, though the Clouds
may be black, and the Storms great which are upon your Tabernacles. Let things
issue how they will in your Families, as to your Children and Servants, whether
they do get good or no, whether they go to Heaven or to Hell; yet this will be
a quieting and comforting consideration to you, that you in some good measure
have done your duty. I have been much taken with those words of Samuel to
Israel, after they had rejected the Lord from being King over them, and he had
made Saul King; 1 Samuel 12.23. As for me, God forbid that I should sin against
the Lord in ceasing to pray for you; but I will teach you the good and the
right way. O! do you so, my dear Friends, let it be the same with you; set this
excellent Copy before you, and write after it, frequently considering with your
selves, what an hearty reviving Cordial it will be when you are able to say to
your Families, Blessed be God, I have not ceased to pray for you, many a
Petition I have put up, and many a Tear I have shed in my Closet, nor have I
ceased to pray with you; your selves are my Witnesses, how frequent and earnest
a Suitor I have been to God on your behalf. I have been pleading and wrestling
every day, morning and evening; and I have also been teaching you the good and
the right way, that of Truth and Holiness, that of God's Commandments, the
Scripture way which is good, because it is clean, and pure, and right; because
it brings to Heaven and Happiness all those that travel and are undefiled in
it: And yet further, it will make the Cordial much more strong, and prove a
singular addition to your comfort, when you are able to say, I have not only
shown and taught you that good and right way, but I have likewise taken you by
the hand, and led you into it. You and I have had a communion in holy Duties.
We have gone to the House God in company, and at home we have walked in the way
of God in company. How cheerfully may you converse together, and go about the
work and business of the day after you have in the morning offered up your
Sacrifice unto God; and how may you at night part with one another in peace,
and lie down to rest in your Beds, after you have desired the spreading of the
Divine Wing over you, and committed your selves to the protection of that God
who is the Keeper of Israel, and does neither slumber nor sleep. If there be
not wilful commission of known sins, nor a wilful omission of other known
duties, but a sincere desire and endeavor of approving your selves to God in
all holy Conversation, a due and constant care of performing Family Duties will
afford you great peace, so that nothing need to offend you. And let me add
this, that constancy in this work will be a sovereign Antidote against many of
those things that cause convulsions, and broils, and disorders in too many
houses. What passions are there in them, and how unruly and exorbitant, by
which all is put into a flame? What discontents, what animosities, what
quarrels and contentions, that people are so far from enjoying one another,
that they cannot enjoy themselves? by means whereof the nearness of the
Relation becomes a great aggravation of the affliction; but joynt-fellowship in
Family Duties and execises of Religion, may very much help in this case, both
to the purpose of preventing those feuds, if you do but consider that of the
Apostle; 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands
without wrath and doubting. As you must pray in Faith, so in Love. You must not
in wrath pray to him that is the God of Love. It will also help to the
repairing of a breach, and healing of a wound, when there is one made; if you
duly consider that of our Savior; Matthew. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to
the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy
Brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Reconciliation must go before
supplication, if we would have audience with God. How can you think your Father
should be pleased if you live at variance with his Children? Peter would have
Love between Husband and Wife, that their prayers might not be hindered; 1 Pet.
3.7. They that quarrel together, will not be fit to pray together. Observe
James his method laid down for general observance among Christians; Iam. 5.16.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another that ye may be
healed. Seek peace with one another by confession, and then peace with God by
prayer.

But to return, this Family-serving of God will promote inward peace in them
that are Governors; it cannot but be a comfort to you to think, that while
other houses have been the sink of sin, yours have been the dwelling places of
the most High. Others have been Bethavens, houses of vanity, yours have been
Bethels, the houses of God; in others there has been the serving of diverse
lusts, and fellowship with Devils, and the unfruitful works of darkness, but in
yours there has been the serving of God, and a fellowship kept up with the
Father and with his Son the Lord Jesus Christ. In a word, while other houses
have been the Synagogues of Satan, yours have been the Temples of the Living
God, and the Churches of Christ. As we do find godly Religious Families
dignified in the Scriptures, and honored with the illustrious name of
Churches. Thus Paul, Romans 16.3. bids them greet Priscilla and Aquila his
helpers in Christ Jesus; and also verse 5. the Church that was in their house.
And again in Col. 4.15. He ordered them to salute Nymphas, and the Church that
was in his house; i. e. the Family which was Christian and Godly; and besides
their joining together in Manual Labor and household business, did unite and
join together in the Worship and Service of God. And I have read that in the
last Century before this, the House of George Prince of Anhalt, for the good
Orders that were observed therein, was said to be Ecclesia, a Church for the
Religion in it, Academia, an University for the Learning in it, as well as
Curia, a Court, for the grandeur and state of it. And if you your selves are of
God, and have in you any real goodness, it will be your comfort to have such
Families also. The Apostle John that beloved Disciple who lay in the bosom of
our Lord, and there contracted an holy heat, in his Epistle to the Elect Lady,
tells her, He rejoiced greatly when he found of her Children walking in the
Truth. It must needs then be as great, if not a greater joy to you to see your
own Children walking in the Truth. For you Fathers, to see the Children that
you begat, and you Mothers, to see the Children that you brought forth, and
that both of you brought up with so much care, and tenderness, and cost,
walking with God, and going on Heavenward. The same blessed Apostle in his
third Epistle which he sent to Gaius his Host, says, I have no greater joy
than to hear that my Children walk in Truth. By them he meant those that were
his Spiritual Children, that he had begotten unto God by the Gospel. And it is
indeed a very great comfort and joy to all the Faithful Ministers of Christ, to
see that they have not run in vain, nor labored in vain; that the precious
Seed which they have sown has taken root in some of their Hearers hearts, so
that they are turned to the Wisdom of the Just, and to the Faith of the Gospel,
and brought over unto God, and then that there is not only an embracing of the
Truth, but a walking in the Truth, a coming under the power of the Gospel, and
a living up to the Rules of he Gospel; a sound Conversion at the first, and
ever after a suitable Conversation; for in this Ministers have their great end,
in this they have the Seal of their Ministry; these persons are now their hope,
and they will be their Joy and Crown of rejoicing in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming; yea, for the present they are their Glory and Joy;
1 These. 2.19, 20. Now I say, if this does afford so much joy to godly
Ministers, to see their Spiritual Children walking in the Truth, that they have
no Joy in the World comparable to it; surely we may conclude, that the Joy of
gracious and holy Parents must needs equal, if not exceed it, when they see
their Families, their Servants, especially their own natural Children walking
in the Truth of God, and in the Ways of God, and cheerfully engaging together
with them in the Service of God, counting none of his Commands grievous, but
his Yoke easy, and his Burden light.

VII. The setting up of the Worship of God in your Families, and a faithful
performance of Religious Duties there, is the way to prepare you for a dying
well; the way to die in peace, and with comfort, and with an holy confidence to
resign up, and commit your Souls unto God as to a faithful Creator. He that
has walked with God in his integrity in this World, need not fear any evil,
when the time is come for his walking in the Valley of the shadow of Death, for
there God will be with him, and there his Rod and his Staff shall comfort him;
Psalm. 23.4.

First; You must die; I need not tell you that for your information, though you
have need to hear of it often for the promoting of your preparation. Too many
put far away the evil day, though it be at the very door, and live as if they
were to live always; but the Scripture has told us, It is appointed unto all
men once to die; Heb. 9.27. This is God's Appointment, his Order and Decree
which shall not be reversed; what God has appointed, man cannot avoid. We must
all die once, and it is our great concern and wisdom to make sure that we shall
not die twice, that over us the second death shall have no power; that the
first will, experience plainly proves. We see persons die, though at several
Ages, and in various manners, yet one after another they drop into the Grave,
which is the House for all the Living; and when our turn comes, we also must
among the rest take up our abode there until the Morning of the Resurrection.
Now since we all must of necessity die, our business is to make as sure as we
can of dying well. Many are for an easy death, but I would have you be for an
happy death. It is indeed difficult and troublesome to crowd through a strait and
narrow Gate, but it is no great matter though you be pinched, and pained, and
greatly put to it for a while, so that you find it an entrance into the
glorious Kingdom of your God and Savior. But then know,

Secondly; Those that neglect duty cannot rationally expect to die comfortably.
How can they think to be admitted into the Joy of their Lord, who have been
unfaithful in their little, and hid their Talents in a Napkin? They that have
lived without God in the World, and in the neglect of him, it will be very hard
and unpleasant to them to think of departure hence, and going into the oath
World, where if they have not God welcoming, delighting and satisfying them,
they shall meet with nothing but misery and torments; if they are not admitted
into the bosom of his Love, they shall be thrown into the flames of his Wrath.
How was it possible that the unprofitable Servant could look his Master in the
face with any comfort? he had all along hard thoughts of him, and in the end no
hope of any good from him. He had been indeed entrusted with a Talent, but
though he had not embezzeld and squandred it away, yet he buried it, it lay
dead upon his hand, there was no improvement of it for his Masters Interest,
and by that means he undid himself for ever. The losing of his time was no less
than the losing of his Soul. Every one of you, my Friends, that is the Master
or the Mistress of a Family, have a Talent committed to you by the great God,
and for it you must be accountable; there is a day coming wherein your Lord
will reckon with his Servants; what other Talents you have, of Knowledge,
Gifts, Interest, Estate, and the like, you know best; but for certain you have
a Talent of Power and Authority put into your hands, you had need be very
careful how you manage it; let me ask you, what do you do with your Talent?
What do you do? Ask your selves the question, if you do not serve your
Generation according to the Will of God. If you do not Trade with your Talent
for the honor and glory of God, you will be cast into outer darkness, where
you shall have torment and sorrow enough; here you had business enough which
you would not do, there you shall have misery enough from which you shall not
escape; here you will not give glory to God in an holy activity for him,
hereafter he will extort it from you in a way of Vindicative Justice; if you
will not apply your selves to praying and reading the holy Scriptures, with the
teaching and instructing of your Children and Servants in the things of God,
you may well tremble to think of fiery indignation, and of the dismal effects
of it, weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, which will be the portion
of your Cup to all Eternity, unless you do seasonably repent, and reform, and
make your peace with God, for what reason have they to promise themselves a
comfortable Reward, who do now live in the neglect of their Duty. But then on
the other side,

Thirdly; When your Hearts have been upright with God, and sound in his
Statutes, and walked (as David resolved to do) within your Houses with a
perfect Heart, and behaved your selves wisely in a perfect way; then you need
not tremble at the nearest approaches of the King of Terrors. It is indeed a
solemn thing to die, and as it is a taking the compositum in pieces, as it is
the parting of those two old Friends, the Soul and Body, which had lived
together long in great intimacy, and close union, Nature startles at it, and
they seldom are divided without an agony and struggling. But yet such a Person
as I have now described need not fear, but as he can look back with comfort, so
he may look forward with boldness, as Paul did, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7 8. I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. Well, Paul, thou art
now ready to be gone, but what did thou do while thou wast here? I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; and what
do thou now please thy self with? That hencefort there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which God the righteous Judge will give unto me at that
day; and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing; and who are
they that can love his appearing as a Judge? surely none but they that have
been obedient to his commands, and done his work as he was their Lord and
Master; when you have served your Generation according to his Will, you may be
as willing to fall asleep as a weary Man is at Night after a hard days labor,
when he has finished his work; in short, when you have been faithful in your
little, much more when you have been always abounding in the work of the Lord,
you may be sure that your labor shall not be in vain, but you shall receive
your reward, even that Gift of God which is Eternal Life. To this purpose I
would have you consider two things.

First; The account our Lord and Savior could give of himself, and what
thereupon he did expect and ask of his Father. Both these we meet with in John
17.4.5. The account which he could give of himself was this, Father, I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.
He glorified his Father in and by finishing his work. Now let it be your care
and mine to tread in the steps of our Lord, and to write after so excellent a
Copy set us by so great a Person, and so dear a Savior; though we cannot equal
him, that is a thing impossible for us poor weak sinful Creatures to do, yet
let us imitate him as much and as far as we can, and the good Lord help us so
to do; and if we will up and be doing God will be with us. Will you therefore
endeavor it? Oh do, glorify God upon earth; you have too much dishonored him
by your sins against him, by your disobedience to him, by your preferring
worthless trifles, broken cisterns, lying vanities before him; mend now, and
for the future make it your business to glorify him; you were made for that,
it was the end of your Creation; you were sent hither into the World for that,
whatever other business your hand finds here to do, this is the main and
principal, this does deserve and call for your best thoughts, and utmost
diligence, and do you glorify him by finishing the work which he has given
you to do. There is none of you, but God has given work; as he casts your
Lines, and carves your Portions, so he has cut out your work: I beseech you,
study it, labor to know what it is; and knowing it, mind it, set about it
speedily without delay, and follow it close, neglect no part of it, but finish
it as far as you are able; you cannot do all, because so much of your time is
already lost, and your strength is so much impaired, and corruptions do so
greatly clog you, and your spiritual and carnal Enemies will so resist and
hinder you that you cannot do all you should, and will need pardon for your
miscarriages and failings in what you do; yet do all that you can, not only the
work of your general Calling as you are Christians, but also the work of every
particular place, station and relation in which the Divine Providence has set
you; whether it be Civil or Ecclesiastic, Public or Domestic. Art thou a
Sheriff of Justice in the Country, a Mayor, Alderman, a Common-Council-Man or
Constable in the City? Do thou the duty of thy Place. Art thou a Minister of
the Gospel? Do thou thine. Preach the Word, be instant in Season and out of
Season; art thou a Child, a Servant? Be thou obedient, industrious, faithful:
art thou an Husband, a Wife, a Parent, a Master or Mistress, the Head and
Governor of a Family? Do thou thine. Walk within thy House with a perfect
Heart, rule in the fear of God. He that is not good in his Relation, is not
good at all; he that is not a good Husband, a good Master, is not a good Man;
much of the power of godliness does consist and discover it self in the
performance of Relative Duties, See then that much of your care be employed
about this, and see that your places be not empty of Duty, nor your Families
void of Religion.

Now observe what our Savior did hereupon expect and say, Father glorify thou
me with thy own self: Here has been my work, where now is my glory? So when
you have finished the work which God gave you to do, when you have walked with
God, and lived to God, when you have improved your Interest, your Power, and
your All for God, then you may say, Father do thou accept of me, and receive
me, and glorify thou me, my work is done, now let me have my rest, always
remembering that you are not to expect this upon the score of Merit, but only as
a Reward of Grace; for our Lord has taught us to call our selves unprofitable
Servants, when we have done all that is commanded us; what are we then now we
fall so short, and perfect not one piece of work that is put into our hands?

Secondly; Consider that good account which the Prophet gives of those good Men
whom after a Life of Service God takes away from hence; would you know what
becomes of them, whither it is that they go, into what state they are put? He
tells you, Isa. 57.2. They enter into peace, they rest in their beds, every one
walking in his uprightness, i. e. every one having walked in his uprightness
while he was here; they professed Religion, and were true to that Profession;
they owned the Interest of God, yea, and to their power they served that
Interest; they have studied uprightness and integrity; they have been faithful
to God in their Generation, and in their several places, and when such do come
to die, they have no reason to be afraid of dying, no reason for them to draw
back, and be unwilling to go; say to them it shall be well with them, they
shall enter into peace, into a complete and perfect peace; they shall live in
peace, and enjoy themselves in peace, they were here sometimes fear round
about, buth henceforth they shall be peace round about, and they shall rest in
their Beds. Poor hearts! they had but a little rest while they were here, a
great many fears, and a great deal of care, and but a little rest; alas! it was
broken and disturbed by Enemies without, and by Sins within; Head and Heart
were discomposed and out of order, at sometimes there is no soundness in their
flesh, nor rest in their bones, Psalm. 38.3. But when once Death has cast them
into their last sleep, they shall have placidam quietem, a sweet and pleasant
rest; their Bodies for a time, and but for a time, in a Bed of Dust, for that
is not intended for the place of their abode, they only Inn there by the way,
yet it is made easy for them, and safe, and perfumed, for it is the place
where the Lord himself lay; but their precious and immortal Souls shall rest
for ever in a Bed of Spices, in a Bed of Love, in the Bosom of Abraham, in the
Arms of Jesus, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; not only
the Martyrs that die for him, but all Believers that die in him, in the Faith
of Christ, in obedience to him, in a state of Union to him, and Communion with
him, for their works do follow them, all their works of Charity, and all their
works of Piety, all the good they have done abroad in the World, and all the
good they have done at home in their Families, none shall be forgotten, none
dropped nor lost by the way, but all shall follow them, and in Heaven meet them
in great, glorious and inconceivable Rewards, so that the Lord Jesus shall be
both glorified in them, and admired by them.

VIII. You having made it your work and business to serve and worship God in
and with your Families, and brought them cheerfully to join with you therein,
you may leave them with the far greater hope, and by consequence with the
greater comfort. And while they are mourning, and sighing, and weeping, because
they must now part with you; yet you may be glad and rejoice, because hereafter
you shall meet with them in a better place and state; and here again take into
your Consideration these few things.

First; That all these things must be dissolved. You now see it is so as to
many of these things, and believe it will be so as to all the rest. Death does
travel up and down, and mows people down apace, and will pursue his bloody work
till he had snapt asunder the nearest and dearest Relations, broken up all
Houses, and put an end to Families. It would not by wise persons be counted
incongruous at a Marriage Feast to have a Death's Head set upon the Board, nor
to dash your sweetest Contentments and Delights with dying Thoughts; think, my
Friend, often think that Husbands and Wives must part, the Conjugal Knot shall
be loosed, Parents and Children must part, sooner or later, but how soon none
of us do know; the great God, in whose Hand our Times are, that locked that up
among his Treasures, and no Man has a Key to let him into the knowledge of it;
the certainty of the thing does engage us to diligence, and our ignorance of
the time is a strong Argument for our doubling of that diligence.

Secondly; That will be a very sad parting which will be in despair. As they
must needs mourn bitterly who mourn without hope; so they must needs die
dismally who die without hope; and what can be thought more likely than that
such will be the death of those, who in the days of their Health and Prosperity
have forgotten God, and lived without him in the World, who have made it their
work to sin together, and to dishonor God together, and profane his Name and
abuse his good Creatures together? If these believe there is a God, and a
Resurrection, and a Judgment to come, in which all Persons shall receive
according to what they have done in the Body, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil, they may have such thoughts as these forcibly breaking in upon them. I
and my Family, after we have lain a while and slept in the Dust, shall rise
again, and we shall meet again, but where? Oh where shall we meet? We shall
meet at the Judgment Seat of Christ, there to hear that Condemning Sentence
pronounced upon us, Go ye cursed: we shall meet in Hell, where we must make our
Eternal abode; we shall meet in Torments, which will be both intolerable and
eternal, that so as we have sinned together, we may smart together, and burn
together in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and that which will render these
thoughts more grievous and painful to them may be this; that their Children and
Servants coming thither will be the aggravation of their own misery, since they
were so much the cause of it, which as some think was the great, nay only
reason why the rich Glutton, (of whom you read in Luke 16.) being in Hell was
so unwilling that his Five Brethren should come into that place of Torments; it
was not out of good nature, and love to them, for there is no such thing in
Hell, it was not out of a desire to prevent their misery, but the aggravating
of his won, he having contributed so much to their ruin and destruction by his
vile and wicked Example. But then,

Thirdly; Those of you who can at a dying hour look upon your Relations as
having walked with you in the ways of God, likely to follow you into a blessed
Eternity, may leave them with joy. All of you that have made God your choice,
and his glory your end, that have made Religion your principal business, and
Family-duty your work, and been constant in the dispatch of it, you may part
with comfort, and leave one another with joy; though there will be a shower,
Bowels will yearn, and Love will melt the Heart, and make it drop Tears, yet
there need be no storm within; you that are Parents may commit them to God,
whom you brought up for him, and so rejoice in hope that though you leave them
behind you, yet they will not leave that God to whom you are going; but though
they stay behind in a wicked World, which is full of snares and dangers, bad
Company, bad Examples and Temptations, yet since you have by Faith and Prayer
committed them to him, they shall graciously be kept by his power, through
Faith unto Salvation; and that the Counsels you have given have made an abiding
impression upon them; and the Seed which you have sown shall not be lost, but
spring up and bring forth fruit, and when you are dead and gone they will
continue and proceed to practice as they have been taught, and they will know,
love, and fear the God of their Fathers, and serve him with a perfect Heart and
a willing Mind; you may hope, that of all that which has been by you said and
done something will stick. The Heathen could say, Quo semel est imbut a recens
servabit odorem
Testa diu --


A new Vessel will for a great while retain the scent or savor of that Liquor
which was at first put into it; and so young ones: and I am apt to think that
many of those who after a pious Education turn aside from the good ways of God
to crooked paths with the workers of iniquity do not sin at so easy a rate as
others do, but offer violence to their Consciences, and call to mind again that
of God himself concerning Abraham and his House, which I have already quoted
more than once; He will teach his children, and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord. His Instructions will infuse such
Principles into them, that they will do it, and my Grace shall so powerfully
cooperate with those Principles, and influence them that they shall do it.
They shall keep the way of the Lord, the way of his holy Precepts, and the way
of his instituted Worship; they shall do it after him, after his example, and
after his decease, when he is dead and in his Grave; my fear and service shall
be posteritiz'd in his Family. Abraham's advice and practice shall live in
their Minds, and Religion shall live in their Houses, and so it did in Isaac's,
and in Jacob's, and so down. and further for the strengthening of this your
hope, I desire you to take along with you that passage of Solomon, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a child in the way that he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it* The Scripture sets it the next Door to an impossibility for
them to learn to do well who have been accustomed to do evil; and though it be
not so hard, yet it is not very easy for them to do evil who have been all
along accustomed to the doing of that which is good. Zophar speaking of the
wicked Man, says, Job 20.11. His bones are full of the sins of his youth,
which shall lie down with him in the dust; which Gregory expounds thus, Usque
ad pulverem non deserunt; i. e. usque ad mortem ab iniquitate non cessat: He
does not forsake his Vices as long as he lives, he does not cease from them
till he dies, his youthful sins stick close, fast to him; he continues the
practice of them while he lives, and when he dies he receives the punishment of
them. It is a matter of greatest moment to take heed what we do accustom young
ones to; teach Children that which is good at first, and they will learn it
well, and that is the way to have them keep it well. It is reported of the
Hearts in Scythia, that they do betimes teach their young ones to leap from Turf
to Turf, and from Bank to Bank, and from Rock to Rock, and so they continue it
when they come to be old, and by means thereof they cannot be taken though they
be hunted, whether that be so or not is none of my Enquiries; sure I am,
teaching Children their Duty toward God, and going before them, and with them
in the performance of it, is the way to engage them to a perseverance therein,
and to secure them from the great Nimrod of Hell, that cruel and bloody Hunter
of precious Souls: so that they shall not afterward be drawn away from it by
the wiles, subtilties and temptations of that wicked one, nor seduced by the
bad examples of evil Men, who know not the Lord. Do you by your Teachings and
Instructions lay up the words of Gods Mouth in their Heads, so through Divine
Grace they may come to lay them up in their Hearts, and then they will be
preserved from sinning against God, and kept from the paths of the Destroyer.
And as an happy consequence hereof,

You may at your departure from hence leave them with a comfortable hope of
meeting them again with mutual and exceeding joy in the other World, in a
better place, and in a far better case than that is in which you leave them;
when all troubles shall be removed from the Flesh, and all corruption from the
Spirit, when there shall be nothing within to disturb, and nothing without to
offend, but you and they shall have a spotless Purity, and blessed Eternity.
You shall be raised out of your Graves in which you have had so sound and long
a sleep, and stand upon the Earth, and be caught up together with the rest of
the holy Ones into the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall you
ever be with the Lord, and O the joys that will be at that meeting! The meeting
of the Bridegroom with the Bride is not to be compared with it; the meeting of
the Father with his penitent and returning Prodigal falls short of it; Oh the
Smiles, the inward Satisfactions, the dear Embraces, the loud Triumphs, the
Hosannahs and Allelujahs that will be at that meeting! All which will arise
from the condition you meet together in, freed from sin, and from
imperfections, delivered from all your Enemies, having got the last of them
Conquered, and now under your Feet; yourselves being in a state of safety,
peace, and acceptance with God; and also it will arise from the thoughts and
considerations of that which you then meet together for. It is for the greatest
purposes, and most glorious ends that can be; you meet to receive the Reward of
all your services, and of all your sufferings, the answer of all your Prayers,
the accomplishment of all your desires, the fulfilling of all your hopes; you
shall meet the Bridegroom, whom though you had not seen, yet believing you
chose, and loved, and were espoused to, and between him and you there shall be
everlasting Nuptials; you shall meet together to take possession of that
incorruptible undefiled Inheritance which fades not away, but is reserved in
Heaven, of which you were newborn the Heirs; you shall meet to see, and
together enjoy that God in Heaven whom you served upon Earth, to Sun your
selves in his Beams, to solace your selves in his Arms, to Delight your selves
in that fullness of Joy which is in his presence, and to bathe your selves in
that River, or rather Ocean of Pleasures which is at his Right Hand for
evermore. You that have walked in the same way shall come to the City of God,
the heavenly Jerusalem, of which the Lord and the Lamb are, will be the
everlasting light; and having set your Hand to the work of God, and having had
your Heart in it, you shall enter into the same rest. You that have mourned
together, and together mingled your Groans and Tears, and poured out bitter
Complaints against your Sins and your Selves, shall then rejoice together, and
that with exceeding Joy, because of your own and each others thorough Cure, and
perfect Health. You that have confessed your faults together, both Heart and
Life-sins, shall then be delivered from them, and triumph over them all. You
that have prayed together upon Earth, and with all the power of your Souls
Besieged the Throne of Grace, shall in Heaven sing praises together, even
Eternal Allelujahs, and to make the Consort complete, and that melodious
Harmony the more ravishing, you shall be joined with an innumerable Company of
Angels, and all the Saints that were Redeemed unto God by the Blood of the Lamb.

Oh! how deliciously sweet will it be to your Souls who have been the Father of
a gracious Family, or the Mother of it, if at the last and great day, when the
whole World shall be summoned to appear, and give up their account to God, you
shall be able to say, Lord here am I, and the Children which thou have given
me; these thou gave to me in thy goodness, and these I gave up to thee in
Covenant, and accordingly I brought them up for thee; I am not ashamed to own
them for mine, and I trust that in Christ thou will be graciously pleased to
call them thine, now thou art making up thy Jewels; these I did carefully teach
thy fear, and did also lead them in the way that thou did choose, and they
were willing to learn, and ready to follow: they were my hope, when but little,
and my comfort when grown up, and now, Lord, we present our selves before thee
in hope of being accepted by thee, and finding favor; and then our Lord Jesus
shall look upon you with a gracious Eye, and say, I know you, you are some of
my old Friends and Acquaintance, you did rejoice and work Righteousness, and
remembered me in my ways, and in those ways I did meet with you; Come ye blessed
of my Father, you are welcome to me, and you will be so to him, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, you have been
industrious seekers, and now you shall be successful and happy finders; you
have been running the Race, now you shall receive the Prize; you have been
sowing in Prayers, and Tears, and a Conscientious performance of Duty, and now
you shall with joy reap the Harvest, your Faith shall be swallowed up of
Vision, and your Hope of Fruition. This is no more, my dearly Beloved, than
what you, and such as you may with good ground hope for, and live in the joyful
expectation of, and the lively hope of it may very well allay the bitterness of
Death, and afford you that comfort, which may through Christ keep your Souls in
perfect peace, even when you are in the greatest agonies and strugglings with
the King of Terrors. When you are ready to draw your latest Breath, and to bid
farewell to all the world, and to set up your Sails for the other world, and to
shoot the Gulf, your Conscience can bear you witness that you have heartily
submitted your selves to God, and believingly closed with the Lord Jesus
Christ, renouncing all confidence in the Flesh, and making mention of his
Righteousness as that only by which you must be justified; yet that you have
not had an idle and unactive Faith, but endeavored to walk in all the
Ordinances and Commandments of the Lord blameless, and that you have been
sincerely desirous to improve your interest and power for the honor of God,
and accordingly have ordered and brought up your Family for him, and so have
spent your time together in his fear and service: I say, you may hereupon
cheerfully commit your own Souls to him as to a faithful Creator, and also your
Children to him; them you may leave in his Hand as the proper Objects of his
Covenant Love, and Fatherly Care, hoping that you shall meet again in his
Blessed Presence, and live for ever in his Kingdom and Glory. You see I have
brought from your selves, you that are Masters, Mistresses, Parents, Heads and
Governors of Families, Eight Arguments for your setting and keeping up in them
the Worship of God, and Religious Exercises, and upon every one of them I have
insisted long, and enlarged much* that if it be possible I might convince your
Judgments, and work upon your hearts and affections. Now the question is, what
you think of, and say to these things. For mine own part, though I do not, and
hope never shall overvalue any of my own labors, yet I would set a great
estimate and high price upon all the truths, of which I am sure these things
which I have brought to you are some, how much soever they may taste of the
Earthen Vessel in which they come to you, yet know assuredly they are of God.
And let me add, it is a common Saying and a true one, that Interest governs the
World; though it is no less common and true, that men are greatly mistaken
about their real and grand interest, placing it where it is not. But I say, if
your own interest have any place and power with you, if you would secure and
promote it, you will find not only good but abundant reason for the doing of
that which I am pressing upon you. viz. Setting up the Worship of God in your
Families.

And if any of you have hitherto been strangers to it, I earnestly beseech you
to show your selves persons of teachable and tractable Spirits, easy to be
entreated, and evidently to manifest your fear of God, and love to your selves,
by your speedy doing it; take not up with some inclinations toward it, or good
purposes or resolutions for the future, but up and be doing, fall presently to
practice for Gods sake, and for your own sake, and for your Families sake do
not defer and put off, do not say you will do it afterward, for though that
should stop the mouth of a sleeping lazy Conscience, it will by no means
please an holy God. Besides, that is no other than a wretched fallacy, and base
cheat, that a malicious Devil and a treacherous deceitful heart would put upon
you; that Old Saying carries a great truth in it.

Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
He that is not fit and willing to day, will be more unfit and unwilling to
morrow; Convictions will wear off, and the heart will grow harder, and
corruption stronger, and the Devil will clap the faster hold, and the Spirit of
God may withdraw and move no farther; strive no more, and where are you then?
Thou said, seek ye my face, and my heart answered, thy face Lord will I seek.
So David, here was a sudden compliance, he did not stand arguing and
questioning, he did not take time, but immediately arose and girded himself to
the work. O! that it may be so with you, strike Man, Woman, strike while the
iron is hot, as soon as the wind blows spread your Sails. I beg of you, yea,
with utmost importunity I beg, that you would go home to day and do it, do not
dare to lie down in your Beds this night without the performance of
Family-duty, considering that it is Duty which I am calling you to* it is not a
thing indifferent. I do not think it worth my while to contend for matters of
that nature, but this is none of them, this is not a point of liberty, no, no,
it is Duty, and Duty must be done, Duty is Debt, you owe it to God, to your
Families, and Debts must be paid, otherwise Divine Justice will Arrest you, and
you shall answer for it. Now, seeing it must be done, the sooner it is done the
better, you do not know how soon you may die, it may be too night, and I am
sure it is best and safest for you, that when ever Death comes, it should find
Faith in you, and you in the way of your Duty. Blessed, for ever blessed is
that Servant, whom when his Lord comes he shall find so doing.

But I shall now proceed (as indeed it is high time) to a third head of
Arguments, drawn from your Children, who are near, and ought to be dear to you,
unto whom you were in the hand of God Instruments of conveying life and being.
Children that are parts of your selves, that are your selves in a second
Edition, whose welfare therefore and happiness you are by all imaginable bonds
obliged while you live to study, and promote even as your own. They likewise
will in part be drawn from your Servants, particularly your Apprentices, who
are under your roof, and committed to your care, and employed for some time in
your service, and about your work. And here I desire you seriously to ponder
upon these following Particulars, and to lay them close unto your hearts, and
wisely judge what there is of strength in them, what a rational inforcement of
this holy practice upon you.

1. Think with your selves what they are by Nature, both your Children, and
your Servants, more particularly your Children, because the nearness of the
Relation does strengthen the engagement upon you. And here we will consider
them both as to their Bodies, and their Souls, and that in three Particulars.
We will begin with their Bodies, and outward Man, which are indeed but dust,
but the Workmanship of Gods hands wonderfully made. now

First, Some of them peradventure are objects of pity in the eyes of all that
behold them, some are defective and imperfect, an integrating part is missing,
others of them are crooked, or their Members are misplaced, or very much
deformed; so that Spectators turn away their faces from them, as from loathsome
and odious Creatures, not fit to be exposed to the sight of any; others of them
are lame in their hands, or feet, one or both, or blind; others of them came
excellent out of the hands of God, and the wombs of their Mothers, but since a
disease has seized them, as the Small Pox, or the Scrofulous Humor, which
have made sad work in them, and utterly defaced their Beauty, digging pits and
making seams in their faces, distorting their mouths, eating off a finger from
this hand, and another from that, and so devouring them by piecemeal. Now let
me ask you, is not this enough to draw out your compassions toward them, and to
cause the sounding of your Bowels; could you be content that there should be no
sound part in them, but all throughout nothing but botches and boyls, and
putrefying Sores; would you have their Souls as bad as their Bodies? would you
be content that they should have ignorant blind Souls, crooked and perverse
Souls, ugly filthy and deformed Souls; that as nice and curious Persons cannot
abide to look upon them; so the great and holy God should not endure to look
upon them neither, but say, cast them out of my sight, my mind cannot be
toward them. Methinks you should bestir your selves to the utmost, and do all
that in you lies, that the loveliness of their Souls may compensate and make an
abundant amends for the deformity of their Bodies; look out for the best Beauty
for them, that Wisdom, and Grace, and Holiness may make even their faces to
shine; yea, that their beauty may be perfect, through Christ's comeliness put
upon them. But

Secondly, There be some of your Children which are amiable and pleasant to
behold, curious pieces of God's Work: Sons that are Plants of Renown, and
Daughters as Corner-Stones polished, after the similitude of a Palace, as you
read in Psalm. 144.12. They have bodies of a comely stature and exact shape,
Limbs of a due proportion. Countenances lovely and lively, in which you see
excellent Features and admirable Complexion; the Lilly and the Rose having met,
and concurred to render them accepted and desirable in the eyes of men, and
certainly this is a great Mercy, for which you and they have cause to bless
God, only let them have a care they do not abuse it to Pride and Wantonness.
Besides this fair outside, this well built Tabernacle of Clay, they are
inwardly adorned with good Tempers, smart, brisk and exquisite Parts, which
greatly accomplish them and render them fit for Converse, so that all who know
them are delighted with their Conversation.

And now sit down, yet Parents, sit down and consider, is it not a thousand
pitties that such Tabernacles should stand empty, or be possessed with an evil
Spirit? Is it not pity such Bodies should have in them wicked and vile Souls;
that those lovely persons, who have so much without to commend them to Men,
should have nothing within to commend them to God? Would it not be sad, if
these Persons, who have almost Angelical Countenances, should be no other than
Cages of unclean Lusts, Sinks of Sin, Habitations of Devils, mere painted
Sepulchers, fair to the eyes, but within there is nothing but filth, rottenness
and a stink? Oh, how much better is it for them to resemble and take pattern by
the King's Daughter, mentioned Psalm. 45.13. who has not only her garments of
wrought gold, but is likewise all glorious within. This is the way for them to
become precious in God's sight, and honorable; this is the way for Jesus the
Lord of Glory and King of Saints greatly to desire their Beauty, though he
himself is the chiefest of ten thousands, and deserves to be the Desire of all
Nations. And then,

Thirdly, let your Children be what they will as to the outward man, fair or
black, complete or defective, beautiful or deformed, what are they as to their
Souls? the very best part about them is stark naught, indeed it is the very
worst; that which David called his Glory, and should be theirs, is their Shame;
alas there is cause enough why it should be so. Be they as lovely as you think
them, they are not Paradises, but Deserts and Wildernesses overrun with
Briars, Thorns, and Weeds, not Cedars but Brambles; by nature they are
Crabstocks, and is it not pity but they should be grafted upon with holy
Instructions, and religious Principles? that so, instead of wild grapes, the
grapes of Sodom, and the clusters of Gomorrha, they may become Trees of
Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that by them he might be glorified,
which will also turn to their own singular Advantage; for having their Fruit
unto Holiness, the end will be everlasting Life; for such Trees when their
bearingtime is come to its appointed Period, will be sound not Fuel for the
Burning, but Timber for the Building; or, if you please, Death shall take them,
and Grace transplant them into the Paradise of God.

You that are Parents and have beautiful Children, look upon them with a great
deal of Pleasure; you look and like, you look and dote, you see your selves in
them, and several curious strokes and pretty tricks, and all these please you
highly. But I remember when Samuel was greatly taken with Eliah, 2 Samuel 16.7.
the Lord said unto him, Look not on his countenance or on the height of his
stature, because I have refused him. So say I; do not look upon this or that
natural or acquired Excellency in your Children so as to rest satisfied with
that; but see if you can discover any thing of Christ in them, any thing of a
new and divine Nature; as for their natural state you will see in them more of
the brute than of the man, if you do but look upon them through a
Scripture-glass; that will help you to the best prospect. To this purpose let
us make use of that which we find in Job 11.12. Vain man would be wise, though
man be born like the wild asses colt. In which words there are three things
worthy of our observing; what Man is, what he would be, and what he was born.

First, what man is; vain, proud man, conceited man, but still vain man. In the
Hebrew it is empty man. Indeed sometimes he makes a great noise, but there is
little worth: He has nothing in him, nothing of value, much froth, much wind,
but no substance; he has too much of that which he should not have, Sin,
Satan, Folly, Madness, Madness is in the heart of man whilst he lives, but
there is nothing of that which he should have, nothing of that beautiful Image
which was at first stamped upon him, nothing of that primitive Glory with which
he did at the first shine, nothing of that real Excellency and Beauty which our
gracious and blessed Redeemer came to advance him to; he has nothing of the
saving Knowledge of God, but his foolish Heart is darkened, and he become vain
in his Imaginations: nothing of the divine Spirit, but sensual, not having the
Spirit, sunk into the Flesh, immersed, drowned in Flesh, nothing of sanctifying
Grace, nothing is made new, but all old and rotten, wholly alienated from the
Life of God, dead in Trespasses and Sins; there is in him no Love to God, no
Faith in Jesus Christ, but altogether throughout filthy and abominable. Again,

Secondly, there we see what Man would be, wise. Vain Man would be wise; but,
perhaps, you will say, this is well, it is very good, it is a sign he is not
altogether empty. Here is a Will that stands right, Desires directed to a
proper and deserving object. But mark what is the meaning of the Words, take it
in these two things: He would be wise, i e he affects a show and appearance of
Wisdom, and if he can attain that, he concludes he has enough. He does not
care so much for being wise, as for being counted wise; he is wise in his own
conceit, and in his own eyes, and he would be so in the opinion of all that
know him. It is evident he does not care for Wisdom it self, because he does
neither pray, nor take pains, for it; he does not dig for it as for Silver, nor
does he seek and search for it as for hid Treasures. But whatever he now would
be, or be thought to be* what was he at first, what when he came into the
World? Zophar tells us,

Thirdly, He is born as a wild asses colt. What a strange Climax or Gradation
is here? He is born a Colt, that is, at best, a Brute, be it never so handsome
or well made, yet is no other than a Beast, and has not the Understanding of a
Man; but that is not all, he is born an Asses colt, a dull, heavy and foolish
Creature, good, fit, for nothing; nor is that all, he is born a wild Asses
colt, the dullest and most untractable Creature; so of all Fools, Man is the
worst and most sottish. Thus the Scripture speaks, Isai. 1. The ox knows his
owner, and the ass his masters crib; but Israel does not know, my people does
not consider. And again, Ier. 7. The Stork in the heaven knows her appointed
season; and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the times of
their coming, but my people know not the Judgment of the Lord. Now then I will
leave it to you, O Parents, to Judge, whether you have not need betimes to
break these Colts, if you would have them come to good; have you not need to
take a great deal of pains with these Asses, and the taming of these wild
Asses. Is there not reason why you should do what you can to bring them to bear
the yoke in their Youth, and to draw in it. I mean not only your yoke, but
Christ's too, which is easy, and none of his Commandments grievous; and so to
turn these Beasts into Men, yea, into Saints; certainly you should, because
they are yours, and if you love them you will; natural affection accompanied
with religious Principles, will put you upon all diligent use of means to so
blessed a purpose, viz. Bringing them out constantly to the public Ordinances,
and at home taking care to pray for them, and with them, and to instruct,
command, exhort and catechize them, together with the setting before them holy
and good examples.

II. Add this Consideration to the former, How much you have contributed to
their corruption and defilement, they are indeed degenerate Plants, but the
Plants of a strange Vine, and that is you, Ier. 2.21. Now here I will consider
you both as Parents, and how much your Children are the worse for you, and as
Masters, and so how much your Families do suffer by you.

First, you are Parents, God has crowned your Conjugal Relation with
Posterity, but what is your Posterity but the Seed of evil doers, Children of
those that have corrupted themselves? those pure Souls which were created by
God, were polluted and spoiled as soon as they entered into those bodies that
came of you; you did convey a cross, froward depraved nature to your Children,
who therefore are so bad because they are yours. It is said, Genesis 5.3. Adam
begat a Son in his Image, and after his likeness, not in the Image and likeness
of God, as Adam himself had been made at first, but in his own Image, in his
Image not only as he was Man, but also as he was lapsed Man, his Son was like
himself in Body and in Soul, and in Sin, and thus have the Sons of Adam done
ever since. Job says, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
Man being unclean, cannot make himself clean, let them wash in tears, let them
wash with Snow water, he cannot fetch out the dirt, the spots and stains* he
cannot wash himself clean; and being himself unclean, he cannot produce and
bring forth that which is clean. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; weak
flesh, sinful flesh; that water which is soiled and muddied at the Spring,
cannot be pure and clear in the Stream. Aethiopissae Filius nigrum ab ea
Colorem trahit. The Son of a Blackmoor will be a Blackmoor too. You know there
are hereditary Diseases, as the Gout, Stone, Spleen, Lethargy, which commonly
run in the blood, and are transmitted by the Parents to their Children; Sin is
one of them, it is the worst of them, it sticks close, and descends from
Parents to Children, and that from Generation to Generation, without
interruption, without exception, unless that of our dear Lord Jesus, who was to
be holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners, that he might be a
Sacrifice, and a Savior, and in order thereunto, came into the World in an
extraordinary way of generation, being formed in the Womb of a Virgin, by the
power of the Holy Ghost who over-shadowed her; otherwise Sin does inseparably
follow Nature, and never goes out of the blood. So that I may call Parents the
Channels, the Kennels, the Common-Sewers, in and through which all that
abominable filth runs, which defiles their otherwise lovely and desirable
Children, rendering them odious and abominable unto God. And never carry your
heads high, because your Children are of a Noble or Gentile descent, come of
such a Family, bear such account, or because you can leave them a great Estate,
there is one thing, alas! that stains and spoils all that Glory, viz. It is
from you they have it that they are born Sinners. And truly, as there is a
great deal of joy at the birth of an Infant, because a Man-Child is Born into
the World; so there is reason why that joy should be upon this account somewhat
allayed, and mingled with grief and sorrow, that a Sinner is born into the
World.

Secondly, Let us consider you as the Heads and Governors of Families; are not
your Families the worse for you? you that are Husbands and Wives should be the
better for one another, and fill your Relations, and carry in your places as
those that are Coheirs of the grace of life, that you may have cause of
blessing God you ever came together. But reflect and curiously enquire, are not
you the worse for one another, and are not your Children and Servants in some
respects the worse for you both? You that have no Religious Duties performed in
your Houses, are for certain very injurious to them, by that your omission; for
you teach them Atheism, neglect and contempt of God; you teach them to live
without God in the World, like so many Brutes; you do thereby teach them to
neglect their precious and immortal Souls, and to mind nothing but the
concernments of a vile and perishing Body, and the inferior good things of a
Transitory World: But what do you think of your selves who are the best, who
walk most closely with God; do you foot it so right that you do not sometimes
tread awrie? do you demean your selves with so much exactness, that nothing
amiss is to be discerned in you? do you order your carriages and conversations
with so much judgment and circumspection, that they are without fault, and
blameless. David says, Who can understand his errors? and, if thou, Lord,
should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? and have you not read such
passages as these in the Scriptures? There is not a just Man upon Earth that
lives and sins not. In many things we sin all. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. There are too many graceless
Persons in the World, but there is not one sinless Person; there are many holy
Persons who have been washed, and justified, and sanctified, but not one that
is cleansed from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, and who has attained
to a perfection in his holiness, and can you think that your blemishes and
miscarriages are invisible? do not those that live and converse with you
observe you? yes, they do, and see more spots in your faces than you do in your
own, though you look in the glass; and they will be exceeding apt to tread in
your steps, and to imitate you, especially in that which is evil, for unto that
their own corrupt Nature does incline, and like a strong Bias carry them that
way; yea, and your example shall be made use of and pleaded as their sufficient
Warrant. If they should be reproved by some sober judicious Persons for doing
that which they should not, they will justify themselves thus; I saw my Father
or my Mother do so, my Master or my Mistress do so, and therefore I may do it
too. Poor things, they do sometimes think of their Parents, and Masters above
that which is meet, and not considering their imperfections, and that body of
Sin and Death which they carry about with them; they do not in their following
them make use of that caution which they ought to do. Be serious, my dear
Friends, be serious and consider whether your Children and Servants be not the
worse for your Pride, discovered in your haughty looks, and lofty words, and
stately gestures, and costly garbs and dresses; the worse for your Passion,
shown in sharpened Eyes, furious Countenances, and words like Swords and
Daggers; the worse for your mispence of time, in vain visits, frothy
discourses, games and recreations, and lazy lying in Bed upon the Lord's Day,
till much of the morning is lost, and a considerable part of the Public
Worship be over before you come into the Congregation. In short, are they not
the worse for this, and that, and the other; yea for many things, which your
own Consciences (if you please to consult them, and give them free leave to
speak) can and will inform you of far better than I can, being every day with
you, and in you, and keeping a Book of Accounts, in which is inserted and
recorded what it observes.

Now then, ought you not to repair this damage to your utmost? and since you
have done, and go on to do them so much hurt, should you not do them all the
good you can, and be heartily glad when it is in your power to do it? have you
shown them many things by which they have offended God? and will you not show
them by counsel and practice those things that will please him? I beseech you
to bestir and lay out your selves and your all for the making of them amends,
and the recovering them out of that Snare of the Devil into which you have
helped to bring them.

In what I now say, I do not put you upon impossibilities, nor the doing of
that which is without the reach of your power. I do not bid you sanctify them
by forming Christ, and planting Grace in their hearts. I do not bid you raise
them out of the Grave of Corruption, and breath into their Souls the Breath of
Spiritual Life; that must be effected by the Arm of Omnipotency; none else can
do it, none has a Regenerating Power, but he that has a Creating Power; but
you may pray for them in your private Retirements, and you may pray with them
that God would be pleased to give them his Spirit, and to work his Grace in
them: You may take your Children and your Servants with you, and carry them to
God, and beg of him that he would pity and help them. As you read, when our
Lord Jesus was here upon Earth, Tabernacling among Men, they came to him from
all parts of the Land, begging of him a Cure for themselves, and their Children
and their Servants, as the matter did require. Now Christ is in Heaven, he has
the same power, that you must needs believe and grant; for here he was in his
State of lowest Humiliation, there he is in his State of highest Preferment and
Exaltation. After his Resurrection he told his Disciples, all Power was given
him both in Heaven and Earth, and distance of place does not hinder. He can
help afar off as well as at hand, his Arm being long as well as strong. There
is no need of this great Physician leaving his Fathers Right Hand, and coming
down in Person to cure Diseased Souls; by sending his Word he can heal them, as
he did formerly; Psalm. 107. v. 20. And his Glory has not in the least
detracted from his Mercy. His Heart is now what it was, as loving and tender;
his Bowels are not shrunk up, nor do his Compassions fail. Jesus Christ is the
same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever; Heb. 13.8. As his Hand of Power is
not shortened, so his gracious Ear is not grown heavy; therefore go to him,
taking Faith along with you, and say, Lord, my Children were born blind, O! do
thou anoint them with thine Eye Salve, that they may receive their sight. Open
their Eyes that they may see wonderful things out of thy Law, and the precious
things of thy Gospel; that they may see the sinfulness of Sin, and the beauty
of Holiness; that they may see their own undone condition, and the absolute
need they have of Christ, together with the all sufficiency of his
Righteousness, and the riches of his Grace, the sweetness of his Government,
and the easiness of his Yoke. Go to him and say, Lord, my Children are
grievously troubled with a Devil, a proud Devil, a lying Devil, a disobedient,
stubborn, obstinate Devil, O that thou would make thy Power known in the
casting of him out! Once more, go to him and say, Lord, My Children have got
the Leprosy of Sin, it has spread it self all over them: O do thou say, I
will be ye clean. My Children are Enemies in their Minds by wicked works,
Enemies to Thee and all that is spiritually good, O do thou reconcile them!
that of Enemies to Thee they may become Enemies to Sin, and for the time to
come they may love thy Father, thy Self and Spirit, thy Truth and Ways. Lord,
My Children are the Slaves of Satan, and they delight in their Chain; they
serve diverse Lusts, and are pleased with their Bondage, and count their
Drudgery a Recreation. O! let these Lawful Captives of the Mighty be delivered,
break their Chains asunder, and bring them into the Liberty of thy Children,
and, as they have yielded their members Servants to uncleanness, and to
iniquity, unto iniquity, even so now and for the time to come they may yield
their members, Servants to righteousness unto holiness; Romans 6.20. And what you
do to this purpose for your Children, do also for your Servants; take them up
in the Arms of your Love and Prayer, and lay them at the foot of God, and beg
him that he would sanctify and save them.

And as you can thus pray and plead with God for them, so you can add hereunto
if you will. There are other things which you can do: You cannot infuse into
them a Principle of Grace, but you may teach them the Principles of Religion;
you may show the way in which they should walk, though you cannot put that way
in their hearts; as we have that expression; Psalm. 84.5. Blessed is the man
whose strength is in Thee, in whose heart are the ways of them. You cannot bow
their Wills to God's, nor raise and spiritualize their Affections, nor set them
upon their proper Objects, those things which are above, but you may inform
their Judgments. You cannot write the Law of God in their hearts, nor put his
Fear into their inward parts, but you may acquaint them with the Law of God,
and read the Bible to them, and hear them read both it and other Othodox good
Books, but the Bible most and rather than the best Books in the World. So
again, you cannot make them good, but you may set a good Example before them,
and write a very fair Copy for them to imitate, and invite them to tread in
your steps, saying to them as Paul did, Be ye followers of me as I am of
Christ, and walk so as ye have us for an example. It is certain, all this is in
your power, you may do it; and oh that you would! Oh that you would abound in
the doing of it! considering how much you have done against them, how greatly
you have prejudiced them, how much they have suffered through your means, how
much they have been tainted by you. Really, you are obliged to this, this is no
more than what you owe to these poor Creatures, and if you are careless,
negligent and wanting herein, you are unjust, you with hold that which is meet,
and it tends to your own poverty, and sorrow at the last; it is in the power of
your hand to do it, therefore do not withhold it from them to whom it is due;
it is a Debt, and that both of Charity and of Equity; up then in your several
Families, and apply to this excellent needful work; for the Lord's sake apply
to it with diligence and cheerfulness; what your hand finds to do herein, do
with all your might: And since your planting and watering will turn to no
account, unless God give the increase, begin and second all these holy
endeavors with prayer. Beg of God that he would open their understandings, and
hearts, that he would work together with you, and by you, and that he would be
pleased to outdo you; that he would work that in them and for them which you
cannot.

III. Consid^r seriously whose your Children and Servants are; they are yours,
yea and they are God's as well as yours, God's more than yours.

First; They are yours. Your Children are yours by Nature, begotten or born of
you; parts of your selves; from you under God they had their Being. Your
Servants are yours by Compact or Covenant. And here let us call again to mind
what was said before, they are both your Charge, and therefore they ought to be
your Care; you are to look to them; you will look to your Money and Goods, and
not lose them if you can help it. The Countryman will look to his Corn and
Cattle that he may not lose them, and is there not reason for as great care
here, and greater too? Our Savior said, It is the will of him that sent me,
that of all whom he has given me I should lose none; and I am sure it is so
here. It is the will of him that sent you into the World, that of all whom he
has given you, you should lose none. There may be indeed, as there was in
Christ's Family, so in yours, a Son, a Daughter of Perdition, who lose
themselves, who will ruin and destroy themselves, and their Blood will be upon
their own heads. But have you a care that you do not lose them through your
wilful carelessness and neglect. For, as I have said, they are your Charge, and
believe me, the Charge of a Family is a great Charge, of mighty weight and
importance as all the World, all ranks and degrees of Men will find it when
that day shall come in which the Eternal God will reckon with them. You know
that if any one come by an untimely Death, whether it be in the City, or in the
Country, the Coroners Inquest must be called and sit upon the Body, who ought
to make a strict and impartial Enquiry about it, that the Murderer might be
discovered and brought to condign Punishment, because there is not only the
Loss of a Relation or a Servant, but also the King has lost a Subject. Bring
this to the present case before us; here is such an one, a Soul lost in this
Family, and there is another lost in that Family, and so in a great many more,
the Lord only knows how great the number of them is. How many thousand of Souls
do every day drop into Hell! If people would give themselves leave seriously to
consider it, it would make their hearts to ache and dissolve into Tears; and
peradventure it is, nay I do not in the least question but it is the case of
some of your Families. You have lost a Child, and you a Daughter and you a
Servant, in that sense in which the compassionate Father said concerning his
Prodigal, This my Son was lost, he was dead. He was dead in trespasses and
sins; the poor mournful Father had lost him, and the Devil taken him up for a
Stray; but these of yours are lost beyond the possibility of a recovery, their
Souls are lost for ever; they are dead, and dead in sin; their Bodies are laid
in the Grave in a Bed of Dust and their Souls are gone down to Hell, and there
laid upon a Bed of Flames, which Divine Justice has prepared for them, and the
Breath of the Lord like as a stream of Brimstone does feed. But now here God
has lost a Creature, one that was the work of his own hands; and you may be
sure, that He will make Inquisition for Blood: How did this Soul, and that Soul
come thus to miscarry? was it their own doing? was it through their own folly
and madness, because they would not hearken to the Voice of their Teachers? or
was it through the neglect of those to whose care and tuition they were
committed? The guilt of every ones Blood shall be laid some where, and God will
lay it where it ought to lie; and there is, as you may gather from what has
been said, reason why God should thus proceed; because,

Secondly; They (I mean your Children and Servants) are God's as well as yours,
nay they are more God's than yours. He indeed gave them to you, as Jacob told
his Brother, These are the Children which God has graciously given to thy
Servant. But when he gave them to you, he did not alienate them from himself,
nor part with his own Right, but reserves that whole and entire to himself. He
so gives them to us, that still they are his: Yea, they are more his than ours.
And so it is with all our other Enjoyments. Take one Scripture or two for the
proof of this; first as to our Enjoyments, some Men think their Estates are
their own, and their Money their own, so that they may do with them whatsoever
they please, but it is no such matter, we are but Stewards, God is the Lord of
all. For this see Hos. 2.8, 9. I gave her Corn and Wine, and multiplied her
Silver and Gold. They were his, and he gave them to her: But observe now, he
retained a propriety in them, and therefore upon her misemploying and abusing
them, he threatened to take them away. I will return and take away my Corn in
the time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof, and recover my Wool and
my Flax. They were hers by virtue of God's donation, but they were his also,
and now she should know as much, for he will turn her out, and take the
Possession of all again. This consideration should make all wary that they do
not sin with their Enjoyments, nor maintain their Lusts at God's cost, nor with
God's allowances make provision for the Flesh; and it should also teach rich
Men to do good with what they have, and quicken them to acts of Piety and
Charity: Your Estates are yours, but they are God's too, and therefore as you
ought to use them for your own good and comfort, so you must lay them out for
God's honor, and for God's poor; for the Sovereign right in your Estates is in
God; and it is the same as to your Children, God lays his claim to them, Ezekiel.
16.20, 21. Thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have born unto
me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Is this of thy
Whoredoms a small matter that thou have slain my Children, and delivered them
to cause them to pass thorough the fire for them? Mark it, the Lord grants they
were her Children, but he does also call them his Children, he owns that she
did bear them, but says, thou did bear them to me; as it was then, so it is
now; as the Cattle upon a thousand Hills are his, so the Children of a thousand
Families, yea, of all the Families upon the Earth; particularly of his
Covenanting People, Ier. 31.1. I will be, says the Lord, the God of all the
Families of Israel, and they shall be my people. He is the God of all the
Children of those Families, they are his Children; remember and consider it,
your Children are God's Children, they had their Being from him, he formed
them, he brought them forth, and brought them up, and carried them in Arms, and
taught them to go, and put them out to you to Nurse, and you are to look after
them, and take care of them, and bring them up for him; you are to see to it
that they have the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

So for your Servants, they are not only your Servants, but his too, they were
his Servants before they were yours, and his more than they are yours, and more
bound to obey and please him than you; so that if your Will thwart Gods, and
your Commands be contrary to the Commandments of God, they are not to do them,
they are more bound to God than they are to you, and they expect more from him
than they do from you, and have a greater and more necessary dependence upon
him than they have upon you, and therefore they owe him more service than they
do you, Psalm. 119.19. All are thy Servants, Kings and Princes are his Servants,
David was free to own it, O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant. And
Oh that they would all lay their Crowns at his Feet, and serve him by ruling
for him. You that are Masters and Mistresses are his Servants, as proud as some
of you are, and how high soever you hold your Heads, yet know you are but
Servants, though really it is not your disparagement to be God's Servants, but
your Honor so that you are good and faithful Servants, and I beseech you look
to that. And I say your Servants are God's Servants too; yea, and what the
Angel said to John I may to you, notwithstanding the civil distance which is
now between you, they are your Fellow Servants, as you will find at the last
and great day, when you come to be stripped of all these outward pre-eminencies,
and to stand upon even ground with them, only your account will be greater. Sit
down, I beseech you, and think of this once and again, those that are bound to
you are also bound to God; and will you teach them your Business, and not that
which God has given them to do? Will you take care to make them good
Shopkeepers, and not to make them good Christians? Will you call upon them, and
urge and press them to do your work, yea, and beat them too, in case they do it
not, and will you not regard their doing or neglecting of the work of God?
Shall it be nothing to you though they forget God, and let his work lie dead
upon their hands, and serve the Devil and diverse Lusts all the Year round? You
your selves do not serve God as you ought, if you do not promote what you can
your Servants serving him, for so to do is part of your business, it is the
duty of your place.

Besides, let me here add this further, if the Parents of those who are bound
to you be gracious themselves, and do indeed fear God, they did expect much
from you when they did bind them to you; they had a good Opinion of you as of
Persons truly Religious, and of your Families as Religious, and that their Sons
would meet not only with sobriety there, but also with the practices of Piety,
and they did promise themselves that they had disposed well of their Children,
and chosen such Masters for them as would take special care of them as to their
Souls, and go on to build upon that good Foundation which they themselves had
already laid, and that you would be not only giving them an insight into your
Callings, but also showing them the good way in which they ought to walk, and
go before them in it, they did promise themselves that you would provide not
only Meat and Drink, wholesome and sufficient Diet for their Bodies, but also
that Food which would help to the nourishing of their Souls to Eternal Life. In
that hope, and for that end they committed them to you, and if you be careless
herein, if you do not pray with them, nor instruct and counsel them, you
disappoint their expectations, you frustrate and deceive their hopes, you are
false to your trust, and it is impossible that you should ever answer it to God
or them, and yet answer for it you shall, but to your cost except you repent
and reform.

IV. Remember and consider that those who are of your Families, and under your
care are excellent and noble Creatures. How low soever their outward condition
is, and how far soever they are beneath you upon worldly accounts, yet they
were made by the same hand, are of the same original, the Masterpieces of the
Creation in this inferior World; and here I will more particularly offer these
few things to your thoughts.

First; They have Souls as well as you. Souls to save, as well as Bodies to
feed, Souls that quicken and actuate their Bodies, and render them capable of
being serviceable to you; and be their Bodies never so amiable and lovely,
never so robust and well built, never so lively and active, yet without the
Soul they would be no other than useless Carcases, lumps of Clay; both
unprofitable and unsavory, and these Souls being the better, and by far the
more noble part, are to be principally respected, to be sure not totally
forgotten and neglected; and a Trade is to be driven with Heaven for them, as
well as one upon Earth for the Body; and though it be no great matter whether
they be great and rich in the World, yet it is necessary that they be rich in
Faith, and good Works, and toward God; and since there is another World beside
this, and when they go out of this World they immediately pass into that, and
they must continue there to all Eternity without a remove, or any alteration,
it is absolutely necessary that they be well provided before they go, and lay
up Treasures in Heaven. As for the things of this World they must leave them
all behind them, though they have gotten never so much; Riches take to
themselves Wings, and often fly away, they leave their owners in a pitiful
plight; however their owners must at last leave them. Death, when once it comes
will make an Eternal separation; so Job knew, and said, Job 1. Naked came I out
of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither. Hence it follows, that
they are nearly and everlastingly concerned to look after those things which
are better and more durable: To get that knowledge of God and Jesus Christ
which is life eternal, and to be well stored with those Graces, and that
everlasting righteousness of Christ, which will accompany them to the Tribunal,
and to be much busied and employed about those works which will follow them in
glorious Rewards, for otherwise it had been better for them they had never been
Born.

Secondly; Do you know the Souls of your Children and Servants are as precious
as yours? Whatever difference there may be in your Bodies, as to their stature,
and strength, and comeliness, and beauty, yet your Souls are the same, and
theirs come not into the World more corrupt, guilty, and depraved than yours;
Original Sin is the same in all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, their Souls are
as precious as yours; for,

First; The same God made them, Ezekiel. 18.4. Behold all souls are mine, as the
soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine; and as the Soul of the
Master, so also the Soul of the Servant; and as the Soul of the Mistress, so
the Soul of the Maid, they are all Gods; as he is the Creator of them, and the
Lord of them, and the Supreme Judge of them: And he has a respect to them all
as they are the work of his hands, as an Artist has to a curious piece of his
own making.

Secondly; Their Souls have the same Faculties and Powers that yours have;
Understanding, Memory, Conscience, Will, Affections; they are intelligent and
rational Souls, though they have not had the same opportunities, means and
advantages for their accomplishments, which some of you have had and slighted,
and not improved as you ought.

Thirdly; Their Souls cost as great a price to redeem as yours; supposing them
to be some of Christ's purchased ones, God did not set several Rates upon the
Souls of Men, nor did the Lord Jesus pay a greater Ransom for the Soul of David
a King than he did for the Soul of Lazarus a Beggar, not a greater for the Soul
of the Master than for the Soul of the Servant, for the Soul of the Mistress
than of the Maid, but the very same, both the one and the other did stand him
in no less than his Heart-blood; and he rejoiceth over the one when Converted,
Sanctified, and brought into his Fold, and under his Government as the other;
and he will at last as much welcome the one into his heavenly Kingdom, and as
abundant an entrance into it shall be ministered to the one as to the other.

Fourthly; Their Souls may have the same Capacities; and allowing them the like
advantages for improvement, and the like opportunities for action, they may be
as useful in the World while they live, and very serviceable, bringing a great
deal of glory to God, and doing a great deal of good to Man. Valleys are
usually fertile, when lofty Mountains are barren; and those that are poor in
this World, are frequently rich in good works; and they are receptive of as
great Preferment, Happiness and Glory in the World to come. They may, and will
be as quick and nimble in their flight to Heaven, they may as sweetly and
comfortably enjoy God, and be as much fitted and prepared for the Divine
Presence and Bliss, and for a setting upon the Right Hand of Christ, as the
Master or the Mistress; nay, some of them may be advanced to an higher degree
of Glory, and Eternally shine with brighter Beams: but on the contrary, if
these their precious Souls do not go to Heaven, they must be packt down to
Hell; if they are not Saved they must be Damned; if not taken up to the
Enjoyment of God, then they are Companions for Devils; if not Timber for the
Building, then Fuel for the Burning; if they be not taken up into the Arms of
Divine Love, they will be the miserable Objects of Divine Wrath and Fury, and
lie restless and roaring under unsufferable Torments, in which they can have no
relief, not so much as a drop of Water to cool their Tongue, and from which
they shall have no deliverance.

And now, O ye Fathers and Mothers, and ye Masters and Mistresses, what are ye
made of? Have you Hearts harder than a Rock? Are you worse than the
Sea Monsters, and like unto the Ostriches in the Wilderness? Where are your
Mercies? Where your Bowels? Where the yearning and the soundings of them? Will
you not pity these precious Souls? Have you no kindness nor compassion for
them? Do you not desire their good? Will you not seek their good? Will not you
do what in you lies to prevent their everlasting ruin and destruction? It is no
wonder that Devils who be^ool'd themselves into endless misery, and are enraged
against God, and implacable Enemies to Men, envying them the possibility of
being saved; it is, I say, not any matter of wonder at all that they do what
they can to ruin them, and to bring them into the same misery with themselves;
but will you do nothing to prevent it? Will not you do what you can to spoil
the Devils design, and to secure these precious Souls from the Snare of the
Devil, or deliver them out of it? What! Not you who have curam animarum, the
care and charge of Souls lying upon you; not you, to whose oversight they are
committed? Not you, who are Responsible for them, and will at last be called to
an account, will you let them perish without endeavoring to save them, and let
them go down to Hell without laboring to stop them in their Career? Will you
stand by and see them drown without reaching forth an helping Hand? For God's
sake be not so cruel, so hard-hearted, put on Bowels, put on Bowels.

Will it not be a bitter reflection to you at the last, when the matter is out
of your hands, and past remedy? Will it not grieve you? Will it not go to your
very Hearts? In short, will it not be a Sword in your Bones, and a tormenting
Sting in your Consciences, when you shall think such a Child of mine, and such
a Servant of mine are now lost, irrecoverably, everlastingly lost, and they may
thank me for it; they were grossly ignorant, and I took no care to teach them;
they went on in a course of sin, and I did not endeavor to reclaim them, and
they have now fatally miscarried, but it is thorough my fault as well as their
own: had I done what I might have done, had I done what it was in the power of
my hand to do, possibly it might never have come to this; as Ioseph's Brethren
in their distress said one to another, Genesis 42.21. We are verily guilty
concerning our brother; so may you say, I am guilty, verily I am guilty
concerning these my Children, and these my Servants: and really it is strange
to me that you do enjoy any peace, that you can walk about in quietness in the
day, and rest in the night, and are not scared with frightful Apparitions. I
ascribe it merely to the patience and goodness of God, that since poor
Creatures are for ever ruined thorough your sinful neglect, their Ghosts after
their death do not continually haunt you, and dog you from place to place, and
from room to room, and undraw your Curtains, and with a ghastly Countenance and
dreadful Looks stare you in the Face; for their Blood lies on you, yea, it is
you that have been their Murderers, you have Murdered their precious Souls, you
have poisoned them by your bad and heathenish Examples, by your living in a
wretched, ungrateful forgetfulness of God, and in a sinful, vile neglect of his
Worship and Service, not having his glory in your Eyes, nor his fear before
them: You have been the death of them by withholding from them that which was
their due; Family-instruction which you were obliged to have given them, and
other Family Duties which you were bound to have performed with them.

V. And lastly, I judge it worth while as to the business in hand to enquire of
you that are Parents, Whether your Children have not been dedicated and given
up to God in and by Baptism? And of you that are Masters and Governors of
Families, whether you do not believe that the Fathers and Mothers of those who
are your Apprentices and Servants have also dedicated and given them up unto
God? I know there is room and reason enough at this day for such a Question;
because the Administration of that Ordinance unto the Infants of Believers
themselves is by so many denied and decried; and therefore I ask again, whether
they have been brought under the Bond of the Covenant? And whether they have
had the Seal of the Covenant ministered to them? Have they not been Baptized? I
do heartily wish that the Children of all professed Christians were; and
whatever dust has been raised, and is continued, I doubt not, but when that
happy time shall come wherein the Jews shall be converted, and brought to the
owning and believing in our dear Lord Jesus, that Controversy will be happily
determined, and Infant Baptism found to be not of Men but of God. But I ask
now, whether yours have been Baptized? If they have, then,

First; Know and consider that God has a special right and propriety in them.
A more special Interest in your Children and Servants, and a more peculiar
right to them than he has in and to others in the World. He has a right to
others, to all by virtue of Creation and Preservation, as they are the work of
his Hands, from whom they received their Being at the first, and by whom their
Being is continued, and their Souls held in Life; but he has another
superadded right to these, viz. by virtue of Donation, the Parents Gift; they
have a natural right to dispose of their Children, and these have disposed of
theirs to God, which was an act of the highest Wisdom, and dearest Love; all
indeed are Gods Servants, and let them carry toward him accordingly, but
Persons Baptized are his Sealed Servants.

Secondly; Not to train such up for God, is not only cruelty to them, yea,
prodigious and barbarous cruelty, but likewise it is apparent injustice to God;
yea, it is Sacrilege, the worst of Sacrilege. It is accounted, and is a
wicked thing to rob Churches of their Vestments, and Ornaments, and Plate, but
what is that to a robbing God of Men, and Women, and Children, and delivering
them up to Vanity, and Sin, and the Devil; certainly that propriety which God
has in them, your Children and Servants, is a great obligation upon you to
bring them up for him, and to instruct them in his work and service, and to
make them join with you therein, that by being well acquainted with it, and
used to it, they may be expert at it, that they may carry as becomes them, and
act in a sweet suitableness to that Relation in which they stand to God, and be
in the better capacity of setting up his Worship afterward in their Families,
when they come to have Houses of their own, that by this means Religion may be
posteritiz'd, and descend among you from Generation to Generation, and when you
are gone down to your Graves there may not want those who will stand up in
their day to serve, own, and honor the God of their Fathers.

Thirdly; Would it not be a trouble to you if those that are yours should prove
wicked? Without peradventure, if you are Christians indeed, as you profess your
selves; if you have any real goodness in you, and not merely a vain show and
empty name, if you have any Sense, if any Bowels, if any softness and
tenderness of Heart, it cannot but be very affecting to you, and exceeding
grievous to you to think that any of yours should prove Sons and Daughters of
Belial, Persons that know not the Lord, and that fear not the Lord; sure I am,
the very fear of such a thing has made some gracious Persons go bowed down*
and in the bitterness of their Spirits; nay, would it not grieve you that any
of your Servants who are Gods, should turn Rebels against him, or that any of
your Servants, who are Gods more than yours should prove desperate Enemies to
him, and instead of delighting in his Service, and laying out their All for his
Glory and the Interest of his Name, of whom you have had so long and ample
Experience, and unto whom they also are so much engaged, should absurdly turn
their Backs against him, and do the sordid, filthy works of sin, and drudge for
a Devil, and after all their pains receive no other wages than death, yea, the
second death, which will be followed with a Burial in Hell, out of which there
is no Resurrection; and there is one thing more, which I commend to you as
worthy of your solemn and frequently repeated thoughts, viz. That it will
greatly add to your guilt, and by consequence no less add to your affliction
and horror, if it be impressed and set home upon your Consciences, that this
miscarriage of theirs did come to pass through any gross and wilful neglect of
yours, and was the bitter effect of your failure in point of duty which you did
owe both to God and to them. Let me tell you, how light soever any that hear
me, or read this Book may make of these things now in this damnably Atheistical
and Profane Age, yet you will find them like a Talent of Lead, yea, heavier
than a Mountain, when God is pleased to set them home. Unto what has been
spoken with reference both to your Children and Servants; there is something
which I would add with respect to your Children in particular, and that is this.

Fourthly; You that are Parents, consider, I beseech you, and lay to heart your
own actual dedicating and giving your Children up to God. Have you not done it?
I ask you again, have you not done it? And that in the most sacred and solemn
way of a Gospel Ordinance; while others did satisfy themselves with giving
their Children a Name, as if they had not at that time God in any of their
thoughts, as a Person in the least concerned, you did present and bind them to
God, out of a seeming, yea, and professed sense of duty to him, and kindness to
them; did not you go to or send for a Minister, desiring of him that your
Children might be made partakers of Baptism? And were they not by that made (as
I said before) God's sealed Servants? You do, as I suppose and hope, at least,
you should know, that Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision, and is the
Seal of the Covenant, and so by your bringing them to Baptism you did, as a
Learned Divine, Mr. Whiston, says, give them up to God under your Hand and
Seal; some of you have done it publicly, in the Face of the whole
Congregation, which without doubt is the best way, and I do heartily wish it
were universally and constantly practiced, (unless where absolute necessity
forbids;) because being rightly administered, and according to the Institution
and Command of our great Lord, it is most for Edification, which ought to be
studied in all the Churches of Christ; but others, who for Reasons best known
to themselves have chosen Privacy, did Invite some of your Friends and
Neighbors that they might be Witnesses of it in your own Families. Now I look
upon it as being so evident that it is past a contradiction, that this your
giving them up to God did not only express your belief of that right which God
had to them, nor only your willingness they should be his Servants, nor only
your committing them to his care and conduct; but also did necessarily imply a
purpose to train and bring them up for God. If that was not in your Hearts and
Resolutions, what you did therein was a mere cheat, you did in that great and
solemn work act the part of vile Hypocrites, and mocked both God and Man. Sure
I am, many of you did engage your selves to do this, you promised it, yea, and
that in totidem terminis, in so many words, the great God of Heaven is himself
a Witness thereof, and so are all that were present; and what now my Friends?
Have you not bound your selves? And will you play fast and loose with God? An
honest Man will be as good as his word, and will not you? Will you forfeit that
Name? Will you lose your Credit in Heaven, yea, and among good Men upon Earth
that know you? How should any Man trust you who are not true to God, unto whom
you are so much obliged, and upon whom you have an absolute dependence? Dare
any of you go from your words? dare you? Again I say, dare you? What, deal
falsely with God! If Covenant-bonds are no more to you than the green Withes, or
new Cords were to Samson, which he easily snapt asunder; if your Promises will
signify nothing, but vanish like Winds, know, God has other Bonds that are
strong enough, Bonds of Wrath and Fury, everlasting Chains that will hold you;
if your own Promises are not sufficient to bind you to your duty, your breach
of Promise will be sufficient to bind you over to punishment. The Apostle Paul
speaking of God, says, 1 These. 5.24. Faithful is he who has called you, that
also will do it. God has called you to a Fellowship and Communion with him,
and he has made many great and precious Promises, and he is a faithful God, a
Covenant-keeping God, a Promise-performing God, and he also will do it; do it,
what will he do? That which he has promised, all that he has promised, no one
iota or tittle shall fail; consider this, and let it not be said of you, that
you have indeed promised, but you are unfaithful, and you will not do it; you
are very strict with Men, expecting they should keep their word with you, and
keep day too, but you make no Conscience of keeping your word with God.
Consider again what the same holy Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises
of God are in him, i. e. in Christ, yea, and in him, Amen, to the glory of God.
They are all so, God is not off and on with his People, his Promises are
immutable, things in which it is impossible for him to Lie, he can as soon deny
himself as them; they shall all be performed in their season, and to the full.
Christians, do you trust this God, and rely upon these Promises, and rejoice in
them as assurance enough? But withal, do you study an holy conformity and
likeness to this God? And never let it be said of you, that your Promises are
Yea and Nay. Once more let me propound to you the Example of that excellent
Person Hannah, who was a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit, her Adversary Peninnah
provoking her sore to make her fret, because the Lord had shut up her Womb. We
find, 1 Samuel 1. that in her affliction she prayed, which is a proper course, a
good vent to an oppressed Soul, a Sovereign Remedy in distress. In her Prayer
she begged that God would look on her affliction, and remember her, and give
her a man-child; and as she prayed so she promised, that if God would fulfill
her desire in giving her a Son, she would give him unto the Lord all the days
of his life, and she did so. When God had granted her Prayer she performed her
Promise; when she had the desire of her Heart, God had given her a Son, whose
Name she called Samuel, she and her Husband Elkanah brought him to the House of
the Lord which was in Shiloh, and so having obtained him of God by Prayer, she
returned him unto God with Thankfulness, and while he was a Child, a very young
Child, soon after he was weaned she carried him thither, viz. unto the
Tabernacle, 1 Samuel 1.25, 26, 27, 28. The Child was young, and they slew a
Bullock, and brought the Child to Eli, and she said, O my Lord, as thy soul
lives, my Lord, I am the Woman that stood by thee here praying unto the Lord;
for this Child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my petition which I asked
of him, therefore also have I lent him unto the Lord as long as he lives he
shall be lent unto the Lord; and there she left him with good old Eli the
Priest, that by him he might be tutored, educated, and brought up for God, and
instructed in the Law, and so the better prepared and fitted for the work and
service of God in his Generation. But that I may shut up this Particular, I
will look upon this Congregation as having in it Persons of different
Persuasions about the Ordinance of Baptism, or the Persons unto whom it is to
be administered, the Subjects capable of it, and I shall speak something to both.

First; There are possibly some Persons, though I suppose not many of them,
here present before the Lord, who are not satisfied in their Consciences about
Infant Baptism, and therefore have not that sacred Ordinance administered unto
their Children during that their Minority, that Sign or Token of the Covenant
is not set or given to them, as apprehending them to be in the same condition
with those who are Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the
Covenants of Promise; though the truth is, the Children of Believers are the
holy Seed, born Members of that Commonwealth, and within the Covenant of
Promise. But I dispute not the Point with them, having in mine Age something
else to do than to spend my few precious hours in Controversies; but this I
would say to all those that are of that Persuasion, that it does very greatly
concern them to be very careful and constant in the performance of
Family Duties, and I should be very glad to hear that they are conscientious,
and as diligent therein as the matter does require. Oh! that they would take
pains and spend a convenient portion of time in praying with their unbaptized
Children and Servants, and in Instructing and Catechizing of them, and in using
all the means which God has appointed, and that are within the compass of
their power, that so they might be brought to the knowledge of God, and to a
believing in, owning of, and submitting to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to a
laying hold upon the Covenant; that so they may, when grown up, have a right to
the benefits of it, and partake of the Blessings of it, and be fit to receive
the Seal of it; and my hearty Prayer to the Father of Mercies, and God of all
Grace on their behalf is, that they may lay it to their Hearts as they ought,
and often think with themselves how much it stands them in hand, and what an
obligation resulting from their own Principles, lies upon them to be very holy
in their Lives, and very industrious in their Places for the good of their
Families, and in order to the working of Knowledge in their Heads, and Grace in
their Hearts, and Holiness in their Lives, that of those concerning whom they
do now say, They are none of God's people, God may be graciously pleased to
say, They are my people, and I am the Lord their God; But,

Secondly; There are others here, with and for whom I am more concerned, as
being of that Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made me an Overseer;
and these are for the Baptizing of Children in their Infancy, and so for an
early dedication and binding of them to God and his Service; you are my Charge,
and I can say as to many of you, you are my Joy and Crown, and, I hope, will be
so in the day of Christ: and it is my hearty Desire and Prayer that you may
adorn the Gospel, and walk unto all well-pleasing, and make it your endeavor
to stand complete in all the Will of God. Now I would have you all to know, and
do entreat you to consider and remember that (as a worthy Divine, as yet I hope
in the Land of the Living has observed) there is an equal Tie, and full out as
strong an Obligation to an holy care and diligence this way, lying upon those
Parents that are for the Baptizing of Children in their Infancy, as there is
upon those that are against it; you ought not to be more slack and remiss in
teaching and rightly principling your Baptized Children than they are in
instructing their unbaptized Children; you ought to be as diligent in bringing
them up graciously whom you have bound to God, as they are or can be in the
Education of them whom they do thus far leave at liberty, though indeed you do
not drive on the same design with them, nor level and aim at the same end they
do, for as he says, and it is true, Antipaedo-baptists, who are conscientious,
and do indeed love and fear the Lord, ought and will endeavor to bring up
their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and earnestly to seek
their conversion and turning from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God, and their personal embracing and laying hold upon the Covenant,
that thereupon they may be brought into a Covenant-state, that they may be
admitted and taken into Covenant, and that they may come under the Wing, and
Benefit, and Blessing of it.

Whereas those holy Parents who have their Children Baptized in their Infancy
have not that in their Eye as their end, for they do not doubt of their
Covenant-state, for they do firmly hold their being Born in Covenant with God,
as they are the Children of Believers, and they also know that that Covenant
has been sealed to them; yet notwithstanding they do reckon themselves greatly
concerned and no less obliged to endeavor the Instruction and Conversion, and
their own personal owning and embracing of the Covenant, and Cordial, Cheerful
coming up to the terms and requiries of it; and that for these Considerations
and Reasons which I shall name, and lightly touch, and so pass on.

First; That they might understand their Duty, what it is that the Lord their
God requires of them, and what their Parents did in their young and tender
years bind them to the observance and performance of, that through their own
folly and default they may not be cast out and cut off, as Ishmael was tho he
had Abraham for his Father, and had himself been Circumcised; and so it was
with Esau afterward. Now these Parents do not think it enough that the
Covenant between God and their Children has been struck and sealed, but they
would have it established, everlasting and sure, they would have their Children
kept, preserved in a Covenant-state, live and die in it.

Secondly; It is the earnest desire of such holy and gracious Parents, not only
that their children might be preserved in a Covenant-state, but also that they
might be happy sharers in the good of it, and the Benefits and Blessings
thereof may descend upon them; for Persons may be in a Covenant-state, and yet
fall short of the best and richest Blessings of it, such as are the fruits of
special love, and distinguishing. As a Man may be in Christ the true Vine, and
yet not partake of his sap and fatness, John 15. So he may be in Covenant, and
yet not have Covenant-grace, nor a Covenant-spirit; a Man may be externally in
a Covenant-state, and yet in an unregerate, and unjustified-state; and
therefore that which does most strongly engage Parents to teach their Children,
and endeavor the bringing them up to the terms of the Covenant, is that they
might so honor, obey, and please God as withal to reap and enjoy all those
great good things, precious Mercies, and singular Blessings which are contained
in the Covenant, and conveyed by it.

Thirdly; A being faithful to the Covenant, and a living up to its terms, and
performing its conditions, is the Duty and Interest of all those who would be
savingly the better for it; unto that a continuance in the Covenant is of equal
necessity with an entrance and admission into it. How can any Man make that
Covenant his plea or argument, or rationally expect Life and Happiness from it,
who himself has violated and broken it; that Person whose own sin has cast
him out of Covenant, has no more interest in, nor right to the Blessings
thereof than he that was never in it. Nay,

Fourthly; The condition of such an one is far the worse and more dismal of the
two, as his sins are more accented, more black, more provoking and crying than
the sins of another, being breaches of Covenant, sins against greater
Obligations, so there is less hope of him, his case is more dangerous and
desperate, the Wound that he has made looks as if it were altogether
incurable, and the Wrath that such an one is like to suffer may well be more
fiery and fierce, the Judgments more severe, not Rods but Scorpions are proper
in such a case; what will God do when he comes to avenge the quarrel of his
Covenant.

I have thus largely shown you that are Parents and Governors of Families what
Obligations you are under for the setting up and continuing of the Service and
Worship of God in your Families, upon the consideration of the young ones, the
Children and Servants which are in your Houses, and under your Care; and I am
not a little confident, that if you will be so just to the Cause, and your
selves, as to weigh the arguments, your Consciences will tell you the
Obligation is very strong; and oh! that the truth delivered may be so upon you,
and upon many more, that you may not be found rebelling against the light, nor
holding the truth in Righteousness, but falling before it, and to your work.
There remains but one Obligation more to this great and necessary Work of
Family Worship, and Duty, which I shall take notice of in this Discourse, and
speak unto; and that does arise from the consideration of the Public, the
City, the Nation, the Church of God, unto which you are so nearly related, as
being Parts and Members of them, and in which you are so highly concerned; your
Relation is not so near, but that your interest is as great, ponder on these
following Particulars.

Let this I beseech you, return often upon your thoughts, and lay it near your
hearts; you are Citizens of London, Famous London, which Enemies have done much
against, and God has done great things for, what will you do for it? In London
you have many Mercies, many Privileges, many Comforts; you are the Natives of
England, the Freeborn People of England, a sweet and pleasant name, be dear
over it, both name and thing. It was in this Country that you first drew your
breath, here that you were planted by the gracious hand of Divine Providence,
and grown and flourished, and you would be exceeding unnatural and inhumanely
cruel to this poor City, and to this pleasant Land, the Land of your Nativity,
if you do not heartily desire its welfare, and to the utmost seek its good. The
Jews were to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, which was their Metropolis, their
Capital City, where there were the Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the
House of David, and whether the Tribes went up; the Tribes of the Lord, to the
testimony of Israel. See how David excited others, and resolved himself to
contribute what might be to its happiness, Psalm. 122.6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, peace be within thy
walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces; for my Brethren and Companions sake,
I will now say, peace be within thee, because of the House of the Lord our God,
I will seek thy good. We are as much bound to Pray for London, which is our
English Jerusalem; was that the literal Jerusalem, the City of their
Solemnities, so it is called, Isa. 33.20. London, through the goodness of a
gracious God has been, and in spite of Hell and Rome yet is the City of our
Solemnities; and I beseech you read and think upon that which the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel said unto them who were carried away Captive from
Jerusalem to Babylon, Ier. 29.7. Seek the peace of the City whither I have
caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in
the peace thereof ye shall have peace. Now, if they were to pray for the peace
of Babylon, which was the place of their Captivity, we are in reason much more
bound to pray for, and by all means seek the peace and welfare of London, and
England, which is the place of our Nativity.

Secondly, Cast your eye upon the present State of London, and of England, have
not our iniquities brought us low? the hand of God has been for many years,
and in many ways heavy upon the Land, and it is stretched out still; the truth
is, our preservation is wonderful, and the Lord has done great things for us,
of which we have reason to be glad, and to give him glory, but for all that we
are brought low, the Crown is fallen from our head, our honor is under an
Eclipse. In some respects England is scarce to be found in England, there is a
withering blast upon us, and a sad dismal face of things. How many Judgments
does this Nation lie under, both Spiritual and Temporal? O! the sad Divisions
that are among us, which grow wider instead of an healing Spirit; behold a
perverse Spirit is gone forth in the midst of us; how do errors and all manner
of false Doctrines abound and swarm there? the Serpent has cast out of his
mouth like a flood, that he might drown and swallow up the Church of God among
us. Now that she is in her wilderness State. What a Spirit of Atheism has
possessed Men? We have a company of wretches, that rather than they will own
God, will hold they themselves shall die like Beasts; these are none of the old
Fools, who said in their hearts there is no God, these have far out done them
in speaking it with their mouths. I have indeed been told that some of these
are very sensible Men, and indeed I do conclude, that not only some Atheists
are so, but that they all are so, yea, and that they are altogether so, men
immerst and quite sunk into sense, they have shaken hands with reason, quite
blinded and put out the eye of reason; for otherwise, in the very things before
them they would see the invisible things of God, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead, Romans 1.20. To which, I might add that general and monstrous
profaneness which has broken all banks, and overflowed us, which has risen
up to that highth of impudence, that it can outface the Sun, and walk unveiled
at noon; and what do you feel? has not God, think you, risen out of his place
to punish the Inhabitants of London, and of England, for their iniquities? Has
he not revealed his wrath from Heaven against the ungodliness of Men? does not
his Providence frown dreadfully? has he not in legible Characters written his
high displeasure in those temporal Judgments that are among us? what else
means his not going forth with our Armies, the unsuccessfulness of our Fleet,
the taking of our Merchants Ships, the loss of our Trade, the scarcity of Corn,
the dearness of all Provisions, so that Poverty comes in upon us like an Armed
Man? let not Men grumble at these things, but lay them to heart, humble
themselves, and reform, mourn, and amend their ways and doings.

Thirdly, You are Members of the Church, as well as Citizens of London, and
Natives of England. Some of you are come into stricter and closer Communion
than others, in order to the better promoting of your Souls good, and your
enjoyment of Ordinances purely administered, and, as you think, more according
to the mind of God revealed in Scripture. However, all of you do profess your
selves belonging to the Church of Christ, and so to be Members of his Mystical
Body; and you ought to study the good of the Church; if you do not, there is no
life in you, but you are dead members, you may have some kind of being in the
body, but you are not of it, you do not receive Spirits and Life from the Head,
no vital influences. And Oh! how did Paul complain and groan, because men were
wholly selfish, confined and shrivel'd up into a narrow interest, seeking their
own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ, i. e. the glory of his Name,
and the good and prosperity of his Church, which is not a separate but a joint
interest, so that the promoting of one, is the promoting both, and you ought to
study it, and do all that you can to contribute to it.

Fourthly, Do not you know that a great many among us are the burdens of the
Land, and that under them it groans? we see England is sick, yea. it is heart
sick, oh! how faint it is, what convulsions has it, what struglings are there,
even as for life, but who is it sick of? of the Fanatics will some say, and I
say so too, only understand it of them who are Fanatics indeed, not of them
who are Israelites indeed; the Fools Cap is many times through a wilful mistake
put upon a Wise Man's head; but they will say, England is sick of the
Dissenters, the NonConformists, and it will never be well till they be
suppres'd, and purged out; but those that are thus minded, go by very wrong
measures, and are Physicians of no value. Ahab told Elijah that he troubled
Israel, but the Holy Prophet did very justly and honestly return it upon the
wicked King. I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy Fathers House, in
that ye have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Kings 18.18. And I dare
also say, concerning those good men, which some have given that undeserved name
to, what in another case Paul said to the Centurion, and the Soldiers, except
these abide in the Ship ye cannot be saved, Acts 27.31. I am not for making
Parties, nor widening or continuing unnecessary differences, but desire to love
every one that loves the Lord Jesus in sincerity; and I dare affirm, that
those who are godly in the Nation are the strength thereof, the strength both
of King, and Kingdom, Isa. 6.13. the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.
But I was saying, too many are the burden of the Land, I mean, those that have
sucked in, and do belch out damnable Doctrines, and the Profane Crew, the
Debauchees of the Age, the Land is sick of them, and perhaps will not be well
'till it has eased it self, I say not of their Persons, but of their
Principles and Practices; those, those be the Persons that are the Pests and
Plagues of the Nation, and may they be so accounted, in order to their being
avoided, that so the spreading of the infection may be prevented? but since
there are such as these, multitudes of them, you that profess Religion, should
desire, and pray, and labor to be the blessings of the Nation, and so to be,
will be your honor.

Fifthly, To fill up the places in which God has been pleased to set you, is
the way to make you blessings, public blessings; the way for the whole to
thrive, is for every one to do his part; when the Spring, Wheels, and Balance
move regularly, the Watch goes well, there is the honor of the place, and the
profit of the place, and those that are high will expect that; but there is
also the work of the place, and let them and others also do that. It may be
thou art but in a low and mean place, however, be thou contented with the
disposal of Providence, that is the way to have a blessing from God for thy
self, and to be thy self a blessing to the Nation. Consider then the place in
which you are set, and study the duty of that place, and to that do thou apply
thy self, and labor to do it all. Are any of you in public place in City or
Country, clothed with Authority and Power, in a capacity of encouraging Virtue
and Godliness, and of punishing and suppressing Vice, fill up your Place, it is
pity there should be any Wicked, Profane, Idle, Careless Sloathful Magistrates,
they are common Nusances. Have you none but a little Cock-Boat to manage? being
only Governors of Families, do you fill up your place, and do the duty of
that. If you have but a little, it is the more easily done, be you faithful in
your little, that is the way to advance, God may make you Rulers over much, to
be sure you shall not miss of his joy.

Sixthly, Families are the first Bodies out of which greater Societies and
Communities do arise, and of which they are composed. Churches, Towns, Cities,
Kingdoms are made up of Families, as the integrating parts the least Families
is a part of the body, a Family is the first Society, as it was in our
Primitive Parents Adam and Eve, and in its growth an increase it comes to be
made up of several Persons, that stand in several Relations to one another,
Husband, Wife, Son, Daughter, Manservant, Maidservant, Villages, Towns,
Cities, Countries are all of them made up, as was said before, of several
Families; and according as it is in these smaller bodies, it is like to be in
those greater ones; if the several members be corrupt, it is utterly impossible
that the body should be sound. If there be a Plague raging in the Houses, it is
impossible there should be health in the City. And so if Families be tainted,
corrupted, spoiled, who can rationally think that the Kingdom should be good?
Those larger and more numerous Societies which have been spoken of, may not
unfitly be compared to Orchards, or Vineyards that should bring forth Fruit to
God, and ought to be watered with the Magistrates eye, and watered by the
Ministers hand; our Families are the Nurseries in which young tender Plants are
set and Nursed, and reer'd for the supplying and furnishing them afresh, as the
Old Stock, the Super-annuated Trees of Righteousness do decay and wear off. Now
if the Nurseries be not minded, if the young Plants there be not carefully and
duly tended, what will become of the Orchard and Vineyard in a little while?
From hence we may, not without good reason, conclude that private Family-care
is necessary for the promoting of public and common good. Therefore I beseech
you to look to your Nurseries, take care of your Families.

Seventhly, I would ask not only those that are truly gracious, but likewise
them that are sober and serious, are you not ashamed of and troubled at those
crying Abominations that are among us? Can Foreigners that come hither, and
understand what is pure Religion, and undefiled before God, even the Father,
and do observe the Miscarriages of Men; I say, can they look upon this as
Immanuel's Land, when they see it so overrun with Weeds, Briars and Thorns,
can they think it to be the Garden of the Lord, or rather some of the
Wilderness of the World, some of the Devils waste? might not Heathens and
Pagans say, they are become like some of us, yea, and worse than many of us?
The good Lord look upon us in mercy, and does it not affect and afflict you,
that it is thus, after all the Gospel Light that has shined among us, and
after all the means that God has used for our Resormation, in a mixed way of
Mercy and Judgment, of Kindness, and Severity.

I do very well know, there are almost every where great complaints of
Profaneness and Debauchery, and truly those complaints are not without great
cause; for Sin, gross Wickedness does abound in all places, both in City and
Country, if the Court be free I shall rejoice, there are bad reports of Camp,
and Fleet, Wickedness hoth broken in like a flood, as if it would deluge us,
and prevail against all Piety, yea, and against all Morality too, filling all
places with Atheism, and Brutishness, and without doubt, Men in High Places did
draw up the Floodgates, for the furthering an Antichristian design, Popery and
Profaneness are near a kin, let men have a liberty to do what they will, i. e.
to commit all uncleanness with greediness, and an hundred to one they will be
content that those who are uppermost should choose their Religion for them; yea,
and also inferior Magistrates and under Officers have paved its way. Blessed
be they of the Lord, who have offered themselves willingly to give a check and
stop to it; and blessed be those Magistrates, who encourage and assist them
therein; and Oh! that the work may prosper in their hands; but in the mean
time, have not you private Men had an hand in it? You do cry out against
Public Houses, Taverns, and Alehouses, and as I hear, so I believe, not
without much cause, though some of them are in good hands, and care is taken
that good Orders be observed in them, yet certainly the wickedness of others,
yea, of many others is exceeding great; they are the Devil's ground, in which
he sets his Nets and lays his Snares for the catching of his unwary Prey, they
are the Devils School, in which Men follow his Trade, and by both together
young ones are taught it; there it is that modesty is put off, and sober
Principles plucked up by the Roots, and they learn the Mysteries of iniquity,
and commence Masters of that Black Art. But you who do complain of these
Publick-Houses, look home, lay your hands upon your hearts, and ask your own
Consciences what you have done, and what you have left undone. Is there not the
neglect of God, and the duties of Godliness in your houses, there is no
Drunkenness, nor Whoredom, no Cursing and Swearing that you do allow, that is
well, but withal, there is no Praying, nor Reading the Scripture, nothing of
the Service and Worship of God there; and by that means you do not as you
ought, Principle your young ones against the Vices of the Times, and so you
leave them too naked and open to the assaults of Temptation. This I would have
impressed upon your thoughts, that the making of good Families, is the way to
make a good City, and a good Kingdom. Let every one make it his business to set
up Religion at home, and then we shall all be sure to find it when we go
abroad. If all our Families were good, we should have good Princes, and good
Parliaments, good Magistrates, and good Ministers, and good People; good
Husbands, Wives and Children, good Friends, and Neighbors, it would indeed be
Aurea Aetas, a Golden Age.

Eighthly and lastly; The conscientious performance of Religious duties in
Families, is an excellent means for the rendering of Public Ordinances more
successful. I am persuaded, there would much more good come of that precious
Seed which the faithful Ministers of Christ scatter in their several
Congregations, were Masters and Mistresses of Families careful before they come
to prepare the Soil for the Seed, and after it is sown, careful to cover it
with Prayer, and to water it with suitable discourses and exhortations.

Thorough the Divine Goodness and Bounty there is in this City, and near it, a
great deal of excellent Preaching. Confident I am, no Place in the World can
show such plenty. Heavenly Manna does abundantly fall about our Tents.
Whatsoever there is of a scarcity as to Bread for the Body, there is no Famine
here (oh that in every poor Country there were none neither!) of hearing the
Word of the Lord. We have it upon the Lord's day, and the week days too, every
day in the week one where or other within your reach; blessed be God for it,
the joyful sound is continually in our Ears. It would be a thousand pities,
that such admirable plenty of a thing so precious as the Everlasting Gospel
should do any hurt, and that any should wax wanton, and instead of the Bread of
Life, be hankering after Mushrooms and Kickshaws, or that they should grow nice
and curious, not relishing plain Truths, and the Simplicity of the Gospel,
unless it be dressed and sauc'd to their humor, and served up to them in words
which Man's Wisdom teaches. Though I fear we have among us too many of that
mind, mark, how they live, and what becomes of them; but be that how it will,
it must be granted, that this place where God has cast our Lines, is a Goshen,
a Valley of Vision, and a great many People are much, very much for hearing of
Sermons; they run up and down to Lectures, and some of them will hear four
Sermons, and much good may they do them: It is a great encouragement to the
Servants of God, and a ground of hope that they shall catch some of them for
their Master. He has made them Fishers of Men, and the Fishermen love to cast
their Net where there is a great Shoal. But I would say to these who do so much
frequent Sermons, two things.

First; By way of Advice; Look to your whole Duty; and labor to stand complete
in all the Will of God. Hearing is not the whole work of a Christian. The
Scripture indeed says, Hear and your Souls shall live; but if you would live,
you must do something more than hear. Your much hearing is a sign of a good
Appetite; but there are some Bodies that have a caninum Appetitum, a greedy,
ravenous Appetite, and yet are mere Skelletons, nothing but Skin and Bone: You
that have so great an Appetite, will do well to look to it that you also have a
good Concoction. Under the Law those Beasts were by God declared clean that did
chew the Cud. Hear, and then ruminate; do not only let Truths come crouding
into your Ears, for then one may thrust out another, but ponder them in your
hearts, as Mary the Mother of our Lord did, and hide them there as David did.
You should spend some considerable time in meditation, that so, what Truths you
have heard you may chafe in and work upon your hearts.

Secondly; I would speak unto you by way of Question, thus; When you spend all
your time in hearing abroad, what is done at home? Where are Family Duties? who
is it that prays there? who teaches and catechizes the young ones there? Know,
O Soul! no good thing, is thy duty out of season? nor art thou to prog for thy
self by robbing thy house: And know this also, we that are Preachers of the
Gospel, have but little hope of doing much good upon your Children and Servants
by our Labors in the Church, if you who are Governors over them, and have the
power, will be careless and negligent, and do nothing at home: How can we think
that they will follow our counsels, when you will not second them? Alas! their
weak leaking Memories let them slip, and their corrupt Natures reject them.
There had need be Precept upon Precept, Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line,
Line upon Line, here a little and there a little; and all little enough, yea
and all too little, unless accompanied and set home by the All-conquering Power
of the Eternal Spirit. God indeed can do his work alone, needs neither you nor
us; but as he did by his own Word without Means and Instruments, call the World
out of nothing, and raise Lazarus out of his Grave; so he can by the same
Power, in the same Way convert most obstinate Sinners, and turn the disobedient
to the wisdom of the Just, or if he please to make use of Ministers for that
end; he can make them prosperous. He honors us by employing us, and if he will
doubly honor us, by making us successful, no difficulty shall be insuperable,
no opposition an impediment; great Mountains in our way shall sink into Plains,
and Iron-Gates shall be opened. His concurrence is enough alone; through God
the Weapons of our Warfare will become mighty, so that strong holds shall be
demolished, and imaginations cast down, carnal reasonings silenced and subdued,
together with those high things that exalt themselves against the knowledge of
God, and every thought brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ; 2
Cor. 10.4. And therefore though some, though many of you stand idle with your
hands in your bosoms, we will into the Vineyard, and follow our business as
long as we have any, being sure our Labor shall not be in vain, something will
come of it. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious. But, as
Paul said in another case; Phil. 4.17. We desire fruit that may abound to your
account, and to the account of yours, even the Salvation of you all, the
Conversion of the Youths, and from thence Comfort to the Parents. And as we
love our work, so we would do it with delight, and we shall do so when you set
your hands to it, because when all hands are at work, we may the more hope that
God will work together with us, and that his Spirit and Blessing shall
accompany our joynt-endeavours; and while we prophecy upon dry Bones, he will
cause breath to enter into them, so that they shall live. Up, therefore, I
beseech you, up and be doing; come ye forth to the help of the Lord and of his
Servants against that gross Darkness, those corrupt Principles that are in the
Minds of Young ones, and those potent Lusts that are in their Hearts. Do you
teach as well as we, that they may know the Lord; do you back our wholesome and
holy Counsels, that they may follow them. And while the Masters of the
Assemblies come with their Nails of Truth which were given by one Shepherd,
even Jesus Christ, who is the great Shepherd of the Sheep, and take much pains
for the driving of them home; in order to the uniting them to God by Faith, and
to one another by Love; do you, who are Parents and Governors, come with your
Hammers, and do what you can toward the fastening of them?

I am now at length come to the end of this discourse, wherein I undertook to
prove, That setting up the Worship and Service of God in our Families, is no
other than our reasonable service. Whether I have performed what I undertook,
you will judge, and what evidence there is in the proof; if I do not mistake,
you will find it clear and full. And now, my dear Friends* may I hope, I am
indeed very willing to hope, and I shall be exceeding glad to hear, that by all
these pains that I have taken, and all these Arguments which I have used, some
of you, who have been altogether strangers to this work hitherto, and lived in
the total neglect thereof, have been persuaded the doing thereof is without
question your duty; and that therefore it is your present, yea your fixed
Resolution through the Grace and Assistance of God to set upon the doing of it.
And that since you are convinced and satisfied about it in your Judgments, and
your own Consciences do vote and plead for it, you will take it into your
practice. The good Lord grant it may be so. And I bless his Name, I do hear
something to that purpose, and that these Labors have not been in vain; oh!
that I might hear more and more, that so my Joy both in the Lord and in you
might be increased.

Will you begin this Evening, I say, this Evening, for delays in Soul-matters
are by no means to be allowed. Whatsoever is Duty ought to be done, and if it
ought to be done, why not presently? Possibly you think afterward will be soon
enough, but God is not of your mind. He says in Psalm. 95. To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts; and when God says, to day, what art
thou that thou should say, to morrow? Come, my Friends, that sooner the
better. Has not the great Majesty of Heaven waited long enough upon you for
his Service and Honor? oh do not make him wait any longer! It is a dangerous
thing to abuse Mercy, and tire out Divine Patience. Woe be to that Man,
concerning whom God says, My Spirit shall no more strive with him, and my
Patience shall no longer wait upon him. Do not therefore in this or the like
case consult with flesh and blood; make not carnal Reason your Counselor;
listen not to Objections, though never so seemingly fair and plausible, for
there is no sufficient Argument to be brought against any thing which really is
a matter of Duty, whether you owe it to God or Man.

All this while I have been speaking to you altogether in generals, but now I
shall descend to particulars, and here with all the earnestness that I possibly
can use, I shall exhort you to these three things, and give you some Directions
for your help in the doing of them. 1. To pray with your Families. 2. To teach
and instruct your Families. 3. To set them a good Example in your own Lives and
Conversations in order to the keeping or banishing sin and profaneness out of
them, together with the promoting of Morality and Godliness in them.


I shall begin with the great Duty of Family Prayer, and oh! that I might
through the Grace of God persuade you all into the practice of it! Oh, that
from this very day there may not be found one prayerless Family among you! For
I do not doubt to affirm, that which is a prayerless Family, is also a
graceless Family. Where there is no seeking of God, there is no love to him, no
fear of him. And that Family which is void of the Grace of God, is without his
Blessing; and though there may be outward Plenty and Grandeur in it, and the
Sun of worldly Prosperity may shine upon it, yet it stands open and exposed to
the Wrath and Indignation of God, who is, and cannot but be angry with it every
day, seeing himself slighted and neglected by his own Creatures who live upon
him, and receive their All from him. And there is standing upon Record in the
Sacred Scriptures, a dreadful Prayer against those Families which do not pray;
let those that are guilty read it and tremble; for as it was indicted by the
Spirit of God, so it shall be fulfilled by the Justice of God; Ier. 10.25. Pour
out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that
call not upon thy Name. The Families that do not call upon God's Name, do not
know him; for as those that know his Name will put their trust in him, so they
will seek him; and they may very well be reckoned Heathen-Families, though they
are Christian by a verbal Profession. Christians in Name, but Heathens in
practice; and over these Families there hangs a great black Cloud of Divine
Vengeance, which at one time or another will disgorge and empty it self upon
them; there shall not only be some little small drops of Anger, but the pouring
out of Fury; and methinks danger should be enough to drive you to Duty; though
he is not ingenuous, not of a right temper who is moved by no other
consideration. I would have you walk with God, and in the way of your Duty, not
for wrath only or chiefly, but for Conscience sake; not only that you might
avoid being bound in Chains of Wrath, but because you are allured and drawn
with the cords of kindness. Though we may, and should use all the Arguments we
can muster, and those of all sorts for the persuading of our dull and heavy
hearts, that are so backward unto that which is spiritually good; to that end
therefore consider, you have Family-sins, and therefore ought to join together
in your confessing of them, mourning over them, and humbling your selves before
God for them; and you have Family-sorrows and afflictions, and therefore should
be joynt-suitors to God both for the sanctifying of them to you, and for the
removal of them from you; and you have Family-mercies in which you do all
share, and of which you taste the sweetness, and therefore you should all bear
your parts in a Song of Praise, and cheerfully join together in your
acknowledgments of them, and thankful returns to the God that gives them. And
withal, be sure of this, that if you do exclude Family Prayer, you shut out God
himself, and at the same time you open the door to the Devil, and let in
together with him a crowd of sins, and, by conseqence of mischiefs. Therefore I
beseech you mind and resolve upon the great and excellent work of
Family Prayer, yea, and make Conscience of performing it. And in order to the
better management thereof, I shall give you these following Directions, which I
desire you to observe, and the good Lord grant you an heart to follow them.

I. Live in the performance of Secret Prayer. When you are in your Retirements,
be upon the ascent, when you are alone, be with God. You that are Parents and
Masters of Families, do this your selves, and heartily commend it to all under
your care, your Servants and your Children which are in a capacity of doing it,
which you will not find to be any detriment or loss to you. For this you have
an express Command from our dearest Lord Jesus Christ; Matthew. 6.6. Thou, when
thou prayest enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to
thy Father which sees in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret will
reward thee openly. He does not here take you off from praying with others, but
he puts you on praying by your selves; that is not to be neglected, and this is
to be done; therefore do you allow them time for it who are under your roof.
Let the Husband pray by himself, and the Wife by her self, the Children apart,
and the Servants apart. It was a dreadful thing when in the 8th of Ezekiel the
Lord in a Vision carried the Prophet from place to place, and in them all he
showed him abominations; in one place there was the Image of Jealousy, in
another place the form of creeping things, Beasts, and all the Idols of the
House of Israel portrayed upon the Wall; in a third place Women weeping for
Tammuz; and in a fourth place there were others worshipping the Sun toward the
East. Idolatry was committed in all those places; hereupon God threatens to
dwell with them in Fury. But how sweet will it be, when God looks into your
houses, and sees the Husband praying in one room, and the Wife in another, a
Child upon his knees pouring its supplications out before him here, and a a
Servant doing it there; this is the way to have him dwell with you in mercy, and
according to the exceeding riches of his Grace.

I desire you that are Servants, to redeem some time for this work, though you
have enough to do, your heads, and hearts, and hands full, yet get some minutes
for this; for so you may comfortably expect, that when you are about the
business of your Calling, God will strengthen you the more for it, and bless
you the better. Wrest some time out of the hand of sleep. Wrestling with God is
better than an idle slothful lazying. It is a thousand times better to break
thy natural Rest, than to lose thy Duty. One quarter of an hours hearty,
fervent, and believing Prayer, will more revive thy spirits, and be a far
greater refreshing to thy Soul, than an hours drousing, and render thee more
lively, more good, more comfort is to be got upon thy knees, than upon the
pillow; therefore rouse up thy self, awake thy Soul and Body, and say with
David; Psalm. 61.1. O God my God! early will I seek thee. Get up, get up the
sooner in the Morning, take unto thee the wings of the Morning, and flee away,
that so thou may get up to thy God and be with him. Let me mention two things
by way of Motive.

First; The sweetness that is in Secret Prayer. You Christians that have tasted
it, make your reports, and commend it to your Friends and Acquaintance, tell
them what you have found. David would not conceal the Loving Kindness of his
God, but invited others to come and hear what had been done for his Soul; so to
do argues a thankful spirit, and in this very particular many of you may find
abundant matter to enlarge upon; for it is no jejune barren Subject. It is a
most pleasant Converse that a gracious Soul has when it is alone with God; O
the intimacy and closeness of that Communion which it enjoys when there is no
body else by! O the humble familiarity and holy freedom that it can at such a
time use! The Prophet said; Psalm. 39.1. He would keep his mouth with a Bridle
while the wicked was before him. Yea and Prudence will tell the Saints, there
is a necessity for their doing so when the Saints are before them, and their
dearest Friends; they are forced to suppress many things, there are such black
thoughts in their minds, such stirrings and workings of corruption in their
Heart as are not fit to be imparted unto any upon Earth. So that though their
Hearts are ready to burst, they cannot ease themselves by giving vent, but when
they are got alone, and no body hears but their Father which is in Heaven, they
know how to pour out their complaints into his Bosom, and open their case,
though with shame and blushing, because it is so bad, and fetch things up from
the bottom, and tell God all that is in their Hearts, Psalm. 38.9. Lord, all my
desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.

Secondly; There is great advantage comes in by secret Prayer. As sweetness in
it, so good by it, and that in this respect, as it is a means to fit a Person
for praying with others; when thou have been upon thy knees with God in thy
Closet, thou may comfortably hope that thou shall find him graciously
accompanying thee into thy Family, and there helping thine infirmities by
giving thee a larger measure of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication for thy
better inablement to manage and go thorough with thy Duty there. When Scholars
at the University have a Speech to make in the College or Schools, they will
say it over by themselves first. Chase thy own Soul in thy Retirements, that so
thou may be warm and warm others in thy Family. Now in the performance of
your private Devotion I commend to you an holy freedom, and that in these two
things.

First; Be very ingenuous in your Confession of sin; this is one great special
piece of your Duty. It is a singular way of giving glory to God, and of easing
a burdened, oppressed Conscience. When therefore you go about it do it
thoroughly; confess thy sins with shame, but be not ashamed to confess them; he
that covers his sin shall not prosper, no, not in that, not in his covering
them, for what he covers God will reveal, who loves to bring to light the
hidden things of dishonesty. There are two Reasons for a free and full
confession of sin to God; the one is, Because it is in vain to keep back any,
since he knows them all, for he searches the Heart* possesses the Reins,
understands the Thoughts afar off, compasses the path, knows our
down-sitting and up-rising, is better acquainted with us than we are with our
selves, having our secret Sins in the light of his Countenance. The other
Reason is, Because he is ready to forgive, and has promised, whosoever confesses
and forsakes his sins shall find mercy, as much mercy in God as he finds sin in
himself. Does the penitent Confessor find crying sins in himself? He shall find
tender mercies in God, yea, a multitude of them.

Secondly; Be large in thy desires. Let not modesty prevail against thy
necessity, and hinder thee in thy begging, but open thy Mouth wide to ask as
well as to receive. Consider you go to one that is a Fountain, never emptied by
the streams it sends forth, to one that has an inexhaustible Treasure, and
does not in the least impoverish or lessen himself by enriching of others. The
Sun has never the less light by shining upon the World, nor has the Ocean
less Water by feeding the Rivers. God is able to make thy Cup run over, and thy
Cistern too; yet retain his own Divine Fullness* which can neither be more nor
less than it is, because it is infinite. And as thou go to such a Fullness,
so to one that is thy Father. It might well discourage and damp thy Spirit
had thou to deal with a Stranger, or only with a Friend, but it is thy Father
to whom thou do in Prayer address, such a Father as has not his Fellow
neither for Fullness nor Affection. Therefore when thou art in his Presence, and
at his Foot speak out, and carry away no burden nor want which thou do not
acquaint him therewith; let him have as full an account of all from thine own
Mouth as thou can draw up, that is the way to have the removal of those
burdens, and relief under those wants, and for thine encouragement frequently
meditate upon those two Scriptures, Iam. 1.5. God gives unto all men
liberally, and upbraideth not; and that in Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all
your need according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ.

II. Besides secret Prayer in your Closet or Chamber, make Conscience of
Family Prayer. Having been alone with God, and by thy self, sit not down
content with that; but apply to the remaining part of thy Duty, call those that
are under thy charge, and carry them to God together with thee. As when the
woman of Samaria had heard the discourses of our Lord Jesus, while they were by
themselves, she was so taken with them, that she left her Water-pot, and went
to the City, and called her Neighbors to come and see him, and converse with
him too. Would you not be willing to have your Family go to God in glory? Sure
you would, and if so, then bring them now with you to God in duty: All that are
capable of joining with you, and of understanding what you do and say; yea,
bring your little ones, your young and tender Babes, so that they will be
quiet, and give you no disturbance in the work, that so you may,

First; Present your selves before the Lord, offering and dedicating them to
him.

Secondly; Enter them early, and from the Cradle in his Service.

Thirdly; Beg a Blessing from God upon them, though they cannot beg one for
themselves.

If you will consult the Scriptures, you will find that God's ancient People,
the Jews, did bring sometimes their Children with them to the great
Congregations. Take two instances of it, one of them you have in Deuteronomy. 29.10,
11. All Israel did appear before the Lord when Moses made a Covenant with them
in the Land of Moab. Now read what Moses there said to them, Ye stand all of
you this day before the Lord your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your
Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of Israel, your little ones, your
Wives, and thy stranger that is in thy Camp, from the hewer of thy Wood, unto
the drawer of thy Water. Not only the Males but the Females, not only the great
and honorable Men but the meanest, not only the Fathers, but the Children, not
only those that were grown up, but the little ones were brought before the
Lord, to enter into Covenant with him, and into the Oath which the Lord their
God made with them that day.

So when in Ezra 9. the Princes came to that holy Man, and told him, the people
of Israel, and the Priests and the Levites had not separated themselves from
the people of the Lands, but taken their Daughters for themselves, and for
their Sons also; so that the holy Seed had mingled themselves with the people
of the Lands, the good Man upon the hearing thereof rent his Garment, and his
Mantle, and plucked off the Hair of his Head, and of his Beard, and sat down
astonished, at the Evening Sacrifice he fell upon his Knees, and spread out his
Hands unto the Lord his God, blushing, and professing himself ashamed to lift
up his Face to God, because of that great trespass which had been committed by
the people, though he himself was not guilty of it. Now consult Ezra 10.1. and
you find there, when he had prayed, and when he had confessed, weeping, and
casting himself down before the House of God, there assembled unto him a very
great Congregation of men, and women, and children, for the people wept very
sore. The poor Children were brought as Persons concerned, as those who were
obnoxious to the stroke of Justice, and might perish in a common Calamity
brought upon that sinning and God-provoking People. So that it was no childish
thing in them to bring their Children with them to such serious and solemn
work; there was much in it as might easily be shown.

Now let these Examples prevail so far with you as to bring your Children with
you to your Family Duties, there present them before the Lord; for though they
can do nothing to the duty, yet you cannot tell what God may do upon and in
them; he has a way to their Hearts, and can do that good work in them which
neither they nor you do know now, but both they and you may know it afterward.
Therefore though they cannot pray themselves, though they cannot understand
what you say in your Prayers, yet let them be present at them; there they are
under the Eye of God, and he may bestow upon them a look of love; they are in
the way of mercy, and it may give them a visit; the Prayers you cause to ascend
may gather into a Cloud over you, and when that pours down a shower of
Blessings, some drops may fall upon your little ones.

And since you should bring your little ones to Prayer, it is plain that you
ought to call those to it that are elder and grown up, and have attained to the
use and exercise of their Reason, your Sons and your Daughters, your
Man-servants and your Maidservants, invite them to come in, call them, exhort
them, show the goodness of it, the excellency and necessity of it, persuade
them, draw them with the Cords of a Man; if they, or any of them be careless,
refractory, obstinate, command them to come in, compel them to come in, use
that power and authority with which God has invested you. Do not suffer any of
them to absent themselves from one Prayer without just cause. Let them not eat
of your Bread, nor live under your Roof, who will not join with you in the
service of your God. You have in this Discourse heard, and now read much
concerning the noble and gracious Resolution taken up by that great and
excellent Person Joshua in the Text, As for me and my house we will serve the
Lord. I will do it, and they shall; I and all mine, my House, my whole House,
every Individual Person in it. Let none serve you that will not serve your God
as well as you. For mine own part, I never was a Friend to Impositions, and I
think and hope never shall be: Not for Men's adding their Inventions to Divine
Institutions, and then requiring all to submit and comply with them. Let
themselves use them, yea, and all those that like them, only may they grant
liberty to such as are otherwise minded, and count that worship best, most
pleasing, most profitable, and most glorious, which is of God's own
appointment. But I am for requiring what God has required; it is the duty of
Magistrates in Nations, and of Governors in Houses to see that Gods Laws be
observed and obeyed; and therefore be you very careful in that respect, and
strictly command all under you to be constantly present. If any of them will
not let them know your displeasure, and that you will not endure it; whether
they refuse to join with you out of a Spirit of Error, with which too many at
this day are acted, or out of a Spirit of Profaneness, it is all one for that;
if they will not with you seek and serve the Lord, let them not continue in
your House, nor tarry in your sight; they are no other than Plagues in your
Families, and may spread the Infection, others are in danger from them. They
are rotten Members, cure them, or cut them off; bring all to Prayer.

III. Be sure to make Family Prayer the work of every day. God loves your
Company, therefore be not strangers to him. He never thinks you come to him too
often, why then should you go but seldom? Do not content your selves with
praying only upon the Lord's Day, and bringing all your service of God within
the compass of a Sabbath, as if the other six days were so your own, and for
your own work, that you must spare none of them for God. This indeed, as I have
been informed, is the manner of some among us; upon a Lord's Day they will call
their Families together, and then they will do something for God; but they must
give me leave to think, what they do then is pitifully, shamefully done; they
are so seldom used to it that they must needs bungle at it; and let me ask you,
my Friends, are these Persons liberal to God? Nay, are they not very beggarly
and penurious, who will give him a visit upon that day which he has reserved
wholly and entirely for himself, and set about it the Hedge of a command to
keep all secular Affairs from intruding or breaking in upon it? But they will
not part with any of that time which he has allowed them for the dispatch of
their own business; but their Work and Recreations, their Eating, Drinking and
Sleeping shall ingross it all; in short, the Language of their practice is
this, they will pray a little when they have nothing else to do, or when there
is nothing else that they may do; but the Law commands them to shut up their
Shops, and to lay by their worldly Trades, but, my Friends, is this fair? Do
not you rob God of some of his time? Why then will you not return him some of
your own? Do not you commit too many sins upon a Sabbath Day, and will you not
do some duty upon a Weekday? Do you mingle sin with your holy things, and will
you not mingle Prayer and holy Thoughts with your earthly things? Is this to
continue instant in Prayer? Is this to pray without ceasing? Is this paying due
homage to the Lord of your time and comforts? Is this enough for depending
Creatures who cannot live a day without God, no, not a moment?

The truth is, Love to God should draw us frequently that we may have Communion
with him, and necessity might drive us that we may have supplies from him; all
your Springs are in him, with him is the Well of Life, therefore let down your
Bucket of Prayer often, that you may draw Water with joy. You may observe that
in the Lord's Prayer which Christ gave his Disciples for an excellent pattern
or example by which we all should draw up ours, he teaches us to say, Our
Father, that speaks Communion, and a joining together in Prayer; one Saint, one
Child of God may go alone to the Throne of Grace and say, Father. or, O my
Father, but, Our Father, speaks Society and Fellowship in the duty: That there
are more Suitors, more concerned than one. And further observe, that there our
Lord bids us say, Give us this day our daily bread; from whence we may gather
these three things.

First; He bids us pray for Bread. Temporal good things are to be sought of
God. The Dew of Heaven, yea, and the Fatness of the Earth, Provision for our
Souls, and Food for our Bodies too; we are to seek God, and rely upon him in
and for the greatest things, and also the least. In every thing by Prayer and
Supplication we are to make our Request known to God. We cannot get our Bread
unless God gives it to us.

Secondly; He bids us pray for Bread, not for Dainties, not Sweetmeats, not
Venison, not Varieties, Necessaries are to be sought, not Superfluities;
nothing to feed our Pride, nor to spend upon our Lusts. Feed me, said wise and
holy Agar, with food convenient for me; that which is suitable to the place in
which thou have set me. Seek not great things for your selves, for those great
things may prove great snares.

Thirdly; He bids us to say, Give us this day our daily Bread. We are to pray
for Bread for to day, supplies for to day; and we are to say that, or something
to the same purpose every day. He does not bid us pray that God would give us
Bread for this Week, or for this Month, or for this Year, or for twenty Years
to come, but give us this day, and we are to say so to morrow as well as to
day, and the day after that as well as to morrow, and so it is to run thorough
the whole course of Life. Every day we are to say, Give us this day, etc. that
is, as we desire to have our Bread of God every day, we must ask it every day;
daily Bread and daily Prayer must go together. God does love to answer the
occasions of his People, and to supply their wants; He gives meat to them that
fear him, because he is ever mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. III.5. but he
stands upon his honor, and expects to be owned, and therefore said, he would
be sought to by the House of Israel to do it for them,

I have read this Story of an Heathen, whose Name I cannot for the present call
to mind, that when he had at any time passed a day without doing some Act of
Charity or Mercy, he would in the evening sit down bemoaning himself, and cry
out, perdidi diem, I have lost a day. Truly it is so here; thou may at night
with bitterness of Soul reflect upon that day which thou have spent without
Family Prayer, and say, perdidi diem, I have lost a day; and he that knows the
shortness, the uncertainty, the worth of time, and how much depends upon the
right improvement thereof, will reckon the loss of a day to be a very great
loss, and we are wont to say, one loss seldom goes alone; what thou do lose
besides that, God only knows; what communion with God, what answers, what
manifestations of Divine Love, what communications of Grace, what Blessings,
therefore I beseech you all to make Conscience of Praying in your Families
every day.

And if at any time, through forgetfulness or surprise of any kind, or being
oppressed with business crowding in upon thee, thou art so hindered that thou
can not perform thy duty, but the Season is as it were violently wrested out
of thy hands; bewail the loss, sigh and mourn over it, let God see thou art
afflicted for it, and not pleased with thy self, or the avocation; and long for
another opportunity, in which thou may go and appear before thy God; and
when once it comes, welcome it with gladness, and lay hold upon it, thy Soul
being like the Chariots of Amminadib, and then confess thy former omission, and
beg thy Father to cast the Mantle of his love over it, and then double thy
diligence, and thy hea^, then spend the more time, and put forth the greater
strength, then do thou follow the harder after God, and keep the closer to him,
and let it be thy desire to make up that which was lacking before, that so
neither thy God may lose his honor, nor thy self, nor thy Family the good and
benefit of a duty; but like the Sea, what Religion loses at one time, it may
gain at another.

IV. Be sure that you Pray in your Families Morning, and Evening. I would not
have you from hence conclude my design is to render you so strait laced as not
to pray oftener than so, to do this, and take up with doing it, making that your
stint, your allowance, resolved not to exceed; no, no, it is your interest to
study liberal things in your dealings with God, for by liberal things you shall
stand; you cannot be too much with God, nor do too much for him? you cannot
pray too much, so that you have a prudent and cordial respect to all his
Commands, and to all the parts of your Duty, not suffering one to justle out
another; as the Body is not all one Member, so Religion is not all one Duty, it
does not consist altogether in Prayer, nor altogether in Hearing; and as that
is a lame Body which wants one Member, so he is a lame Christian that is
careless as to any one piece of Religion, such a wilful defect is a great
deformity. Set your hand to all the work of God, and in particular be much in
Prayer; David gave himself unto Prayer, as a Man much set for it, and devoted
to it; Daniel the Man greatly beloved of his God, was at it three times in a
day, Dan. 6.10. His Windows being opened in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he
kneeled upon his knees three times in a day, and prayed and gave thanks before
his God, as he did afore-time. He loved Prayer so well, that neither danger nor
death, no, not a violent death, being cast into a Den of Lions could affright
and deter him from it. David, the Man after Gods own heart, was much more at
it, Psalm 119.164. Surely he had great encouragement so to do from his
experience, he sensibly felt that it very greatly tended to his advantage, he
saw begging was a good trade, he did thrive upon it, and therefore he followed
it close, the oftener he went to God, the more he got from him, and of him; he
never rose off his knees, nor returned from the Throne of Grace without an
Alms. The most Praying Christian, is certainly the most growing Christian, as
he has his expectations, I will direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up;
so he has his answers, and sees something is coming; but let the Morning and
Evening of every day be your stated and set times for Prayer, there is a great
deal of reason for that, viz.

First, The Divine Order and Appointment, of this we did before take notice; in
Exodus 29. God required there should be two Lambs offered up every day in
Sacrifice, the one in the morning, and the other in the Evening, which was
called the continual Burnt-Offering; and shall we be exceeded and outdone by
them? shall the dispensation now be more glorious, and shall we be more
penurious that live under it? shall God now more magnify his grace, and shall
we grow poorer in our returns? their Sacrifices were more costly and
chargeable, and shall ours be fewer? surely since in the times of Messiah there
is a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit, there should at least be an equal
abounding in the work of the Lord* our Sacrifices of Prayer and Praise, the
Calves of the Lips, and the lifting up of our Hearts and hands to God, should
be as frequent as those bloody Sacrifices.

Secondly, This Practice is commended to us in the Scripture, we are directed
to think upon those things that are of good report. Now this has obtained a
good report in the World, and as it is with Men, so it is with things, to be
well spoken of by the word, is more than to have all the World speak well of
one; look then into the 92 d Psalm 1. v. It is a good thing to give thanks unto
the Lord, and to sing Praises to thy Name, O thou most High; to bless God, to
exalt God, to give him glory, is good, it is duty, it is the employment of
Angels, the Work of Heaven, and Eternity, and those that have good hearts will
delight in good work. If you would know what are the fittest and most
convenient times for the doing of this good work, for that tends much to the
adorning and setting off a work, every thing being beautiful in its season. He
tells you in the next words, to show forth thy loving kindness in the Morning,
and thy faithfulness every night; and when we do in the sincerity of our Souls
thus begin and end our days, we are like to find them good throughout.

Thirdly, God visits us every Morning, it is no less than Gods humbling himself
to behold those things which are above, the glorious Angels, much more to look
upon Man, sorry dust, what is it then for God to visit him? the Prophet admired
it, Psalm. 8 4. What is Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man that
thou visitest him? Great Princes are not wont to go into a Beggars Hovil, they
reckon it below them, but the Great God stoops much lower; and Oh! how
necessary is this for us, Job 10.12. Thy Visitation has preserved my Spirit.
By this he meant a gracious Visitation, a Friendly one, this revived him, this
preserved him, his Spirit, his Life, his Courage, his Comforts, all were upheld
and maintained by the gracious visitations of God. Again, how frequent are
these with us? how many gracious Visits does God bestow upon his poor People?
Job 7.18. Thou visitest him every morning, there is never a Morning that we
miss him, as often as the Morning returns, God comes to visit us, yea, he is
with us before we are up; and since Gods visits are so frequent, shall ours be
few? shall he come to see us, and see to us, and shall not, we wait upon him?
shall the strangeness be on our side? let us visit God every Morning, and pay
him visit for visit, and let us be sure to carry our Family with us, for so we
shall be the more welcome.

Fourthly, The continuation and constant succession of Mercies does oblige to
this, and call for it; Gods Mercies are new every Morning upon us, and shall
not our returns? shall we not follow hard after him, and delight in our
approaches to him, when he draws us with the Cords of a Man, yea, with
loving kindness; the very pouring out of his Name, which is as a precious
Ointment, should make us love and run after him; Oh! let the pouring out of his
Grace and Mercy do it. Day unto Day utters speech, and Night unto Night shows
knowledge, and one would think that when both Day and Night speak in the
Language of Love, we should answer them, and not be silent. God sows his Seed
in the Morning, and in the Evening he witholdeth not his hand; and surely that
Heart and House is a very barren Soil, and near unto a Curse, that does not
twice a day pay its acknowledgments to him.

Lastly, methinks there is not any one who has the use of reason, and believes
a God, but has a Monitor in his own bosom to prompt him to this, and not need
a Minister in a Pulpit to press it upon him, or a Friend at his elbow to jog
him, your own reason should and would direct you to it, if you did but consult
and hearken to it. It is fit that we should make God the Alpha, and the Omega,
the first and the last, for so he is, and therefore we ought to begin and end
our day, and other things too with God: we cannot rationally expect to prosper,
if we do not begin with him, and in case we do not end with him, our labor may
be lost, and all that we have done may ravel out again. Our necessities would
engage and spur us on to this. In the Morning we should seek him for direction,
assistance, and blessing upon the work and business of the day. For Direction,
else we shall mistake our way, and lose our selves, it not being in him that
walks to direct his steps; he that thinks himself wise enough to be his own
guide, will find himself a Fool for thinking so. For assistance, because in him
we live, and move, and have our being, and without him we can do nothing;
nothing supernatural, nothing natural, the concurrence of his grace is
necessary to all our Spiritual and holy actions: the concurrence of his
providence is as necessary to all our natural and civil actions; if he subduct
from us we cannot stir a finger, nor move a foot. And for a Blessing, for upon
that all our success depends, we had as good sit still if we take not God along
with us; Solomon tell us in one place, the diligent hand makes Rich; in another
place, that the blessing of the Lord makes Rich; the former can never do it
without the latter. In the Evening we should beg of him Protection, for it is
his hedge that secures us, his wing that covers us, Psalm. 4.8. Thou, Lord, only
make me to dwell in safety, no Guard comparable to a God; beg of him rest and
sleep, for it is he that with a tender hand closes the eye, and binds up the
senses, and gives his beloved sleep, beg of him refreshing by that sleep, else
you will have sick sleeps, and disordered Spirits, and akeing heads after them.
Once more, our daily receivings do oblige us to the offering up of this our
Morning and Evening Sacrifice. In the Morning we are in gratitude bound to
bless him for watching over us while we slept, and that with a never-slumbering
Eye, and for his not holding our Eyes waking, of which poor Asaph complained,
Psalm. 77.4. And that you are not in the same case with poor Job in Job 7.13,
14. Who, when he said, his bed should comfort him, and his couch should ease
his complaint, was scared with dreams, and frighted with visions. We have cause
to bless God in the Morning, that when we sought rest in our Beds we found it
there, and that our sleep was not our terror. And again in the Evening we have
cause to bless God for the help of the day, that he directed, and strengthened,
and prosper'd us in the work of our Heads and Hands, and for the Mercies of the
day, Health, Ease, Relations, Friends, Food, Raiment, and that we relish our
Enjoyments, and taste any sweetness in our Enjoyments; for a little matter
would vitiate and corrupt our Palates, and render our pleasant things as
insipid and unsavory to us as the white of an Egg, or a dry Chip, nay, bitter
and loathsome, Job 20.12. His meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of
asps within him. It is one thing to have outward Mercies, and another to have
the comfort of them; and these two go not always together, but are often
separated; when we have them both, surely we should be wickedly ungrateful if
we do not own and honor him who is the Father of those Mercies, and the God of
that Comfort.

V. For the better offering up of these your Morning and Evening Sacrifices in
and with your Families, be sure to make choice of the fittest and most proper
time. God does all his works in their time, so should we do ours; that will be
the Beauty of them. The blessed Man brings forth his Fruit in its Season, and
that is lovely, pleasant Fruit. Now which is the most proper and convenient
time for the Duty; I shall not take upon me here to determine, for the
occasions and circumstances of Families are various and different, yea, and not
seldom those of the same Family; wherefore the Governors of Families are to
make use of their own Prudence and Discretion in the choice thereof; you are
most likely to know it best, only do you choose that which is best; and I shall
lay down two Rules in general by which you may judge what is so.

First; That is the best time for Prayer, in which you can promise your selves
the greatest freedom from all other business, and to meet with the fewest
avocations from the work, and disturbances in it.

Secondly; That is the best time for Prayer, in which you find your selves in
the best composure; wherein your Minds and Hearts are in the fittest frame for
the Duty, most serious, most spiritual, most lively, and have good reason to
conclude, those who are to join with you in the work will be so too as well as
your self. This is highly desirable, and in a special manner to be looked to.
A wise Man will see that his Instrument be in Tune before he will begin to play
his Music. Do you here see to it that your Hearts be in Tune, otherwise you
cannot hope that your Prayer will be God's delight. Now here I must be plain
with you, that I may be faithful to you; and faithful I must be, because I am
accountable, and how else shall I answer it to my Judge. I charge no body in
particular, that would not be becoming in such a place, in such an Assembly;
but I draw my Bow at a venture, God himself direct the Arrow, that it may hit
the mark, and pierce to the Heart of those who are guilty. And I do advise
every one of you to reflect and search into your own Lives, and examine your
Practices, and if your Consciences smite you, and say as Nathan to David, Thou
art the Man, Thou the Woman, take it to your selves, and I give you free leave
to think your selves the persons whom I meant, and that was said I intended to
and for you, only, know it for your good. The God of Heaven accompany what I
shall say with his Spirit and Blessing, and lay it on the sore place, and make
it stick in order to the working of a Cure. There are, my Friends, two things,
of which I am informed, and upon their account there are great thoughts of
Heart among serious gracious Christians.

One is that of unreasonable and unseasonable Gaming, I mean, in the houses of
Professors, such as call themselves Christians, and would be counted the
Friends and practisers of that Religion which is pure and undefiled before God
and the Father; as for others who are the Servants of Sin and Satan, I leave
them to the righteous Judgment of God. But, as I have heard since I entered upon
this Subject, there is in the houses of Professors sitting up at Cards till it
is late, ten, eleven, twelve of the Clock at night, yea sometimes till morning:
I ask them by the way, whether ever they sat up so long at prayer, or reading
the Scripture? Unto such persons I would only say these few things.

First; As touching the Game it self, I will not take upon me peremptorily to
determine, that playing at Cards is utterly unlawful. Yet I do very well
remember, that in former times when Professors lived more up to the Rules of
Religion than most now do, and did not allow to themselves that latitude which
many in our days take; Cards were counted so by many godly learned Ministers
and gracious Christians, and accordingly were then called, The Devil's Books,
and the use of them for play was a thing of bad report, and to have a pack of
them in the house was then reckoned scandalous. It is true, one of no small
esteem for Learning and Piety (whose Name I forbear to mention) has written
for it; but I humbly conceive, he had better have spared his pains. So pitiful
a Cause did not deserve so Learned a Pen, so great a Patron; and what he and
others have said is not satisfactory, but still (sub judice lis est) the matter
is disputable, and there are more against it than for it. And I am sure in
matters questionable, such things as will admit of a debate, it is the wisdom
of those who love their own Souls, and desire to approve themselves unto God by
an holy exact walking before him, to forbear; there may be sin in using, but
for certain there is no danger in letting them alone. Though you are not sure
there is Poison in a Glass of Wine, yet if you do suspect it you will not drink
of it. Perhaps the company will jeer and laugh at you for your over-niceness,
and let them till they be weary, better so, than to have your own Consciences
raging and storming at you for your over-boldness. It is not good to rouse a
sleepy Lion, a little matter will do it. But then,

Secondly; As to any other Game which is evidently lawful, and concerning which
no dispute has been raised among good men. Nature does require, and God does
allow Recreations. The Bow that always stands bent will grow to be a Slug. And
there are Recreations in themselves very innocent and harmless, that tend much
to the health of the Body, and not to the detriment or prejudice of the Soul;
yet even in these you must manage your selves with wisdom, for otherwise you
may sin in them. What the Apostle Paul says of the Law; 1 Timothy 1.8. We know
that the Law is good if a man use it lawfully. I may say in the present case,
we know that Recreation is good if a man use it lawfully; but withal we know
that the greatest danger of real sincere Christians lies inter licita, among
things lawful; and though the Recreations, which you use, are lawful in
themselves, yet you may sin in the using of them, and that many ways;
particularly, in the using them out of season, and by being too long at them.
Time is too precious a Jewel to be thrown away.

Thirdly; I desire you seriously to consider, whether Gaming be a good
preparative for any holy duty. We have been wont to blame those that would upon
the Lord's Day come reeking out of their Beds to Public Ordinances; and if I
be not mistaken, they are as worthy of blame, who immediately go from their
sports to the Service of God. Is this, my Friends, is this the way for People
to get themselves into a fitness for duty, their hearts into a serious, solemn,
spiritual and holy frame? Is this the way to qualify you for an appearance in
so great and glorious a Presence as is that of God, and for engaging to so
important and momentous a work as is that of Prayer? You that love Recreations,
do not love them too well; and you that use them, let it be without abusing
them; do not make Play your work, but use it moderately, as becomes those who
were sent hither for higher and nobler purposes than to sport upon Earth as
Leviathan does in the Sea; and as becomes them who knows the shortness,
uncertainty and preciousness of Time, and that your everlasting welfare and
happiness in the other World depends upon a due improvement of it; and as
becomes those who believe you must at last render an account thereof unto the
God that gave it to you. And I also advise you to take special, care that there
be a sufficient interval or space of time between your Recreation and your
Duty, that so you may call your thoughts in which you had given leave to
ramble, and raise your Affections up, which had been too much deprest, and sunk
to Objects so mean and low, and that by holy Meditation, spiritual Divine
Contemplations, you may recover your former warmth, and chafe your selves into
a due heat, and be fervent in spirit serving the Lord, remembering, it was in
the flame of Manoahs Sacrifice that the Angel did wonderfully.

Fourthly; You that are Parents, I do earnestly desire you to think with your
selves, and that seriously, whether you are kind to your Children in playing at
Cards; does this speak your love to them, and care of them? Is this the way to
keep them from the path of the Destroyer, and to bring them up for God? Does
this tend to the making of them gracious or serious? Do you think in your
Consciences that you would be willing Death should come and find you so
employed, that Death should come and take you at Cards? Or do you think in your
Consciences, that you do herein set your Children a good Example. Really this
deserves your thoughts; for as we Ministers are to be Examples to the Flock, so
you Parents and Governors ought to be to your Families. What manner of persons
then should you be in all holy conversation, in all the actions of your Lives?
and are you so exemplary when you play at Cards, as it becomes and concerns you
to be? Possibly, some of you think you have enough to say for your selves, viz.
that you do not make a Trade of it, nor a common practice, you do it but at one
time of the year, when the Nights are long, and you know not how otherwise to
pass away the time; but by the way, do not say so, for that proclaims your
egregious weakness and folly) what! have so great work to do, and so much of
it, yet know not how to pass away the time? or you satisfy your selves with
this, that you do not play for Money, at least not for much, so that upon that
score you are much at a pass whether you win or not, and this may be, but you
cannot tell what your Children may do after you; you do show them the way, and
lead them in it, but they may shortly go a great deal farther than you your
selves either do or dare to do; because they see you play at Cards, they
conclude it lawful, and that they may do so too* and accordingly do, for
Children are imitating Creatures, and by practicing it, they may fall in love
with it, for Childhood and youth are vanity, and by consequence very apt to
follow after vanity, and in time they may come to love it so much, as to
consume and spend their time in it, until their purses be exhausted, their
Estates dwindled and shrunk into nothing, and themselves with their Families
reduced to beggary, and a morsel of bread, and at the same time their Souls are
lost into the bargain; and surely rather than that should come to pass, it is a
thousand thousand times more desirable that all the Cards in London, in
England, yea in the World, should with just indignation be Sacrificed in the
Flames. In short, as to this, I beg of you that you would do justly, in giving
to God the things which are Gods, and let not Cards nor any other game hinder
his Work and Service, nor keep you from the performance of your Duty. Many have
been undone by gaming, and thousands enriched by praying; it was by this means
that Jacob as a Prince had power with God and Men, and did prevail. Oh! that so
much may suffice to be spoken to that complaint, and Oh! that God would
accompany it with his Spirit, and Blessing.

There is another thing which is indeed the matter of a general Complaint, and
has raised a great Cry that reached mine Ears, and the Ears of many of my
Reverend Brethren; and that which renders it so much a Gravamen, so grievous
and afflictive to our spirits, and those of other persons truly fearing God,
and concerned for the Honor and Interest of our Religion, which deserves to be
dearer to us than our Lives, is that it is the common, yea daily custom, not of
the vile Debauchees of the Age, the wicked and profane Crew, from whom nothing
is to be expected, that savours of goodness and sobriety, but even of sober
Persons, grave Citizens, yea of Men eminent for their Profession, Members of
Churches worshipping God in that way which so many unjustly labor to fix a
black brand of Infamy upon; but our Heavenly Advocate will one day plead our
Cause, and bring forth the Righteousness of it as the Light. But the thing is,
such Persons sitting so long as they do, at Public houses of one kind or
another, and spending there so much time, that it is nine, ten, yea and often
eleven of the Clock at night, before they return to their home; so deeply
engaged are they in their Clubs, and Discourses, in telling and hearing of
News. I bless God I very seldom hear of Professors and Members of Churches
being charged with Drunkenness, Uncleanness, or other gross Immoralities,
though I wish there were none of them guilty, and do fear there be some who are
Spots in our Communion; yet this we can say, we allow them not, and if we did
know them, and there were just proof, we should proceed against them according
to Scripture-Rule. Further to prevent my being mistaken, I shall say these two
things.

First; I do not speak against men's inquiring after News, or their being
desirous to inform themselves concerning the State of Affairs, and how matters
go in the Nation, and abroad, and with the Church of God, specially in such a
time as this. When the Army of Israel went out to War against the Philistines,
good old Eli could not stay at home, but out he went and sat upon a Seat by
the ways side, watching, for his heart trembled for the Ark of God; 1 Samuel
4.13. And I look upon it as a duty, yea, a necessary part of duty in us all,
that so we may be accordingly affected, and the better understand how to order
our Spirits, and demean our selves, and how to direct our Prayers and Praises
unto God, that so there may be no unseemly discord and jarring between God's
Providence and our Prayers, but an harmony and consent.

Secondly; I do not speak a word against Citizens having their Clubs, in order
to the better and more prudent management of their Trades: this I am a stranger
to and therefore do not meddle with; for any thing I know it may be convenient
for them, and profitable, and more than so, needful; but for Men to sit in
those places so long, and keep from their own houses till it be so late, is
indeed blameworthy, and calls loudly for a reformation, and oh! that I could
help toward it, I will do my endeavor, and in order thereunto, offer some
things to your consideration.

First, if any of you who are here present before the Lord, and are Husbands,
be guilty of this thing, and make an ordinary practice thereof, I beseech you,
when you are most calm and composed, seriously to reflect upon it, and think
with your selves, whether this be kindness to your Wives? Is this walking
answerably to that near intimate conjugal relation into which you did
voluntarily and of your own choice enter, promising to express all love and
tenderness? Is this living up to the Law, and doing the duty of that Relation?
Is this being as good as your word? Is this your love and kindness to her, in
whose Company and Converse you ought to delight above all others except Gods?
Is this to be a Comfort to her as you ought to be? Think that while you are
abroad Merry, Jocund, Pleasant, Delighting your self with your Friends and
Wine, she for want of you is at home Melancholic, Concerned, Afraid, Troubled
lest you should Contract any Guilt, or come by any Hurt; at least, she is
solitary and alone.

Secondly; To that thought add another, While I am here does not my Family want
me? May you not be more useful, and do much more good at Home, than you are
capable of doing in one of those Public Houses? What becomes of your own
Vineyard, which you are bound to keep? Would it not turn to a better account,
and prove far more advantageous both to you and yours to be teaching of your
Family, commending God and Godliness to them, giving them good Counsels,
instilling into them sound Principles, reading to them your selves, or hearing
them read the Holy Scriptures, and other good Books, by which they may be
richly furnished for good Works, and made wise to Salvation; or Catechizing
them about the main Fundamental Points of Religion, and examining them as to
their knowledge in the things of God, for want of due care wherein while they
are young, many when they come to be grown up, prove unstable Souls, and an
easy prey to them that lie in wait to deceive. Possibly you do not, and I will
hope that you do not Drink to Excess in those Houses, nor spend too much Money
upon them, who will not thank you for it afterward; but what say thou
Conscience? Speak out, to them, speak plain, do they not spend too much time
there? May they not spend it much better at home, and about something else?

Thirdly; Suppose the great and holy God should come to you at such a time, and
in such a place, would you not be startled at it, and afraid of him? When
Elijah in danger of his Life upon the rage and threatening of Iezabel had fled
and hid himself in a Cave, the Lord came to him and said, What do thou here
Elijah? 1 Kings 19. Suppose God should then and there come to thee, not in a
great strong Wind, nor in an Earthquake, nor in a Fire, but in a gentle manner
as he did to him, in a small still voice, and say, what do thou here, O Man?
Is it not high time for thee to be at home; honest Men should be so, specially
such as call themselves by my name should be so, what then do thou here?
Could you give a satisfactory account of it unto God? Could you justify and
maintain it before God? Could you with boldness answer, Lord, I am where I
should be, I am where my work is; I do not at all doubt, but such a question as
this propounded by the most holy God would raise a blush in your Cheeks for
shame, or cover your Face with paleness for fear; it would leave you
speechless* and make you tremble; it would cause rottenness to enter into your
Bones, and teach you to make more haste home the next time. Well know, though
God does not appear and act to such a purpose as this for the present, yet if
you do not amend, and sue out your Pardon, he will question you about it at the
last, and punish you for it too.

Fourthly; When you come so late to your Houses, do you in your Consciences
think that you come soon enough to your duty? Is so late at Night the best time
you can pick out to bestow upon God? It is more than probable that then you
your selves are not in any fit condition to make your appearance before so
glorious a Majesty, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and very
sensible of his Creatures neglecting him, and who will not be mocked, no, nor
slighted neither. Surely you are not then in a fit case to present your
Petition to him, in whose Hand your Souls and Lives, and All are; you are not
then in a fit case to strive in Prayer, and wrestle with Omnipotency; though
indeed the Door of Grace does stand always open, yet your Souls are not always
active, and at that time your Bodies will be a clog and hindrance to them. At
that Hour, not only your Hearts, it may be, are down, and flat, and dead, and
your Spirits run very low, but your very Heads are discomposed too, and out of
order; and it is not likely that Grace should be lively and vigorous in its
motions, when Nature it self is jaded, tired, and calls for relief. But how do
you think it is with the rest of the Family, who have stood in your Shops till
their Legs have ak'd, and been spent and wearied with the toil and labor of
the day, doing your work, and running from one end of the Town to another upon
your Errands, and after all have been impatiently waiting, and wishing, and
looking for you till they could look no longer, not being able to hold up their
Eyes; for though the Spirit be never so willing, yet the Flesh is weak. Now I
appeal to you, is this a good Praying-time? And are not all in a right praying
case when in such a case as this? And the work is like to be done as it should
be when they that set about it scarce know what they do, possibly they are all
asleep as soon as ever they are fallen down upon their Knees, or if not so
soon, before the Master has done, and the Prayer is ended? O Great God how art
thou served by these pitiful Wretches that owe thee more than they are worth!
How would they put thee off! Were thou not what thou art, God, and not Man, and
were not thy Goodness, thy Patience like thy Self Infinite? Thou would not,
nay more, thou could not bear it; and I leave you to think, whether you have
reason to hope that he will accept. In short, by this means at sometimes the
duty is totally omitted, and then they are sent to Bed as Swine to their Sties;
at other times it is slightly and shamefully performed, and so there is
short-praying, and sleepy praying, and dead, heartless praying, and indeed no
praying; for we have reason to be confident that God will not call that
praying, but a trifling and fooling, not a seeking, but a mocking of him. If
this be your Incense that you offer to him it must needs stink in his Nostrils,
and it is no wonder that he counts and calls it an abomination; this is no
other than offering unto him the Blind and the Lame for a Sacrifice, and he may
speak to you in the very same words that he used to those wicked Persons, Mal.
1.8. If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the
lame and sick, is it not evil? Is it not evil? Yes it is; if it be not evil in
your Eyes, it is in mine, and evil in it self, and would be counted so by a Man
thy Superior, therefore he thus goes on, Offer it now unto thy Governor, will
he be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person, says the Lord of Hosts? You see
what pains I have taken about this one thing; shall I entreat and prevail with
you to consider and lay to heart what has been said, and if there be reason,
of which I do not doubt, be ruled by it. And if any that have heard me this day
be guilty herein, let them humble themselves before God, and implore his
Pardon, and let them be sure to reform this great abuse. Go home, and sin no
more, do so no more, the time past may suffice.

VI. I do advise that you would neither in your Closets, nor in your Families
confine and tie up your selves to a form of Prayer. I would do every thing that
I do for good, would both speak and write to the advantage and edification of
others, and not willingly anger the Wasp, much less offend any of Christ's
little ones; therefore that I may, as far as in me lies, have peace with all
Men, and above, and within too; I say,

First; I do not wholly condemn a form of Prayer. I do not deny the lawfulness
of it; nor would I for a World charge any Man with sin for making use of one,
so that he do but pray with his Heart also. It is far better to pray with a
form than not to pray at all, better to go to God with a good Prayer composed
by another, than with his own nonsense. And I also add* That a form of Prayer
is not only lawful but necessary too for some, namely, those that know not how
to pray without one; Those who (as Learned Mr. Tho. Fuller says) have not yet
attained, what all should endeavor, to pray ex tempore by the Spirit, for them
a form of Prayer is as necessary as a Crutch is for a lame Man. And I do not
doubt but such an one may have sweet Communion with God, and find welcome and a
gracious Entertainment, so that he be upright in his Heart, and fervent in his
Spirit while serving of the Lord, or to use the expression of the same worthy
Person, Though a Man has not change of Raiment, and cannot appear at the Court
of Heaven every day in a new Suit, but comes in the same Clothes, yet if he be
a Loyal Subject, he shall have free access to the King of Glory; if he be a
Child Heaven-born, his Fathers Ear will be open to him, and his Petition
received and granted; but while he goes to God with his old Prayer, let him
labor to carry with him new affections. But,

Secondly; I must needs profess, to the Imposition of a form of a Prayer I am
no Friend. I have been pleased with the Composure of several, for the
spiritualness and variety of the Matter, and for the aptness of the Expression,
but do not like the imposing of them; neither some Men's taking upon them to
impose them on others, nor that any Man should impose one upon himself; and I
am sure it is not from a Spirit of Error, or of Division, or of Contradiction,
that I believe and assert it far more excellent and desirable both for
Ministers and private Christians to be able from an inward sense of, and
acquaintedness with their own case, wants, and necesties, and from the
abundance of their Hearts, together with the gracious assistance of the Blessed
Spirit of God to pour out their desires into his Bosom, and make their Requests
known to him, than to borrow, and make use of, and tie themselves to the best
form of another composing. And I am persuaded our dear Lord Jesus did draw up,
and give out to his Disciples that most sweet, full, and comprehensive Prayer
as a pattern for them to imitate, not as a form, with which they should sit
down contented, without looking after, or making use of those Gifts and
Abilities which he either had or should by his Spirit bestow and confer upon
them. And as for those who do ridicule and laugh at praying by the Spirit,
making it the matter of their scorn and derision, I do not stick to charge them
with a Spirit of Profaneness, only I beg that God would show them their sin,
and give them Repentance, and a Pardon. These things being thus premised, I do,
as before, Counsel you who are my Hearers, not to tie your selves up to a form
of Prayer, and I shall give you three or four Reasons of my advising you so.

First; Because it is my hearty desire that all of you who make Prayer your
work and business, should keep your selves at the greatest distance possible
from a lifeless cold formality. Do all that you can to avoid it; not that I
think formality is inseparable from form, or that it cannot find room in him
who prays extemporarily; we all have need to watch both unto Prayer and in
it, else we shall have our Hearts to seek while we are seeking of God. But I
look upon it as a thing past question among experienced Christians that
conceived Prayer, (as it is commonly called) being rightly managed, has a
greater and more direct tendency to the affecting both the Soul of him that
utters it, and the Souls of those that join with him, and toward the raising
of them up to a due warmth of Affection, and preserving them in it. I shall
recite to you the words of a late Reverend, Holy Divine, of mine intimate
Acquaintance, that did Conform to the Church of England, viz. Mr. Gurnal,
Famous for that excellent Piece of his, The Christian in complete Armor, a
Book worth Gold. After he had there pleaded for the lawfulness of Forms of
Prayer, yea, and that in the Church, he has these Expressions, The evil is not
in a Form, but in Formality, and that is a Disease which may be found in him
that prays with a conceived Prayer. A Man may pray without a Form, and yet
not pray without Formality; and this I grant, but now observe that which
follows; I confess, he that binds himself constantly to a set Form, especially
in his private addresses, seems to me to be more in danger of the two, of
falling under the power of that lazy Distemper.

Secondly; There are some things which may, and often do fall out, which none
can so well speak to, as the Master of the Family himself can do, supposing him
furnished with such a competent measure of Abilities as does become one in his
place. There are indeed common ordinary cases both of Persons, and Families,
and Nations, which some forms may reach, and do very well suit; but there are
and may be some particular cases, which the Governor of a Family, who, as he
ought, studieth both himself and it, is best able to express and spread before
God, Prove. 14.10. The heart knows his own bitterness, and a stranger
intermeddles not with his joy. And surely then he is the fittest Person to
relate both the one and the other. Supposing a sick Patient have the full use
of his Reason, the Physician does expect from himself the best account of his
state.

Thirdly; Conceived Prayer is the most direct way to Spiritual Increases. It is
the duty of Christians not to sit down with present seize, but while they
are on this side of Heaven and Glory, to be continually aspiring and reaching
after more; more Grace in order to a greater fitness for the happiness
hereafter, and more Gifts in order to a greater serviceableness here. Now what
progress is he like to make who continually walks in a round. If a Child will
always walk holding on a Bench, he is not like to be a good Footman. The old
saying is, Use Legs, and have Legs; it holds true here, use Parts and have
them, yea, and more too. To him that has, and imployeth what he has, shall be
given. I do not doubt but conceived Prayer is better than the constant use of a
form for the enriching of a Person with praying-gifts, if I may not say, with
Grace too. Let serious and truly honest Christians both of one way and the
other speak as they find. I know nothing fitter to determine that than their
Experience.

Fourthly; The confining of your selves to a form of Prayer is a dishonor unto
God, whose Glory ye should be dear over, and promote to your utmost. Your Gifts
are bestowed upon you in order to his Honor, but what Honor has he from them
when concealed? This is ingratitude to God, where are the returns you make to
him for the benefits you have from him. To have the Gift of Prayer, and not to
use it, is no other than to bury the Talent in a Napkin; and so to do is not
the part of a faithful Servant, nor the way to enter into the Joy of your Lord,
when you leave Earth.

Fifthly; It is a dishonor to your selves; as it would be for a Man to walk
with a Crutch when he can go as well, and better without it; it is a making
your selves poor when God has enriched you, and living upon the Basket, when
you have a sufficient Stock of your own.

Sixthly; When you have Gifts for Prayer, and yet c^nfine your selves to a
form, you are injurious to others. Every manifestation of the Spirit is given
to profit with all, 1 Cor. 12.7. Every Gift, by which the presence of the
Spirit, the in-being and influence of the Spirit does appear, is bestowed upon
Men not merely for Ornament, but for Use, not for Ostentation, but in order to
greater Serviceableness, that they might profit with it, profit others, their
Friends, their Families, the Church of God. But now those that have the Gift of
Prayer, and use it not, do not profit with it; they do no good to others. It is
like Money kept up in a Chest that the Miser is not the better for; or a Candle
in a dark Lanthorn that gives no light, and they are not like to profit in it:
Not to make any improvement or increase, it is a dead Commodity; thy not using
it is losing it; it is the way to have it taken from thee, to have God blow
upon it with a withering Breath. And indeed why should a Man have that which he
will do nothing with. You know the Parable, the unprofitable Servant buried his
Talent, and his Lord commanded he should have it no longer, but be severely
punished for his neglect. For all these Reasons, Christians, I do advise you
not to tie your selves up to a form of Prayer; use your own Gifts, but see
there be Grace too; content not your selves with a volubility of Tongue, a
freedom and neatness of Expre^sion, but see that the words of your Mouths be
the Meditations of your Hearts, and accompanied with the Affections too, that
is the way to have them acceptable in the sight of God.

VII. In all your solemn approaches to God, consider with what an infinitely
glorious Majesty you have to do, and set your selves to the work as in his
sight. Consider his being of purer Eyes than that he can behold iniquities
without loathing and abhorrency; consider that he cannot be deceived, and will
not be mocked; and that he is most jealous in those things that appertain to
his worship, Lev. 10.3. This is it that the Lord has spoken, I will be
sanctified of all them that come nigh me. Again, consider that God is observant
of you at all times, but most curiously so when drawing near him in Duty. He
has said, Where two or three are met together in his name, there he will be in
the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. As to hear their suits, so to observe their
behavior. The Judges place is usually in the midst that he may the better see
and hear; so God is in the midst of Congregations and Houses to take notice how
his work is done, and whether his Servants carry toward him (...) as becomes a
God. Do you remember therefore the Exhortation given, Heb. 28.29. Let us have
grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, for
our God is a consuming fire. Where we may observe,

First; What our God is, viz. A consuming fire. Not a stock or piece of Wood
like the Heathen Idols, but a Living, Mighty and Active Being, who can, like
Fire, quickly and severely punish those that do provoke him. Nadab and Abihu
experienced this upon their Offering with strange Fire. The Apostle says, Our
God is so; the God of the Christians is a consuming Fire, as well as the God of
the Jews. He is indeed the Father of Mercies, and God of all Comforts, but with
all, Vengeance bel^ngs to him, and he will repay it.

Secondly; What our great interest is, to serve God acceptably. While here we
cannot serve God to perfection, but we must serve him to acceptance; what is
not done to acceptance is done to no purpose, and will turn to no account;
where there is no acceptance of the Duty, there can be no rational expectation
of a comfortable Reward.

Thirdly; What is necessary in order thereunto, Grace. Those Duties that come
from Grace will meet with Grace; without that the Calves of the Lips will be as
odious as Swines-flesh, or the cutting off a Dogs-head. If the Person be bad
the work cannot be good; though the Sacrifice of the wicked may be rich and
costly, yet because it is his, it proves an abomination to the Lord.

Fourthly; How this Grace must discover and show it self, viz. in reverence and
godly fear. See that the awe of God fall upon you, and fill you, that your fear
of him be not slavish but filial, that you fear him and his Goodness, fear to
offend as well, and as much as to suffer. Thus David resolved to appear before
him, Psalm. 5.7. I will come into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies.
Encouraged by the many Mercies that have been extended to me, and relying upon
that Infinite Mercy that is still in thee; and in thy fear will I worship
toward thy holy temple. And let this inward godly fear manifest it self by the
reverence you express while in his presence and service, both at your entrance
and all along, from the beginning to the end. Before him Seraphims the glorious
Angels cover their Faces with two of their Wings; and if this become those
excellent Creatures, Heavens Courtiers, then Dust and Ashes much more. God
indeed allows his People a boldness, but it must be an humble one; and herein
be you Examples to all in your Families. It indeed is not within the reach of
your power to work Grace in the Hearts of your Yoke-fellows, Children or
Servants; nor to stir up in them a true filial fear of God, that cannot be
effected by any power less than an Omnipotent one, by any Arm shorter than the
Divine one; yet see to it that there be a due reverence expressed by them all in
their outward Gestures and Deportments; strictly charge and command them to
avoid lolling, sleeping, talking, laughing, gazing about, and every thing else
that speaks a vain light Mind. I add one thing more;

VIII. Be sure to put up all your Prayers to God in the Name of Jesus Christ.
He has left his Spirit, and his Name with us, therefore let us make use of
both, seeking for assistance from his gracious Spirit, and for success from his
prevailing Name. Unto this we have been directed by our Lord himself, John
16.26. At that day ye shall ask in my name. While he was Corporally present
with them, they made their applicaaion to him, and asked of him, and he did
supply all their needs, and granted to them those things which they desired and
were convenient, but after my Resurrection and Ascension, when I am absent from
you, and received up to Glory, Ye shall go to my Father, and that in my Name. I
give you free liberty to set my Name to all your holy Petitions, and desire him
to fulfill them for my sake.

And to the doing hereof he does encourage us by a gracious promise of success;
both that he himself will fulfill such desires, such Prayers. For this he gives
them his word, and we may be sure he will be as good as his word, John 14.13,
14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son, or by the Son whom he has raised with his own right
Hand, and constituted the sole Mediator; and for our greater assurance and
comfort he repeated it in the next Verse, If ye shall ask any thing in my Name,
I will do it; not only take care that it shall be done, but I my self will do
it; which is a strong Argument, and clear Evidence of Christ's being God, since
he does the work of God in hearing and answering of Prayer. And he likewise
tells us in John 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will
give it you; only you must necessarily suppose that what you so ask must be
according to his Will, and for our Good, 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence
which we have of him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us; we shall be sure to obtain it, to have the Petitions we desire of
him. There is a certainty of speeding when we pray aright in the Name of
Christ, and with Faith in that Name; that which so goes up in a Cloud of
Prayer, shall descend in a Shower of Mercy; there is nothing shall hinder it,
none on Earth, none in Hell can, and none in Heaven will, for the Father and
Christ are one, one in Nature, and one in Will; both are perfectly agreed as in
other things, so in this of fulfilling such Prayers; you shall have your
desire, Christ will do it, and so will the Father, both will consent, both
concur and cooperate. This is, as a late worthy Divine has observed, part of
that Glory which God has put upon Christ, all must be done in his Name.
Prayer, ask in my Name. Church-meetings, when two or three are met together in
my Name; Church Censures, 1 Cor. 5 4, 5. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
when ye are gathered together* and my Spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ* to deliver such an one unto Satan. Ministers are to Preach in his Name,
and to Baptize in his Name; therefore whenever you pray to the Father, be
sure that you do it believingly in the Name of Christ, both in public and in
private, both when you are by your selves alone, and when with your Families;
and that,

First; For your own sakes; that when you knock, it may be opened to you, and
you may have what you ask, and find what you seek; that instead of being with
anger rejected, your Prayers may be graciously received, and be sanctified by
the Golden Altar, and being accompanied with the Incense of our Blessed
Advocate, may come up as so many Odours, and find the desired acceptance, and
do it.

Secondly; For your Families sake; that by this means they may be put upon
Enquiries after this precious Lord Jesus, for this will be to them an occasion
of asking you and others concerning him, who, and what he is? And so they may
come to some knowledge of him, whom to know is Life Eternal, as the way to it,
and the beginning of it; they may know him as the one and only Mediator between
God and Man, as the great Master of Requests that is at the Fathers Right Hand
ready to receive all the Petitions of his poor but dear People, and as ready to
expunge the faults and supply the defects of them, and so to present them to
the Father, and to back them with his own Intercession which is powerful and
prevailing, the Father hears him always; and this being accompanied with the
Spirit and Blessing of God may prosper to the working in them some love and
good liking of him, and by consequence kindle in them some desires after an
Interest in him, as in one that is great and good, as in one that they stand in
absolute need of, without whom they cannot be saved, nor find favor with God,
but must everlastingly perish and be undone; since there is nothing that can
commend them to God but Jesus Christ; no Wings that can secure them but those
of this Sun of Righteousness; nothing that can wash out their stains and filth
but his Blood, nothing that can cover their nakedness and shame but his Robe;
nothing that can make their Beauty perfect but his Comeliness put upon them. In
short, in this way, and with your help they may come to understand, that it is
not their good meanings, nor their good doings, not their civility and honest
dealings with Men, not their keeping clear of bad actions, the gross pollutions
that are in the World through Lust, no, nor their running in a round of duty
that will justify them; but only the complete, perfect Obedience of Christ,
and his precious Blood, as of a Lamb without spot; and that it is not their
Prayers, though long and fervent, that will prevail with God, but only the
Mediation and Intercession of Christ. And to this end I would give you this
advice further, content not your selves with a bare naming Christ in your
Prayers, but make an honorable mention of him, after such a manner as this;
Our dear Lord Jesus, Jesus who is the Lord our Righteousness, who loved us, and
washed us in his own Blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God; Jesus who
dyed for our Offenses, and rose again for our Justification. By frequent
repetitions of such things in your Prayers, and suitable Discourses at other
times, the Lord Jesus may become acceptable and precious to them, through whom,
and for whose sake both you and they must become acceptable to God, if ever ye
be so. Having spoken so largely to this Subject, my earnest Request is, that
you all would set up, and keep up this necessary and excellent duty of Morning
and Evening-prayer every day in your respective Families, carefully observing
and putting in practice those Rules which have been laid down for the better
performance of it; and my hearty Prayer for you who do so is, that you may have
help from Heaven in the work, and afterward receive such gracious answers, and
plentiful returns, as may raise and fix in you a resolution of calling upon God
as long as you live. There is but one Objection against this holy practice,
which I judge worthy to be taken notice of, and I will do what I can to silence
the Objection, and to do him good that humbly makes it.

Object. Some poor Creature may put in and say, Sir, you have with much
Importunity and Zeal stirred us up to the performance of Family Duties, and in
particular that of Prayer, and I have with diligence attended to what has been
spoken, and cannot but acknowledge there is much strength in those Arguments
which have been used and urged for the pressing it upon us; so that I am
convinced of the goodness of the thing, and own it to be my Duty, and would be
glad to do it if I could, but I am not in a capacity, my ignorance is exceeding
great, and my parts full out as little; I have no such Gifts as other Men have,
and so tremble to think of undertaking so great and weighty a thing as this;
should I make an attempt, for certain I should most shamefully miscarry, and
render my self ridiculous; it is to be feared, that this is really the case of
too too many in this City, yea, and possibly of some in this Congregation.

Answ. To such an one I will answer in these following Particulars.

I. Thou who make this Objection art a very great Object of Pity, and I do
heartily pity thee. What! O Man, can thou converse in the World, and
discourse with thine Acquaintance, manage thine Affairs, and carry on thy
Trade, and yet not Pray? Can thou deal with thy Customers, and not with thy
God? Thou have scarce thy Fellow in any sort of Wretches; there is not a poor
Creature in Town or Country that wants Bread, and has a craving Stomach,
but he can beg, though he does not know one Letter in the Book, yet he can ask
for an Alms; nor is there a Malefactor in danger of his Life, but will find
something to say for himself; though he cannot make out his Innocence, nor
clear himself of the Crime laid to his Charge, though he has nothing to say
why the Sentence of Death should not be past upon him, yet he can fall down
upon his Knees and say, Mercy, my Lord, Mercy; and can thou not do as much
when thy Case is as bad, and worse? Thy Soul, Man, is ready to starve, and so
are the Souls of thy Family, all in extreme necessity, and can thou not beg?
Thou art worthy of death, and so are they, Sentence has been already past, and
have thou not any thing to say for the staying of the Execution? Thou and thy
Family have a great number of great wants, and can thou not ask a supply when
it may be had for asking? Thou art a poor, sorry, pitiful Creature indeed, if
there be one in the World. It is a thousand pities thou should have a
Family, a Wife and Children, who can neither provide necessaries for their
Souls, nor beg for them. Thou have indeed but little, very little love and
kindness for thy self, and Family, in thy heart, and as little brains in thy
head, who can not go to God, and speak a few good words for them.

II. Since thou do not to this day know how to Pray, I advise thee to learn
to do it, and that speedily, for it is high time; when thou wast young and
little thou did not know great A. but now thou can read distinctly,
roundly, yea, and write a legible hand, how came that about? thou did learn
it. So when thou wast first bound an Apprentice to thy Master, thou could do
nothing at thy Trade, no, not a stroke, thou wast a very Ignoramus, thou
could not tell the Price of those Commodities which thou wast to deal in,
much less judge of their goodness; nay, thou could not so much as tell their
Names, but now thou art expert and skilful, and there are very few Persons that
can out do thee in thy business, and how came this about? thou did learn it.
In the present Case, go thou and do the like: thou say thou can not Pray, I
say, go thou and learn to Pray; be thou who thou will, for thy Worldly Quality
I am sure thou art not too good for it, and I hope thou art not too old; beg
therefore of God, that he would teach thee; the Disciples desired this very
thing of Christ, Luke 11.1. Lord, teach us to Pray, as John also taught his
Disciples, and without more ado he did it, go you and do likewise; fall upon
your knees, and say, Lord, I am a poor ignorant Creature, I do not know how to
Pray, O! do thou teach me. And for your comfort and encouragement know,

First, It is the work of the Spirit to assist poor Souls in Prayer, it is one
of the works of his Office, Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
Infirmities, for we know not what to Pray for as we ought; that is as much as
thou can say of thy self; neither know how to Pray, to Pray as we should, nor
what to Pray for, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with
groanings which cannot be uttered.

Secondly, God has graciously promised this Spirit to his Church, and
Children, and that under the very notion of a Spirit of Prayer, Zech. 12.10. I
will pour out upon the house of David and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem a
Spirit of Grace and Supplication. He will give much of it, he will pour it out.

Thirdly, God is most ready to make good his Promises, this in particular. He
is both faithful, and free, Luke 11.13. If ye, being evil, know how to give
good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Go therefore, and beg of God, that he
would give this Spirit to thee.

III. Do thy endeavor, making use of those means by which an ability to Pray,
I mean the gift of Prayer may be in some measure attained, for we are not to
please our selves with expecting much, and doing nothing, idle hopes are vain;
if you ask me what means you should make use of, I briefly answer.

First, Carefully observe others, Godly Ministers, and Christians, when thou
hear them Pray, mind how they pour out their requests unto God, and get
something out of their Prayers which is proper for thee; as when Persons are in
a Garden where they see variety of curious and pleasant Flowers, they will pick
one here, and another there, for themselves; do the like with those apt and
pertinent expressions which thou hear from others, make them thine own, only
in using them, let tongue and heart go together.

Secondly, Be very conversant in the holy Scriptures, and there take notice of
precepts and promises, and turn them into Prayer, begging that God would give
what he commands, and perform what he promises; in particular acquaint thy
self well with David's Psalms, in which you will find abundance of excellent
matter both for confession and petition, for prayer, and praise.

Thirdly, Be much in studying your own and your Families State, and consider
how matters stand with you, seriously think what sins there are, and what
afflictions, what wants, and what dangers, and thereupon go to God, and beg of
him the pardon of those sins, and power against them, beg the sanctifying of
those afflictions, that they may be wholesome, though bitter, and out of the
eater there may come Meat; make a thankful acknowledgment of the Mercies you
receive, and give unto God the glory of them; Petition for the gracious supply
of those wants, and prevention of those dangers, from all these things you may
gather together a great deal of fit matter for Prayer, only still beg of God
that he would by his Spirit assist, influence and enable you to make a right
use of it.

IV. I dare assure thee, that if thou will sincerely and in good earnest set
thy self about the work, God will not be wanting to thee; do thou in obedience
go out to thy duty, and he will graciously come in to thy assistance; our
endeavors indeed and utmost activity lay no obligation upon him, but his own
grace and goodness do induce and move him. David said, Psalm 138.3. In the day
when I cried thou answer'dst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my
Soul. Do thou, O poor Soul, take encouragement from thence, direct thy Prayer
to God, and look up in the day that thou criest unto God, he may answer thee
too, and afford thee that which at present thou labourest and groanest under
the want of, and as he strengthened David with strength in his Soul, so he may
bestow upon thee a competency of gifts, and the assistance of his Holy Spirit.

God does now by me call you out to the performance of this Duty, Family
Prayer, but you complain of an unfitness for it, and not without cause; well,
remember God did once immediately call Moses out to a great work, public work,
to go and speak to Pharaoh, and in the name of God to command him to let Israel
go; he was very unwilling to comply, but as thou complainest of inability, so
did he, thou think thy self unfit to be the Families mouth to God, Moses
thought himself unfit to be Gods mouth to Pharaoh, Exodus 4.10. O my Lord, I am
not Eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken to thy Servant,
but I am slow of Speech, and of a slow Tongue, far from being fit to be sent
upon God's Errand to so Great and Proud a Prince; but mark what God answered
him, ver. 11. Who has made Man's mouth? or who has made the dumb or deaf, or
seeing, or the blind? have not I the Lord? therefore go, and I will be with thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say. I that made the mouth can mend it, I
made the Instrument, and can tune it, I can supply the defects, and cure the
infirmities of it; if it be a flow tongue I can quicken it, I can put to it
eloquence, and nimbleness.

Bring this now to the case in hand, it is thy duty to pray in and with thy
Family, thou art now loudly called to it, the great God calls thee to it by me,
and I do not in the least question, but if thou have any sense of a Deity,
thine own Conscience has called thee to it many and many a time before now,
and I pray thee to bethink thy self, did no body else, did thy Wife never
desire it of thee? did thy Child never beg it of thee? did none of thy Friends
who loved thee, put thee upon it? and have thou not done it yet? how inexorable
art thou, how hard thy heart? What! so loath to come to thy duty? yea, to that
which is thy privilege as well as thy duty, this is quite contrary to the
Wisdom which is from above, which is easy to be entreated; take shame to thy
self, and mend now, go home, and in good earnest fall to the work, and I dare
say God will be with thy heart, yea and with thy mouth too.

V. Practice will be accompanied with improvement, use does greatly facilitate
things. How aukwardly does a Child move the feet when it first begins to go?
who can observe it without a smile, but yet in a little time it has got the
knack of it, and can move them regularly, nimbly, and with strength, and knows
how to walk and run as well as others. There are indeed difficulties in Duty,
but to the sincere Soul the difficulties wear off, and the duty will grow
easier and easier, the way of the Lord being strength to the upright, so that
therein they go from strength, to strength. After that upon the Commandment of
God, Moses had once gone in to Pharaoh, and spoken, we do not read of his
complaining any more, no, not though God told him that he would harden
Pharaoh's heart, yet as often as God ordered him* he went, not desisting, till
Pharaoh commanded him to see his face no more.

Therefore begin, Man begin, and see what will come of it; fall to work, you
will find that your labor is not in vain. The Scripture says, ye shall know,
if ye follow on to know the Lord; and I may say, ye shall pray better and
better, if ye will but follow on to pray, by means hereof you will attain to a
greater knowledge of God, and more intimate acquaintance with him, and your own
hearts, and you will find inward increases and growth in grace, and a changing
of you into his Image, from glory, to glory, and that will help toward the
production of a more holy boldness toward God, and a greater Parrhesia, liberty
or freedom of Speech, and your hearts will be more enlarged; as Sin grows by
acting it, so does grace, yea, and gifts too. Trading tends to thriving, to him
that has, shall be given, i. e. to him that uses what he has as he should;
the conscientious performance of duty is the way to bring down from God a
blessing upon your parts. I will add but one thing more.

VI. Supposing thou should never be able to do thy work so well as many of
thy fellow Servants can, yet do not lay it aside, but do it as well as thou
can. The Apostle Paul speaks of diversities of gifts, and diversities of
administrations, and diversities of operations, 1 Cor. 12. So there is a
diversity of degrees, in Gods conferring those gifts upon Men; good and
faithful Servants are not made equal, as we read in the Lords intrusting them
with Talents: one had five, another had but two, yet both faithful and
industrious; the wicked and sloathful Servant had only one, yet he should have
traded with it, though he had but little to do, he ought to have been doing. So
it is here, God is pleased to give large parts to some, so that they have a
quick and fertile invention, and an answerable elocution, they can speak their
minds freely, and cloth their conceptions with apt, yea, curious expressions,
so as to charm the ears, and delight the hearts of those that join with them;
but thou art poor, and barren, ^at a great loss both for matter and words; be
humble upon this account, and little in thine own eyes, but not altogether
discouraged, but fall to thy work, Man, Trade with thine one Talent.

What though thou do not Pray so as to raise the admiration, and gain the
applause of them that hear thee? is it not very well if thou can so pray as
to find acceptance with God? what though it be jarring in their ears, so long
as it is music in his? know thou have to deal with a good Master, the God of
all grace, who, if there be a willing Mind, does accept according to what a Man
has, and not according to what he has not. The poor Publican was very short,
he had much to desire, yet little to say, his dejected looks and sorrowful
gesture spoke more than his Tongue did; but though he was short, yet he was
sweet, we read but of one Petition that he put up to God, God be merciful to me
a Sinner, but he accompanied it with his heart, and it came before God as
incense, who sent him home to his house justified, Luke 18.13.14. God took away
the filthy garments, he came in, and put on him a Robe of Righteousness. The
Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and a contrite Heart, O God,
thou will not despise, Psalm 51.17. despise it! no, no, he is so far from that,
that he requires it, and approves it, and will bind it up. A broken Prayer from
and with a broken Heart, makes Melody in Heaven. God will count it his delight.
Alas! he sees not as Man sees, looks not at the flourishes of words, but at
the life, fervency and Zeal of the Soul, for those flowers may be strewed upon
a dead and rotten carcass. Indeed, if a Man bring the Torn, and the Sick, and
the Lame for an Offering to the Lord, when he has better, it shall not be
accepted, Malach. 1.13. but if that Torn, and Lame, and Sick, be the Male of
the Flock, if it be the best he has, God will receive it graciously, and have
respect to the Person, and to his Offering, and Grace will say he has done
what he could, as our Lord pleaded for the Woman, when his Disciples did
absurdly trouble her, Mark 14.8. Not only those Richer Persons, who brought
Gold, and Silver, and Silk, and Precious Stones to the service of the
Tabernacle were welcome, but those also who came with their Goats-Hair, and
Badgers-Skins, if they had no better. I am willing to hope, that by what has
been said, the mouth of this Objection is stopped, the edge of this Argument
blunted, and so this untoward rub removed which lay in the way of thy Duty;
therefore I beg earnestly of thee that thou would defer no longer, but get
up, break through all opposition, and since God has said, seek ye my face; let
thine heart answer, thy face, Lord, will I seek. Before I go off from this
Subject, I shall direct my Discourse to two sorts of Persons.

First, I would speak something to you whose hearts God has touched, so that
you love your work, and do it, making Family Prayer your every day business. I
bless you in the name of the Lord, and the God of Heaven bless you; while I beg
it for you, may he bestow it abundantly upon you, and pour it out till you be
rich in blessings; the good Lord strengthen your hands and hearts more and more
in this work, and encourage you by his gracious answers; may you find by
frequent and large experience, that he has not said to you, seek ye my face in
vain. The Lord teach you to pray, and assist you by his Holy Spirit? the Lord
send you help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen you out of Sion; remember all
your Offerings, grant you according to your own hearts, and fulfill all your
Petitions, which are according to his Mind, and Will; may you by the Bucket of
Prayer draw Water with joy out of the Well of Salvation; let him never turn
away your Prayer, nor his Mercy from you.

Secondly, Do you also suffer the word of exhortation, who have your lines cast
in those Families in which there is Prayer, and the Worship of God; do you take
special notice of it, as a choice mercy, and accordingly value it, and bless
the Lord for disposing you so graciously, planting you not in a dry and barren
Wild^erness where there is no Water, but in a Paradise, an Eden that is so well
watered. You that are Wives, and Married to Praying Husbands, do you bless God,
and you Children who have been begotten by Praying Fathers, and you Servants
who work for, and wait upon Praying Masters, let all that is within you bless
his Holy Name, and see to it that you improve the Mercy, lose not such a
Season, such an Opportunity. Oh! how much good may you get, how much the better
may you be, in case you be not wanting to your selves? and who can tell how
much Mercy such an Husband, such a Father, such a Master, may obtain, how many
Blessings he may procure at the hand of God for you? read what the Queen of
Sheba said to King Solomon, in the 1 of Kings, 10.8. Happy are these thy Men,
and happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before thee, and that
bear thy Wisdom. She had seen the House he had built, and the ascent by which
he went up to the House of the Lord, and the Meat at his Table, and the sitting
of his Servants, and the attendance of his Ministers, and their Apparel, but
there was something above all this that she admired. She did not look upon the
happiness of his Servants, as consisting in beholding the greatness of his
State and Honor, and the Splendor and Glory of his Court, or in feeding every
day upon his Royal Dainties, and Drinking his Generous Wines, but in hearing of
his Wisdom. I may as well, yea, and much more say of you, in case you are your
own Friends, happy, thrice happy are you, who live in such a Family (though as
the lowest and meanest Members of it) in which you may every day hear the
Master of it speaking to God, and conversing with Heaven, and every day
perfuming the House with the precious Odours of his gracious and holy Prayers.
So much may suffice to be spoken concerning that great and excellent Work of
Family prayer, and Oh! that it may not be in vain as to any of you, if it be,
you must answer for it another day.

But that is not all, Christians, the whole of your work does not lie in
Prayer, this you must do, and not leave the rest undone, no, none of it undone^
I remember the holy Apostle Paul speaking of Epaephras, whom he calls a Servant
of Christ, and of them, a Citizen of Colos, a Member of their Church, and
Teacher, much set for their good, says, Col. 4.12. He always labored
fervently for them in Prayer, that they might stand perfect and complete in all
the will of God; which is a great thing, and deserves our utmost endeavors,
and his so laboring in Prayer for them to this end, spoke him a good Man, and
a singular Friend of theirs; and it is my Hearts desire, and my frequent Prayer
that it may be so with you. And this should be the Desire and Prayer, the Care
and Endeavor of every one of you who are Godly Parents, and Religious
Governors of Families, that both you your selves, and all those that are
yours, may be perfect and complete in all the Will of God; that the Divine Will
may be known by you, and likewise conformed and lived up to, for, He that
knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes;
when God takes his Rod in Hand, Luke 12.47. Now, Family-instruction is one part
of the Will of God concerning you who are Parents and Masters, yea, and
Mistresses too.

You are Priests in your own Houses, and as such ought not to be without your
Sacrifices; Prayer is your Duty.

You are Prophets also there, and though it would be folly in you to turn
Enthusiasts, and Predict Things to come, yet you ought not to be without your
Teachings* and wholesome Counsels; and in one respect you will not. You that are
Parents will, as soon as may be, teach your Children to speak and go, and when
through Age and Discretion they are capable, you will bring them up to some
Employment and Trade or other, that they may afterward arrive at some
considerable Quality and Estate in the World, at least, that they may be able
to earn their Bread, and get their Living without being chargeable to your
selves or others; and shall this be the utmost Extent of your Care? Will you
not teach them the fear of God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ? Will you
not labor to bring them to a good understanding in the matters of Religion
which are of highest importance, and show them the way they should take in
order to their coming unto Glory at the last? If you are guilty of neglect
herein what satisfactory Reason can you give of being so? Here I cannot forbear
telling you, that it has often, and often been to me great matter of grief to
see Persons grown up to Man's and Woman's Estate, yea, to gray Hairs, that
could not read a Word, nor tell a Letter, whereupon I could not without just
indignation reflect upon their unnatural Parents, who were so brutishly wanting
to that love, kindness and pity which they ought to have had for them; and now
I make it my Request to you, yea, the poorest among you, that you would take
greater and better care of your Children, see that they be taught to Read, and
then that they Read the Bible; do this though you pinch for it in other things,
yea, though you spare it out of your own and their Bellies; and if you cannot
possibly do it out of your sorry pittance, beg the Charity of those you know,
who may help in that without prejudice to themselves, a little matter will do,
and this will turn to a greater account than relieving common Vagrants. And so
for you that are Masters and Mistresses, and have Apprentices bound to you, I
own it that they are bound to give you reverence, and to serve you with all
diligence and faithfulness, and so let them in the fear of the Lord, but withal
do you know and consider that you are obliged to take care of them, and teach
them, what? Your Trades? And the Mysteries of them? Yes without peradventure,
your Indentures tell you so; and if you do it not you deal falsely, but you are
also to instruct them in the greatest and best Trade, that of Godliness, that
with Heaven, in order to their being wise Merchants, and getting the Pearl of
Price. That Family-instruction ought to be carefully attended to, I shall
briefly prove. 1. By Scripture Precedents. 2. By Scripture Precept.


First; By Scripture Precedent, or Example. This has been the practice of good
Men recorded there, of a great Character, Eminent for their Faith and Holiness.
You have in these Discourses already heard of that great confidence which God
had in Abraham, who was called the Friend of God, and Father of the Faithful.
God said, He knew him that he would command or order his Children, and his
Household after him, that they should keep the way of the Lord. And we must
conclude, Divine Wisdom, which is Infinite, is not, cannot be liable to a
mistake, neither as to things nor Persons. Now we read in Genesis 14. that when
his Kinsman or Nephew Lot was taken Captive and carried away. Abraham armed his
trained Servants, and pursued them unto Dan; your Bibles in the Margin have it,
his instructed Servants, some render it his Catechized Servants, those, say
some Learned Expositors, whom he had well taught and instructed not only in
Domestic Business which concerned the House, nor only in Military Affairs
which related to War, but likewise and principally in Religion, and the Law of
God.

So again, Solomon the wisest of mere Men, at least in his time, was called
Iedediah, the Beloved of the Lord, and that he was so appeared by God's
appointing him to succeed in the Throne as King of Israel, and choosing him to
Build the Temple, both which were demonstrations of that particular kindness
God had for him. And he was dearly beloved of his Father and Mother; now the
Love which they did bear him was evidenced by his gracious Education, and in
their Parental Care for the right bringing of him up, Prove. 4.3, 4. I was my
Fathers Son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my Mother, he taught me
also, and said unto me, let thy heart retain my Words, keep my Commandments,
and live; get wisdom, get understanding, etc. One says, Doubtless his Father
David being a King had Nathan the Prophet, and the best and most accomplished
Persons the Kingdom could afford for the bringing up of his Son for whom he
designed the Crown, yet he did not leave it wholly to them, but would himself
have an hand in the work, yea, a main one. Neither did his Mother think her
self excused, but as she had brought him forth, so she would bring him up, as
you may see in Prove. 31.1. The words of King Lemuel the Prophecy which his
Mother taught him. But passing from that, we will consider,

Secondly; Scripture Precept. And as I desire you to imitate and follow those
good Examples, so to remember and conform to holy commands given out from God
by his Servants, who wrote as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. I shall only
mention that one which we have, Ephesians. 6.4. Parents provoke not your Children
unto wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. It is
a Scripture that deserves to be written in Letters of Gold, and to be deeply
impressed upon the Minds and Hearts of Parents. I cannot lightly pass over it;
two things are remarkable in it. First; A Prohibition. Secondly; An Injunction.


First, Here is a Prohibition; something forbidden, and carefully to be
avoided; Parents provoke not your Children unto wrath. It may be, this will
sound harsh in the Ears of some, who have better thoughts of themselves than
they do deserve, or any body else have; they may be apt to conclude that Paul
did forget himself here, and should rather have said, Children provoke not your
Parents unto wrath To avoid that is their Duty and Interest; but the Apostle
knew what he did, when he said, Parents provoke not your Children unto wrath;
though you are above them, older and stronger than they, though they have their
dependence upon you, though you at present give them their Maintenance, and
must hereafter their Portion, yet provoke them not, do nothing to incense and
inrage them. A Wasp is a very little feeble Creature, yet do not anger it, for
it has a Sting. Do not irritate your Children by too much severity; remember
the Authority you have over them is Parental, therefore your Government should
be sweet and easy; you should so carry as to be both feared and loved at the
same time; and in order to that not rule with a Rod of Iron, but draw and bind
them to you with the Cords of a Man, those of Reason and Kindness; more
particularly, do not provoke your Children.

First; Not by unreasonable requiries, and hard commands; lay not a Man's
burden upon a Child's Shoulders; exact not that which is above their ability to
do.

Secondly; Do not make unequal distributions of your kindnesses among them,
being all Honey to one, and all Gall to another; remember they are equally
yours; though your Affections may incline more to one than another, yet conceal
it as much as you can, unless their goodness and obedience make an apparent
difference.

Thirdly; Provoke them not by giving them undue, unreasonable Correction; the
Rod is sometimes as necessary as Bread, but it must always be used with a
prudent love; let not your Rod be too smart, nor your Hand too heavy; convince
them that your chastening of them is not for your pleasure, but for their
profit.

Fourthly; Provoke them not by calling them reproachful Names, as Fool,
Blockhead, Rascal, or the like, which may expose them to the slight of others,
to the contempt of your very Servants; while you hate their offenses be tender
of their Reputation.

Lastly; Provoke them not by continual chiding, and threatening, finding fault
with every thing they do; overlook some smaller faults, and wink at others,
knowing your selves are not blameless; let not the Poison of Asps dwell under
your Tongues, nor all your words be as sharp Swords, but draw them to their
duty, keep them at it, and encourage them in it, rather by love than fear. By
provoking your Children unto wrath by all or any of these ways, you create to
your selves more grief and sorrow than you at present are aware of* for by
rigor and severity the minds of your Children may be alienated and estranged
from you: through your imprudent and unnatural Carriage, it may come to pass
that instead of loving, reverencing and honoring you as Parents, they will
only fear and dread you as Tyrants; so that in aftertimes when you shall need
them as Staffs in your Hands for support, they may prove Thorns in your sides
piercing you thorough with many sorrows. Well, remember provoking your Children
to wrath is forbidden, therefore carefully avoid it.

Secondly; In that Scripture there is an Injunction, or something commanded;
that is, the bringing of your Children up in the fear and nurture of the Lord.
The Greek has it, (...). The nurture and admonition of the Lord. The former
word Translated Nurture does signify such Education or Discipline as is
convenient or fit for young ones, made up of wise Instructions and needful
Correction. The latter word by our Translators, rendered admonition, may be
looked on as being of a double import, and signifying, 1. A putting something
into the Mind. 2. A putting of the Mind into a right frame.


First then; It is the Duty, and should be the Endeavor of Parents to put
something into the Minds of their Children, to stock them well, to instill and
drop into them something that should be there, something that will be proper
for them, and do them good; that those choice and excellent Cabinets may be
filled with Spiritual Riches, with goodly Pearls, yea, the Pearl of Price, in
which by Nature (as it is now corrupted) there is nothing but filthy dross and
dung. Now there is in them nothing but Vanity and Folly, false Notions, wrong
Conceptions of things; and it is pity such vain Thoughts should lodge there, a
thousand pities they should continue and abide there; labor to get them out by
degrees, as soon and as fast as you can, that so instead of them, and in their
room, you may happily introduce those things which are precious, and of value,
viz. the Truths of God, Right, Orthodox and Saving Principles: get into these
narrow-mouthed Bottles drop by drop, as they are capable of receiving them, the
true Notion of things; for good Principles do directly tend to the producing of
good Practices; and a Divine Light set up in their Understandings may keep them
in the way of Peace, and out of the path of the Destroyer, for by means thereof
they will be put into a capacity of discerning the way in which they ought to
go. Ignorance may be the Mother of a silly Devotion, that O Papists we will
grant you, but, God having told us, His people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge, we cannot but look upon it as the Highway to Perdition. Since
without knowledge the Heart cannot be good, we will not stick at concluding,
that without it the end cannot be peace.

Secondly; It is the duty, and should be the endeavor of Parents to put the
Minds of their Children into a right frame, to cast them into a due Mould, and
set them in a proper posture. It is now a dark Mind, there is blackness of
darkness in it, your work is to illuminate it, and to set up there the Candle
of the Lord. It is a corrupt Mind, the Scripture tells us, The Mind and
Conscience is defiled, your work and duty is to cleanse it, and rid out all the
filth that is there. Now that I may afford you all the help that I can in order
thereto, I shall propound and offer some things to your Consideration and
Practice, speaking first more generally, then more particularly; in general, I
advise these four things.

First; See carefully to it, that the Holy Scripture be read in your Families.
The Bible is the Book of Books, may as well be so called as the Canticles is
the Song of Songs. There is an inexhaustible Treasure for the enriching of the
Mind, and a Golden exact Rule for the ordering of the Life. That is the most
blessed and full Revelation of the Mind and Will of God concerning us* whereby
we may by Prayer and Study come to know what things we are to believe as God's
Truths, and what to practice as our own Duties, what to reject as Errors, and
what to avoid as Sins. There we have the great things of the Law for our
Direction, and the precious things of the Gospel for our Consolation; these are
able to make us wise for Salvation, and thoroughly to furnish us for every good
work which our heavenly Lord and Master has cut out for us.

This is part of the description of a blessed Man, that his delight is in the
law of the Lord, and in that law he does meditate day and night, Psalm. 1.2. And
it is the Will of God not only that you your selves should know them, such
Monopolizing is not grateful to the King of Glory, but also teach them your
Children, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in
thy heart to know them, and to love them; but to have them in their own Hearts
was not all, it was not enough, no, no, read on, thou shall teach them
diligently to thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk in the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. The Word of God is to be the matter of our Meditation, and of
our Discourses at all times, and in all places, I mean, in the Morning, and in
the Evening, at home, and abroad. This alone is excellent Food, and to other
discourse it is an excellent seasoning. Paul in his Epistle to Timothy speaks
of his having known the Scriptures of a Child, ab incunabulis, almost from his
Cradle; he did, as it were, suck them in with his Mothers Milk, but how came
that to pass? By means of Parental Care, the Teachings and Instructings of his
Parents, for certain, of his Mother in that young and tender Age.

Secondly; Look diligently to the Catechizing of them. Blessed be God that
Exercise has been for some Years kept up in our Congregation, and is now
singularly well performed by my worthy Brother, Mr. Alexander, whom you have
chosen and called to that and other Ministerial Work among you; the Lord grant
his Blessing both to him and to it, that there may be much good fruit thereof
seen and felt both in young and old; and by the way I cannot pass it by in
silence, that it is some trouble to me there are no more of your Children and
Servants brought into it; and I cannot but reckon it a bad sign of proud or
slothful unwillingness in them, or else of a wretched neglect or carelessness in
some of you. But I advise and earnestly desire you as to be thankful for, so
not to rest in what is done here, but come out to our help, and do your duty at
home, teach you your Children and Servants their Catechism, and examine them in
it your selves. In the Assembly's Catechism (which is used in our Congregation,
and which I commend to your Family use) you have a Body of Divinity summarily
contained, the main Fundamental Principles of Religion, necessary to be known
in order to Salvation, methodically propounded, and also brought into so narrow
a compass, that they will not oppress and burden the memory, but if blessed of
God, mend both head and heart. To the want of this we may, I doubt not, in part
impute it, that there among us so many wicked and profane persons, so many Sons
and Daughters of Belial, so many ungodly, impudent and debauched Young ones;
Hos. 4.1. There is no knowledge of God in the Land; to be sure then there is a
great deal of villainy; yes; verse 2. By swearing, and lying* and killing, and
stealing, and committing Adultery they break out, and Blood touches Blood.
Darkness being in the Mind, the Works of Darkness will be in the Life: an
uninstructed Head, an unsanctified Heart, and a wicked Life go together;
through this means so many precious Souls go down to Hell, and are for ever
lost, they perish for lack of knowledge; for lack of this the Labors of
Ministers are no more successful. Want of Family-Instruction is one great
reason of so much unprofitable Hearing.

3dly. Take all possible care, that none under your Charge profane the
Lord's Day: That is a day which God has sanctified, by choosing it out of the
rest of the days, and setting it apart for holy use; and it is his will that
all his People should sanctify it too; as he has made it holy, they must keep
it so: We are to call it a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
honor it, or, him; i. e. Honor God by honoring the Sabbath, not doing our
own ways upon it, nor finding our own pleasure, nor speaking our own words.
There are ways, and pleasures, and words proper for that day, but they must not
be our own, no, nothing of our own, it must be the way of God, and the pleasure
of God, and the word of God that we are for upon that day, and not our own;
Isa, 58.13. Neither our corrupt sinful thoughts, the froth or scum of our
depraved Nature, nor our worldly profits, nor our sensual pleasures; we must
bring our thoughts, our minds and hearts, and strength with us, but lay them at
the foot of God, devote them to his service, and engage them entirely about his
work. Upon that day we are not of a due elevation till above our selves, and
above the World; nothing of our own is to be minded or done by us save works of
Necessity and Mercy: It is God's day, and therefore to be employed about the
things of God, thoughts of God, discourses of God, the Service and Worship of
God should take up the whole of that holy day: To do worldly business, to
follow bodily recreations upon that day, is no less than Sacrilege, a robbing
of God. Therefore take care of your Families as to this; do not you set your
Children or Servants about the affairs of your Callings on that day; see also
that they mis-spend it not themselves, but in the performing acts of duty,
preparing to wait upon God in the way of his Public Ordinances, and thither do
you carry them with you, not suffering them to stay lazying, sleeping, or
playing at home, or to go rambling abroad whither they themselves please; no,
no, in this case put on the Spirit of Elijah, and be very jealous for the Lord
God of Hosts; see that That day be kept for God, and when you and your Families
are at home, exercise your selves and them unto Godliness. The continuance of
Religion in England does under God very much depend upon a care of keeping the
Sabbath. Many years ago when I was a young Man, Famous Mr. Newcomen of Dedham
told me this passage: This Question was put in the Conclave, What is the best
way to reduce England to the sea of Rome? To this every Cardinal was to give
his Answer, beginning at the youngest. Many Expedients were propounded, at
length an old Fox stood up, and said, Take away their Sabbaths, and that will
effectually do it: This Invention was hugged, this Medium resolved upon, and
not long after came out the Book of Sports. O holy Mother Church! whose
Interest is promoted by such unholy means. And let me tell you, I do never
expect to see Religion flourishing, nay not living long in that Family, in
which there is not due regard had to the Lord's Day. Therefore as in all other
things, so particularly in this, I do advise and earnestly beseech you to be as
tender and careful of the Interest of the great God as you are of your own, and
more too.

Fourthly; When you have been waiting upon God in the ways of his Public
Worship, and have had the Counsels of his holy Will made known to you, and the
great Mysteries of Religion opened, at your return to your own houses, do you
retire your selves and be alone with God, lest by being in company with others,
and falling into discourses of another nature, you lose the things you had
heard, and those impressions wear out that were made upon you; and also allow
convenient time to all in your Families for their Private Devotions, remembering
they have precious immortal Souls, the Salvation of which they are as much
concerned to work out as your selves are of your own. I have somewhere read of
a King (I wish there were more like him) who, while he was teaching a poor Boy
that belonged to his Kitchen, being asked the reason why he did so, answered,
The poorest has a Soul as precious as mine, and cost the same price, no less
than the Blood of Christ. And when you see a fit season, call them all
together, and bless God for the Truths you have heard, and pray that he would
bless them to you, and bring them back to your own and their minds by the
repetition of them; and demand of them an account, which to do is a very
probable way to keep them from sleeping in the Congregation, and from a supine
carelessness, and vain foolish absurd gazing about, and also of imprinting
something upon their minds and thoughts, which may have a powerful influence
upon their hearts and lives, and do them good afterward, yea as long as they
live; and when this is done, praise the Name of the Lord by singing of a Psalm,
and pray to him for acceptance of, and a blessing upon what you have done, and
so commit your selves and yours to his Fatherly Protection in the Night, and
his gracious Conduct the following Week; in the course whereof let there be
nothing contradictory to your Lord's-days profession, or inconsistent with it.
I beseech you draw an eaven Thread in Religion. These four things which I have
spoken to you, are good for you, and necessary to be done, but they are
generals: Therefore now I shall proceed to some more particular Directions, for
the Instructing of your Families, which I would have you carefully to observe,
and the great God shine upon your endeavors, that so they may prove very
successful to your comfort and joy.

First; Begin with instructing them about the Being of a God. Though this Truth
be engraven in their hearts; though the things that are made do plainly Preach
to them his Eternal Power and Godhead, yet be not you silent, but speak the
same thing to them over again and again, and so betimes, even as soon as ever
you can; principle them against that brutish, yet growing Atheism; which is an
Enemy to all Religion, and opens a wide and effectual Door unto all Villainy and
Profaneness. That Person who denies the Being of a God, is a sit Tool for the
Devil to make use of, yea to employ about his worst Services, and basest
Drudgery.

And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Fathers, said good David; 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Know there is a God, and in particular know him that has been,
and is thy Fathers God, and let him be thy God too. Love him, choose him, cleave
to him.

Show them the Heaven and the Earth, and the things that are in them, and that
these could not make themselves, but must of necessity be made by another; how
many second Causes soever may be enumerated, we cannot take up our rest in any
of them, but must pass thorough them all, and ascend to the first Cause, and
that first Cause that ens entium, that Source and Original of all Being, is
God, and besides him there is none else; Ier. 10.11. The Gods that have not
made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from
under these Heavens.

Tell them, that upon this God all things that are have an absolute and
necessary dependence. The Beam does not more depend upon the Sun, than the Sun
and all do upon God; for them to subsist without him is a thing utterly
impossible; if he should withdraw his hand, Man would crumble, Earth would
sink, the Heavens would shrink, and the Angels themselves drop from their
present height into that first nothing out of which they were fetched by the
Divine Power.

Let them from you know, that they themselves are his Offspring, and indebted
to him for their Being, being by him formed in the Womb, and brought out of it;
and that he has looked after them, and taken care of them ever since: when
they hung upon the Breasts, he carried them in his Arms, and taught them to go,
and held their Souls in Life, and provided for them ever since, and therefore
they are not their own but his, he has the Sovereign Right to them, and to
Reign over them; and that upon this account they are bound to love this God,
and to fear this God, and to serve and honor him as long as they have any
Being.

Acquaint them with his being an holy God, in his Nature, in his Will, in all
his Ways and Works, glorious in Holiness, and of purer Eyes than that he can
behold Iniquity; and that he has given out a Law that is holy, just and good,
which they and all are bound to obey, the Commandments of it not being grievous.

And that he is every where present, observing how his Will is observed, and
his Law obeyed, and his Creatures order and demean themselves; he takes notice
both of the Evil and the Good, of them that fear him, and them that fear him
not, and does so strictly observe, that he sets down in his Book of Remembrance
those that fear him, and think upon his Name, and can set the sins of the
wicked in order before them, yea the same order in which they were committed,
with all the circumstances that cloathe them.

And that he has appointed a day wherein he will Judge the World in
Righteousness by the Man whom he has ordained, and bring to light the hidden
things of dishonesty, and render unto every one according as their Works have
been, whether good or evil; Romans 2.7, 8, 9. To them who by patient continuance
in well doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality. eternal life; but
unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, indignation and wrath: Tribulation and anguish upon every Soul
of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; but glory,
honor and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile; for there is no respect of persons with God. That he has an
Heaven for the good, no other than the Habitation of his own Holiness and
Glory, in which there are many Mansions, and Crowns, and Thrones, with
unconceivable Felicity; in his presence a fullness of Joy, and at his Right Hand
Pleasures for evermore; and besides that, an Hell for the wicked, a bottomless
Pit, where there is a gnawing Worm that shall never die, and a Fire burning
that is unquenchable, in which they shall for ever fry, scorch and burn without
being ever consumed, and consequently they shall have weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth.

Secondly; Instruct them concerning the miserable, lost and undone condition of
all Mankind by reason of the Fall of the first Man.

That when God had formed Man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
Nostrils the Breath of Life, so that he became a living Soul, he was pleased
not only to make him upright and in his own Image, induing him with all Natural
Excellencies and Perfections befitting one who was to have Communion with his
Creator, and Dominion over this Inferior World, and to put him into a state of
Happiness, appointing Paradise for the place of his Residence, or Royal Seat;
but also to enter into a Covenant of Friendship with him, thereby binding Man
to a continuance in a course of Personal and Perfect Obedience to his great
Lord, and thereupon by promise insuring to him an endless duration of his Life
and Happiness, but withal threatening that in case of failure and disobedience,
He should die the death; viz. Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal.

That this Covenant was not made with Adam alone, but with all Mankind who were
to descend from him, and were considered as being then in his Loins, and He as
the great Parent and common Person representing them, and so Adam breaking the
Covenant by transgressing the Law of his Creation, and in particular, that
positive Law which commanded him not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, All Mankind sinned in him, and fell with him in that first
Transgression, and so all the World is bebecome guilty before God, and
obnoxious to his Justice and Wrath; all the World is become filthy and
abominable. Primitive Righteousness is lost, and the Primitive Order broken,
and we are all unclean; all of us by principle and disposition Children of
disobedience, and all by Nature Children of Wrath.

And bring this home to them, and let them know that it is as much their Case
as the case of any persons in the World, that they have the guilt of sin upon
them, the sentence of Death denounced against them, a vile Heart and Nature
within them, the Seed and Principle of all sin, which renders them prone to all
manner of evils, even the vilest and most monstrous. This will tend to the
hiding Pride from them, and preventing those high towering Conceits which they
are ready to hugg and swell with through their self-unacquaintedness; this may
awaken them to the greater vigilance and care, and bring them to keep a
stricter Eye upon their hearts; and this may keep them from being much taken
with, and doting upon those trifling childish vanities and youthful follies
which the Souls of others are so much addicted and devoted to, while they hear
there are things of infinitely greater importance and nearer concernment unto
which they must attend.

Thirdly; Make it much your business to convince them of the evil of Sin. In
order to their loathing it and themselves for it before God, do you, as much as
you can, set it before them in its ugliness and deformity; look upon it in the
Glass of God's Law, and of Christ's Blood, and then draw its picture and show
it to them. History tells us, this of the Lacedaemonians, that when they saw a
filthy drunken Sott stagger and reeling in the Street, vomiting like a Dog,
falling and tumbling in the Mire like a Swine, they would run into their
houses, and fetch their young Children to the door, that they might behold how
much he was unmanned, how like a Beast he made himself (and by the way know, it
is far better to be a Beast than to be like a Beast) that so they might betimes
learn to abhor and detest that brutish practice. Do you do the like, I mean,
make unto them a true representation of the odiousness of Sin in general, yea,
and of some Sins in particular, specially those which are most rampant, raging,
and abounding in the times in which they live, and those Sins too with which
they are most in danger of being infected; paint them out in the blackest
Colors that you can, as black as Hell, for indeed so they are. You cannot
disparage Sin beyond its demerit; you cannot speak too bad of it; you cannot
make it look worse than it is. As we cannot exceed nor rise too high in the
commendation of God; our greatest words are too little, our highest thoughts
are too low. Angelical conceptions of God are infinitely short of his
Perfection. He is exalted above all blessing and praise. So on the other side,
we cannot speak too much in the dispraise of Sin; our greatest anger against
Sin is not hot enough, and our sharpest words against Sin are not keen enough.
There is not to be found so great an evil in all the World as Sin is.

Afflictions are not so bad as Sin. Poverty, Plague, Fire, Sword, Famine, all
the desolations that be made in Towns, Cities, Countries, not matter of so
great Lamentation as Sin. They are Physic to cure, this the Disease to
destroy; they are Fire to purify, this is Filth to pollute. Death it self does
only kill the Body, Sin ruins the Soul. Death sends the Body to a Bed of Dust,
but Sin, if unpardoned, unmortified, sends both Soul and Body into a Bed of
Flames.

The Devil himself is not so bad as Sin: For he was an excellent Creature, a
glorious Angel: There never was any thing of goodness in Sin, nor ever will. He
was the Workmanship of God himself, but God had no hand in the making of Sin.
It was Sin that turned him into a Devil.

Hell is not so bad as Sin: For though it be a place of gross utter Darkness,
yet there is seen the Purity and Holiness of God in his hatred of Sin, the
Justice and Righteousness of God in the condemning and punishing of Sin; there
he declares his Wrath against all ungodliness and unrighteousness; but there is
no good, not the least good in Sin, it is a mere Anomia, disobedience to, and
transgression of such a Law as is holy, just and good, it is evil throughout,
only evil, and that continually.

Sin is evil in its Nature, being contrary to the pure, holy, infinitely
perfect and glorious Nature of God. There is nothing in all the World contrary
to God but Sin, and what Sin has made so. Its Nature is so bad, that nothing
can rectify it, nothing can mend it, nothing make it good: It is so bad, that
God would not allow it a place in Heaven; and the day is coming after which it
shall be found no more upon Earth, but be for ever confined and shut up in Hell.

Sin is evil in its Consequents and Effects. Indeed, who did ever gather Grapes
of Thorns? How can any good Fruit grow upon this Root of bitterness? Let me
briefly name some of those Mischiefs which Sin has done, and still goes on to
do in the World.

1. Sin has defaced the Beauty of Man, sullied and stained his Glory, thrown
him down from his Excellency, turned the Nazarite into an Ethiopian; so that
he, who at first was but a little lower than the Angels, is now become like
unto the Beasts that perish, yea worse than they.

2. Sin has spoiled Man's Communion with God, which was inconceivably more and
better than the Delights of Eden, or his Dominion over the Creatures. As his
Holiness did consist in his conformity to God, so did his Happiness in
Communion with him; but as soon as he had committed Sin, that stood as a middle
Wall of Partition between them.

3. Sin has broken Man's Peace, that Peace which once he had with God, and
sown Enmity: So that God is angry with him, and he a Traitor, a Rebel against
God. That Peace which was once in himself: The faculties of his Soul were once
harmonious, Reason sitting in the Throne, Judgment ruling and governing, the
Will and Affections knowing, keeping their place, and following the Dictates of
the Understanding, but now there is discord and jarring; the Understanding
mistakes, the Will and Affections mutiny, so that frequently there are
disorders and confusion in the Soul. And oh! how dismal are the Contests
oftentimes between a Man and his Conscience; he crosses his Conscience, and
that will not bear it; he wounds his Conscience, and then that rages and
storms, and lays about it as a fury; and wheresoever he goes, it follows him
with its clamours, so that he becomes a terror to himself.

4. Sin has brought in all the Troubles of Life. How many are they, and how
great! Who can understand his Errors? who can sum up his Sorrows? Most come
into the World crying, and go complaining thorough it. In sorrow do Women bring
forth Children; some are grieved because they have none, and some more, because
those they have are so bad. How are the endeavors of many vain and
unsuccessful, their hopes blasted, and their expectations disappointed! how are
some wasted and consumed with sickness, others ground and tortured with pain!
Now a Fire comes and devours your pleasant things, burying your Habitations in
their own Ashes, and then a War, which knows no compassion, but turns fruitful
Lands first into Fields of Blood, and then into Wildernesses.

5. Sin has introduced Death, and Armed against us that King of Terrors. Had
not Man made Sin his Work, he had never received Death for his Wages; had not
Sin been, Man had either continued in a perfect and Paradisical State upon
Earth, or else been translated into the Region of Light, and Life, and Love
above; but now if ever he would come thither, he must walk thorough the dark
Shades, and be dissolved in order to his being glorified. We now mourn over a
dead Friend, a dead Relation, let us remember that Sin killed them, Romans 5.12.
By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed
upon all Men, for that all have sinned.

6. Sin has dug Hell. This is that Tophet which is mentioned in Isa. 30.33.
that is made deep and large, the Pile whereof is Fire and much Wood, the Breath
of the Lord like a Stream of Brimstone does kindle it. The Hell in the
Conscience, which some Men do feel now, and that Hell into which all wicked
wretches shall be tumbled at the last, are both of them the fruit of Sin.

Now, my Friends, will you be careful in this matter? will you consider, what
Natures all brought into the World with them, how Sin dwells in you and yours?
Oh! show unto them the evil that is in it, and the mischiefs that come by it;
for by doing so, you take a course to damp the Tinder that it may not catch
Fire when the Spark is struck, and to arm them against Temptations, when they
come out in their greatest violence; this will tend to the preserving them from
the path of the Destroyer, though it be such a beaten Road, and so full of
Travelers. This was the Antidote that secured Joseph from the Poison that was
offered him in the Cup of Fornication. He was shreudly assaulted, and that more
than once; the onset was renewed day by day, and he was in his youthful Blood,
and on that account a great deal more in danger of being prevailed upon, and
wrought to a compliance; but it was labor in vain, he looked upon the vile
sinfulness of the thing, and that was more powerful to affright him from it,
than the Charms of his Mistress were to allure him to it; and therefore with a
( Pathos, or) Zeal of Soul he cried out, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God? He saw such a filthiness in that Sin, as that
he loathed to touch either it or her that had tempted him to it, but fled from
them both.

Fourthly; Be much in acquainting them with our Lord Jesus Christ, and the way
of ruined Man's recovery by him, and by him alone. He being the only Mediator
between God and Man, and the only Redeemer of God's Elect. Let them know that
by Nature, and by reason of Sin their case is extremely deplorable. When once
our first Parents had transgrest, it was dark round about them; nothing offered
it self to their Eye that had a promising aspect. God that had been before
their chiefest comfort, was then their greatest terror; his Voice that had
been so sweet and pleasant to them, was then in their Ears like Thunder. As
soon as Adam heard it, he was afraid and hid himself; but as deplorable as
sinful lapsed Man's case is now, blessed be free and rich Grace, it is not
desperate, unless he himself by obstinate impenitency and unbelief do make it
so. There is hope in Israel concerning this thing, because all-sufficient help
is laid upon One that is mighty.

1. Though God was greatly affronted by the work of his own hands whom he had
so obliged, and by that affront had been so highly provoked, yet being a God of
bowels, whose compassions do not fail, in wrath he remembered mercy; and though
he had no yearnings over the sinning Angels, but immediately banished them from
his presence, threw down from their first estate, and with indignation tumbled
them into Hell, where he has clapped upon them everlasting Chains, in which he
reserves them to the Judgment of the great day, yet he had it in his hearty to
pity and show kindness to fallen Man; it was the fixed resolve and purpose of
his Grace to mend the marred Girdle, and to repair the broken Potsherds of the
Earth, and of many among them to make Vessels of Honor fit for his Use and
Service here, and for his Kingdom and Glory hereafter.

2. For that great and most blessed End he chose and sent his own Son, his only
Son, his infinitely beloved Son, who was the brightness of his Fathers Glory,
and the express Image of his Person, Man not being in a capacity to help
himself, nor all the Angels in Heaven able to relieve him; their back was too
weak to bear that burden of guilt which lay upon him; and their whole Stock too
little to discharge those Debts which he had contracted; and their Arm
infinitely too short to reach him, and draw him out of that horrible Pit into
which he had cast himself and all his Posterity. Now I say, when things were at
this pass, God was pleased to send his Son to humble himself, to empty himself,
to become poor, to become our Brother, and to assume our Nature with its
sinless infirmities, and to be in the form of a Servant, of no reputation, made
under the Law, that he might fulfill all Righteousness, and be the End thereof
for Righteousness to all that are found in him, and to be made sin for us, i.
e. a Sacrifice for sin* that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him;
a Ransom* that he might be a Redeemer.

3. The Son of God being thus chosen by the Father and sent did come, he most
readily and freely came in the fullness of Time, and according to the Counsel of
Peace which had been between them both, he came to do the Will of God* he was
incarnate, was manifest in the Flesh, yea in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and
was numbered among Transgressors, the Iniquities of all his People were laid on
him, and he did bear them in his own Body upon the Tree, becoming obedient to
the Death, even the Death of the Cross; he did die, the Prince of Life did die,
his Blood was shed, that therein might be opened a Fountain for Sin, and for
Uncleanness.

4. Neither is there Salvation in any other; there is no other Name under
Heaven by which Man may be saved, but his; no Blood by which he may be washed
but his, nor Righteousness by which he may be justified but his; and therefore
it is altogether in vain, mere lost labor to look for Salvation any where
else: Whither shall we go, Lord? said Peter, with Thee alone are the words of
Eternal Life. And as it is in vain, so it is altogether needless; for Christ is
able to save to the utmost all those that come unto God by him. Mark it, them
that come unto God by him, them without exception, all them, one and another,
be they never so many, and be they what they will, never so bad, he is able to
save them, and that completely, to the full perfection of Salvation, to the
utmost of their dangers, to the utmost of their desires, to the utmost of
Eternity, he is the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him;
and truly be that has a Salvation which will reach as far as Eternity, does
not, will not need one any longer.

5. This Salvation does come most freely from him to all th^se that humbly seek
it, Zech. 9.9. Behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, having Salvation.
He comes to poor Sinners, and brings his Salvation with him. He once came into
the World in Person, to work Salvation for them, he still comes by his word and
Spirit to bring Salvation to them. We before said, he is able to save, and he
is full out as willing as able; Oh! that lost ruined Sinners were as willing to
accept Salvation, as he is to bestow it; indeed what should hinder his being
willing, all the charge is over, it did cost him a great deal, but it will cost
him no more, no more blood, no more sweat, no more tears* no more sighs, no
more sorrow or shame: it is having the joy that was set before him, it is
seeing the fruit of the travel of his Soul, that will issue in his
satisfaction. It is but his own taking possession of that which he purchased
for himself, and giving his People possession of that which he purchased for
them. Hence we have reason to conclude that his heart is in the work, and that
he does it with joy and delight; be much and often in speaking to your Families
concerning this most sweet and precious Jesus, and the good will which he bears
to the Children of Men. How he stands with his gracious arms stretched out to
receive and embrace them that are willing to accept of him, and of Salvation,
upon the terms propounded in the Gospel, and has given us his faithful word
for it, which he can no more deny, than he can deny himself, that whosoever
comes to him, he will in no wise cast out, though he has been never so vile,
though his Sins have been never so great, yet if he will but come, he shall
find Grace to welcome him, and meet with a most kind reception; he will spread
his skirt over him for the covering of his shame and nakedness, and his wings
too for the security of his Person, and the healing of his wounds.

5. Carefully instruct them about the Covenant of Grace, that there is a
twofold Covenant. 1. A Covenant of Works. 2. A Covenant of Grace.


A Covenant of Works, which had Grace in it upon this account, that God should
deal in a Covenant way with Man, which he needed not to have done. He was Man's
Creator, gave him his being, and therefore was his undoubted and Sovereign
Lord, and might have proceeded with him altogether in a way of Sovereignty,
exacting obedience of him, and let him refuse it or fail in it at his peril. It
was a gracious condescension in God to act in a Covenant-way, and oblige
himself to reward man for his obedience, this is called a Covenant of Works,
because therein Life was promised to Man upon the terms of his personal perfect
obedience, and his perseverance therein. Now this Covenant was transgressed and
broken by our first Parents, soon after that it was made; so that no good, no
happiness is to be hoped for from it, by us, or by another; the Penalty indeed
threatened, upon the breach thereof may be most righteously exacted, and so it
will of all those who are found guilty, and continue still under it, not having
fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hopes set before them, i. e. not having
closed with Christ, and by Faith taken Sanctuary in him, but no life is to be
had by it, the Law cannot justify because it is grown weak through the flesh,
Romans 8.3. weak to the purpose of justification, and this was by accident,
through Man's fault, Man's weakness is the reason of the Laws weakness, the Law
was able to have justified innocent perfect Man, but it cannot justify lapsed
sinful Man. Homo est impotens ad praestandam legem, Lex ei Vires dare non
potest; Man is too weak to perform the Law, and the Law cannot give him
strength. In a word, Man being now fallen, corrupted, infeebled, and throughout
depraved, he cannot possibly keep the Law, and therefore that cannot justify
him.

But there is another Covenant, rightly called a better Covenant, which God
has been pleased to make better for us as the case stands, for it contains
in it better Promises, Heb. 8.6. and is in the hand of a Mediator Jesus Christ
our fast Friend, a Covenant by which David saw all his Salvation secured, and
in which he summed up all his desire, knowing it to be everlasting, ordered in
all things, and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5.

In this Covenant (as in all) there is a mutual stipulation, it has its
requiries, and its promises, by it Man is engaged to believe in Jesus Christ
with all his heart, to accept of him, and close with him as he is by the Father
and himself offered in the Gospel, to receive him in all his Offices, as
Prophet, to Teach, and as King, to Govern, and Command, as well as Priest to
Atone, and Interceed and Bless; and thereupon it promises Salvation, it
requires repenting of Sin, and forsaking it; and thereupon it promises Mercy,
and the blotting out of Transgressions, it requires returning to God, and the
performance of sincere obedience, and to every one that does so, God engages
himself to be their God, for this is a Covenant of Reconciliation, he engages
to pardon their Sins so fully, so abundantly, that they shall be as if they had
never been, white as Snow, and to receive them into favor, and to love them
with an everlasting love, and to give them grace, and glory, Crowning at
length, and satisfying them with happiness.

All those that have not laid hold upon, and are not in this Covenant of Grace,
are to this day under the Covenant of Works, and so in a state of Damnation;
and all those that are in the Covenant of Grace, must come up to the terms of
it. Let Men in this erroneous, teachie, froward, quarrelsom Age say what they
will, and make never so much noise, the Covenant of Grace has its Conditions,
though blessed be God, what it requires it gives, and we must carefully look
that we come up to the terms of it, and that there be in us an answerableness
to its requiries, if ever we would share in the blessings of it. He that
believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned; repent,
and your Sins shall be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come
from the presence of the Lord, but except ye repent, ye shall all perish.
Christ will be the Author of Eternal Salvation unto all them that they obey
him, but he shall at the Great Day be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel. And then it will appear, that Obedience and Holiness are
something, that to fear the offending of God, and a diligent care of pleasing
him, were other manner of things than many mistaken Persons do now take them to
be. Let your Families know that impenitency does bind upon Men and Women the
guilt of all their Sins, and that without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord,
and that Christ came to save from Sin, as well as Wrath, and to Redeem, not
only from Hell, and Condemnation, but likewise from a vain and vicious
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.19.

Sixthly, Frequently put those who are Members of your Families, and under your
charge, in mind of their being in Covenant with God, and of their having been
Baptized, and so received the Seal or Token of the Covenant, inculcate this in
your Discourses with them. I hope that all your Children and Servants (to you I
now speak, who are Members of this numerous Congregation) have been made
Partakers of that great and precious Ordinance, and you ought to tell them of
it again, and again, for by that means you may do them much good, in making
them serious and thoughtful; let them know from you, that they were not by
their Parents left at liberty to choose whether they would be the Lords, or not,
whether they would serve him, or not, whether they would bow their necks to the
yoke of Christ, or be the Sons and Daughters of Belial. But their Parents,
whose they were, and who had a right to dispose of them, did, in conscience of
their own duty, and in dear love to them, bind them to God betimes, they did
devote and consecrate them to God, they did as it were, Seal Indentures between
them, and God; so that now they are Gods Covenant People, his Covenant Servants.

And tell them that being in Covenant with God, they shall have all the good of
the Covenant, all the Mercies and Blessings of it, in case they do not deal
falsely therein; they may rejoice in it, as that which is security enough, they
may live upon it, and that comfortably in the worst times, and they may plead
it with God, and say with David, remember thy word unto thy Servant, upon which
thou have caused me to hope.

But that it will be sad and dreadful for them to sin against it, I mean
wilfully, sins in them are of a deeper die, and have a louder voice than the
Sins of others in the World, and by them God is justly more provoked: merely to
break one of Gods Commandments is nothing near so bad as to break Covenant with
God, that is an accent upon the head of Sin, and does greatly aggravate it; and
those Persons that are guilty thereof, may expect, and with trembling think how
severe God will be at last, and what fierce wrath he will pour out upon them,
when he comes to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant. Labor to convince them
what a dismal thing it would be for them to withdraw themselves from God, whose
they were by Covenant; for them who had been in their Infancy by their Parents
given up to God, now to run cross to them, and to null what they had done as
much as in them lies, and to give up themselves to Sin, and to the Devil, and
to sell themselves to do evil; this is a throwing dirt in the face of their
Parents, as if they had chosen ill for them, and bound them to a bad Trade, and
an hard Master; and this is a reproach to God, as if he had been a Wilderness
to them, and a Land of Darkness, and they had found iniquity upon him, and this
cannot but be an high provocation, and must needs raise storms of wrath and
fury.

Seventhly, Be very much and often commending to them the Service of God, and
the Yoke of Jesus Christ, that they may not be prejudiced by wrong notions, nor
misled by misapprehensions of him, as the unprofitable Servant pretended to
be, who looking upon his Lord as Austere, and made up altogether of Severity,
therefore would do nothing for him, but even buried his Talent in a Napkin.
That Gods Service is perfect Freedom, and then do Men and Women walk at
liberty, when they keep his Precepts. Whereas the Service of Sin is no better
than Slavery, and its work a drudgery; the Sweetmeats of Sin are wrapped up in a
Curse, and its most pleasant ways lead down to the Chambers of Death. Whereas
the Yoke of Christ is easy, being lined with Love, and his Burden is light,
having both Wings, and the Shoulder of God to help them to bear it. In the
service of Sin a poor Creature spends all at his own cost like the poor
Israelites under Pharaoh, and his Cruel Taskmasters, who were not only forced
to make Brick, but likewise to find Straw to make it with, and then the Wages
given at last will be death. Whereas God does cut out Work for his Servants,
and give them strength to do it, he chalks out their way, and inlargeth their
hearts to run it, he gives power to the faint, when they have none of their
own, he supplies them with enough, so that Paul said, He could do all things
through Christ's strengthening him.

Show to them the reasonableness of the Law of God, which has been given out
to Man for the Directory of his Life, and the Rule of his Actions, that it is
pure, and perfect, and worthy both of our obedience, and our Love, yea, does
and will afford great, singular delight to a person of a right frame and
constitution; and well it may, seeing the Law is holy, and the Commandments
holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. It is such a Law was fit for God to give, and
fit for Man to receive; it being purity throughout, and is suitable to the
Nature of God, who is an Infinite, Holy, and Righteous Being. It was also
suitable to the Nature of Man, possible, easy, pleasant to him before he was
degenerate, corrupt, and depraved. Let us run through the Commandments, and at
the first view it will appear they are not grievious, as the beloved Disciple
says, 1 John 5.3.

What can be more reasonable than that we should have and own, love and trust
in, fear and serve him for our God, and him only who is God indeed, and God
alone, besides whom there is none else? What could with greater reason be
forbidden, than the making of any Graven Image, or the likeness of any thing
which is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the
Earth, so as to fall down and Worship them? for what can be more ridiculous,
than to give Divine Honor to that which Man himself gave being to? what more
gross and egregious nonsense, than to call that a God, part of which is
consumed in the fire? Is it not reasonable that we all should sanctify the
name of God, and not profane it nor take it in vain, and that we should
cheerfully spend some time in his Service, who is the great Lord of time, and
keep holy the Sabbath Day, laying out that seventh part of time which he has
chosen and sanctified, and set apart for himself in his service and Worship?
what exceptions can be made against Honoring our Fathers, and Mothers;
Childrens honoring their Parents, Servants their Masters and Mistresses,
Inferiors their Superiors, Subjects their Governors? what more just than
that Men should not kill others by violence, nor themselves by intemperance,
and excess; nay, that they should not hate one another, nor be angry without a
cause, nor too much, nor too long? What also can be with reason objected
against that Law of God, which forbids Rapine, Theft, Robbery, Adultery, and
all Uncleanness, all Reviling, Slandering, Backbiting, and bearing false
witness against our Neighbors, and also coveting those things which are not
our own, but commands us to sit down contented with those things which we
have, whether they be more or less, till God shall please to carve out for us a
larger and more liberal allowance. Surely as to all these things, save only the
seventh part of time, the light of Nature would dictate and lead to the
practice of them. Reason it self does suggest and teach, that to be religious,
righteous, good, temperate, chaste, kind, meek, humble, and lowly, is fit for
Men; it highly becomes them, and does greatly conduce and contribute to their
honor, and peace, and prosperity, to their welfare and comfort every way;
these things give them boldness, make their faces shine, and commend them to
all that know them. But on the other side, injustice, oppression, disobedience,
drunkeness, uncleanness, theft, lying, subornation, perjury, false witness,
swearing, debauchery, and profaneness of all sorts do offend Heaven, and
Earth, they tend to the dishonor and displeasing of God, and to the undoing of
Persons, and Families, yea, to the ruin of Societies, and Kingdoms, and the
whole World, for these things sake the wrath of God comes down upon the
Children of disobedience. To shut up this particular, let them know, there is
none of Gods Commandments but what does evidently and directly make for Man's
own good, it tends to the preserving of his Name, that it may be like precious
Ointment, without a dead Fly in it, and of his Life, that his days may be long
in the Land, and of his Health, that his life may be comfortable as well as
long; and of his Estate, that that may prosper and increase, and not be blasted
with a Curse, and so consume and melt like Snow before the Sun, they have a
benign and kind influence upon Man's whole interest, Godliness being profitable
for all things, for Soul, Body, and Calling, for Time, and Eternity, for the
Life that now is, and for that which is to come; and there is nothing can be
named, by which we can possibly so much promote our own good, as by a cordial
and constant respect to all God's Commandments; we shall not then be ashamed
nor repent. Oh! how sweet and pleasant will it be when we can in truth say with
holy Paul, Herein do we exercise our selves, to keep a Conscience void of
offense both toward God and toward Man, Acts 24.16.

Eighthly; Acquaint them with the present Advantages that come by Religion, and
a conscientious performance of Duty. God's Israel have their Manna now, and
their Clusters by the way, in the Wilderness, as well as a Land flowing with
Milk and Honey at the last. As there are some drops before the Storm, so
First Fruits before the Harvest. David says, God's Commandments are right and
true, more to be desired than Gold, much fine Gold, sweeter also than Honey and
the Honeycomb, and that in keeping them there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11.
There is Meat in the very Mouth of duty; he does not say, there shall be a
great reward, though that is true, it shall be in Heaven, but there is so. God
is now a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and are careful to obey
him; his Servants shall not stay for all, but have something down, the Feast is
to come, but there are foretastes at present. We frequently see that Sin does
carry its punishment along with it. Soon after Cain had killed his Brother, the
Innocent Blood cried, and Judgment was in part Executed. Quickly after Judas
had played the Traitor, God made him his own Executioner. While Belshazzar was
impiously Carousing in the Vessels of the Sanctuary, there was an Handwriting
upon the Wall, and that very Night was he slain. So God hangs up some Notorious
Criminals, as it were in Chains, in terrorem, that others might be warned and
frighted, and some restraint laid upon, and bounds set to wickedness, which
would otherwise overflow all, and that some order might be preserved and kept
up in the World.

On the other side, God does even in this Life frequently reward good Men, and
both give them Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Things, and outward Blessings in
Earthly Things, thereby making it evident to all that have Eyes in their Heads
and will observe, that it is not in vain to fear God. And though his upright
Job's are not so sordidly Mercinary as to serve him merely for hire, yet he is
so infinitely good and gracious that they shall not serve him for naught; but
while they walk before him in their Integrity, and make it their desire and
endeavor to please, and obey him, he watches over them with a
never-slumbering Eye, and takes special Fatherly Care of them, and does them
good; they have peace in their Breasts, and Families, protection about them and
all that they have, and also Food convenient for them, a supply of all their
need. And though some others of his People who are dear unto him, and exceeding
precious in his sight, have but little, a very little of this Worlds Goods, but
from Hand to Mouth, yet they can be cheerful, sitting down to a Dinner of
Herbs, and eat them with a merry Heart, giving God thanks, because they know
they have the love of God in it, and the Blessing of God with it, and by
consequence that little which they have is better than the Riches and great
Revenues of many wicked; their Brown Bread is better than the others Venison,
which is peppered hot with a Curse, and their Cup of cold Water is better than
the others most generous Wine, because the Wrath of God is dropped into it, and
all shall at last be dearly paid for, when Divine Justice shall bring in the
Reckoning.

Show them that the Service of God, and a care to please him, is the way to get
the good things of the World, both the Creatures, and the Comfort of them; for,
as we before said, Godliness has the Promises of this Life, i. e. both of Life
it self, and what does appertain to it. And as it is the Blessing of God that
makes Rich, so his Blessing is upon his People, upon them, and only upon them.
Others have no Interest in the Promise, and therefore cannot lay claim to the
Blessing, nor groundedly expect and hope for it. Profane Esau would fain have
had the Blessing, he asked it, he begged it, he wept for it, but alas! it was
gone before, Isaac had past it to his Brother Jacob, and he was not to be
altered; Esau had contemned the Birthright, and sold it for a Mess of Pottage,
and therefore he should not have the Blessing: He found in his Father no place
for Repentance, although he sought it carefully with Tears: Profaneness
excludes from the Blessing.

But withal, take some pains with them, yea, do all that you can to keep their
Hearts from being engaged to the World, and their Affections from being wedded
and devoted to these sublunary Enjoyments; do not commend to them fine Clothes,
gorgeous Attire, and outward Bravery, that is the way to make them proud, but
the Robe of Righteousness, a putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith and
Imitation, and a being clothed with Humility. Do not commend to them earthly
Riches, which reach not the Soul, which are uuncertain, and take unto
themselves Wings and flee away, leaving the poor Owner in a worse condition
than they found him but commend to them the good part that shall never be taken
from them, the Riches of Faith, and an Interest in the Promises. Not worldly
Grandeur, which is so slippery, nor high places from which so many tumble, and
fall, and break their Necks; but great goodness, great measures of Faith and
Holiness, great serviceableness in their several places; labor to convince
them of the littleness, and vanity, and nothingness of those things which the
bewitched worldlings do so madly dote upon, and so idolatrously hug, and pursue
still after with so much eagerness, as if they could never have enough; and
indeed let them get never so much of them, they will never find enough in them,
but in the fullness of their sufficiency they will be in straits, Job 20.22.
Such Men are in straits during that fullness of sufficiency; though they have
abundance they do not think it enough, their condition is high, and their
outward comforts are large, but their spirits are too big for their condition,
and so they are pinched and pained like a Gouty Foot in a narrow and little
Shoe. And many times God chooses that as his Season, for the making both his
Power and Anger known upon them; when they are at the full they are eclipsed,
when their Cup runs over, he empties them, when they stand st^utting and
vapouring as Nebuchadnezzar in his Palace, Is not this great Babylon which I
have built; then Divine Providence trips them up, and lays their Honor in the
Dust.

Turn away their Eyes from beholding these Vanities, and direct them to more
noble and amiable Objects that do better deserve their Love, and will requite
it at a greater rate; make them to know there are other manner of Beauties and
Glories to be had, and therefore to be sought and looked after, those Riches
and Honor which are with Wisdom, durable Riches and Righteousness, Prove. 8.18.
Tell them that one Dram of Saving Grace is better than Thousands of Gold and
Silver; that Christ is better than Creatures, God better than all the World,
and his Favor than Life, his Smiles than the brightest Sunshine; therefore
Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of
Egypt, and rather chose to suffer affliction with the People of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a Season, Heb. 11.25, 26. And David counted one
day in God's Courts better than a Thousand elsewhere, and would rather be a
Doorkeeper in the House of his God, than dwell in the Tents of Wickedness.

Once more convince them, if it be possible, that beginning with God is
beginning at the right end, this is the best method, and will be most
successful. To set our Affections upon things above is the directest and most
compendious way of attaining those things which are here below. Let a Man make
sure of Christ, and he may very well trust God with all his outward concerns.
The Lord is my shepherd; let that be the Proposition, and then, I shall not
want, is a good conclusion by no means to be denied, Psalm: 23.1. whereas
setting Affections upon things below is the way to miss of those things which
are above. Dunghil-rakers do not find the Pearl of Price. Saul indeed seeking
the Asses, lighted upon the Kingdom, but I think the Bible affords not such
another instance. Paul tells us, Destruction is the end of those whose God is
their belly, and who mind earthly things. Minding earthly things as the
chiefest good is the high way to Beggary and Ruin in the end. They that will be
rich fall into Temptation, and not seldom under Heart-wounding, Heartbreaking
Disappointments. Our dear Lord Jesus, who is the faithful and true Witness, and
the wisest Counselor, has given us excellent Advice commended by a sure and
comfortable Promise; Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added to you, Mat. 6.33. All these things added?
Yes, so far as your Heavenly Father sees them necessary for you, nay more, so
far as he sees them good for you; no good thing shall he with hold* and truly
that is far enough, farther than so they are not to be desired, farther than so
they are not worth the having.

Lastly; In your Families, and among them who are committed to your Charge,
direct your Speech very much to the great things of the other World, and that
recompense of Reward which is to come. God took Abram after Lot was separated
from him, and said to him, lift up now thine Eyes, and look from the place
where thou art, northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward, for all
the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever,
Genesis 13.14, 15. So do you take the Members of your Families, and bid them lift
up their Eyes, and look off from this dirty World, up to that glorious Canopy
over their Heads, the Firmament bespangled with Sun, Moon and Stars; that is
but the Floor or Pavement of the Presence Chamber of the King of Glory, the
Bride-chamber of the Lamb, the Seat of the Blessed, which he will give for an
Everlasting Inheritance unto them who have chosen, and love, and obey him. Be
often and often discoursing to them of Heaven, the Company there, the
Employment there, the Felicity and Satisfaction there, the Vision and Fruition
that the Saints shall have there of God and Christ, whom they shall see not as
in a Glass darkly, but Face to Face, the sweet Fellowship and Communion they
shall there have with God in the greatest Intimacy, without the least
disturbance or interruption; there being no sinful withdrawings from God on
their part, and no angry withdrawings from them on God's part, and no Enemy to
divert the Mind, or break the Peace, or abate the Delight, but a fullness of Joy
they shall have in the presence of their God and Savior, and at his Right Hand
Pleasures for evermore. Let them know what you can of the greatness of those
Preparations which he has made for them that love and fear him, even such
things as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has entered into the Heart of
Man. There is an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for them* As there are all dimensions in the love
which Christ bears to them, height, depth, length, and breadth; so there are
in that Happiness and Glory which he has prepared for them.

Mind them of the nature of this their present Life, that it is but transitory,
in a continual flux, we die daily; look how much we have lived, so much we are
already dead; our Candle is burning down into the Socket, and the Oil of our
Lamp spends apace; not a Day, Hour nor Minute passes over our Heads but it
brings us nearer to our Grave, which is the House of all the Living* and unto
it we are continually traveling. It is a troublesome Life; sin deserves it
should be a lamentation thoroughout, and God might make it so; however they
will find it checkered; be their Morning never so fair and serene, yet their
Day will be overcast before Night comes; and though at the first setting out
they have a pleasant Gale, yet they must expect to meet with many a furious
Storm before they come into their Harbor. Children come crying into the World,
Men and Women go sighing thorough it, and groaning out of it. Many are the
afflictions of the very righteous, though God will deliver them out of all. It
is an uncertain Life. Who knows what is in the Womb of Providence, or what may
be the product of a day? we are but short-sighted, and cannot tell what stands
at the Door, ready to draw the Latch. Samson found Honey in the Carcass of a
Lion, but many find Wormwood and Gall in the very Hive where they expected
Honey, and what they did hope would have been their greatest comfort does prove
their bitterest vexation, their greatest torment; and what wise Man would take
up with such a Life, since a better may be made sure of? But again, this is but
a short Life, a span long, three or fourscore Years to come seem a great while,
but when past, they are as a Tale that is told. Few and evil, said good Jacob,
have the days of the years of my Pilgrimage been; and truly, since sin and
sorrow do make them evil, it is a Mercy that God does make them few. But since
our Lives are short, we should not be covetous, for a little will serve the
turn, a little will serve to carry us thorough our Journey. See that there be
but Oil in the Vessel against the Bridegroom's coming, and then it is no great
matter though there is but a little Meal in the Barrel, let them have their
Bellies filled with hid Treasures whose Portion is in this Life; let them hunt
after great things here, who are to have their good things, their all here.

But insisth much among them upon that Life which is to come, that will know no
end, but has an Eternal duration. O, Eternity, Eternity, may thou strike us
all with astonishment, and fill our Souls with an aweful regard. There will be
another state into which we must every one pass at death, that will be
unalterable, a state that is altogether a stranger to hope, or to fear, that
will know nothing to abate its sorrows, or to lessen its comforts; that has
either Meridian brightness without any obscuring shade, or scorching Flames
without the least refreshing drop; such a state as will be either inconceivably
Happy, or unspeakbly Miserable, and that to all everlasting. The Blessed shall
from their height of Bliss look down without any danger of falling, and the
Damned shall in their Abyss of Misery and Woe look up without any possibility
of rising. So Abraham told the Rich Glutton in Hell, Between us and you there
is a great gulf fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot,
neither can they pass to us that would come from thence.

Now as there is a double end, so there is a double way leading to them. That
way which leads to Life is a narrow way, and the Gate strait, there is not room
enough for a Man and his Lusts, Nature must be curbed, and the Flesh Crucified,
and the Body kept under, and self denied. That way which leads to Hell is
broad, and the Gate wide; there a Man may take with him his Sins, and his
Pleasures, he may fare deliciously every day, and be wicked every day; he may
live without God in the World, and have Fellowship with Devils, and fulfill the
Wills of the Flesh. He need not care what he does, who does not care what
becomes of him. Well, assure them of this, that Sin ushers in Misery, and the
ways of Sin go down to death, its steps take hold of Hell; but a Life of
Holiness and Duty, a Life of Faith and Obedience to God carries to Heaven and
the Happiness above. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the upright; see the last
of him, for the end of that man is peace: Though the way have its difficulties,
an up-hill way that calls for great pains and labor; though it be hedged up
with Thorns, and lined with Enemies, yet it has a good end. The good Servant
that Trades with his Talent, minds his business, and is faithful in his little,
shall be made Ruler over much; and when he has finished his work enter into
the Joy of his Lord. The Reward will be sure and great, what will both issue in
abundant satisfaction, and raise the highest admirings; so that the glorified
Soul shall think, and say as David did upon another account, O Lord, who and
what are all my services, and what my Fathers house, that thou have brought me
hitherto.

Bring them by degrees to understand something of what it is to behold God's
Face in Righteousness, and to be satisfied with his Likeness; to lie at the
Fountainhead of Happiness, and to delight ones self in the bottomless,
boundless Ocean of Goodness. How pleasant it will be to reflect upon the
troubles of the past Life, the violent Storms they past thorough, the scorns
and abuses of a foolish and mad World, the rage and fury of wicked,
unreasonable Men, and what a change is made; how ill it was, how well it is;
how sweet it must needs be to be above the reach of all sorrows and wants, of
all Enemies and fears, and to be incompast, feasted filled with the best and
choicest delights. What a privilege will it be to sit down as welcome Guests
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God at a Feast of Glory, there
to take your fill of Love to all Eternity, when you shall see so many shut out?
What an Honor will it be to sit upon Christ's Throne? How easy to lie in the
Bosom of Abraham? How comfortable to be ever with the Lord? How infinitely is
this beyond all the Pleasures that Sin can afford its Votaries, beyond having
the Belly filled with hid Treasures? Will you do this, you that are Governors
of Families? Oh! How good is it! How much your Duty, and how much good may you
do! This is the way to render them serious and thoughtful, the way to make Sin
odious and abominable to them, so that they shall not desire to taste of those
Dainties, this is the way to commend Godliness and Religion to them, so that
they shall be like the Chariots of Amminadab; this also is the way to blunt the
edge, and break the force of a Temptation, when it would at any time draw them
away from God, and take them off from the performance of that duty which they
owe unto him. I will here add these two things, and desire you to put them in
practice, in order to the rendering these Instructions or Teachings the more
effectual.

First; Go over with these things again and again; and insist much upon them;
yea, though they be unwilling to hear, yet be not you weary of speaking; nay,
though they cast your words behind their Backs, do you still follow them with
more. The Prophet Ezekiel was to continue speaking to the People of Israel,
though they were a Rebellious House, nor might he be silent till God shut up
his Mouth, and struck him Dumb; so must you do with your Families; though they
be dull and slow to learn, yet teach; though they be obstinate and stiff
necked, yet counsel and persuade; let there be frequent repetitions of the same
Truths, and the same Advice, and the same Arguments. Gutta cavat lapidem. Drops
of Rain often falling make an impression upon a Stone. Immortal Souls are so
exceeding precious, that the gaining, the saving of one is worth the labor of
a Life. How long did God wait upon you? And how often did he speak to you
before you would hear; do you the like to yours. As Children must be often fed,
so they must be often taught. Precept must be upon Precept, and Line upon Line,
here a little and there a little.

The understandings of young ones are weak, and therefore you must deal with
them in all plainness, and by degrees. They are like narrow mouthed Bottles,
not receptive of much at a time, and you cannot pour in much at once, but by
little and little. Drop in Truths, Counsels, and Instructions into them
according to their ability to receive them. Their Memories also are labil and
slippery, too tenacious of bad things, but not of the best, like Sieves that
let the Flower go, and only retain the Bran; as they are not capable of
receiving much at once, so but weak in keeping that which they have received.
The Apostle saw cause of writing thus to the Hebrews, Ye have forgotten the
Exhortation which speaks to you as unto Children, Heb. 12.5. It is certain
there is too much of this to be found among Men, grown Men, yea, grown Saints;
we read the Word, and forget what we read; we hear Sermons, and forget the
Sermons we hear, we forget the Promises we make, and the Mercies we receive,
and the Experiences we have had of the power, care, and goodness of God. Men
and Women are apt to forget Truths, Precepts, Counsels and Exhortation; we did
stand in need of an Ordinance; the blessed Sacrament to put us in mind of
Christ himself; and it is no wonder then if young ones be so, their Memories
are leaking Vessels, and those impressions which are made upon their Minds and
Affections do quickly wear out again; and therefore there is an absolute
necessity of our going over with the same things again; upon this account, as
well as that of the backwardness and great natural aversness of their wills
from that which is good, daily Instructions are as needful for them as their
daily Bread.

Secondly; Back your holy Instructions with holy Exhortations; and let all your
gracious Counsels be followed and pressed upon them with earnest persuasions and
entreaties, and so give forth and accompany the light with a due measure of
heat, by that means endeavoring to work upon their Hearts as well as upon
their Heads, that you may bring them to the knowledge of the Truth, yea, and to
a receiving it in the love thereof; to an understanding of the way wherein they
ought to go, and likewise to a sincere desire and fixed resolution, through
Divine Assistance of walking therein. Whatsoever there is of wholesome and
gracious Counsel which you apply to them, be sure to chafe it in with a warm
Hand; it is sad to think how coldly some Ministers preach, so that their
Auditors may sit and freeze under them; and also how some speak of God, and the
things of God in their Houses, as if they were not concerned in them, or
rather, as if they were ashamed of them; do you so discourse of these things,
as become those who believe your selves, and are affected your selves, and
do-know the Terrors of the Lord, and are indeed in good earnest; do what you
can to convince them of these two things.

First; That you have an high esteem and valuation of Religion, and all that
appertains and belongs to it. The Truths of God, and the Ordinances of God, and
the Day of God, and the Ways of God, that you do not look upon these things as
trivial matters, of none, or but little importance, but of a more excellent
nature and higher concernment than any thing else in the World. Again, manage
these Exhortations with so much prudence, love, and fervor, as that they may
be convinced.

Secondly; That you are really and heartily set for the doing of them good; and
that your great aim is as the approving of your selves to God in the
conscientious and faithful discharge of your duty, so the doing of them good,
and the promoting of the Spiritual and Eternal welfare of their Souls; and
herein imitate David's example in the counselling of his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles.
28.9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou seek
him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off for
ever. So much may suffice to be by me spoken as to these parts of your duty,
Family Prayer, and Family-Instruction; the good Lord grant that what has been
declared and proved to be your duty may be forthwith and always put in practice
by every one whose duty it is.

I now proceed to the third part of that Counsel which I purposed and promised
to give unto you who are the Parents and Governors of Families; and Oh! let it
be acceptable to you, and prevalent with you. It is this, Look wisely and
carefully to your own Carriages and Conversations, and be sure that you order
them aright; be circumspect, curious, exact, think not that you may do what you
please, but labor to do what you should; what becomes both your place and your
profession; in Psalm. 123.2. the Prophet speaks of the Eyes of Servants looking
to the hands of their Masters, and the Eyes of a Maiden looking unto the hand
of her Mistress, for direction and supply, for help and assistance. I may
likewise say, the Eyes both of Children and of Servants are and will be upon
the Lives and Actions of their Father and Mother, of their Master and Mistress,
and therefore your Eyes should be very much upon your selves, and I count it
your wisdom and duty to weigh the words you speak in their hearing, and the
actions you do in their sight, as well as in the hearing and sight of any other
graver and greater Persons. Never think it enough to speak to them good things,
as long as you set before them bad examples; for they will sooner do as you do
than as you say. Praecepta docent, exempla trahunt; Precepts do but teach,
Examples draw. This was Christ's manner of teaching, he said, Learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly. Learn this by my Doctrine, yea, and by my Disposition
also; in his Mind, Life and Death, he sets us an example that we should tread
in his steps; and since that was his way of teaching it should be ours. That
was a good saying, Oh! that it were at this day true of all those upon whom the
Name of God is called. Non magna loquimur sed magna vivimus; we do not only
speak great things, but we live great things; we speak of Christ, and we live
Christ; we speak of the Gospel, and we live the Gospel; we profess Godliness,
yea, and we practice Godliness; know for certain, it is your practicing that
which is good, that is the best and most probable way of commending it to
others; by this means they may be induced to believe that Religion is not mere
notion but a reality; that it is a thing practicable, yea, and that it is
pleasant. It is your drawing up in your own lives a beautiful, lovely Picture
of Religion, that is the most likely way to make them full in love with it, and
make it your business to see to it that there be as few spots in it as
possible; for however some vain Persons do absurdly think spots in their Faces
are their Ornaments, and set them off; yet sure all will believe and grant that
spots in the Life are blemishes, and a mere deformity. Hence it is that Wives
are commanded to carry as becomes them in their Conjugal Relation, Being in
subjection to their own Husbands, and of a chaste conversation coupled with
fear, that if any do not obey the word, they may without the word be won by the
conversations of their Wives, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. And this, Oh! this is that which I
would gladly have among all upon whom the Name of Christ is called; as for the
wicked and profane of the Age, if they hate to be reformed, and are resolved
upon their way, they may go on. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and
he that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Rev. 22.11. Yes, if he will, let
him, and see what will come of it. But, I say, as for Professors, let them live
up to the Principles of their Religion, let them abstain from all appearance of
evil, let their Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, and in all
things adorn the Doctrine of our God and Savior, let your Conversation be a
God-honouring Conversation, and a World-condemning Conversation, and a
Soul-winning Conversation; Oh! the good that might by this be done, how much
might the Credit and Honor of Religion be retrieved, which has sunk and lost
so much in this Degenerate, Atheistical, and Wicked Generation in which there
is nothing more common, though most unjust, than for vile Wretches to take up
all the dirt which they find in the Lives of some Professors, and throw it in
the Face of our glorious Religion? but woe be to the Men and Women who give the
occasion, and by whom the offense comes, it had been better for them they had
never been Born. Woe to the Men and Women that pray in their Families, and then
contradict their own Prayers by an unsuitable Conversation, that give very
wholesome Counsel and Advice, but live quite contrary to it. What these Men
Build with one hand, they pull down with the other; these are the Persons that
do Religion a mischief; through them it is that the Name of God is Blasphemed
among others, Romans 2.24. Therefore here also I will give you some Directions,
and desire you carefully to follow them.

First; Look to it that you be of an unblameable Conversation. I know that
while you are here you cannot be altogether sinless. Paul groaned under a Body
of Death, but he could not get rid of it; but if you will walk so wisely and
circumspectly as you ought, and have power to do, you may be blameless; Daniel
was so, so accurate in the management of himself, so true to his trust, that
though his great Preferment drew upon him the Envy of the Court, and his high
Place rendered him the more conspicuous and visible, and those that were his
Enemies watched him narrowly, yet they despaired of finding any occasion
against him, save in the matter of his God, Dan. 6.5. He would break the Laws
of Men when they did cross the Law of God, and that was his Duty, and still
will be his Honor.

It is an excellent thing, that which nearly, greatly concerns us all, so to
carry as that our own Consciences may not blame us; one of which is more than a
Thousand Witnesses, and will be a greater evidence; see that you do not arm
them against you, that they do not reproach you; this was Paul's daily care and
study; his constant Employment and Exercise, to keep his Conscience void of
offense, Acts 24.16. he would by no means offend his Conscience, nor give it
any cause of chiding and being angry with him.

It is also highly our Interest so to carry as that God may not blame us at the
last; that he may not reproach us when we come to appear in open Court before
Angels, Men, and Devils, and to be Tried for our Lives, and Sentence as to our
Eternal State; that God may not say, You called your selves my Children, but
you were a company of disobedient Children; you were a dishonor to me, and now
before all I do disown you, you are none of mine, I know you not. Oh! do you
please God now, and obey him now, and honor him now, that he may not blame you
at the last, 1 Pet. 3.14. Be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace,
without spot, and blameless; this does require and deserve all the diligence
you can use.

But that which I would press upon you now is an unblameable walking before
Men; that you may be able to look any Man in the face, and being righteous, be
as bold as a Lion; and do so in your Families; behave your selves wisely by
walking within your houses with a perfect heart, and in a perfect way. Some
when they go abroad put on a Cloak of Morality, and Religion, but when they
come home again they put it off; they look like Saints, good Men, sweet
tempered Men in other folks, in other Men's houses, but they are Tigers or
Devils in their own. Be you every where what you should be, in the fear of God
all the day, and in all places, good every where, best at home. Let Godliness
be no Underling, but Commander in chief, ordering and ruling both your words
and actions. See that your selves be not guilty of Lying, Swearing, Cursing,
Gaming, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, neither let any filthy Communication proceed
out of your mouths, for it is infectious, tending to the debauching of others,
and the corrupting of good manners.

The holy Scriptures, which are the best, and most exact Rule of Faith and
Manners, do very much insist upon this, and loudly call for it; 2 Timothy 2.19.
Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity. Whatever he
did before while he was an Atheist, an Heathen, though he loved Iniquity, and
lived in it, though he drew Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin as with
Cart-ropes, yet now that he is a Christian, he must turn over another Leaf, if
he would prove himself a Man in Christ, he must lead a new Life, and be a new
Creature; he must now be divorced from Iniquity, and depart from it, from all
Iniquity, from all sorts of Iniquity, and that as far as ever he can, saying of
his Iniquity, what Ephraim said of his Idols, What have I to do any more with
them? Hos. 14.8. His very naming the Name of Christ, professing Faith in that
Name, and calling himself by it, does strictly oblige him thereunto. Again,
this blessed Scripture (which is as Gold tried seven times in the Fire) does
require you to have the same Mind in you that was in Christ Jesus, and to work
out your Salvation with fear and trembling, and also to be blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Generation among whom ye live, and to hold forth the Word of Life;
Phil. 2.15, 16. Though your Lines are cast in a debauched place, though you
live among a company of profligate Wretches, yet do not you learn their
Manners; they will not be the better for you, be not you the worse for them;
keep you your selves pure, though you live in a dirty World that lies in
wickedness, be you as spotless as is possible, imitating Noah, of whom this
admirable account is given, that when the wickedness of Man was great upon the
Earth, which was filled with violence, and all flesh had corrupted their way;
Genesis 6.5, 12. yet he was a just Man, and perfect in his Generation, and walked
with God; Genesis 6.9. Indeed even he miscarried afterward; for there is not a
just Man upon Earth that lives and sins not, but hitherto he pleased God,
and set you an excellent Copy, write after him. This, my dear Friends, is the
least that all Men have to expect from you who call your selves Christians, and
make a Profession of Godliness, therefore, I beseech you not to fail herein; be
sure to do this, be ye blameless.

Secondly; Be you always grave and serious. Keep not only clear of Sin, but
also of Vanity, which will abate your esteem, and render you less valuable.
Really, I have not seldom thought it more than enough to offend and turn the
Stomachs of sober and wise persons, to see the foolish tricks and Antic
gestures of some whose Age and Stature did speak them Men. That is evidently
true which Elihu said, Great Men are not always wise, neither do the aged
understand Judgment; Job 32.9. There may be, and too often is want of Brains in
an hoary Head. Paul says, when he was a Child, he did as a Child, and spoke as
a Child: Neither was it a thing to be blamed or wondered at; what else was to be
expected from him? Though sometimes excellent Wisdom appears in Young ones, as
in Timothy, who knew the Scriptures of a Child. And Ambrose says of Agnes,
Corpore juvencula, animo cana fuit; she had a youthful Body, and an aged Mind.
Young Samuel had in Grace out-striped old Eli: But, says Paul, When I came to
be a Man, I put away childish things: And it is greatly to be wished, that all
would do the same, and not be Children all their days. That when they write
Man, they would act like Men, bidding an everlasting farewell to childish
Tricks, and childish Discourses, childish Pleasures, childish Actions and
Carriages. Yea and if there be any such things as manly follies, have nothing
to do with them. How do any think to train and bring up their Young ones to the
Wisdom, and Discretion, and holy Prudence of Men, when they themselves are
playing the Children before them. Therefore, as I said before, be you grave and
serious; let Wisdom breath in all your discourses; speak much the Language of
Heaven; let it be stamped upon all your actions; for one act of folly will
detract more from your Reputation, than twenty prudent ones will be able to
repair and make up again; let it show it self in all your Converses; be so
familiar as to know your place; so let out your Love to Man, as still to keep
up your Fear of God; so converse with Friends here, as not to interrupt your
Communion with your heavenly Father; be so courteous, as still to be Religious;
so sociable, as to keep within those bounds which God has set you.

I would not be understood as speaking one word, no not a syllable against
cheerfulness, a sober and well regulated Mirth; for it is not only allowed by
God, which is enough to prove its lawfulness, but also commanded, which renders
it a Duty; Eat thy Bread with a merry Heart, rejoice with the Wife of thy
Youth, yea, and of thy Age too; and Paul doubles the Precept, Rejoice evermore,
and again I say rejoice; and the Psalmist tells us, Praise is comely for the
upright; not Complaints, but Songs; not always Prayer, but Praise; the Garment
of Praise is the Beautiful Garment which sits most neatly upon a Saints Back,
and with this they shall be Invested when taken up to Glory, and admitted into
the Joy of their Lord; and this I desire them to consider who please themselves
in a dejected, melancholic Temper, and think they never look well, and as
becomes them, unless it be when they have a Cloud upon their Countenances, and
Tears trickling down their Cheeks, and if ever they would speak properly, it
must be in sighs. I wonder who told them so, it must be no other than the
Devil, who is an inveterate and implacable Enemy as to their Holiness, so to
their Peace and Comfort. Sure I am, that alacrity and cheerfulness is your
Friend, and promotes the Health of your Bodies, and furthers the lively,
vigorous motions of your Souls in their most noble Employments; it is Health to
your Navels, and Marrow to your Bones, and Oil to your Wheels.

And this is also sure, that cheerfulness does become you; it is most becoming
because most proper for you most suitable to that God who is your Father, to
that Jesus who is your Head and Husband, to that Covenant upon which you have
laid hold, to those Promises in which you are interested, to those Hopes under
which you are planted, and to that safe, sweet, blessed state into which you by
Grace are brought; and that it does become you is evident from hence, because
it does belong to you. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright
in heart; and it is fit you should reap that which Heavens Hand has sown for
you. There are no Persons in the World that have such a Right and Title to Joy
as Believers have; wicked Men indeed have none at all, no, though they be Rich,
yet are commanded to weep and howl for the Miseries that shall come upon them,
James 5.1. For a Temporal Heaven, they shall have an Eternal Hell.

And further it is sure, that cheerfulness is one way to commend Religion to
others: The World is mistaken about it, and has taken up a wrong notion of it,
which it holds fast, viz. that it is a dull, heavy, mopish, and melancholic
thing; that it is morose and ill-natured, an Enemy to Manners and Mirth; but
that is a false notion, a grand mistake; it does not forbid cheerfulness, but
directs and orders it, it teaches Men to be merry and wise; and I do heartily
wish all that cheerfulness were quite banished which is inconsistent with the
Rules and Principles of our Religion. The World would be far better without it;
what need is there of that Laughter which Solomon called Madness, or what good
comes of it; away with all that Jesting which the Scripture calls vain. It is a
sad thing for Men to live Jesting, and after that go to Hell in Earnest; you
will find it best to be Merry and Religious. R^s severa est verum gaudium; true
joy is a severe, grave, and serious thing, and let that measure your days; let
there be lightsomness, but nothing of lightness; solidity, but no froth; let
your Families be witnesses of your Integrity, and see nothing in your
Conversation that is below understanding Men, nothing unworthy of gracious
Christians. But this is not enough.

Thirdly; Let your Carriages be holy. Our Savior said to his Hearers, what do
ye more than others? Mat. 5.47. You that have received more than others must do
more than others; you that have been made partakers of Grace must out do, and
out go, and outshine those that have no more than Nature; it is not enough for
you that you do nothing contrary to the Divine Precepts, that you do not
point blank run cross to the Rule of the Gospel. Negative Religion will never
commend you to God, nor carry you to Heaven; you must conform to those
Precepts, and walk up to that Rule, so shall you have Peace, and find Mercy. I
have hoped for thy Salvation, and done thy Commandments; not legally, but
Evangelically, Psalm. 119.166. Yea, he that has the Commandments of God in his
Heart may have Salvation in his Eye. He that leads a Life of obedience may live
a Life of Hope; and so godliliness richly pays for the pains it calls for;
therefore I say unto you walk in print, so walk as to set Copies for others to
write after, so that you may say to them, Walk so as you have us for an Example.

You do very well know how ready young ones are to produce you for their
warrant, and they think your Example is sufficient authority, and should
signify as much as an (...) did formerly in the Schools, which stopped the Mouth
of Contradiction, no Argument to the contrary was to be admitted; so here,
young ones think the day is their own when they can say, I heard my Father or
my Master speak such a word, or I saw him do such a thing; and from thence they
strongly conclude, that without all peradventure they may speak and do the
same; where as poor Creatures they are greatly mistaken, that is a very sorry
Plea, a weak, pitiful Argument that cannot justify them, nor will it satisfy
God; if the thing done be amiss, your doing it will not bear them out when the
matter comes to be tried before the Judgment Seat of Christ; nay, your Example
alone is so far from being sufficient to justify them, that your command will
not do it. I do indeed know it has been said, If Superiors command what is
unlawful, Inferiors are bound to obey them; and in such a case, Though the
Superiors shall be damned for their command, yet the Inferiors shall be saved
for their Obedience; but it is a Cursed Opinion; we are bound to obey God
rather than all the Men in the World; their Examples are not for us to follow,
nor does their commands oblige us to active Obedience, when they run cross to
the Law of God: and the Wrath of God has broken out, and will still break out
against Persons and People for such their Obedience, Hos. 5.11, 12. Ephraim is
oppressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the
Commandment, therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a Moth, and to the House of
Judah as Rottenness.

Wherefore I advise and beseech you that ye would be holy, that so ye may be
exemplary; be you sure to keep the way of God, that they may safely tread in
your steps; do you follow Christ that ye may with boldness call upon them to be
followers of you. I cannot but again mention that resolution of David, and
desire you to remember it, and make it your fixed resolve too; Psalm. 101.2. I
will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, I will walk within my House with a
perfect Heart; do you the same? Behave your selves graciously, that is,
behaving your selves wisely, walk in the Scripture-way, for that is the perfect
way; then you may humbly invite God to come unto you, and comfortably hope that
he will. Do this, I say, in your House, in your Families, and before your
Domestics, where, and with whom, you do most frequently and intimately
converse; and in order to the more firm fastening of this Resolution, and your
better putting it in practice, I advise you often to call to mind that
excellent Question propounded by the Apostle Peter in his second Epistle, Chap.
3. ver. 11. Seeing all these things shall be dissolved, all what things? All
those things that he had spoken of in the former part of that Chapter, all
these things that are within your sight; your Families shall be dissolved, your
nearest and dearest Relations, Civil, Conjugal, Natural, shall be dissolved;
the Union between your Souls and Bodies shall be dissolved, those two old dear
Friends must part, the whole Frame and Fabric of Nature must be dissolved, The
Heavens, i. e. these visible Heavens, shall pass away with a great noise, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, for the Lord Jesus will be revealed
from Heaven in flaming Fire; the Earth also and the works therein shall be
burnt up; what Works? Gods Works, and Men's Works; well, what then? One Question
I would ask you, and have you to ask your selves, that is this, What are you?
Are you fire proof? Are you Gold? Can you endure the Burning? Can you dwell
with devouring Fire, and not be devoured by it? Another Question is, What
should you be? Take it in the same Apostles words, What manner of Persons ought
ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness? not of the ordinary make and
common size of Professors, See that you be Saints of the first rate; let your
godliness be of the highest pitch, and most lovely complexion. See that you be
excellent and eminent for your Holiness, that every step of your way be no
other than a walking with God, that every one of your actions be right and
regular, and that your whole Conversation, all the windings and turnings of
your Lives be plain and evident demonstrations of your holiness and godliness.

Fourthly; Be humble and meek in your Deportments. As you are commanded to put
on Christ, that lie may be visible in your Tempers and Lives, and others may
love Christum habitantem in vobis, Christ dwelling in you; so you are commanded
to be clothed with Humility. This should be the upper Garment, and through
this your Graces, and Gifts, all your Excellencies and Accomplishments will
shine with the greater and more taking Beauty.

I must and do most readily grant there is a distance between the Rulers and
the Ruled, between Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Mistresses and
Maids; Nature it self teaches it, and God himself has ordered it; and
Superiors should know their places, and be known in them; it is fit, it becomes
them, yea, it is their duty, and they ought not to part with any of that
honor, and power, and authority, with which God has invested them, so to do
would be sin. And on the other side, Inferiors are to understand themselves,
and to know their places, and to keep their distance. There is an honor owing
from Children to Parents, and they ought most cheerfully to pay it. There is a
fear, a reverence, an awe due from Servants to their Masters and Mistresses,
and they are bound with all readiness to give it, they sin if they do it not;
they must not think to be (as the Proverb has it) hail Fellows well met; the
Sacred Scripture knows no such thing, the Great and Holy God does not allow
it; see how his Will in this matter is revealed in his Word, Ephesians. 6.1, 2.
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right; honor thy Father
and Mother that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long upon the
earth; ver. 5. Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters according to
the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto
Christ. The like you may read in Col. 3.20, 21, 22. And again, 1 Timothy 6.1. Let
as many Servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all
honor, that the Name of God, and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. God is not
the God of Confusion, but of Order, and it is his Will that Order should be
maintained and kept up in Churches, and Nations, and Families.

Yet notwithstanding all this, it is the duty and very becoming of Superiors
as to be low in their own Eyes, so to be humble in their Behavior toward those
below them, and to condescend to those who are of low degree. Christ Jesus was
Master, though he took upon him the form of a Servant, he was Lord of all, yea,
the Lord of Glory, yet he was meek and lowly; and it was his Will that all his
Disciples should of him learn to be so, Mat. 11.29. The highest Heaven is not
so much above the Earth as the great and glorious God is above Angels and Men;
there is an infinite distance between him and us, yet how low does he stoop,
how wonderfully does he condescend to his poor Creatures, to Worms, to Dust and
Ashes, to whom he looks, with whom he dwells, whom he gives leave to lay hold
upon his strength, to wrestle with him, to come with boldness to his throne of
Grace, to whom he says, Ask me of things to come concerning my Sons, and
concerning the work of my hands command ye me! Isa. 45.11. Mind these things,
and be astonished that so great a Majesty should so greatly bow to such pitiful
shreds of Being; Psalm. 8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the
Son of Man that thou visitest him? Now certainly since the great God, and our
Savior, do thus stoop and humble themselves, we cannot but conclude, that
Pride becomes no body, but it is the shame and disgrace of all that are guilty
of it; and generally those Persons are highest in Pride who are lowest in
Worth; Pride and Frowardness turn Men and Women into Monsters, yea, into a kind
of ugly Devils, for as such they appear in the Eyes of those that have to do
with them, yea, let their other accomplishments be never so great, yet this one
thing spoils all. Such a Man is an Understanding Man, a Learned Man, a Wise
Man, an Active Man, a very Useful Man; this is an high Encomium, but he is a
Self-conceited Man, a Proud, Lofty Man, it is a great blot in his Escutcheon,
Men do not like him, and God will resist him; whereas Humility is an Ornament
wheresoever it is found, but it sets them off most who are highest. God
delights to see such a Man, he will dwell with him that is of a contrite and
humble Spirit, Isa. 57.15. And that is an evident sign he likes and loves them
well, and as he will dwell with him, so will be good and liberal to them, he
will revive his spirit, and give him grace, Jam. 4.6. He has a special favor
for them, he will smile lovingly upon them, he will give forth plentifully of
his Spirit unto them, they shall have fresh influences, and blessed
assistances, grace for grace. Thus an humble Spirit renders you pleasing to
God, in and through Jesus Christ, and a kind, affable, courteous behavior will
commend you to Men, to all those with whom you Converse.

But while I am commending humility to Family Governors, I would not have them
to do any thing unworthy of that place in which God has set them. Stoop, but
not basely, not below your place, show your selves humble and kind, but do not
make your selves mean, and cheap. Remember you are Parents, and Master and
Mistress, and carry as such, and let not Inferiors forget themselves, nor turn
kindness into wantonness and neglect; there are due bounds and limits unto
which they may go, and beyond which they cannot pass without being
Transgressors. It is not fit that Servants should be all tongue in the presence
of their Master, or their Mistress, or boldly mingle them selves with their
Discourses; yet they may be permitted to speak before them, so that they open
their mouths with wisdom, in a due season, and in a right manner. It is not fit
that Servants should usurp Authority, or take into their own hands the reins of
Government, as if they had a right to dictate and give order; no, no, their
business is to do the work, and not to cut it out; yet they may sometimes, and
in some cases modestly show their Opinion. Servants are to be obedient to their
Masters, pleasing them well in all things, not answering again; not quarelling
and murmuring against their Orders or Corrections, not thwarting and
contradicting them, and thereby provoking their anger and indignation against
them; yet when they are spoken to, they must not be sullenly silent, but give
respective answers; yet when they have received wrong, and are unjustly
charged, they may seasonably with due submission, and soft words (which turn
away wrath) assert their own innocence, and clear themselves of that blame
which was laid upon them. An instance hereof we have in David, 1 Samuel 24.8, 9,
10, 11. When Saul looked behind him, David stooped with his face to the earth,
and bowed himself; and David said to Saul, wherefore hear thou men's words,
saying, behold, David seeks thy hurt? Behold, this day thine eyes have seen
how that the Lord had delivered thee to day into my hand in the Cave, and some
bid me kill thee, but mine eye spared thee: and I said, I will not put forth my
hand against my Lord, for he is the Lords Anointed. Moreover, my Father, see,
yea see the skirt of thy Robe in my hand; for in that I cut off the skirt of
thy Robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see, that there is neither evil
nor transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; thus he
did, and so Servants may humbly clear and vindicate themselves when innocent.
And Saul himself, as bad as he was, did hearken to him, and owned his
integrity; saying, thou art more righteous than I, for thou have rewarded me
good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.

Before I pass on and leave this particular, I shall propound to your
consideration the practice of Job, who was a Mirror of Patience, and a
Non-such for Piety. He tells us, it was far from him to despise the cause of
his Manservant, or his Maid Servant, when they contended with him. If I had
done so, says he, what shall I do when God rises up, and what shall I answer
when he visits? Job 31.13, 14. We must needs speak something to that word
contended; when they contended with me. May Servants contend with their Masters
and Mistresses? they do often, too too often contend among themselves, one with
another, more shame for them; but would Job allow them to contend with himself?
if he did, indeed we may admire his Patience, but have no reason to commend his
Prudence. What therefore are we to understand by this their contending? let
Holy and Reverend Mr. Caryl answer the question, which he does, in these
Particulars.

First, We are not to understand this, of a bold and saucy contending,
doubtless Job was a Wiser Man than to endure such unmannerly Servants in his
House; such sacucie carriage deserves and calls for sower returns; nor

Secondly, Are we to understand hereby contention in a way of gainsaying,
thwarting him in his Orders, and contradicting his Commands; a Master who knows
his place, will not bear with that, he is not to have them for his Controulers,
nor

Thirdly, are we to understand it of any unreasonable murmuring and dislike
upon every trivial and frivolous occasion; these things, says he, are not to
be permitted in any well-governed Family, such as Job was. If Servants will
thus contend with their Masters, they have, says he, not only reason to
despise and dislike them, but unless they amend, to rid their hands of them,
and put them out of their Houses. Therefore we have cause to conclude Jobs
meaning was this.

Fourthly, When any Servant had matter of complaint as to any Household
grievance, he gave them free liberty to acquaint him with it; they needed not
be afraid to present their case to him, whom they should find to be their
Patron, as well as their Master, and as ready to do them right, as to expect
service from them, as the same Author says. Sometimes Servants complain that
their Reward or Wages is too little, sometimes that their Work is too much, and
lies too hard or heavy upon them. When Jobs Servants contended with him about
those, or any such matters, he did not bid them hold their tongue, or get them
gone, much less did he say as Pharaoh did, there shall be more work laid upon
you, that you may labor therein, but he heard them patiently, and gave them
redress, if their Complaints were just, which many Masters would not do; or
else he convinced them by his Wisdom, and the weight of his Arguments, that
their Complaints were causeless, and unreasonable, which most Masters could not
do. He was always willing and ready to rectify whatever was amiss, and to
remove every thing that was really a grievance; go ye and do likewise.

It is past dispute, that Masters and Mistresses have a place above their
Servants; God himself has by the all-disposing hand of his wise Providence,
set them upon the upper ground, and they have a power over their Servants, so
long as they continue such; but yet they are not to abuse them, nor trample
them under their feet; no, no, you ought to be humble, meek, and lowly, though
never so great, so high, and rich. The Sun is a glorious Creature, and much
above the Earth, yet how comfortable is it to the things therein, how kind and
benign its Beams and Influences? be you so in your Places, not only righteous
to them, but courteous, not Labans, not Nabals. To this end, frequently
remember and consider, that as you are Persons in Authority, so you are under
Authority, you your selves have a Master too; you are above your Servants, but
there is a God in Heaven who is infinitely more above you, and has Persons,
Times, and Things, in his own hand, and at his own dispose, and does make
frequent turns and changes in the World, and it is his delight to abase the
Proud. If any of you will pride it in the place of Masters, and Mistresses, God
can easily, and he quickly may bring you down into the place, rank and
condition of poor Servants, and such an alteration will be very uneasy to you,
unless God brings your Spirits down to your Condition, it will be very uneasy;
a strait Shoe drawn upon a big foot, pincheth it, and puts it to pain.

Fifthly, Be loving and Kind in all your Carriages. Love like Varnish puts a
beauty and gloss upon all things, and like Sugar or Honey a sweetness into
them, it is a most glorious representation of God to us, the Scripture says,
he is Love. It was an excellent Chariot which King Solomon made for himself,
Cant. 3.9, 10. of the Wood of Lebanon, there was sweetness, the Pillars thereof
were Silver, and the bottom was Gold, and the covering of it of purple, there
was Richness, and Princely State, but what follows sets off and commends all
the rest; the midst of it was paved with Love for the Daughters of Jerusalem.
Yes, had there been no love there, one might as well have rode in a Cart, as in
Solomon's Chariot. Love goes with the Holy Soul to Heaven, and there it is
perfected, and there it eternally abides, and is the Heaven of Heaven, it is
the brightness of its glory, and the sweetness of all its delights. Faith and
Hope are two excellent Graces, and of singular use here, but they will both
cease; Faith being swallowed up of Vision, and Hope most gladly resigning its
place to Fruition, but Love remains. Heaven would not be Heaven without Love;
call that place Hell where Love is not, that House Hell where Love dwells not.

You that are Husbands, and Wives be loving and kind to one another, in your
looks and in your lips let there be the law of kindness* that will strengthen
your interest in your Family, and power over it, as well as sweeten your own
life, and Relations; whereas your quarrels and contentions do and will render
you mean, cheap and contemptible in the eyes of your Inferiors. Some may think
it great to ride Master, and to have their will, but they lose much more in
their honor than that comes to. Therefore if at any time there happen a
disagreement between you, keep it close and private between your selves, not
suffering it to take air; if there be a spark of discontent kindled* put it out
with all speed, and let it not break forth into a flame.

Be also kind and loving to your Servants, and to your Children; when you give
out your Orders to them, do not do it in an imperious way; some think it
becomes them to speak altogether in thunder, but let them remember, that it
pleased the great God to speak to his Servant Elijah in a still voice. To
command with Love, is the most likely way to be obeyed with delight, and
cheerfulness.

When you Teach and Instruct them, do it with gentleness; the moderate Rain
does more sweetly soak into the Earth, and refresh the Fruit of it, than
Thunder-Showers, which falling with violence, lay the Corn, and the Grass, and
damnifie both; it is better to instill into them knowledge and good Principles,
than to knock and beat them in. Love does most sweetly unlock and open the ear,
and makes a free and easy passage for Instructions, and Councels to enter in,
and it does mollify and soften the heart, so that it is rendered more ready to
receive impressions, more faithful and careful to retain them.

When you do reprove them, as reprove them you must when they do deserve it,
silence in such a case is sinful. He that suffers Sin to rest upon his Child or
Servant, brings guilt upon himself, and becomes a partaker with him in his evil
deeds. He that does not reprove for Sin, encourages in it, and for not
reproving, shall be reproved. But whenever you do reprove, let it be done in
Love. Adam had disobeyed God in eating the forbidden Fruit, God did not wink at
it, resolved to punish him for it, and did, yet he came to him in the cool of
the day. Always dip the Nail in Oil, for that is the way to make it drive best,
and pierce deepest, otherwise the Board may split, or the Nail bow and break,
through a stubborn resistance.

When you are angry with them, moderate your passion, and mingle it, do not
stir up all your wrath, but in the midst thereof remember Mercy; even then let
them see that you love them, and that though their sinful Practices be odious
to you, yet their Persons are dear, and all the fruit you aim at, is the taking
away their Sin, and that you design your hottest anger for nothing else but a
refining fire, to separate their dross from them, that afterward they may come
out like Gold.

When you chide them, be sure it is not without a cause, nor more than it does
deserve. He is no Wise Man, that for the roasting of an Egg, makes a fire big
enough to roast an Ox, all that cost might have been saved, and the thing
better done. In such a case a holy warmth is necessary, and highly desirable;
but let not your tongue be set on fire with the fire of Hell, no, no, let Grace
be poured into your lips, and out of them too; mix your severest Chidings with
convincing Discourses, gracious Counsels, and persuasive Arguments; and while
you would drive them from Sin, at the same time draw them to Virtue, and
Godliness.

When you Correct them, do it in Wisdom; if Rods will do, make no use of
Scorpions; yea, and let Love lay on the Rod, remembering God, who contends in
measure; let them see clearly that your chastning of them is not for your
pleasure, but their own profit, that they might be reduced from the error of
their way, and made partakers of Gods holiness, and when you Correct, pray for
them. It is Gods Ordinance, therefore beg a blessing of him upon his own
Ordinance, that through him it may prosper, to the destruction of the corrupt
Flesh, and so the Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5.

This is the ready way to gain them a most proper course, to render all the
means you use effectual upon them, then will they look upon your very smitings
as a kindness, and upon your reproofs as an excellent Oil, that will not break
their heads. This is the way to make your Counsels theirs, and to make them yet
more your own, by gaining their hearts. As kindness makes subjection most easy
to the inferior, and most pleasant; the Yoke will not gaul if it be lined with
Velvet; so it commands with the greatest power, it draws suaviter, and
fortiter, sweetly, and strongly, so that the Soul runs; it allures and
constrains too: and at the same time it makes Government pleasant to the
Superior, plucking Thorns out of the Crown, and instead of them, sticking it
with Roses. Whereas an imperious froward Lord or Master does not only make his
Family uneasy, but himself too; as their Yoke is heavy, so his Seat will be
hard, and while he is all for Whip and Spur, it will make both his arm and his
heart ache to hold the Bridle. Remember that Gods way is to draw with the Cords
of a Man, i. e. with rational Arguments for the convincing of the Judgment,
and with loving kindness, in order to a moving upon, and winning of the
affections; be ye followers of him as dear Children. The more there is of love
in your hearts and lives, the more there is of God, the more do you express and
glorify him; and here let me add that which follows hereupon, or rather most
sweetly accompanies it.

Sixthly, Be not severe and rigid in your dealings with them, but tender and
compassionate. It is said of the Egyptians, that they made the Children of
Israel serve with rigor, and they made their lives bitter with hard bondage,
in Mortar, and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the Field, all their
Service wherein they made them serve was with rigor; Tyranny, Violence,
Fierceness, citra ullam clementiam aut misericordiam, without any clemency, or
mercy, Exodus 13.14. therefore Egypt is called an Iron Furnace, Deuteronomy. 4.20. but
Israelites were forbidden to rule over one another after this manner; If thy
Brother be waxen poor, and sold unto thee, thou shall not compel him to serve
as a Bonds Servant, Levit. 25.39. Thou shall not rule over him with rigor, but
shall fear thy God, ver. 43. over your Brethren the Children of Israel, ye
shall not rule one over another with rigor v. 46. ye shall not rack him with
labor, nor with blows, nor with threatenings; ye Masters forbear threatenings,
Ephesians 6.9. not altogether, sometimes they may be necessary, but do not use
them always, nor often. Well then, God would have you not rigorous and
oppressive, but tender; be so then, as to instance in some particulars.

In their Sickness, let them have what you can afford, and their case does
require; give them convenient Lodging, due Attendance, with all that is
necessary both for Food, and Physic, that so they may see their Lives are
valued by you, and precious to you, and that it is your will they should not
want any thing that is fit for them. How did the good Centurion regard his sick
Servant? Luke 7.2, 3. His Servant who was dear unto him was sick, and when he
heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the Elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he
would come and heal his Servant. By taking care of them under their Distempers,
you will gain their hearts yet more, and engage them to take the greater care
of your business when their health shall be restored them.

In their Work do not over-task them, do not call them to that which you know
they have not skill to do, nor lay upon them such heavy burdens as are above
their strength to bear, though such Taskmasters have been found among
Egyptians, let there be none such among professed Christians. It is more
becoming the Servants of Pharaoh, who is called a Dragon-Leviathan, than the
followers of Jesus who is the Lamb of God, a Lion indeed for strength in his
defending of them, but a Lamb for meekness in his dealings with them; when he
invites Men and Women to take his Yoke upon them, he tells them it is easy,
and his burden is light; and whether it be so or no, ask one of his Servants
who did draw in it, and was able to speak from his own experience, and he has
past his word for it, and left it upon Record, that his Commands are not
grievious.

And in their failings be ye merciful to them; if you are only concerned, bear
as much as is fit, but if God be concerned too, make them know your deep
resentment; but withal, do what you can to restore them with a Spirit of
meekness, trample not upon them when down, but lend them your hand toward the
raising them up again to Repentance. And by it, I would not have you (as I said
before) wink at Sin, either in your Children, or in your Servants; for who
knows how great a matter a little fire kindles? how many Unclean Spirits may
follow one that was admitted and found entertainment before? Besides, to bear
with Sin in them, is the way to provoke the anger of God against your selves,
because you do not punish Sin in them, God will punish that neglect in you. Yet
even in that case, you ought to act with prudence, and Christian moderation,
and let the offending Parties find, that while your wrath burns against their
sin, your bowels yearn over them. As when God threatened Adam and Eve for their
Disobedience, yet he threw out to them a plank after the Ship-wreck, and before
he turned them out of Paradise, he opened to them a door of hope in that early
and most gracious Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head.

And for the promoting of this tenderness in you, consider your own
obnoxiousness to God, they have their miscarriages, and you are not without,
but do offend in many things; you did so when you were young as they are, and
to this day you are not faultless, but if the Lord should be strict to mark
iniquities, you would never be able to abide it, and therefore have need to go
down upon your knees every day, and humbly sue out your pardon; and it is a
plain case, such as stand in need of a Pardon themselves should be very free to
give it out to others: and upon those terms only it is to be expected, our
Savior having told us, that if we forgive not men their trespasses, neither
will our Heavenly Father forgive us our trespasses. 6. Mat. 15. That King was
justly severe with his cruel Servant, who owed him Ten thousand Talents, and
upon his entreaty had that vast debt forgiven him; but meeting with his fellow
Servant who owed him no more than Five hundred Pence, laid hold on him, took
him by the Throat and cast him into Prison; whereupon his Lord was wrath and
delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due. So, says
Christ shall my Heave^ly Father do also unto you, if ye from your heart forgive
not every one his brother their trespasses. Matthew 18 23. So that your Lives,
your Pardon, your Salvation depend upon this: if you will show no mercy, you
are not like to find any, that measure which you meet to others shall be meeted
out to you again; neither is this forgiveness to be past to a Brother only, but
to an Enemy, to a Servant, upon profession of Repentance, and the promise of
amendment. How Pathetically did the Apostle Paul plead with Philemon for his
forgiving of Onesimus, and receiving him again into his favor and Family, who
had before been an unfaithful Servant, but was at that time a Penitent and
Convert.

Eighthly and Lastly, In the measuring out of your love and kindness, make no
difference but where the merit and desert of Persons did make one first; This
is the way to encourage virtue, without discouraging any one. Indeed it is too
common and ordinary a fault, and too frequently visible in Families for Parents
to be partial, unequal, yea and unjust in the distribution of their favors,
when bystanders are not able to give any; no not the least shadow nor color
of Reason for it* One Child, and possibly that too none of the best shall be
the Darling, and have all the countenance and respect, and all the attendance,
and abundance of good things given it, when the others are slighted and
neglected as if they were not their own, or not worthy to be owned; though they
have cost the Mothers much sickness in breeding them, and as much pain in
bringing them forth; and as much care and trouble in their rearing of them up,
yet after all they are looked upon as the refuse and offscouring of the
Family; and whereas they have a right to the privileges of Children, they are
debased to the condition of Servants, if not of Slaves. This I my self have
been a mournful spectator of, feeling in me the workings of those p^ssions of
grief and displeasure which such a matter might well raise; and as for those
Parents which are herein guilty, I desire them seriously to consider these few
things which I shall but briefly touch upon.

First, What a great discouragement this is to th^se poor neglected Children.
Hereby you damp their Spirits, and take off their edge; possibly they are dull
and heavy already, and you take a course to make them more so; if they be
naturally quick and lively, they are the more apprehensive and sensible of your
unkindness, and that causes the greater dejection.

Secondly, You create in them a grudge against him who is your fondling. And
lay the foundation of a present and future, if not a perpetual breach, and he
or she who is the object of your unequal love, may for that very reason be the
sole object of their envy and rage. I suppose you know how Ioseph's dreams did
incense his Brethren against him, and how do you know but your dreaming or
rather doting folly, may have as diresul an effect of one kind or another?

Thirdly, You do provoke those Children to be less respective and dutiful to
you. Truly Parents, if they be wise, will so carry as to get their Childrens
love; for as they depend upon you now, so you may when they are grown up stand
in need of them; though now they are but little ones, yet remember they may
come to be Men and Women, and be great supports and comforts to you when you
can do little for your selves, and it is not your bringing of them forth, not
their mere having a being from you that will endear you to them; in case there
be afterward an apparent defect in your love, you will find their memories are
tenacious. I heartily wish, this may never be your case, but there is too much
reason to fear it, and if it should come to pass, you will see cause to repent,
but alas! then it will be too late, the matter is past cure.

Fourthly, This partial and unequal affection of Parents may provoke against
them the Divine displeasure. Yea, and make them to feel the smarting effects
thereof. God may write his anger in such plain and leigible Characters that
they may run and read their sin in the punishment. As in another case, when God
saw that Jacob loved Rachel, but not Leah, or Rachel more than Leah, he opened
the Womb of Leah, and gave her Power to Concieve and bring forth, but shut up
Rachels* Womb and struck her with Barreness, 29. Genesis 31. and I will appeal
to you, have not some of you known Parents herein chargeable; the Father or
Mother have set their Hearts too much upon one Child, and their Affections have
run with a strong and violent stream in that Channel; and it has issued in
lamentation and woe, one of these two things have followed thereupon. Either,

First, God has taken away that Child from them. They hugged it to death, as
the Ape does her young ones. Jonah was exceeding glad because of the gou^d that
shadowed his head, and in some measure helped and relieved him against the
vehement scorching heat of the Sun; here joyced with great joy, he was
overjoyed, and what followed? God prepared a Worm, when the Morning rose the
next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered. 4. Jonah 6, 7. He joyed too
much, and his enjoyment was short; over-loving a Child is over laying it. It is
as killing it with kindness. Or

Secondly, If that Child has been continued to them it has been in wrath.
They have the life of it, but they want the comfort of it; for it has proved
naught and vicious, and so been a Thorn in their side, an Heart-break to them.
They had better while it was Young have followed it to the Grave, than see it
now notoriously wicked, an Enemy to God and all goodness, disobedient to them,
and galloping to Hell with full speed, as if it thought it could not get
thither soon enough.

Therefore upon all these accounts the advice which I give unto Parents is
this; observe the spirits and carriages of your Children, and also of your
Servants, which of them do most fear God, and respect you; which of them are
most tractable and diligent, and let them have most love and respect who do
deserve it best; bestow your greatest cost upon that Soil which makes the best
returns, by this means they will have no just cause of quarreling you. By this
you will prevent envy, discontent and breaches among them; and also promote
Piety and Goodness in your Families, by stirring up in them all an excellent,
sweet and Friendly Emulation. So that there shall be a striving together
without wrath and bitterness, how they may excel in Godliness and Virtue, and
in all those things which you require of them, and which will render them
acceptable and pleasant unto you; this will sweeten and commend obedience to
them, it will increase and add to their endeavors, it will be as a Golden Spur
to quicken their pace in the way that they should go.

Now for a Coronis or conclusion of this my Discourse, upon this great, and
(specially at this day) necessary Subject of Family Duties, I shall add some
Miscellany Counsels, and make a kind of Medley, inviting whoever will to come
and take, and apply those of them to themselves, which they shall judge most
proper and pertinent to their case; and the God of Heaven bless them to them.

First, Look diligently, lest any fail or fall short of the grace of God, 12
Hebrews 15. You see there it is the Apostle's Advice, it will be your wisdom to
take and follow it; see that the Spirit of Christ dwell in you, else you are
none of his; and that you have been made partakers of his renewing sanctifying
Influences: without the Spirit of God you will never be fit for the Work of
God: Without Christ's breathing upon his Apostles, and their receiving from him
the Holy Ghost, they could never have done the work of an Apostle; so without
Christ's breathing upon you, and your receiving his Spirit, you will never
rightly perform the work of a Christian.; where there is not the Spirit of
Grace, there is not the Spirit of Supplication.

Nor will a person void of the Spirit and Grace be welcome to God, nor his
Service pleasing. Such an one indeed may peform the External Duties of
Reliligion, and set up the Worship of God in his Family, and it is no more than
what he owes to God, and to himself, and to his House, yet that which he does
will not be accepted; if the man be bad, what he does cannot be good, but is
quite spoiled by his doing it: The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
the Lord: Though the Sacrifice for the matter of it be rich and costly, yet
God's soul loathes and abhors, it because a wicked man brings it; The Lord had
respect unto Abel, and to his offering, 4 Genesis 4. first to the person, and then
to the thing.

Besides, unless you have the Spirit and Grace, you will not be constant in
Duty, a small matter shall take you off, and stop you in your course; the
question is, Will the hypocrite pray always, will he always call upon God? The
Answer is easy and ready; no, he will not, and the Reason is plain, because
there is not a spring to feed the stream, not an inward principle to keep on
the motion: God complained of old, That the people drew nigh unto him with
their lips, but their hearts were far from him: Mark, though there were
appearances before God, yet their hearts and God did never meet together in the
Duty, and therefore the day will most certainly come when there will be a
parting between such people and their duties, they never cordially and
thoroughly agreed with God himself, never came to a full closure with his terms,
never loved him for his holiness, nor rejoiced at the remembrance of it, and
therefore for something or other they will fall out with his Works and Ways.

Consider my dearly beloved, and again consider what the Scripture says. It is
a good thing that the Heart be established with Grace, Heb. 13.9. both with the
Doctrine of Grace, and with an internal Principle of Grace, for the one will
not do without the other, nothing short of Grace can strengthen, stablish and
settle the Heart, till Grace be infused into the Soul, and becomes a new nature
in it, till it comes to be commander in chief, the Heart of man will be
fluttering and unstable, off and on playing fast and loose with God, it will
look toward the holy Temple, and take some steps in the Way of God, and that
with seeming life and vigor, as much zeal for the Lord of Hosts as Iehu
pretended to have, but being only a preternatural heat, it cools again, and the
man jades and tires.

But when once Grace comes in truth and with Power it fixes the Soul, and as
when the Rulers of the People and Elders of Israel commanded the Apostles not
to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus. Peter and John answered them
thus, we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, Acts 4.20.
so when there is an holy frame wrought in any, they cannot but wait upon God,
converse and walk with God, they cannot but Read and Hear and Pray: they cannot
live a spiritual life without these spiritual breathings more than another life
without natural breathing, an holy fear will powerfully drive them to their
duty, a filial love will sweetly draw them to it, and Faith will mightily
encourage them in it, while they do really and firmly believe that God is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; they cannot but be a
seeking People, while they do believe that let them be steadfast and immovable,
and never so much abounding in the Work of the Lord, their labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord, they cannot but be an industrious and diligent People: and
while they do believe that in the keeping of Gods Commandments there is great
reward, besides all that which shall be hereafter, they will delight themselves
greatly in them, and it will be their meat and drink to do them, and yet more
when besides this Faith in God, they themselves have tasted that God is
gracious, and had experience of that advantage which comes in by religious
duties. I Love the Lord, said David, because he has heard my Voice. He has
experience of Gods goodness and a love to him, because he has inclined his ear
unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live, Psalm. 116.1, 2. His
mercy to me has drawn out my love to him, and my love shall influence my
obedience. I love him, and I will cleave to him and follow after him.

Secondly, While you are young covet after those gifts which may in some good
measure accomplish you for the filling up of your duties and places, and the
performance of every duty. It is an excellent thing for Christians to be well
furnished, and youth is a golden season for that purpose, as for those, who are
not studious while they are in the morning of their age, there is too much
ground of fear, that they will continue Fools to their latter end.

It is indeed too apparent, that some, yea, too many who have good natural
parts, and attained to some Knowledge and Learning, are thereupon wretchedly
self-conceited, and puffed up, knowing neither themselves, nor any body else;
their pride testifies against them to their very faces, and this is their
folly, and their shame; they have no reason to swell, for they are empty, and
the opinion they have taken up of themselves, is far above their abilities;
when a Wise Man comes to fathom them, he finds they are very shallow, and their
real intrinsic worth does fall extremely below that price, which they set upon
themselves.

On the other side, there are many that pretend to nothing, and indeed there is
nothing which they may pretend to, being altogether ignorant, weak, and poor,
their upper room is wholly destitute and unfurnished, they are not able to
discourse of God, and the things of God; they cannot pray, but want both matter
and words, whereas they should be rich, and increased in goods, they are blind
and wretched, and poor, and miserable; and whereas they should be thoroughly
furnished for every good work, they are furnished for none at all: And from
whence does this proceed, but from their own gross neglect? they have not
meditated as they should, nor read the Scriptures, nor heard Sermons as they
should; they did not labor to stock and store themselves while they are young,
and so they come to be poor and beggarly when they are old; they squandred away
their Golden Age, and now they are come to their Silver hairs, their heads and
hearts are little worth.

I do therefore now direct my Discourse to you young ones of both Sexes, and
would have you better to befriend your selves, and as you do now learn your
Trades, and your Books, and to manage Household business, and labor to get
betimes a good insight into your several Callings, and so to understand them,
as that you may be able afterward to set them up, and carry them on with
Credit, and to advantage; go away and do the like as to Religion, and the
things of God. Begin betimes to mind those things which do most deserve your
minding, now acquaint your selves with God, look into your own hearts, and
States, and study them well, get the knowledge of your Sins and Wants, when you
read or hear, or are in company with good Men, see that it turn to account, and
you get something by it, make something your own; be continually laying up,
though it be but by little at at a time, yet it may come to something. The
Evangelical Prophet has this expression, Isa. 42.23. Who among you will give
ear to this, who will hearken and hear for the time to come? Truly that is
excellent Husbandry, very good for Men to be before hand; will you study this
really? it is your best way, it is your interest. I would advise you to
nothing, but what does one way or another make for your own interest; this does
so; to read for the time to come, and to hear for the time to come; and to this
end consider what you do in other cases: you will labor to get Money and Land
for the time to come; and some of you to stock your selves with Clothes and
Linen for the time to come: and give me if you can, a Reason why you should
not be as desirous to get Knowledge, and Gifts, and Grace for the time to come?
are not these things as good as the other? are they not better? O! do it then,
I beseech you do it: be not Wise for your Bodies, and Fools for your Souls;
Wise for time, and Fools for Eternity. See that you do things now in your
single capacity, while you have the greatest leisure, and briskness of Parts;
that so when you come to be Married, and have Families to order and govern, you
may be Workmen that need not be ashamed, and able to do all your Work and Duty:
And have a treasury out of which you may bring forth good things new and old,
for the enriching of others; whom it should be your desire, and will be your
comfort to see thriving under you. A Christian rich in gifts and grace, is most
like to do good.

Thirdly, Study well how things stand with your selves and with them that are
yours. Though I might also add with the Nation and Church of God, which are the
Body of which you are Members, the Ship, in which you have so great a venture;
and since you have a concernment in them, you ought to be daily and earnest
supplicants for them. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her cunning, if I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy. 137. Psalm 5, 6. But that
which I advise you at present is a care within doors; see how matters stand
with your Heart and with your House. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy
stocks, and look well to thy herds. 27. Proverbs 23. And if such diligence
should be used, such knowledge to be got of Flocks, and Herds, then Men should
study and labor to understand their own state, and the state of their yoke
fellows, and Children, and Servants, be strict observers of them, and frequent
in your inquiries concerning them, and all that are under your charge, and see
how matters have been with you, and them, and how they are, what are the
providence of the day, and the dispensations of God toward you, and them.

This will supply you with matter of Prayer, yea, probably with variety of
matter, and he that has good store of matter, is most like to find good store
of words to express it. Though a full Vessel may for a time want vent, yet when
a little is given, it runs apace at the tap. This you may gather from those
passages of Elihu, Job 23.18, 19.20. I am full of matter, the Spirit within me
constrains me; behold my Belly is as Wine which has not vent, it is ready to
burst like new Bottles; and what now? there was no need of any squeezing him to
get a drop out; no need of pouring some water in, in order to the pumping more
out; no, he was resolved to ease himself. I will speak that I may be refreshed,
I will open my Lips, and answer. The informing and rectifying of others, the
correcting of their errors and mistakes, was an ease, delight and refreshing
to Elihu himself.

Yea, and as this is the way to supply you with matter for Prayer, so to
furnish you with suitable affections also; without which, Praying is no better
than trifling, a losing of time, and a mocking of God. When your hearts are
dead and dull, this considering of things is the way to excite and quicken them
in the Duty, Psalm. 39.4. My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the
fire burned, than spoke I with my Tongue. I shall give you two or three
instances; when you consider your own personal sins, or those which have been
committed by any of your Family, it will help you in Confession, which is a
special part of Prayer, and a giving Glory to God; and very much conduce to the
humbling, softning and melting of your Hearts, and then you will appear before
the Throne of Grace as becomes you, and cannot carry with you a more acceptable
and welcome present. Psalm. 51.17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. When you ponder upon
your own and your Families wants, necessities, burdens and afflictions, it will
draw forth desires and longings; hungrings and thristings, and God fills the
hungry with good things, it will raise an Holy fervor and heat, and as in
Manoahs, so in the flame of thy Sacrifices the Father of Mercies, the Angel of
the Covenant may do wonderfully. And when you are considering of the mercy and
goodness to you, and commended by such and such circumstances, it may tune both
Heart and Tongue to a Song of praise; and not only afford you just matter of
thankfulness, but also raise up your Souls to a God-blessing, God-admiring, and
God-exalting frame, and while you are much in Offering praise; you may
comfortably hope, and expect that God will more and more show you his
Salvation, and compass you about with his favor as a Shield, and so sweeten
your lives to you with farther instances of his care, and evidences of his
Love, as shall further and raise your after comfort and joy.

Many are spoiled, ruined, and for ever lost through want of consideration.
They do not repent because they do not consider, they do not reform nor amend
their ways and their doings, because they do not consider; so in the present
case, many cannot pray, because they do not consider. The most thinking Men
are, and not without good Reason, looked upon as the wisest Men. So the most
thinking Christian is the best Christian, most fit for the great work of
Prayer, and most like to prosper in that or in any thing else, unto which he
shall turn his hand. Only do not rest here, nor take up with your own Thoughts
and Studies as if they would be sufficient, but let your Eyes ever be to the
Everlasting Hills, from which comes your help, and humbly beg of God the
gracious assistance and influence of his blessed Spirit, who is (as you have
heard) a Spirit of Grace and Supplication; and whose work it is to help the
infirmities of his poor People, without he fill your Sails you will lie
Wind-bound, but if he be in you as he was in Elihu, he will both constrain and
enable you; and think with your selves how acceptable you must needs be to God,
and how powerful, yea, prevalent your Prayers with him, if you be some of those
blessed ones, who have the Spirit of God making intercession in them, and Jesus
Christ the Son of God, at his Fathers right hand in Heaven making intercession
for them.

Fourthly, While you are in the conscientious performance of Family duties;
curiously take notice and observe what comes of all. A wise Man would do
nothing in vain, no more would a wise and serious Christian. I run, said Paul,
Corinth. 1.10. Not as uncertainly, so fight I not as one that beats the Air.
He did run as one that hoped to get the price, and he did fight not merely to
exercise himself, or to show his Strength and Valor, but with a design and in
hope to obtain the Victory. Thus it should be with you and all the Children of
God, with reference to duty: you have been Praying, but what answer is there,
what return? The Dove has been sent out is he returned with an Olive Branch.
You have let down your bucket into the Well of Salvation, have you drawn Water
with joy? inquire what you your selves are the better for it? and whether your
Families are the better; do you see less vanity in your young Ones, and more
solidity and seriousness than there was before? What amendment is there, and
Reformation of things amiss? What Conquests and Victories over Passions? What
Patience and contetnment under Crosses, Losses, Afflictions, Provocations? What
more Reverence and Humility in Duties of Worship. More taking up of the Bible
and other good Books to Read? What more attentiveness to wholesome Instructions,
and Counsels? What more dutifulness and respect to you in reward? What token of
Love from above, what increase of goodness below? It is not good after vows to
make enquiry, but to do it after Prayer is very good.

It has been the practice of Holy Men that are recorded in the Word; when
David resolved in the morning to direct his Prayer unto God; he did at the same
resolve to look up: Psalm 5.3. He looked to see what would, become of his
Prayer, and what God would send in to him after it. When the Prophet Elijah had
been Praying for Rain; He sent his Servant to look toward the Sea seven times,
and left not till he saw a little Cloud; Kings 1.18.44. and that was to him a
token of his speeding. And so again when Habakuk had been mightily wrestling
with God in Prayer for Israel, and against the Caldeans, that bitter and hasty
Nation, which should march thorough the breadth of the Land, and gather
Captives as the Sand. He said in Habukuk 2.2. I will stand upon my watch, and
set me upon my Tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me. He that
Prays much expects much and where there is an hopeful expectation there will be
a curious Observation; if any of you do not look after your Prayers when you
have put them to God, it is a sign you did not mind them while you made them.

And as I advise you to do thus after Praying, so do the same after your
Reading and repeating, and instructing and counselling your Families; the great
God does thus, when he had been at much cost and charge upon his Vineyard. He
looked it should bring forth Grapes, and what Grapes it did bring forth? Isaiah
5. our Lord Jesus does so too. Cant. 6.11. I went down into the garden of nuts,
to seek fruits of the valley, and to see whether the vine flourished and the
pomegranates budded. And when the laborious Countryman has Sown his Seed, and
committed it to the Earth, he freequently goes into the Field to see how it
comes up, and what crop he is like to have. So when the Merchant has sent his
Commodities to Sea* he longs to hear of their safe arrival at the intended
Haven, and then waits for a rich return: and what shall your Prayers and pains
be neglected and forgotten as things merely thrown away? I grant, they are not
worthy God's regarding; but are they not worthy your own? Therefore, I say,
when you have been taking pains in your Families, and scattering holy truths
and counsels there which are as so much precious Seed; take notice, what place
it has in them, and what power upon them; whether it passes away as a tale
that is told, or roots and abides, and what good comes of it, what fruit there
is like to be.

And though you meet with no success as yet, be not weary of well doing; but go
on, duty is yours, success is Gods, who gives it when, where, and as he
pleases: follow one counsel with another, one instruction with another, one
reproof with another, and one prayer with another; do not sin in ceasing and
giving over. Something may come of it at the last. The Husbandman waits f^r
the precious fruit of the Earth, and has long patience. James 5.7. He (...)
not Sow and Reap in a day, the Seed lies a considerable time in the Furrows
buried under the clods; follow then the Wiseman's advise. In the morning Sow
thy Seed, and in the evening withold not thine hand, for thou know not
whether shall prosper this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.
Eccles 11.6.

Fifthly, When you set upon holy duties (particularly, that of prayer) see that
you be well composed, and enjoy a calmness of Soul; we are required to lift up
holy hands, as in faith, without doubting* so in love without wrath. I have
known and heard of some that would go chiding and scolding to their Prayer, in
a chafe and fret; but are they like to be welcome? Sure, it would be more
advisable to stay till they were cooler. God did in a most tremendous manner
destroy Nadab, and Abihu for Offering Incense with strange fire; what then must
thou expect, who Offerest thine with Hellfire?

The same Persons will fall into a scolding fit again as soon as the Prayer is
over; what think you, does this speak Grace in their Hearts? did they pray
their Hearts into Heaven? had they any communion with God, sure if they had,
they would have risen off their knees more like to him. When Moses had been in
the Mount with God Forty days, at his coming down his face shone; there was a
Light, Beauty, and Glory upon his Countenance he did not look, speak, nor act
like a fury; besides* how can such an (...) think, that others should get good
by his Prayer^ when he himself gets none, or that he should (...) any one of
this Family into Godliness, when he does no^ pray himself into quietness? Thou
O Man, being under such a distemper, would not go to thy King, how then
dare thou go to thy God? If thou be touchy and froward at, in, and after
thy Prayer, God is not like to be pleased: Psalm 18.26. With the froward He will
show himself froward.

Sixthly, Do not choose to live in those Families, where there is not the
Worship of God, nor Religious exercises, if thou art only a Lodger in such an
house, deal with the Master, and in a Friendly manner put him upon it, if he
will not be persuaded, thou have cleared thine own Soul, that Family is none of
thy charge, therefore that neglect shall not be charged upon thee, only be thou
careful to pray by thy self and with thy Family if thou have one, yea and with
his too if he either desires it or will permit it, but why do thou choose to
lodge there? could thou find no other place to pitch thy Tent in? If thou
can, why do not go to it? Suppose there be where thou now art more outward
conveniences, consider God is not there, and it cannot be good living where
God is not: for the pleasantness of the place Lot had a mind to dwell in Sodom,
but had not God been more merciful to him, he had been consumed in the Flames
of that vile City. It was a dismal time with the Egyptians ^^en in every one of
their Houses there was one dead, and must it not of neccessity be very
uncomfortable to thee, if alive unto God, to live in a Family where they are
all dead? How did David bemoan himself while in the House of Saul, though a
Family unto which he was related, yet because wicked he reckoned it his
unhappiness to be there? Psalm 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I
dwell in the Tents of Kedar.

Seventhly, Take none into your Family but those who will keep you company
while walking with God. Carnal respect sway with many, after which much
mischief follows and the repentance of an whole Life. Accept not of him for thy
Husband who cannot or will not live with thee as a man of Knowledge, a Child of
God. How shall He help thee on in thy journey to Heaven, who will not himself
walk in the way that leads thither. Neither, do thou, O man if fearing God,
take her for thy Wife, who will not draw with thee in the Yoke of Christ, but
rather despise thee in her Heart, or mock and flout at thee when serving and
honoring of the Lord. Some indeed, good natured men do take such in hope of
gaining them afterward, but for certain they run a desperate venture, let the
Portion be never so great, thou had better be without it, than fasten a Clog
to thy Heel, or take a Viper into thy Bosom: let Birds of a Feather get
together, what have Birds of Paradise to do with Vultures and Owls? Favor is
deceitful and beauty is vain, but a Woman that fears the Lord shall be praised
and should be chosen. The like for Servants their skill, parts, strength and
fitness are to be looked to, but Godliness is not to be overlooked. A wicked
Servant may be a curse, a moth to the house, whereas a gracious one will be a
blessing, a treasure.

Lastly, You that are Servants in Prayerless Families, supply that defect if
you may have leave, only do it humbly, and double your respects to your
Governors, if leave for that be denied, be more in secret Communion with your
God, though they keep a bad House keep you a good Chamber, and if thou may
honestly remove, do it, the sooner the better. Let not mere secular advantages
keep thee there. It is better being out of the warm Sun than out of Gods
blessing.

And you that are fixed, as a Wife, Child, an Apprentice, count the want of
Family-duty as your Affliction, and groan under it as such, and in your private
addresses beg down, if possible, Mercy and Grace upon them. Pray heartily for
them who will neither pray for you nor for themselves, the godly Wife for the
ungodly Husband, the gracious Child for the profane Parent, and the Religious
Servant for the Wicked Master or Mistress, yea, wrestle mightily in Prayer for
them, and with Jacob weep as well as make supplication, and be sure to live up
to the Laws of the Relations you stand in, filling up your days with the duties
of your places, that though they will not practice Godliness, they may see the
power of it in its influences upon you. If the Wife be peaceable and quiet,
loyal and loving, respecting and reverencing her Husband, the Children very
dutiful and obedient, the servants submissive, diligent and faithful, every one
walking in the fear of God, giving no cause of quarrelling with you, or
blaspheming Religion for your sakes. In a word, let your whole conversation be
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

You see I have spent a great deal of time and taken no small pains in
studying, preaching, and writing out all this discourse. Oh! that it may not be
in vain, but all the better that have heard or shall read it; to that end the
good Lord accompany it with his Spirit and blessing* bring you to this work,
keep you at it, and help you so to manage your selves and families, that after
a Life of Prayer on Earth, you may be taken up to a Life of Praise in Heaven
where all your Wants shall be supplied, all your Prayers answered, and all your
hopes accomplished, then you will see the Word was your best rule, the
Ministers of Christ your real Friends, and Religion your grand Interest, when
fury shall be poured out upon them that know not God, and Hell shall receive
the Families that call not upon his Name, where there shall be no end of their
torment and pain, nor of their roaring, cursing, and blaspheming, of that holy,
and righteous, but terrible God, whom they would not be persuaded to love, seek
and serve.

(...).

A POSTCRIPT.
HAVING said so much as I have done in this Book to the graver sort of Persons,
your Parents, and Governors, dear young ones, and that not only for their
sakes, but yours also. I have judged it fit to accompany that advice and
counsel to them, with a few words to you, because you likewise are very nearly
and greatly concerned, and all means possible are to be made use of for the
preventing your present miscarriage, and eternal ruin.

You are now in the Morning of your Age, and prime of your strength, you have
set forth and entered upon that Journey which will certainly bring you to your
last home, where you must take up your everlasting abode, from whence there can
be no remove, and that will be either Heaven, or Hell, the Glorious Mansions
above, or the Bottomless Pit below; where it is absolutely necessary for you to
take heed to your ways, and ponder all your goings, to set out right at first,
and then to go straight on, without turning either to the right hand, or to the
left; otherwise you will be lost, for if the way be not good, the end cannot be
peace; as for such as turn aside unto their cro^ked Paths, the Lord shall lead
them forth with the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5.

It is too evident, that multitudes of young ones, through corrupt inclination,
and bad conduct, have gone out of the way of life betimes, and could never find
it afterward. Having made an early choice of Sin, they grew hardened in it, and
there being a judicial Tradition of them, to the power thereof, they went on to
commit it with greediness, living and dying its Votaries and Vassals; and is it
not sad to consider? may it not well be matter of bitter lamentation, that such
Excellent Noble Creatures should be spoiled, such precious immortal Souls
should be irrecoverably lost, that such sweet and lovely Blossoms should be
utterly blasted; that they who once were the hope of their Parents, and might
have been the Ornaments and Blessings of their Country, should prove burdens
and curses to them both. God forbid that any of you should be so too, for we
have too many such already.

Therefore I pray God that you may, and desire that you would be serious
betimes; get alone, sit down and consider what you are, where you are, whether
you are going? what is for your interest, and what against it? labor to know,
and knowing mind those things which belong unto your peace* youth will not
always last, nor the pleasures of it, which you do now count so very sweet and
delicious, and run such desperate ventures for the enjoyment of. A Sickness may
quickly be sent of God, and cover your faces with a dismal paleness, pick the
Marrow out of your Bones, suck all the Milk out of your Breasts, and convert
all your strength into weakness, faintness, and tremblings; your smiles may be
turned into frowns, your mirth into mourning, your laughter into heaviness, and
your songs into sighs, groans, and shrieks. Your own Consciences may arm
against you as your enemy, and God may so appear, as to be your terror, and
you may be then made to possess the iniquities of your youth, when all the
honey is spent, and nothing but the sting left, the pleasure is over, and only
the guilt remains, whereby you are bound over to the suffering of the judgment
written. If you be not wise in this condition, you may live and die, and then
you will see cause to wish you had never been born. O! be you, I beseech you,
be ye your own friends, provide for your own peace and welfare, and instead of
working out your Damnation with joy, jollity, and self-pleasing, choose to work
out your Salvation with fear and trembling, since all the pleasures of Sin are
but for a season; do you seek out for, and make sure of those which are at Gods
right hand for evermore; and since this life will be but short, when drawn out
to its greatest length, do you lay hold upon that which is quite out of the
reach of death, that life which came from God, and will be perfected in him.

And know, how great a number soever the Prodigals and Profligate Youths of the
present Age do amount to; yet if you will be serious, and truly religious, you
will not be alone, there have been many choice and excellent Persons that went
before you; the Names of some, together with their Character, you meet with in
the Sacred Records, an Isaac who loved Meditation, a Jacob that was set for the
blessing, and by a Vow bound himself to have and own the Lord for his God. And
Abijah, the Son of Jeroboam, in whom there was found some good thing toward the
Lord God of Israel. An Obadiah, that feared the Lord from his youth, a Josiah,
whose heart was tender, so that he humbled himself, and wept before the Lord; a
young John that was the Beloved Disciple of our Lord Jesus, and lay in his
Bosom, and a Timothy, who knew the Scriptures of a Child: And this Age, as vile
as it is, is not altogether barren, but some such are to be found among us,
though too few, the Lord knows, too too few, if compared with the rest of the
World; do you, dear hearts, add to the number, be you Trees of Righteousness,
Plants of Renown.

Two things I do earnestly desire for you, viz. that you may be holy now, and
happy for ever; that you may spend your time as you ought, and then have a
blessed Eternity; live to purpose, and die in peace, Husband and lay out this
life wisely, and make sure of a better. I wish you the good things of this
World, full out so far, and so much as will be good for you, but withal, better
things too; for really, such is my esteem of you, that however the Sons of the
Earth rate them, I look not upon them as good enough to make up a Portion for
you, they are too little, and low and fading, they perish in the using; may
Jehovah, whose is the Earth and fullness thereof, bestow upon you such a part as
will make you serviceable to him, and life comfortable to you, and while you
have it, so use and improve it, that when it shall fail you, you may not miss
of the delights and glories of Eternity.

To this end, I beseech you begin betimes, do not imbezzle and squander gway
your choicest Seasons, your golden hours, lay not out the very best you have
upon the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, thinking to reserve for God the dregs
and refuse; Oh! how sweet is early Religion! how beautiful a green head found
in the way of Righteousness! how pleasant to see tender Plants bringing forth
Fruit unto God? Are you descended of good Parents, do not degenerate, let the
Faith that was in them be in you also; like precious Faith are your Lines cast
in Religious Families, walk worthy of the mercy, and keep peace with them in
the way of God. It is your unhappiness to be in wicked Families, do not learn
their ways, partake not with them in their Sins, be not tainted by them, nor
worse for them, remembering there were Saints in Nero's House; and that it is
great indeed, truly noble to be good in the midst of bad examples, of many
discouragements, and of great opposition; such I would fain have you to be, and
the more such the better. That you may be such, beg of God by Prayer, and
consider what I can but hint to you.

Study well your own case, the vileness of your hearts, and the miserableness
of your State by Nature, whatever you have to commend you unto Men; there is
more than enough to render you odious and abominable unto God. Abhor therefore
your selves, bewail your condition, and get out of it as fast as you can, which
you can no other way do, but by getting into Christ, who is the only City of
Refuge, unto which Sinners may flee for safety, the Rock of Salvation in which
they may hide, and upon it build; who died that he might redeem from Sin and
Wrath, and lives to receive and embrace all those that come unto him; go then
to him, and beg of him, that you may be washed with his blood, and sanctified
by his Spirit, that he would please to be a Principle of Spiritual Life in you,
and the Author of Eternal Salvation to you. Be thankful for restraints, that
you are not so bad as others; but rest not in them, nor in any external
performances, or the most lovely form of Godliness, but look after a saving
change, that there be in you the root of the matter, an heart sincerely set
against sin, and for God. Avoid all loose bad Company, even as you would the
Devil, for his Children they are, and the works of the Father they will do, and
his designs they will be carrying on in all places where they are. Can a Man
touch Pitch, and not be defiled therewith? or familiarly converse with with
wicked Men, or lewd vain Women, and not be in danger of learning their manner?
walk with wise Men, so you may learn wisdom, delight in them that fear the
Lord, and associate with those here, with whom you would choose to be in the
other World. Be not strangers to the necessary and excellent duty of Prayer,
but delight to make it your business every day; keep not away from
Family Duties, but bless God for them, and be serious and fervent in them, yet
think not your selves by them discharged from attendance upon God, and seeking
his face in your private retirements; honor your Parents, and other
Governors, and study to please them well in all things in the Lord. Open your
ear to Doctrine, and be ready to learn and practice all that is good. Hear the
instruction of your Father, and forsake not the Law of your Mother, let them
not depart from your eyes, but keep them in the midst of your heart, for they
are life unto them that find them, and health unto all their Flesh. In your
behavior be sober, modest, and chaste, humble and loving to all you have to do
with, faithful to your trust, and diligent in your business, mind your Masters
interest as much as if it were your own, God will bless you the better for it:
when you are removed from all Spectators, so that no body on earth sees you,
remember there is one above that does, and let that awe and preserve you from
sin, for he is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. Love all virtue and
goodness, hate all vice, all filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit; govern your
selves well, keep your hearts with all diligence, make a Covenant with your
eyes, set a watch before the door of your lips, give honor to Superiors, be
respective to your equals, courteous to your inferiors, civil and obliging to
all; morose and imperious, froward and quarrelsom with none; wise and prudent
in looking to your Concerns, and managing all your Affairs; consider every
motion that is made to you, before you embrace and close with it; ponder your
actions before you do them, that you may not make more work for Repentance than
you need, and weigh your words before you speak them. Moses suffered greatly
for speaking unadvisedly with his lips; keep your selves from Sin, as that
which tends to your destruction, and avoid vanity and lightness, as that which
will issue in your disparagement.

Sweet youth, let me persuade and prevail with you to remember your Creator in
the days of your youth; own him as your great Lord, from whom you had your
being, upon whom you have your dependence, and unto whom you must be
accountable for your time and talents; and all that you have done in the Body:
make God your choice, this is your choosing time, oh! choose well, choose God for
your sweetest Companion, walk with him as Noah did, and Enoch, and all the
Saints in their several Generations. When you awake be still with him, be
continually with him, let your fellowship be with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ. Eye God as the most perfect pattern, and study imitation, be ye
followers of him as dear Children, holy as he is holy, and live to God as your
noblest end, do all to his glory, if you make his glory your end, he will make
use of your Salvation as a means thereto, so that both means and end shall be
secured; count his fear your treasure; Hezekiah valued it more than his Royal
Exchequer, or his Peoples Purses; be you in it all the day, fear him now as a
Father, that you may not at last tremble before him as a Judge, nor be glad to
have Rocks and Mountains fall upon you, and hide you from his face, and wrath.
Oh! let Jesus Christ be precious to you, as he is to all them that believe,
sell all for that Pearl of Price; part with your sins, and your own
Righteousness, all confidence in the Flesh, yea, and whatsoever you have in the
World, rather than go without him; take him in all his Offices, learn of him as
your Prophet, trust in him as your Priest, and submit to him as your King;
follow him in all his ways, and be expressive of him in your own; show forth
the virtues, the humility, meekness, patience, holiness, heavenly mindedness of
him who has called you unto his Kingdom, and Glory.

Ask of God that Holy Spirit, which is a Spirit of Love and Power, and a sound
mind, that he may convince you of Sin, and Righteousness, and Judgment, lead
you into all truth, help your infirmities, strengthen you with all might in the
inner-Man, quicken and enlarge you, revive and comfort you, sealing you up to
the day of Redemption, and beware of resisting, quenching, or grieving him.

Acquaint your selves well with the Scriptures, read them every day, study
them, meditate in them, pray for the opening of your eyes, that you may see the
wondrous things of the Law, and the precious things of the Gospel; make them
your delight, and your Counselors, receiveing no Doctrine as true but what
they own, nor any practice as good, which they do not allow; eye them as the
rule of Faith, and Manners, hide them in your heads and hearts, that you may
not sin against God; know the truth, love, and live in it.

Get Consciences rightly informed, and consult them, and be ready to hear them,
do not cross them, but make it your daily exercise to keep them void of offense
both toward God, and toward Man; remembering that Conscience is Gods Deputy,
which curiously observes, and carefully records thoughts, words, and actions;
is more than a thousand Witnesses, will be a sweet Comforter, or dreadful
Tormentor.

In short, set God always before you, live by faith upon him, in obedience to
him, and communion with him, frequently and seriously think of Death, Judgment,
Heaven, and Hell. So carry, that you may not be a curse to the World, nor a
grief to your Friends while you live, nor a terror to your selves when you
come to die. My hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that God would does bless
you, and make you blessings.

FINIS.

