Christian Practice DESCRIBED, By WAY of ESSAY UPON THE Life of our Savior. By
STEPHEN SKYNNER, Rector of Buckland in Hertfordshire, and late Fellow of
Trinity-College in Cambridg.

IMPRIMATUR,

November. 17. 1692. C. Alston.



LONDON: Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar. MDCXCIII.

THE PREFACE.
IT is a good Observation, That nothing has made more ATHEISTS in the World,
than Superstition. For though Immorality has certainly too great a share in
this, yet may that be reckoned in one respect not altogether so dangerous to
Religion, as the other: Immorality being so contrary to Nature's Dictates, that
all who are not extremely blinded by Vicious Habits, are apt to see into the
Deformities of it; and so it serves but as a Foil to set off the Beauty of
Religion; like those Heresies which the Apostle says, must come, that they who
are approved may be made manifest. Whereas Superstition defaces Religion it
self, as much as in it lies; representing it in such horrid and ridiculous
shapes, that Standersby are rather apt to think it a mere Invention of men,
than that a Wise and Gracious God should be the Author of such Extravagancies.
And the Design of this Treatise therefore is, to remove those Prejudices which
Superstition has raised in men's minds, by setting a true Copy of Religion
before their eyes.

This I thought could no ways better be done, than by following Christ himself,
that great Master, who was the wisdom of his Father, and the express image of
his person; a main part of whose business it was, to restore Religion to its
Native Purity, by presenting the Original Pattern of it to us, in his own
Doctrine and Example: And to his Life therefore I have confined my self,
without referring to any other places almost of Scripture. Not but that I pay a
like Deference to every other part of God's Word; but I supposed, that whatever
I found in our Savior's Life or Doctrine, was sufficiently perfect of it self;
and I was unwilling to swell the Piece to a greater bulk than was proper in
this way of writing, by bringing in every Text that might seem pertinent to my
purpose: For which reason also it is not to be expected that many particular
Objections should be formally answered here; Tho besides the general ones which
I have spoke largely to, I think I have touched upon most of the others that
are any thing material in our Savior's Life. And I know of none in any other
part of Scripture, but what may easily enough be reconciled with the Doctrines
here delivered.

I expect not that some persons should much approve of what I have done; and I
think I have little reason to be concerned at it, considering what sort of
people I suppose them chiefly to be. Our Savior himself Preached Three years
to the World, we know, and his very Adversaries were forced to confess, That
never man spoke as he spoke; yet neither could the Powers of his Divine
Eloquence, nor his Miracles, make any considerable impressions upon the
Pharisees hearts. And it is little to be wondered at therefore, if human Labors
prove altogether fruitless upon such persons. But there are many others, I
presume, to whom this Work may be of good use, as well for driving out some
Melancholy Fears and Scruples, whereby well-meaning people are apt to be
discouraged in the Practice of Religion; as for silencing those unjust Cavils,
of its laying slavish and unmanly Impositions upon men, which profane persons
are wont to bring against it.

Nor do I apprehend the least danger of having this Piece censured by any wise
unprejudiced person, as giving Countenance to Irreligion, whatever weak or
brainsick people may think of it: For I know of nothing I have mentioned in
it, but what I have good ground for from our Savior's Doctrine and Example:
And I am willing to be reckoned among the Advocates for Profaneness, if any
thing that Christ said or did, tended that way. I confess I have endeavored
what I was able, to imitate the skilful Musician here, in not straining the
Duties of Religion to too high a pitch: For tho they make the greatest noise
when they are most raised, and so please the Vulgar best; yet the Sweetness and
Harmony that is proper to them, is lost by this to every judicious Ear. Tho
neither have I been less cautious of slackning the strings of Duty too much.
And I am confident men will find as little Encouragement here for looseness of
Manners, as for an over-rigid Severity.

If some think it necessary to aim at greater Perfection in many Duties than is
here required, (I mean that which such call Perfection) a God's Name let them
do it. Their Zeal may be useful in some respects, tho it wants not several
Inconveniences: And the time may come one day, when God will say to them, as
he does by the Prophet, Who required these things at thy bands? But if the
generality of the world be not able to run so fast in the Course of Religion as
these men do, there is no need sure of discouraging them from trying to walk:
Especially, when Christ has given us such grounds to belive, That a sober
diligence in keeping God's Commands, will carry a man as soon to Heaven, as the
most Furious Drivings of men of more Zeal than Understanding. Nor do I think
therefore, that such deserve less of Religion, who recommend it to men of Sense
in Rational ways, as a thing easy and natural to them, through the Assistance
of God's Grace, than others, who value themselves so much upon moving the
Affections of common people by undue heightning of things, and make as if there
were no Religion but what is next to Impossibilities.

I was loath to interrupt my Method by any long Digression, and therefore
reserved the Discourse concerning the Pharisees Hypocrisy, for an Appendix;
which I think I need make no Apology for adding, as being sufficiently
pertinent to my main Design. For by seeing here what it is our Savior so often
condemns the Pharisees for, we may the better understand our own Duty. And
indeed, our Savior had so much to do with the Pharisees in all his Discourses,
that a man can scarce apprehend the Force and Tendency of many of his Precepts,
without being rightly informed in the Nature and Qualities of that sort of
people, of which Hypocrisy made so great a part. However, if better Judgments
disapprove the Notion I have gone upon, I hope there is no harm done. It is no
Article of Faith, believe the Point which way you will. And if it be any ways
of dangerous Consequence to Religion, I am sure it is much more so in the
common Notion, than in the way that I have explained it.

The CONTENTS.
INtroductory Considerations touching our Savior's Life and Doctrine in
General, Sect. 1, 2, 3. Our Savior's Life and Doctrine in Ceremonial Respects:
And here, Sect. 4. Of Ceremonies more generally. Sect. 5. Of Reverence in
outward Worship. Sect. 6. Of the Sabbath or Lord's Day. Sect. 7. Of Fasting
Sect. 8. Of other acts of Mortification. Our Savior's Life and Doctrine in
respect of Piety toward God. And here, Sect. 9. Of Faith. Sect. 10, 11. Of the
Love of God. Sect. 12. Of Prayer. Sect. 13. Of appropriating due portions of
time to God's Service. Sect. 14. Of Repentance. Our Savior's Life and Doctrine
in respect of Duties relating to our selves: And here, Sect. 15. Of regulating
our Passions aright. Sect. 16. Of Temperance. Sect. 17. Of Chastity. Sect. 18,
19. Of moderating our Desires toward earthly things. Sect. 20. Of Pride or
Vainglory. Our Savior's Life and Doctrine in respect of Duties relating to
our Neighbor: And here, Sect. 21. Of these Duties in general. Sect. 22. Of
Faithfulness in Dealing. Sect. 23, 24. Of Mercy or Forgiveness of Injuries and
Debts. Sect. 25. Of Charity. Sect. 26. Of not being angry without just cause.
Sect. 27. Of not judging. An Objection answered concerning the Primitive
Christians Practice, Sect. 28, 29, 30, 31. Sect. 32. Another Objection
answered. Sect. 33. A Third Objection answered. Sect. 34. The Conclusion. An
Appendix concerning the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees.
Christian Practice Described by Way of ESSAY UPON THE LIFE of our SAVIOR.
WHen I consider the Life of our Savior, I am no less charmed with the
Sweetness and Simplicity of his Character, than the admirable Piety of it. And
it is no small Evidence to me of the Truth of what he declared himself to be,
to find so much of true Holiness in every thing he said or did, mingled with so
little Ostentation of Sanctity. Impostors are wont to raise Credit to
themselves by different Methods. These will take a Form of Godliness upon them,
which shall outdo the Original it self many times; but which, like most
Counterfeits, is found out by nothing more, than that it goes beyond Nature; it
has too much of Varnish and Affectedness in it to be sincere. The show of
Religion is much more to these, than the Substance: And so it is not so much
those Duties that are most Excellent in themselves, or that God requires most,
but those that are most Popular and Plausible in the Eye of the World, that
such chiefly mind. Justice and Charity are undoubtedly Virtues of high Esteem
in God's sight; and I know of none that our Savior presses more earnestly. But
what a poor noise do these make among the Vulgar, compared with long Prayers,
and Mortifications, and high Flights of Zeal, and Scrupulousness about
indifferent Matters? It is these last chiefly that denominate Men Precious in
common Peoples thoughts: And here therefore the Hypocrite places his sole
Diligence. No matter how gross his Failings may be in other points. The
splendour of these shall dazzle peoples Eyes so, as scarce to let them behold
their other Defects. And the very Name therefore of a Person thus qualified, we
find sufficient many times to sanctify the most Unrighteous action.

2. Our Savior had certainly great Reason to conform his Life and Doctrine to
this way of Practice, had it been Convenient in it self. For this was a sort of
Religion more especially in Vogue in his Time. The Pharisees, every one knows,
what Zealous Professors they were of it. Never was greater Perfection in
Holiness than these men might justly Boast of, if mortified Looks and Behavior
were the great things required of us by God. The Sun it self might seem
spotted, Mat. 11.19.
in these respects, compared with their Purity. Whence we find them taking
great Offense at our Savior for his Freedom in Converse, as savouring much of
Looseness and Unsanctifiedness, they thought. And no question therefore, as
this prejudiced them very much against harkening to what he taught, so had he
but humoured them a little in their Affected Preciseness, wherein they laid the
main stress of Religion, it would no less have recommended his Person and
Doctrines to them. By which means he would have gained the Common people also
of Course, these being wholly at the others Beck. The Pharisees were not
blinder Guides to these, than those were blind Followers and Admirers of the
Pharisees. But however advantageous it might have proved to Religion, at that
time, to humor the Pharisees in this, yet was not our Savior to be wrought
upon, even by that weightiest Consideration, to do it, so much as by his
Example. Our Savior in all likelihood considered here, that he was no Private
Person. His Life was to be a Pattern for all Ages to imitate. And it was by no
means fit therefore, for the sake of one Perverse Generation, to lay such an
unnecessary Burden upon the Consciences of the whole World, as his Example must
have proved, had he complied with the Pharisees in any of their Formal ways of
Sanctity.

3. And we find nothing of this therefore in our Savior's Life; nothing of the
Sourness of a Pharisaical Leaven in all his Character. His Conversation is
every where easy and natural; as far distant from a Puritanical Niceness, as
from the Severity of the Cloister. It is holy and blamless in every part; and
yet so accommodated to our Humane Estate, that we have no more reason to
complain of want of due Liberty in it, than of Perfection. And would some
Persons consider it aright, there can nothing more Effectual be imagined, for
removing their Prejudices against Religion. Those whom the starchtness of a
Pharisaical Carriage does justly Nauseate, and who perhaps find as little
Desire, as Ability in themselves, to imitate such a Behavior, would they but
look into their Savior's Example, would find every thing in it so contrary to
this, as must soon make Religion the subject, not of their Scorn, but their
Envy. For there is nothing of the Saint there, but what compleats the Man; and
what is fully as necessary to make us happy, as rational Creatures. A man may
be Religious, according to this, without intrenching upon the Offices of
Civility, or denying himself any reasonable Comfort; without doing any thing
beneath the Honor of a Wise or a Great Person. And whatever show of Holiness
some may make, by pretending to more than this, it is at best no other than to
go beyond the Rule. I speak not this however in relation to our Savior's
extraordinary Mission, but with respect only to the Common Duties of Religion.
As our Savior was a Prophet sent from God, and as he was the Great Mediator
besides, there are several Acts recorded of him, peculiar to those Offices,
which are quite out of the ordinary Road of Life: such was his Preaching in the
Deserts, and in the Highways, and his Miracles. The former of which it is no
less absurd to think our selves bound to imitate, now Christ has appointed a
Regular Ministry in his Church, than it is impossible to practice the latter of
them. But for the ordinary Duties of Piety and Virtue, our Savior's Example is
every where obligatory to us. And this is so excellent in it self, that every
Wise man would choose to follow it, though God had laid no Obligation upon him.
To consider it in the most remarkable Circumstances of it.

4. Look upon our Savior's Life in Ceremonial respects, and you will find
nothing of needless Scrupulousness or Superstition there. He is for preserving
Order and Decency in God's Church as much as any; though not for encouraging
every vain Custom or Rite, which some would impose under the Name of Religion.
When the Canons of the Church he lived under required it, he conforms without
Dispute in indifferent matters. The Feast of Tabernacles may well seem as
beggarly an Element, as any amongst those the Apostle calls such; and no
question it was designed by God, as a fitter Entertainment for the gross
Plebeian Humors of his Servants the Jews, than for his Son. Yet did not Christ
disdain to appear at that, Joh. 7.10.
no more than he did at the Feast of Dedication, John 10.22.
which was a Feast purely of Humane Institution. It was Argument enough to him
for observing that, that it was ordained by the Church of which he was a
Member; and he was not so squeamish here, as to question the Authority of his
Church in constituting so innocent a Right; though it might seem an
Encroachment upon God's Prerogative under the Jewish Theocracy, and though it
was adding weight still to that burden which the Jews before were ill able to
bear.

And what he thus practiced himself, he is very express in commanding his
Disciples to imitate him in. The Scribes and Pharisees, says he, Mat. 23.2, 3.
sit in Moses's seat; all therefore whatever they bid you observe, that observe
and do. There could nothing be said more full than this, for establishing the
Church's Rights in matters of Ceremony; that in every thing of this nature, not
plainly sinful, (for thus far the Command must of necessity be restrained, and
to restrain it further is to destroy the Force of it), our Savior's Will is,
The Governors of the Church ought to be obeyed. For sure the Scribes and
Pharisees at this time, were blind and corrupt enough to be excluded this
Privilege, if ever it were convenient the Governors of the Church should be so.
Not that our Savior warrants any Church by this, in constituting foolish or
burdensome Rites to no purpose; for Tyranny is hateful to God in all
Governments; and more especially to be sure in such, where the Souls of men are
concerned: And our Savior therefore often protests against the Pharifees
arbitrary Usurpations, in clogging God's Service with vain and needless
Ceremonies. But in regard Tyranny was ever reckoned better than no Government
at all, therefore does our Savior command his Disciples to be subject to the
Governors of the Church in all Indifferent matters, rather than Schism and
Disorder should happen in his Church, by people's obeying no farther than just
what they please. Though here he distinguishes betwixt the Public Sanctions of
the Church, ratified by just Authority, and the Opinions of private Doctors,
embraced only by particular Sects. Of which last sort we must reckon those
Traditions of the Elders, so frequently mentioned by Christ, to be, if we
suppose him consistent with himself (with Reverence be it spoken). For these he
neither observed himself, nor does he advise his Disciples to pay any regard to
them, as being wholly unobligatory in themselves, and for the most part very
vain and superstitious: Particularly that about washing of hands before meat; a
Custom abused to that height of Superstition among the Pharisees, that one of
their wise Doctors teaches us, To eat with unwashen hands is all one as to lie
with a Whore. This therefore, and the like Ceremonies, our Savior neglects to
comply with himself; and he scorns the Objection of the Pharisees, Mat. 15.2.
in urging the Tradition of the Elders against his Disciples, for following his
Example in it.

5. The greatest Act of Zeal in our Savior's Life, was spent upon whipping the
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. John 2.15.
Nor is it to be wondered at, to see his Indignation raised at this rate, upon
such an occasion; Natural Religion teaching us, That the Temples of God ought
not to be turned into Markets and Exchanges. If any except at the manner of our
Savior's reforming this Abuse, let them consider the liberty that Prophetic
Persons of old were warranted in by God among the Jews, as well as that which
the Zealots in our Savior's time were permitted ordinarily by the Magistrates
to take upon themselves. Let them consider likewise, that Christ's Commission
was above all others that God ever gave to men. He acted as a Son in God's
House, when Moses himself was but as a Servant. Though, not to examine farther
into his Authority to do this, who had all Power given him upon Earth, no
question but a Divine Spirit was at the bottom of this Act. And the design of
it is evidently no other, than to show, That God's Honor and the Interests of
Religion are not a little concerned in outward Reverence and Respect. For what
else could have put the meek and gentle Spirit of Christ into such a Ferment?
It is not to be thought this was done in favor of the Jewish Temple or
Ceremonies alone: For Christ repeated this Act twice, Mat. 21.12.
and the last time, the very Week of his Passion. But sure he would never have
been so extraordinary zealous in this matter, at such a time, were it only to
support the Credit of the Ceremonial Law a few days, which was now just
expiring with his Death. Some indeed, that reckon nothing too great or glorious
for themselves, count nothing mean enough for God. But our Savior was not of
this humor; he could behold the goodly stones of the Temple, Luke 21.5.
and the gifts wherewith it was adorned, without crying out with Judas, Why was
this waste made? And he could weep in prospect of the Ruins of so stately an
Edifice, Luke 19.41.
when others would have shouted for joy, that proud Babylon was falling. Nor
did Christ pay greater respect to God this way in his Temple made with hands,
than in the Temple of his own Body; for though the greatness of his Character
(being the Eternal Son of God) might justly have entitled him to greater
freedom with his Father; yet for our example, when he prayed, Luke 22.41.
he kneeled down, it is said: Certainly a most unanswerable Reproof to that
rude familiarity which many use with God in their Devotions. For what shall we
say here? Are we more the Sons of God than Christ, that we should think it
seemly for us to sit down before our Heavenly Father, when he knelt? Or are we
wiser than he, to think such outward Reverence of no regard in God's esteem,
when even in a Garden upon the bare ground, Christ made a Conscience of paying
it to him?

6. We find the Pharisees often at our Savior about the Sabbath. And some may
think it strange, that he who expressed so great Zeal for the Sanctuary of God,
should not show greater concern than he did, for the Honor of his Sabbaths.
But the case betwixt these was very different: For the Jews, who at this time
so profanely neglected the Temple, were no less superstitiously nice in keeping
the Sabbath; and tho a Whip were fittest to scourge their Profaneness, a Bridle
was most proper to restrain their Superstition. Wherefore we may observe him
holding the Reins in here upon every occasion: He is far from encouraging any
in a loose regard toward this day; for he considers it as a day dedicated to
God's Service; and we find him therefore Preaching continually upon it in the
Jewish Synagogues; Mark 6.2.
to show that one principal Duty of the Day is to attend the Public Worship of
God; and all the liberty he pleads directly for on this day, is only for works
of Necessity and Mercy. It is in respect of these alone he tells us, Mark 2.27,
28.
That the Sabbath was made for man, and that man is lord also of the Sabbath.
Nor does he give the least countenance for spending this Day upon Recreation or
Secular Business. As sure it is very hard, since God has given us six days in
the week for the benefit of our Bodies, if the seventh shall not be allowed by
us to his Glory, and the good of our Souls. Though neither is Christ for tying
men up upon this Day, to that strictness which was enjoined by Moses as a Clog
and Punishment to the Jews. He himself was a Jew, and as a Jew therefore no
question he observed this Day in all respects answerable to the intent of
Moses, though not to the Pharisees superstitious Glosses upon it: But the Curse
of the Law which he was made under, he desired not to bring upon any of us: And
lest his Example therefore should be brought into president, there is no
mention made of any Legal Observances, in resting from Culinary Affairs, or the
like, which he tied himself or his Disciples up to on this Day. Rather, the
whole drift of his Discourses about this Day, being more to take off from, than
advance any scrupulous Rest upon it, is a plain Argument of his Design to set
up that more Rational Sabbath, which the Primitive Christians afterward
observed upon the Lord's Day; when the Sabbath was reckoned, not so much a Day
of Rest, as a Day of Good Works. And instead of sitting still upon it, as the
Pharisees did, with frozen hearts, and sullen dejected looks, Christians
thought nothing so proper (next to God's Worship), as to express their Joy upon
it, in making comfortable Provisions for themselves, and for the Poor. We know
what hard words the Father gave such persons, who chose to Fast upon this Day.

7. Fasting, I think, may well be brought under the Head of Ceremonial Duties:
And this is certainly an excellent Ordinance in it self; there being no means
more proper for resisting the Devil's Assaults, by making us meek and poor in
spirit, fit for the Influences of God's Spirit to work upon. And our Savior
therefore is so far from discountenancing this, that he says there are some
Devils not to be cast out without it. Mat. 17.21.
And he not only prepared himself therefore by it, Mat. 4.2. Mark 6.16, 17.
in order to that grand Conflict he had with the Devil; but he recommends the
use of it to his Disciples, at the same time that he cautions them against the
Pharisees way of Fasting: Indeed he is against the Pharisees Fasts, not only as
they had an Hypocritical Air of Pride and Vainglory in them, but as they were
reckoned by them a Meritorious Act. For never were higher Asserters of the
Doctrine of Merit by Good Works, than among these Pharisees. Whence it was,
that to enhanse the value of this Duty before God, their Fasts were both
carried on with greater Strictness, and were much more frequent than other
peoples. Neither of which is much commended by Christ: As to the frequency of
their Fasts, our Savior used his Disciples so little to this, Mark 2.18.
as to make the Pharisees think they Fasted not at all. It may seem he was not
for making this Duty too common, but for using it only as occasion required.
When such Duties are practiced of course, they are apt to lose their virtue
soon, like Physic to which men's bodies are accustomed. It is the applying them
upon great and special occasions chiefly, that makes them have due Operation
upon men's minds. And though our Savior therefore tells us, That his Disciples
should practice this Duty oftener when he was gone; Mark 2.20.
this implies not, that it should always be so, but only whilst the days of
Mourning (as it were) for the Bridegroom's Departure, did in an extraordinary
manner require it: And much less does our Savior commend the Pharisees rigid
Observance of this Duty; pale looks, and drooping heads, are things perhaps
that man may admire people for, but God delights not in. Even in this most
Mortifying Act of Religion, Mat. 6.17.
Christ is for anointing the head, and washing the face; for behaving our
selves with modest expressions of Cheerfulness before the World.

8. This Principle of Merit which the Pharisees so espoused, put them not only
upon Fasting at this rate, but upon Whipping themselves also, and using the
like acts of Austerity, as good Authors report; which is the practice of the
Romanists at this day: And this was a mighty work of Supererogation among them.
But our Savior gives not the least Encouragement to this, either by his
Precept or Example. As Whipping is reckoned a part of Penance by the Romish
Church, we are not so unreasonable to expect to find our Savior exercising his
Body after this manner, for sins he never committed; tho as it was reckoned
awork of superabundant Merit, as well as of Satisfaction, by the Pharisees, it
may seem as proper for him, as any body else: But then certainly it is very
strange, among so many Penitents as came to him for cure of their Sins, that he
should never prescribe this Method of letting themselves blood, did he believe
it of any avail to that end. It Is true, Luke 18.13.
he gives a fair Character of the Publican's smiting upon his breast, when he
made Confession of his sins to God; But what then? That was an Act significant
of True Contrition, and was no less natural for persons in great Trouble of
Mind, than Whipping is foolish and unnatural. Nor is John the Baptist's course
of life, which the Papists insist so much upon, any just ground for this, or
the like Austerities: For (besides that there is nothing there of this Whipping
Practice), John the Baptist had an extraordinary Call from God to do what he
did: He was to come in the Spirit of Elias, as a Forerunner of Christ, and so
was to imitate that Prophet in a rough, hardy way of Life: And this, we may
suppose, to represent to us, as in an Emblem, the different Temper betwixt the
Law and Gospel: For John the Baptist was the last Prophet of the old Law, in
whom God would show us the Severity of those Precepts which he thought fit to
hold the Jews under; but which he is pleased now to hold his Church no longer
to, for the sake of his Son: Whose way of Life therefore was a perfect Reverse
to that of John the Baptist. And indeed, such Austerities as these, when men
take them upon themselves of their own heads, or when they pretend to impose
them upon others, are no other than such Observances as our Savior points at,
when he tells the Pharisees, Mat. 15.9.
That in vain they worshipped God, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of
men. The Pharisees pretended no ground for them in their Law, no more than the
Papist can well do in ours. And though in Charity therefore we condemn them not
for such extravagant Will Worship as this, yet we rather pity than commend
them. Such was our Savior's Life and Doctrine in respect of Ceremonies.

9. Consider our Savior's Life in respect of Piety toward God, and you will
find as little of Enthusiasm in it in that, as of Scrupulousness or
Superstition in the other respect. Faith is the great foundation of Piety. And
this is a Duty of an extraordinary nature in one respect, as the Gift of
Prophecy, and the power of working Miracles depend upon it. Though in this
respect our Savior's Faith was not Enthusiastic. For our Savior really
showed the just pretenses he made to an extraordinary Faith, by the mighty
works he did; whereas the Faith of Enthusiasts produces nothing above the power
of Nature. And neither was our Savior's Faith attended with those violent
Perturbations of mind and body, which Enthusiasts are ever possessed with in
their pretensions to Revelation and Prophecy. But as Faith is an ordinary Duty
of Religion, it is only a firm belief in, and reliance upon the Promises and
Declarations of God, whether with respect to Spiritual or Temporal concerns. As
to both which, there is nothing our Savior recommends, but what every wise and
sober man both may, and ought to subscribe to. As to Spiritual conceerns, the
great Article of our Faith is, to believe that God will reward such in another
life, who diligently seek him in this. And what is there in that more, than
what the most Barbarous Nations have ever consented in, and which there is
nothing more dishonorable to our Natures than to deny? If we are bound also to
believe, that the Gospel of Christ proposes the safest and best way of seeking
God, and so of obtaining a future Reward, I suppose no one that calls himself a
Christian will think much of having that added to his Creed. Nay, and
considering the excellency of that Testimony with which the Gospel is
confirmed, if Christians are also required to give their consents to some
Truths therein revealed, which are above the power of Humane reason to
comprehend; I think no man, in common Modesty, can object against this:
especially whilst he considers withal the vast disproportion betwixt God and
us, together with the weakness of Humane faculties in discerning the Nature
Cand auses even of the most common Accidents here below. There are many things
in Nature which we believe, though we see them not, and though they seem
somewhat contrary to reason; such is the Earths hanging upon nothing, in the
midst of the Air, which we have nothing but the power of an Almighty Architect
to fly to for the solution of; but sure it is hard to deny that Faith to
Supernatural, which we give to Natural things As to Temporal concerns, the sum
of our Faith is, That God governs the world with the greatest wisdom and
goodness, and so that we ought to rely upon his Providence in the use of lawful
means, without anxious fears or troubles. And this is no other than a natural
Principle, and such as is the great foundation of Happiness in this life. He
that believes this heartily, is at Peace with himself in every condition; and
the same Peace which he brings to himself by it, he suffers the rest of the
World to enjoy. Whilst some whining Hypocrites, that talk of nothing more than
Faith, and practice nothing less than what Faith directs, are a continual
Plague to themselves and all about them, by needless Complaints and Jealousies.
It is a noble Strain of Philosophy that our Savior expresses himself in, about
that undisturbed Content which every one ought to quiet his Soul with, in
consideration of God's Providence. Mat. 6.34.
Take no thought for the morrow, but let the morrow take thought for it self;
sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

10. I ove of God is the most genuine Effect of true Faith. And the Love of the
Eternal begotten Son toward his Father, we may well think was so great, as to
leave infinitely behind it every thing that is called by that Name. Yet do we
see little of those Transports of Passion in his Love, which Mystical people
talk so much of; and which make the Love of God a Duty no less difficult to be
understood than practiced. He tells us indeed in one place, John 10.30. John
14.11.
That he and the father were one; and in another, That the father was in him,
and he in the father. But such places relate to his Hypostatical Union with the
Divine Nature, which it is Blasphemy for any to pretend to besides himself. And
there is little ground therefore from hence, for those extravagant expressions
which contemplative Rhapsodists love to speak in, of being united by Love to
the Divine Essence, and being Transfused into God. When christ speaks of Love
as a Duty incumbent on us, we have no such Expressions as these. And to love
God then is no more, than to keep his Commandments out of a Principle of Duty
and Choice, John 14.21.
as we count him a Being highly worthy to be served by us before all things.
And there is no need of straining our faculties to such Romantic heights, as
the people I have been speaking of talk of, to do this. For though our Savior
tells us, that we must love the Lord our God with all our hearts, Mark 12.30.
and all our souls, and all our minds, and all our strength; What is this more,
than to express our Love toward him, in obeying his Commands with readiness
and sincerity? As we usually mean in common Speech, when we cry, we will do
such a thing with all our hearts, that we are disposed with willingness and
affection to do it. There are no Notions of Divine Love more sublime, than
those we meet with in Plato and his Heathen followers; from whom it is plain
our Mystical Divinity took its Rise. But such ought to have strong Heads, that
soar aloft, as they did. And if Vulgar Souls are bound to aim at such
Contemplative Perfection as these talk of, we shall want more Bedlams than
Churches. Nor can I think that to be a Perfection in Religion, which none but
Philosophers, and men that lead the lives of such (I mean Sedentary
Contemplative lives) are capable of arriving at. As if God had not the same
regard to a poor Laboring man, that studies diligently to serve him in a plain
well meaning way, as to the most Speculative person in the world. It is the
meek and humble Soul that Christ delights most in; and it were well therefore
if these high Notions did not puff men's minds up with too much Spiritual Pride,
to make them deserve the Character of such persons.

11. I never met any people in my life that were more unwilling to leave the
world, than those who make a Longing desire of enjoying God in Heaven to be a
necessary part of our Love toward him. You shall find these cling as close to
the earth as other people, when Death gives them warning to prepare themselves
for parting with it; they are as peevish as others, and inquisitive after
Remedies, and desirous to be flattered into good hopes of doing well again,
which are certainly no signs of any extraordinary Forwardness to go to their
long Homes. Nor can I see Ground of Condemning men of this, as long as we find
our Savior himself Sympathizing with Humane Nature in it. Were there any
necessity of such an instance to prove our Love toward God to be sincere, we
might justly have expected from Christ, a desire of leaving this world, and
being united to God upon any Terms. For what were the Sufferings he was to
endure, compared with the joy that was set before him? But our Savior desired
not to make himself an Example of such Heights of Love; which (tho visible in
some Prophets, and Divinely Inspired persons, from their intimate Converse with
God, as well as in some Saints and Martyrs immediately before their deaths, for
Confirmation of theirs and other peoples Faith; yet) in the ordinary
Dispensations of Grace are little less than impracticable. And therefore when
the Cup of his Passion was presented to him, Mat. 26.39.
he shrinks back from it, in a natural abhorrence; and he chooses rather to
receive the irrevocable Sentence with an act of bare Submission to God's Will,
(Father, not as I will, but as thou will) than any Rapturous Expressions of
Longing after God: The same which is observable in the whole History of his
Death. But if Christ behaved himself at this rate, whose Faith was so strong,
and consequently his Love of God so ardent, What more can be expected from us
weak Creatures? Indeed the glass we see through here, is so dark, as to
Heavenly Things, compared with that which presents Earthly Objects to us, that
if our Bodily Welfare affect us more than the Hopes of Future Happiness, it may
in a great measure be excused by the different Force of the Objects striking
upon our Faculties: And therefore it required all the Arguments and
Exhortations that the Wisdom of God (as it were) could invent, to raise our
Thoughts to a tolerable relish and apprehension of those glorious things
revealed in his Word. Wherefore, in short, though the Enjoyment of God in
Heaven be certainly the Great End of a Christian's hopes, and that which all
his actions ought in some measure to be directed toward; yet to propose this
to our selves with Passion and Eagerness of Desire, or so as utterly to despise
the Comforts of this World, may well be thought a little above the proportion
of the imperfect estate of a Christian in this life; being reserved by God as a
main part of that Happiness which we must expect in the Blessed Vision above.

12. Prayer is an excellent expression of Piety toward God: And there is
nothing recommends this Duty so effectually to him, as Fervor of Devotion in
it: But then our Savior shows us, that this Fervor consists not (as some
would have it thought) in wild Gestures, or loud and passionare Exclamations.
When he himself prayed in the Garden, he prayed earnestly, it is said; Luke
22.44.
and we may well think his heart was never fuller, than in that bitter Agony,
nor consequently his Affections more raised than at that time. And yet what is
the result of this, but that he fell meekly upon his knees three times, Mat.
26.39, 42, 44.
and uttered these few gentle words, Father, if it be thy will, let this cup
pass from me: And if we consider that Prayer of his which he prescribed to his
Disciples, both as a Pattern to Pray by, and a Form to be constantly used by
them, it may seem contrived on purpose to answer the Enthusiasts pretenses
about this Duty: For (not to insist upon its being a Form of Prayer) in the
first place it was such a Form as was very short, consisting of but Six
Petitions, and those comprehended in few Words: He was not for the way of some
people, who measure their Prayers more by the Hourglass than their Wants. He
exposes it as an Heathenish Custom to use vain Repetitions, Mat. 6.7.
and impertinent Length in Prayer. Besides this, it is calm and meek, suitable
to the Temper of its Author; no Heats of Passion in it, no vehement Outcries or
Exaggerations; nothing to raise those wild Spirits in men, which make 'em rave,
and foam, and toss about, as if they were possessed. Not that Length of Prayers
is blameworthy in it self, nor yet Vehemence of Action or Speech, which in a
sober sense is commendable in Prayer, upon some occasions; but to show, That
Fervor of Devotion is no ways inconsistent with cool blood, or fewness of
words; and that God is as often at least in the still small voice, as in the
earthquake or fire.

13. It is a great part of Piety to bestow due portions of time upon God's
Service: Mark 14.49.
And we find our Savior therefore often in the Temple and the Synagogues of
the Jews, worshipping God in Public, as well as frequently retiring with his
Disciples, and by himself, John 18.20. Mark 1.35.
to his private Devotions: Though all this while our Savior was no such
Euchite, as to think the greatest part of his Life ought to be spent in Prayer;
but he bestows considerable portions of his time upon his own Refreshment, John
2.1. Luke 22.39.
and upon the offices of Humanity and Friendship; besides, what must be
supposed to take up the main bulk of his Life, his Working (as it is thought)
till Thirty years of Age, at his Father's Trade: And neither therefore is he
for that way of practice which prevailed so much in after-Ages, of peoples
retiring from the world, and mewing themselves up in Cells and Cloisters, that
they might have nothing else to do, but to Meditate, and Worship God: The
Romanists look upon this as the greatest Perfection in Religion: And what was
begun therefore in Primitive Times out of Necessity, when men were forced to
fly into Deserts to avoid Persecution, these take upon themselves of Choice;
some few, according to the Original Pattern, but multitudes in a fond
Imitatiod, entering themselves into Monasteries too often as a cloak of
Idleness, to serve their Bellies and their Lusts, more than God. It is a
Remarkable Saying of an Ancient Father to such people; Thou separatest thy self
from the World, that no body may see thee; but whom do thou benefit by this?
Had thou been what thou art, think thou, if every one had done as thou
do? And our Savior plainly leads the way to the Father in this; he is not
for such Perfection in Religion as destroys one main end of it, which is to
make men helpful and beneficial to one another; but he divides the Law into Two
great Commandments, Mat. 22.38, 39.
the Love of God, and of our Neigh bour, which he makes alike necessary to be
observed, and so is not for having one of these to swallow up the Duties of the
other: Tho if one must necessarily be omitted at any time, Mat. 12.7.
he is even for preferring Works of Mercy and Goodness before Sacrifice. For
his own part, the great business of his Life was, To go about, Acts 10.38.
doing good; not to sit Musing continually by himself; by which he brought no
less Glory to God, than Benefit to Mankind. Nor does our Savior prescribe any
set Rules, what time must of necessity be employed upon Acts of Devotion, but
leaves this to every man's Conscience to proportion the time according to his
leisure and opportunities. To be sure, to begin and end the day with God, is
the least he requires from us, as being that which Natural Religion teaches to
be necessary: And yet, would some men make a Conscience of this, tho they work
six days in the week, according to God's gracious Allowance, I question not but
they serve God as acceptably, in profiting the world by their lawful Callings,
as the severest Recluse in bending his knees continually before God.

14. Repentance is a Duty so near akin to Piety, that I know no place more
proper to speak of it than this. This is a Duty of a very solemn and severe
nature, and such as habitual sinners must expect much trouble and contention
with themselves about, before they bring it to perfection: Tho certainly such
have little reason to complain of any hardships in this Duty, as having brought
them upon themselves by their own Fault; and they have much more ground to
admire God's Goodness in allowing any place at all to Repentance, than to
charge his Justice with Severity in making the Terms of our Reconciliation so
difficult, were they much more grievous to us, than really they are. For
indeed, as the case now stands, there is nothing in this Duty but what we our
selves should count reasonable, were it payable to any of us. To be heartily
sorry for a fault; Who is there that admits a gross Offender to Mercy without
this? Who likewise that reckons such a one worthy of new favor, without actual
signs, as well as promises of amendment? Though here I see no necessity for
those heights of Sorrow which some insist upon so much, as the only true marks
of sincerity in this Duty; and which, by unwary Applications, have run so many
into Melancholy, Madness, and Despair: I am sure there is very little ground
for it in our Savior's Discourses about Repentance: His design is rather to
mend, than to break peoples hearts by this Duty; whence we may observe, Luke
19.8.
Zacheus's Repentance is described by an act of Restitution alone; and St.
Matthew's by following Christ, Luke 5.28, 29.
and entertaining him at a Feast presently; and the Theif's upon the Cross,
Luke 23.41, 42.
by humble Confession of his Guilt, and Faith in the Merits of our Savior; and
not one word all the while of any excessive sorrow that our Savior prescribes,
in his Exhortations to these or any other persons. It Is true, the Prophets
often endeavor to awaken the Jews from their Spiritual Security, by calling
upon them to Howl, and Cry aloud, and Rent their hearts, with like terms of
rouzing Rhetoric, agreeable to the Genius of the Old Law, which was delivered
at first in Thunder and Tempest. But such who study to imitate the Prophets
Style, rather than Christ's, I think, scarce consider aright, What spirit they
are of: For sure our Savior had hardened sinners enough to deal with, to
provoke him to this Style, had it been suitable to his Temper: Though still it
must be allowed, there is much of the Hyperbole in those Expressions of the
Prophets, (no unusual Figure among them). And after all, they themselves
confess, That it is not so much the afflicting the soul, as turning from
wickedness, Isa. 58.5.
and doing that which is lawful and right, that God calls Repentance. Not that
Godly Sorrow is otherwise than commendable in every degree of it, as it is a
sure sign of Grace and an excellent means of Conversion; it being half way
toward Amendment of any Fault, to be thoroughly possessed with trouble and
grief for it: And happy therefore is he, whose heart being tender, and his Soul
touched with a deep sense of his Folly and Ingratitude in offending God, can
with David and St. Peter, melt into Tears presently at the remembrance of his
past crimes. But that which is laudable or useful, is not always necessary; and
I think there is as little reason to suppose it should be so in this, as in any
other case; for there are many Natural circumstances of Age, Sex, and
Constitution of body, that cause great difference in peoples Inclinations to
Sorrow; as, the weaker and more tender they are, the more easily they are,
generally, wrought upon by this Passion; Childhood and Old Age are more subject
to it than Manhood; Women more than Men; soft and gentle Natures, more than
rough and manlier dispositions: But sure Salvation does not depend upon such
Circumstances as these, which people can no ways help: And if some therefore,
who upon the most sensible afflictions are not able to shed a Tear, (as there
be many of this Temper), shall with Dry Eyes confess their sins before God,
this certainly shall never be reckoned as a Bar to their Acceptance with him.

This was our Savior's Life and Doctrine in respect of Piety toward God.

15. Look upon our Savior's Life in respect of Duties relating to our selves,
and it is altogether of a piece with what has hitherto been observed: His
Conduct here does more especially show us the free and generous Temper of his
Religion; that the Design of it is not to enslave, but to enoble the Spirits of
men. The regulating our passions aright, is one main Branch of these; and as to
this, our Savior was undoubtedly the greatest Master of his Passions, that
ever the world knew; for what others boasted so much of only in Words, he
practiced in Deed; nor were there any Trials therefore so severe, as to alter
the Evenness of his Mind. When a Cato and a Brutus, after all their pretenses
to Philosophy, fell into the utmost degrees of impatience at last, reviling
Providence as weak and unstable, for not Crowning them with Success answerable
to their Virtue; our Savior could behold his greatest Merits rewarded with the
foulest Ingratitude that the world's Malice could invent, and yet like a lamb
be led to the slaughter, and not open his mouth all the while; than which there
is certainly no truer evidence of Greatness of Soul, in such cases as this,
where to murmur is but to reproach Providence, or at best to exercise our
spleen to no purpose: Though neither does our Savior show himself an example
of such senseless unconcern under any trouble as is contrary to nature. He is
not for those Stoical Rants of looking upon Sickness, and Death, and the like
bodily Evils, as things without, that belonged nothing to him; but where things
were really burdensome to Nature, he is not ashamed to express tokens of
humane weakness, in grieving at them; when the Day of his Sufferings therefore
drew nigh, he falls into cruel Agonies and Convulsions at the thoughts of those
Miseries he was to endure; and he gives not up the Ghost afterward, without
twice crying out with a loud voice, Mat. 27.46, 50.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The extremity of his Torments
wringing from him this Complaint; and that without any imputation of
undutifulness to God; there being a great difference betwixt Expostulating thus
with God in humble ways for seeming to forsake us in our troubles, and charging
his Providence foolishly for so doing; nor does our Savior think it any
lessening to himself, or injury to God, to exercise his Passions upon much
slighter occasions than this; particularly in the case of Lazarus's death, Joh.
1.33.
where he is said to weep, and groan, and be troubled in mind, whilst he saw
the two sisters, Martha and Mary, lamenting over their dead Brother: He was
sensible how great an Affliction the loss of so Dear a Brother must be; and
therefore instead of Reproving the Women for such natural expressions of love,
he disdains not to show a like tenderness of affection himself, in condoling
with them. And indeed, in such cases as this, Passions are not only very
innocent, but very useful and commendable many times, if restrained within due
bounds, being only a more Emphatical way of expressing those inward Sentiments
of our Souls by Actions, which might well become us otherwise to do in Words;
and being designed besides as a Relief to Nature, to soften those Afflictions
by giving them vent, which are apt to swell and rage the more in us, by
endeavoring to stifle them: And when we speak therefore of nothing altering
the Evenness of our Savior's mind, we speak in a sense answerable to the
Constitution of Human Nature; not that outward Accidents wrought no change in
his Passions (for then he must have ceased to be a Man), but that they caused
no such disturbance in him, as was offensive to Religion, or destructive of his
own Happiness and Content. In short, he used his Passions as Servants only to
Nature and Virtue, not as Tyrants over Reason and Sense; whereby he prescribed
the most proper limits to them.

16. Temperance in Eating and Drinking, is another Duty we owe to our selves;
and the world cannot deny it to be a reasonable one, if the design of it were
only to preserve our Bodies in health: Tho here our Savior's Example is far
from obliging us to a Rechabite Strictness, or to weigh our Meat by Grains and
Scruples. He that made the World, knew better for what end the Creatures were
sent, than that they should lie upon the ground and perish: And he had rather
therefore undergo the names of Wine-bibber and Glutton, Mat. 11.19.
from the Pharisees, than abridge Mankind of a due Liberty about these things.
We may well imagine the occasion of those base Reflections being cast upon
Christ, was the over preciseness of the Pharisees in their Rules of Temperance,
who it seems would strain at every Gnat they met with in their Glass or Dish,
though they could swallow whole Camels laden with Oppressing Sins: But our
Savior was not to take his Standard of Morality from their stingy Measures;
and without any thing of Reservedness therefore, we find him frequenting
Plentiful Tables, and Friendly Meetings: Mat. 11.19.
The Son of man came eating and drinking, as he himself testifies. Luke 5.29.
He accepts of a great Feast from his Disciple Levi, as a
Consecration-Entertainment upon his Admission into the Apostleship. And he
fears not to make the Pharisees Witnesses of his Innocent Freedoms at their own
Tables, Luke 11.37.
though he knew how apt they were to violate the Laws of Hospitality, in basely
Censuring him when he was gone. He appears at the Marriage Feast of Cana in
Galilee, and scruples not to work his first Miracle for supplying the Guests
with Wine, after they had well drank, Joh. 2.10.
it is said: Not to encourage any thereby in Beastly Excess, but to preserve
the Master of the Feast, who was his Friend, from Reproach, and to show his
Approbation of a moderate Cheerfulness upon such occasions; if any disordered
themselves afterward, (as we find not they did) it was their own fault: Christ
is no more to be blamed for this, than God Almighty, who provides plentifully
for us of all sorts, tho he knows many are like to make a very bad use of his
Bounty: Nor can Any therefore well desire greater Liberty than Christ allows
here; if they do, I am confident it is not in a sober fit; for there is nothing
more true, than that if Intemperance were imposed upon men as a Duty, it would
be reckoned one of the greatest Slaveries in the World.

17. Chastity may be reckoned another Duty relating to our selves: And this is
a Virtue of so nice and tender a nature, that the least impure thought is apt
to sully and deface it: Though we have little reason to complain of the
Strictness of Religion, in restraining our thoughts about this, if we consider
the proneness of our Natures to lust, how apt they are to take fire at the
least spark, and to rise into a flame presently, if never so little encouraged.
It was necessary such Appetites should be strongly rooted in men's minds, for
the propagation of mankind; since it is scarce to be thought otherwise, that
any would undergo the Pain and Trouble of bringing forth Children and providing
for them, were they not led to it by some very inviting sense of Pleasure: But
then it was as necessary for that end, to prevent Confused Mixtures: And man
therefore is not more possessed, by the Constitution of his Nature, with
Desires toward the Act of Generation, than with Detestation of the Abuse of
it; witness those Sons of Pleasure, who indeed are well enough content to
injure their Neighbors this way; yet reckon nothing so intolerable, as to have
the Chastity of their Wives or Daughters defiled, or to be called the
Offspring of so base an Act. Wherefore to prevent so dangerous and odious a
Vice, Christ endeavors to destroy it at the root, if possible, by condemning
all unchaste Thoughts and Desires: And to this purpose he tells us, That but to
look upon a woman, Mat. 5.28.
so as to lust after her, is to commit Adultery with her: It is not to be
thought here, that every first Motion of our Hearts toward Lasciviousness, if
timely suppressed, is what our Savior means by looking upon a woman; such
imperfect acts as these, being declared by the best Casuists, to be so far from
sins destructive to Salvation, that they become rather the Parents of Virtue to
us, by exercising our Faith and Obedience. And indeed, were such an act enough
to constitute the Adultery of the Eye, the Pharisees Practice (as odd as it
was) might seem no less than necessary; some of whom we are told were wont to
walk continually with their eyes shut, blundering against every one they met,
only to avoid the sight of Women. But in short, it is only the fixing our Eyes
and Imaginations upon one another with wanton Desires, that our Savior
condemns in this place. And this is so far from being a slavish Imposition upon
us, that it serves only to free our minds from one of the most Tyrannous
Masters we can possibly be subject to; such is the Passion of Lust when once it
gets a Head; a passion no less vain than insolent, for the most part, as it
busies it self, and torments men with longing after those Objects, which it has
no hopes or possibility many times of ever enjoying.

18. The moderating our Affections toward Earthly things, is another Duty
owing to our selves, that our Savior very much insists upon; and the more,
because the Pharisees made so light of it; Luke 16.14.
for the Pharisees were Covetous, we are told; and so little sensible were they
of any Hurt being in this, that they could Laugh at Christ, when he talked to
them of the impossibility of serving God and Mammon at the same time. But our
Savior saw enough of this sin in the Pharisees, to convince him of the
pernicious effects of it to Religion, and the Good of Mankind. And had he not
seen it there, he could as easily have foreseen it in his Disciple Judas, to
whose Covetous Disposition he knew the Loss of his Precious Blood should be
owing: Certainly the greatest Brand of Infamy that can possibly lie upon any
one sin! And well therefore might our Savior caution his Disciples against
this sin, Luke 12.15.
with a Beware of covetousness, for the life of man consists not in the
abundance of things which he possesses. The Heathen Moralists spent much time
in exposing this Vice; and the very shame of setting their hearts upon things
which had so little of solid Enjoymen in them, and which were so soon to have
an end, was reckoned argument sufficient among these, for moderating the
Affections of every wise man toward them: But our Savior does certainly much
improve the Argument, when to the Frailty and Vnsatisfactoriness of Earthly
things, he adds the consideration of a Glorious Immortality Above, as a Subject
much more fit to employ a Christian's thoughts and care: And since our Treasure
is in Heaven, well therefore may he require, that our hearts should chiefly
there be fixed; that we should not lay up for our selves treasures upon earth,
Mat. 6.20.
but lay up treasures for our selves in heaven, where neither moth nor rust do
corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. Our Savior does not hinder us by
this, from providing decent and comfortable Maintenance for our selves and
Relations; for even he himself is observed to have carried a Bag in his
Company, John 13.29.
though his Power of working Miracles, which of it self was sufficient to feed
Multitudes, seemed to give little occasion for such a trouble: Nor yet does he
require us hereby so to withdraw our Affections from the things of this life,
as not to rejoice or take pleasure in them; for this is natural, for men to
delight in those things which tend to their Ease or Benefit; and God would
never certainly have implanted in us such strong Desires as he has, toward
Worldly Happiness, did he not allow us to gratify them in some considerable
measures: But indeed all that our Savior requires of us about earthly things,
is only that we love them not, nor pursue them with that Greediness and
Anxiety, as if we reckoned them our great End and Hope: And certainly, he that
has any sense of a Future State, must confess this no otherwise than highly
reasonable, if he consider what numerous Temptations and Snares those that will
be Rich do fall into; and consequently, of what mighty prejudice an over-eager
Thirst after Honor or Wealth is to means Salvation.

19. It may seem a very hard Saying of our Savior's about Rich men, Mat. 19.24.
That it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for such
to enter into the kingdom of God. But I see no necessity why any Wealthy person
nowadays should think the worse of his condition upon that account: For
(besides that our Savior does very much soften this expression in another
place, by saying only, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven); Mark 10.23.
I suppose the Kingdom there spoken of, is not the Kingdom of Glory, but of
Grace, as the Kingdom of God is often taken in Scripture; and that the place is
to be understood in reference chiefly to our Savior's Times, Mat. 19.21.
as the occasion of the words does plainly intimate: And then, considering the
necessity there was in the first Ages of the Church, of men's forsaking All many
times to follow Christ, together with the scorn that rich men exposed
themselves to by taking so outwardly-mean a Profession upon themselves, it is
little to be wondered at, if such were very hardly brought to subject themselves
to the Gospel upon these terms: But these reasons being ceased now in a great
measure, the consequences of them must be supposed to be ceased too; and as to
Riches in themselves, they are certainly of great advantage to Religion; and
our Savior therefore has left several marks of his Honorable Esteem of them:
Mat. 2.11.
Three of the earliest Worshippers therefore that he had, are reckoned Persons
of a Princely Rank, from whom our Savior received Royal Presents, as the
First Fruits of that Service which Kings and Great Persons were to pay him
afterward, when by their Wealth and Authority they were to become Nursing
Fathers to his Church: And as this was one of the first pieces of Respect he
accepted upon earth, so the last office that was paid to him, was performed by
a Rich man: When his Body was to be buried, who so fit to be entrusted with
those Sacred Remains of his, as that Honorable Counselor, Mat. 27.57.
Joseph of Arimathea? Nor is it any Objection against Wealth, That our Savior
was pleased to take a poor condition upon himself; for Christ had many ends of
Religion to serve by this, which no one is charged with nowadays: This
showed, that he sought not the things of this world, but God's Glory, and the
good of men's Souls alone; which must advance the Credit of his Doctrine very
much: This took off from any Objection that might be made, as if his Miracles
were the effects of deep search into the secrets of Nature; his Doctrine, of
Learning or Study; whence the Jews, being confounded at his Wisdom and Mighty
Works, Mat. 13.55.
cried out, Is not this the Carpenter's son? This, lastly, gave his Enemies the
more edge and power to persecute him as they did, and at last to bring him to
that Accursed Slavish Death, the Death upon the Cross, wherein the Mystery of
our Redemption does not a little consist. In short then, let but men make a
right use of their Riches, and Christ has no Exception against them for being
Rich. Wealth is so far then from being a Hindrance to Salvation, that as if the
Court of Heaven were capable of being Bribed, we are advised by our Savior to
make friends to our selves there of this Mammon of unrighteousness. Luke 16.9.
Unrighteous Mammon he calls it; not that it is unrighteous in it self, but by
reason of that unrighteous use that people generally make of it.

20. One ill effect of Riches, as of all other Acquirements that are wont to
raise Credit and Esteem to us, is, That they are apt to make men Proud and
Conceited of their own Abilities; as appears more especially in the Pharisees,
who were certainly the vainest of men, what on account of their Temporal, what
of their Spiritual Endowments; for they loved greetings in the market places,
Mat. 23.5, 6, 7.
and the uppermost seats in the synagogues; as our Savior observes of them;
they affected to walk in long robes, and make broad their Philacteries; and
delighted hugely in being called Rabbi, or great Doctor, at every word. And our
Savior does not only reflect upon the Pharisees often for this, but in
opposition to it prescribes Humbleness of Mind as a Temper highly necessary to
such who would be called his Disciples; proposing himself more particularly, as
a Pattern of this Virtue: Learn of me, Mat. 11.29.
says he, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and for an Encouragement to it,
telling us, That he that humbles himself shall be exalted. The Heathen Ethics
were very defective in Precepts of this nature; as no wonder it should be so,
among such who made Worldly Glory and Applause the great End of their Actions:
And I think it must be allowed, nothing more vain can be imagined, than a
passage we meet with to this purpose in Pliny the Younger; a man otherwise of
great Wisdom and Modesty: He tells us a Story in one of his Epistles, of a
stranger talking accidentally with Tacitus; and wondering at the Learning and
Judgment of the man, he desired to know who he was; says Tacitus, You know me,
and that by my Writings. What then, replied the Gentleman, are you Pliny, or
Tacitus? It is not to be expressed, says Pliny, reflecting upon this Passage,
what pleasure I took in hearing my Name brought in thus; as if Tacitus and
Pliny were Proper Names, not of Men, but of Learning. Upon which he adds
another Story of himself, no less fulsome; That sitting at Table one day with a
Friend of his, where there was also a Country Gentleman present; says his
Friend to the Gentleman, That Is Pliny; pointing at him, and running presently
into high Commendations of his Parts: I must needs confess, says Pliny here,
that I receive much fruit of my Labors from this. And then he proceeds to
vindicate this fond humor, from a parallel case of Demosthenes, who it seems
was not a little pleased to see an Old Woman pointing out at him, and crying,
That Is Demosthenes. A man would wonder such Vanity as this should enter the
thoughts of any wise man, as being so unseemly a humor, that (whatever people
may have of it in their hearts), most are ashamed to own it even to their most
Bosom-Friends: Tho I confess it is no easy matter to fix bounds to our Duty in
this particular, (however nauseous such extravagant Vainglory, as that I have
mentioned, must appear): It being very unnatural to suppose a man of real worth
can be otherwise than sensible of it himself; and it being no less so, to think
that such a one should not receive some satisfaction from the praise and good
opinion of the world: Besides that one great Encouragement is lost to Virtue by
this: And our Savior therefore presses Humility it self, in the case of not
taking the upper, but rather the lowermost seat at feasts, under this
consideration, That we shall have worship of men for so doing. Luke 14.10.
But then, the less men have of Pride or Vainglory in their hearts, the more
it is certain they have of Christ's Temper; and there is very little danger, to
be sure, from the contrary extreme: And still Religion will teach us, That to
Pride our selves in any Excellency, is to Pride our selves in Feathers that are
not our own, having nothing but what we receive from God; and that to assume
the glory of such things to our selves, is to derogate so much from God's
Honor, to whom every good and perfect gift ought to be ascribed, with all
submission and acknowledgment of our dependency on him; accordingly as our
Savior tells us of himself, That in all things he sought not his own, John
8.50.
but his Father's glory.

This was our Savior's Life and Doctrine in respect of Duties relating to our
selves.

21. Consider our Savior's Life in respect of Duties relating to our
Neighbor, and you will find no part of Religion that he lays greater stress
upon; however some are pleased to vilify the Duties of it under the Notion of
Heathen Virtues: Nor did any thing therefore render the Pharisees the subject
of his Scorn and Detestation more, than their gross neglects of these Duties:
These Duties he comprehends in general under that great Precept of Loving our
neighbor as our selves: John 13.34.
A Precept that he seems more than ordinary fond of; and therefore he calls it
a New Command in one place; and in another, he hids us take notice, that it was
His Command; John 15.12.
as if he were jealous lest any one should rob him of the Honor of being a
principal Patron and Founder of it. And to show his Esteem of it yet farther,
he pitches upon this, before all other Duties of Religion, John 13.35.
as a Mark whereby his Disciples ought to distinguish themselves from the rest
of the world: Nor is it to be wondered at, that Christ laid so great stress upon
this Precept, since there is nothing that tends more to the Honor and Interest
of Religion, than a compliance with the several Duties of it; these being such
as are of universal applause among persons of all Religions, and such
therefore, as must mightily recommend Christianity to men, when they see that
an effectual Promoter of such things as they most esteemed; whereas should
Christians have neglected these, the Scandal would have been sure to have been
imputed to their Religion, and no man would have embraced that Doctrine which
seemed to confound Nature, and to root out the Principles of Mercy and Truth,
the great things whereby the Happiness of this world is maintained. And this I
reckon one main reason why our Savior made Love the Distinguishing Badge of
his Disciples. No question but there are several Marks of Faith and other
Graces, whereby Christians may and ought to be distinguished from persons of
other Religions: But this of Love is such a Livery, as appears beautiful and
amiable in every body's eye: And no wonder therefore Christ made choice of it,
as that which must needs redound much to the Credit of its Master.

22. Faithfulness in Dealings is one Duty owing to our Neighbor, that is
necessary above all others for the Peace and Welfare of mankind: And a small
matter of Religion, one would think, might be sufficient to keep men right in
this, since Nature it self abhors a contrary practice: Tho indeed we find none
more wanting in this, than those that pretend most to Religion. The Pharisees
Character too frequently shows it self in such, that they are graves which
appear not; Luke 11.44.
and those that walk over them are not aware of them However scrupulous they
may be in other points, they can devour widows houses without the least
remorse, and boast themselves the Saints of God at the same time; as if they
had a particular License from Heaven to deceive: Certainly a great Dishonor to
Religion this, and such as makes Christianity too often to stink in the
Nostrils of Infidels and Profane persons; and no question so much the worse,
by how much the persons guilty of it, do make profession of greater Sanctity in
other things. We must not expect many Instances of this Duty of Faithfulness in
our Savior's Life, as being beneath the Excellency of his Character, to have
Virtues of so ordinary a size mentioned of him: Tho in general we are told of
him, That there was no guile found in his mouth. 1 Pet. 2.22.
And how grateful such a Character was to him, we have one remarkable Instance,
in that kind Welcome he gave to Nathanael on account of it, when being
presented to him, he cried out, with no less Delight than Admiration, Joh. 1.47.
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. We must not think that by
Guile here, our Savior means downright Knavery and Fraud alone; but every
undermining, overreaching act, whereby we impose upon the Weakness or Ignorance
of our Brother; which is plainly implied in that Dovelike Harmlesness he
recommends to his Followers: Mat. 10.16.
And however therefore some people may value themselves upon their Craftiness,
it is certainly no great Commendation of this Quality, that our Savior called
Herod Fox, as one of the highest marks of his Detestation of him. Not that our
Savior designs hereby to make men weak, and unwary, or Fools in Business; for
Prudence and Simplicity are well joined together by the Poet; and our Savior
therefore commends the Wisdom of the Serpent, Ibid.
at the same time that he requires the Harmlesness of the Dove: But when Wisdom
is made use of for circumventing people to their damage, it degenerates into
Guile and Craft: And this is so abominable in Christ's esteem, that I question
not but to show, the Pharisees themselves might have escaped that odious
Censure of Hypocrisy from him, were it not for this more especially, among
other Vices of a like nature, that they were Godly Cheats, men that walked in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly were ravening wolves.

23. Mercy, or Forgiveness of Injuries and Debts, is another Duty owing to our
Neighbor, which our Savior presses very earnestly upon his Disciples: And it
may seem a strange unimitable Pattern he proposes about this, when he commands
us to be merciful, Luk 6.36.
as our heavenly father is merciful: Thought indeed there is nothing here, but
what human strength, assisted by God's Grace, is well able to perform; and
nothing, besides, but what Nature and Right Reason will challenge from us: As
to Debts, he that will not forgive these in whole, when a Debtor is altogether
unable to pay; or in part, when he has reason to think the poor man's
Necessities very great and pinching, must certainly be reckoned a very hard
man: And I believe no one can read the Parable of the unjust steward taking his
poor debtors by the throat, Mat. 18.28.
and hurrying them away to goal, without abhorrence of his Cruelty: And yet
this is all that God's Example obliges us to, in respect of Debts: He himself
forgives not such Debts, but which we are unable to pay; and he requires
submission here from us, and acknowledgment of his Favor, before the Bonds are
cancelled. And it is much the same thing in respect of Injuries: For are the
Injuries of a light nature, some slips only of weakness or inadvertency? These
God passes by in us, without particular Repentances; and it must be a very ill
temper that will not do as much as this comes to, to his offending Brother. Or
are they more heinous and gross? Here God expects Confession of our Guilt, and
hearty Desires of Forgiveness, before our Pardon is passed: And there is no
Generous Soul but will accept a like Satisfaction. If Punishment be necessary
(as it sometimes is, in such cases) for correcting the Offender, and for the
Warning and Terror of others, God's example does warrant men in this also,
provided they punish Transgressors as he does, out of hatred to their Crimes,
and not to their Persons: So that to imitate God's Mercy, is no other than a
Duty highly reasonable and natural to men: And as there is no greater measure
of Perfection than this, so we may well think Christ requires no more from us.
Upon these terms, the Forgiving so often in a day, as Christ commands, even
seventy times seven, Mat. 18.22.
is no hard Duty; for by Forgiveness there, I cannot think Christ means an
absolute passing by of Faults, though never so little; the least faults, when
so often repeated, being justly interpreted of Obstinacy and gross Neglect,
which are Crimes that highly deserve Punishment; and therefore to forgive
there, is only not to bear malice or ill will against a man; in which sense we
may forgive, though we correct at the same time. Nor is it any thing of an
unreasonable imposition, that we are commanded to imitate God, in loving and
doing good to those that injure us: Mat. 5.44.
For God himself is not wont to take his Enemies into his bosom, whilst they
continue such, but only to afford them the ordinary Blessings of his
Providence: And what Man of Honor will carry his Resentments so far, as to
deny an Enemy the common offices of humanity and pity, in time of Want? Who is
not sensible of the Glory of such Acts, when men are kind and helpful to those
that deserve worst of them?

24. But there is no part of this Duty of Forgiveness that flesh and blood
rises so much against, as that of turning the other cheek: Mat. 5.39.
Nor indeed is there any thing more contradictory to Reason, as well as to the
Spirit of a man, than to bear injuries at this rate. Those must be very servile
creatures that will stoop down thus to take their burdens; and even Worms
therefore are taken notice of to turn again when they are trampled upon.
Wherefore neither did our Savior himself observe this Command in a literal
sense; for when he was smitten by a Servant before the High Priest, John 18.22.
we find not that he turned the other Cheek presently, but he expostulates with
the person that did the Injury, and that not without some marks of concern at
the Injustice done him: And generally therefore this Precept is reckoned to
relate to lesser Injuries and Affronts, which our Savior would have men to put
up, rather than by drawing the Saw of Contention to widen the Breach into
downright fallings out; or to give greater trouble to our selves and others, in
Lawsuits and exchange of Blows, than the Injury is worth: In which sense this
Precept of our Savior's is no less reasonable than any other part of the Duty
of Forgiveness. It may seem strange indeed to some, that the receiving a Blow
on the Face should be reckoned here among lesser Injuries, when it is thought
by many nowadays to deserve little less than a Stab: But we must consider
here, that our Savior spoke to persons of mean Rank, among whom Injuries of
this nature are not so highly provoking; though no question the practice of
this Age in demanding the Blood of each other upon these and the like Affronts,
(let the Quality of the Person be what it will) is sufficiently against our
Savior's Command here: And it is certainly nothing of sound Reason, but vain
Custom alone, that makes people stand at this high rate upon Punctilio's of
Honor: For how unreasonable is it in it self, that nothing less than the Death
of a man, and in that the ruin of a whole Family many times, shall serve as an
Atonement for giving me the Lie, suppose? And what a Madness is it in any case,
because a man has injured me, that therefore I will venture my Life with him
upon equal Terms, in way of making my self Satisfaction? I will confess here,
that Honor is a great Blessing to men, and such therefore as they ought to be
very tender of preserving: And since Custom has brought it to that, that a man
cannot tamely sit down, and suffer some kind of Abuses (no ways heinous in
themselves neither), without exposing himself to Ignominy and Disgrace all his
life after, it makes the case very hard: Some men's Livelihoods, we know, depend
upon the Reputation of their Courage; and every other person has just reason to
keep himself from being despised and trampled upon: But as Custom and
Connivence have brought those false Notions of Honor into Fashion, upon which
this Murdering Practice is founded; so we presume Authority might soon banish
them out of the world, by good Laws, and strict Execution; as has been done in
a great measure in a Neighboring Kingdom. And till this be done, it is little
to be expected that other Arguments should signify much, for rooting such fond
Principles out of men's minds. However, true it is, That no greater Scandal can
lie upon this Age, than that it should be reckoned the greatest Reproach in it,
to obey a plain Command of Christ's; and that nothing can be imagined more
desperate, than for men to hazard their lives thus in the very Breach of a
Command, which (to say no worse) must highly endanger their Souls to all
Eternity.

25. Another Duty of Love owing to our Neighbor, is that of Charity, or a
being kind and beneficial to persons in Misery and Want. In which our Savior
did more especially signalize himself: For it was the great business of his
Life, Act. 10.38.
we are told, to go about, doing good: And accordingly we find him every where
engaged; sometimes as a Physician to the Sick, visiting and curing them of
their several Distempers; and among these, the poorer sort were generally the
objects of his Tenderness and Care; the Maimed, the Halt, the Blind, the Leper,
such as he found in the streets incapacitated for labor, and so begging for a
Subsistence. Sometimes we find him as a Reliever of men's Necessities in other
ways: His Bowels yearned at the Fasting of the Multitude in the Wilderness; and
so, rather than send them away empty, he first bestows upon them all the little
Provisions he could get, Mat. 15.34.
and then twice works a Miracle to supply what was wanting. And it is very
observable, That almost all the Miracles our Savior wrought, had some
Charitable work for their subject; contrary to those of Moses and the rest of
the Prophets. It would certainly have served as well for answering the chief
Design of his Miracles, if they had been matter only of Amazement and
Astonishment to the people; for thereby it would have appeared, That he was an
extraordinary Person sent from God; and this was the main End of his Miracles,
to attest the Truth and Divinity of his Commission: But this was not enough, he
thought, unless Charity also was added to them: Our Savior would have his
Wondrous Works receive no less Glory from the Goodness, than the Strangeness of
them: All which we may justly think our Savior did, to show himself an Example
of that which he desired the most of any thing to engage his Followers to the
practice of, as being not only a most excellent Duty in it self, and most
agreeable with his own Temper, but such also as tends in the highest degrees to
the Honor and Interests of his Religion; for Charity is the most beautiful
part of a Christians Badge; and there is nothing that attracts the eyes and
hearts of men more than this. Even the Jews themselves therefore were wrought
by this into a good opinion of Christ, when the Excellency of his Doctrine made
little impression upon their hearts: Mar. 7.37.
He has done all things well, say they; he makes the deaf to hear, and the
dumb to speak. The Primitive Christians brought infinite Credit to their
Religion by it, when in the time of a great Plague at Alexandria, they visited
the Sick, and relieved the poor, and buried the Dead, even of their Heathen
Adversaries, when their own Friends would take no care of them. And it would be
no less Discredit to our Faith, were that true which the Romanists object
against us, That our Religion is barren and unfruitful in such good works as
these: Though I think we may safely enough defy them to make good their
Charge; when a Reverend Author in King James the First's time, has given us a
particular Account of Charities bestowed upon Colleges, Hospitals,
Free-Schools, and the like Pious Uses, within the compass of Sixty Years since
the Reformation, amounting to a Million of Money: That which he challenges any
Age of Popery to parallel in this Kingdom. And I think this Age has given
sufficient Evidence to stop the mouths of our Adversaries, of the respect they
bear to this great Duty of Religion, in those Liberal Contributions they have
made of late to Distressed Strangers, as well as in every other Instance of
Charity. Which also ought the more to be taken notice of, for that it is done
in a free generous way, from the voluntary motions and inclinations of the
Benefactors alone; not grudgingly, or of necessity, as it frequently happened
in former times, when people were frighted into Charity by their Confessors,
sorely against their wills, only to make composition for Pardon of their sins.
May our light still so shine before men, that others seeing our good works, may
glorify our Father which is in heaven.

26. There is nothing that tends to the ease and benefit of mankind, that seems
beneath our Savior's Care: And therefore, besides these greater Duties that we
owe to our Neighbor, he insists upon others that may seem of lesser moment,
though they are of no small comfort to those among whom we converse. Such,
particularly, is that of not being Angry with our Brother rashly, or without a
cause: For indeed there is nothing that destroys the Blessings of Society more,
than this Vice of Anger; Prove. 21.19.
what Solomon says of an angry woman, being certainly as true of an angry man,
It is better to live in a wilderness, than where such be. Besides, that the
Consequences of this Vice are oftentimes very mischievous and fatal; Anger
being a Passion of a very bloody and desperate nature; wherever it is suffered
to grow to a head, it knows no rules or bounds. The two Sons of Zebedee would
have destroyed a whole City in a mad Fit of this Passion, had Christ been as
ready to furnish them with Instruments of Revenge, as they were to call for
them: And we have multitudes of Instances in every Age, of peoples murdering
their Dearest Friends, and doing other things in their Anger, which have proved
Wounds to their Reputations and their Minds, never to be cured in this World:
Wherefore our Savior presses the Duty of not being Angry, under as great
obligations as any other Duty of Religion; for he tells us, That no less a
danger attends the breach of it, than that of the Judgment, Mat. 5.22.
and of Hellfire. And to show of how great esteem it is in God's sight, he
represents it as such, without which God will accept no Sacrifice from us; --
24.
Leave thy gift at the Altar, therefore he says, go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Not that our
Savior would make his Disciples hereby such poor passive creatures, as to
hinder them from expressing their Resentments with shows of Anger, upon just
occasions: For by commanding us not to be angry with our Brother without a
cause, he plainly insinuates, that in some cases a man may have just cause of
being angry: And we find therefore that he himself looked upon the Pharisees
with anger at the hardness of their hearts; Mark 3.5.
and that (by the Privilege of his Prophetic Office) he called Herod Fox, in
way of Indignation, Luke 13.32.
when the Message was brought that Herod had a design to kill him. Wherefore it
is only some Excesses and Irregularities of this Passion, that our Savior
reproves, when he condemns Anger as a Vice: As, when it breaks out upon trivial
occasions; when it is disproportioned to its cause; when it swells to
immoderate heights; when it rankles and breeds bad Blood in us; every of which
are things not only so mischievous in their consequences, but so unseemly in
themselves besides, that if Christ had not forbid them, our own Consciences
would have done it: And there is nothing of a Wise or Brave man therefore, but
though he may be taken sometimes in such Indecencies, is ashamed of himself
afterward. Whilst the Blood indeed is up, and the mouth swells with big words,
a man appears to himself very Great, and he Lords it with no small Pride and
Tyranny over those who are bound in Duty or Interest not to oppose him: But he
that stands by, and considers the poor grounds upon which this deal a-do is
often made, is so far from admiring the Greatness of the man's Soul, that he
does but pity his Weakness all the while. They are the shallowest streams that
are generally most Noisy, and most subject to overflow: And a man therefore
that values his Reputation, would keep a strict hand over himself about this
Passion, tho he had no other obligation to restrain him.

27. Censoriousness is another Vice opposite to the Duties of Love, which may
seem of lesser moment to our Neighbor's good, though it cause none of the
least uneasinesses to him: This our Savior frequently reflects upon the
Pharisees for; who, it may seem, reckoned it a greater piece of Holiness to
Judge other peoples Faults, than to Correct their own: And all their Discourse
therefore ran upon this subject; and they could not so much as Pray to God, but
they must tell him of their Neighbors Faults, and thank him that they were not
as other men, Luke 18.11.
not as this Publican: It was much the worse, to be sure, that their
Censoriousness was generally attended with Pride and Uncharitable Aggravations;
though it had been bad enough, had it been only a supercilious reproving their
Neighbors continually for lesser faults, which for the most part they had no
other ground to condemn, than that they were not according to their own
Pedantick ways of walking: For this is what our Savior means, by their
beholding the mote in their brothers eye, Mat. 7.1, 3.
which gave occasion to his Precept of not judging. And indeed this must render
Converse so very uneasy to men, and consequently Religion so uncomfortable a
thing, when upon every appearance of evil they must be disciplined and Schooled
by their Friends, that it is more to be feared they should be hardened against
all Reproof, than to be hoped they should amend by it; which is the greatest
dis-service we can do either to Religion or our Neighbor's Soul. No question
but to reprove people with Candor and Discretion, is an excellent Duty in it
self; and there is no office of Love more worthy the name of true Friendship:
But to perform this aright, requires more of Temper and Prudence than the
Vulgar are generally Masters of. And that men may use all Caution therefore in
it, we find our Savior more solicitous in condemning the opposite Extreme,
than in enforcing the Duty. Particularly, where Reproof is like to do more harm
than good, Christ has given us Advice very plainly, in a prudential way, not to
expose Religion and our selves in such cases: Mat. 7.6.
Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine,
lest they trample them under foot, and turn again and rent you. Though this is
to be understood, not without some Reserve to Parents, and Ministers, and
Masters of Families, and the like, whose Duty it is to be instant in season and
out of season, in reproving those committed to their Charge; as there is much
less danger of their Reproof being despised by such, than by Strangers or
Friends; it being the proper business of their Office to do this, which few are
so unreasonable as not to make some allowance for; and more especially, these
having Authority on their side to back their Reproofs with Correction, where
the former work not the effect designed.

This as to our Savior's Life and Doctrine in respect of Duties relating to
our Neighbor.

28. I should now put an end to this Discourse, but that I think it convenient
to answer some general Objections that may be brought against it: The principal
of which is, The Example of the Primitive Christians; whose rigid observance of
many Duties, it must be confessed, was much beyond the Measures prescribed
here; especially in respect of Temperance, Contempt of the World,
Mortification, and the like self-denying Virtues. And now in answer to this, I
must declare, That I cannot think the Primitive Christians practice an adequate
rule of walking to us: For though their Zeal be certainly much to be admired,
yet it is plain in some things they went as much beyond the bounds of Prudence,
as of their Duty: Particularly in the case of Martyrdom; a thing they grew so
fond of in a little time, as to run themselves wilfully into Dangers, and even
to provoke their Persecutors to put them to Death: As if our Savior had given
no such Advice to his Disciples, Mat. 10.23.
to fly from City to City, to avoid Persecution; and this they did sometimes in
ways scarce warrantable: Such was that of Apphianus, a famous Martyr of
Palestine, holding the Prefect Vrbanus's hand when he was going to Sacrifice.
Insomuch, that the Church thought fit at last in several Councils to blame this
unnatural and overzealous Ambition. And neither were their Austerities less
strained beyond the Limits prescribed in the Gospel: Origen's choosing to lie
upon the ground, and walk barefoot many years, was more, I am sure, than any
Law of Christ obliged him to; as likewise were those severe Rules of
Temperance, which he and others observed in those days: Of which we have a
remarkable Instance in one Alcibiades, who was wont to live upon Bread and
Water for a long time, till it was Bevealed (says the Historian) to Attalus the
Martyr, That the Man did not well in refusing God's Creatures, and giving
offense to his weak brethren: Upon which Alcibiades was prevailed upon to eat
and drink as other people, and gave Thanks to God for it. And the same must be
said as to their Renouncing the World, to that degree, many of them, as well
nigh to fall under the Apostle's Censure, 1 Timothy 5.8.
of not providing for their own; at least, to come within the compass of that
voluntary humility, Col. 2.18.
and neglecting the body, which the same Apostle declares to have only a show
of wisdom in them. And it would be endless to insist upon every other Duty,
wherein the Zeal of those Times was wont to supererogate; as in Watchings and
Fastings, in Vows of Chastity, in unmerciful Penances, and the like.

29. Though here I cannot but admire the Wisdom of God's Providence, in
ordering things at this rate, as well for the good of those that were already
Converted, as for the Conversion of others in those times: For considering what
Persecutions the Primitive Christians were to lie under, it was little less
than necessary to infuse such Principles as these into their minds: By this
means their voluntary Austerities became a sort of hardening to them, to make
them fit Soldiers for that severe Service they were called to: For it was no
great difficulty for such to endure long and cruel Imprisonments, who were wont
to lie upon the bare earth, and fare coursly in their ordinary way of life. And
this must mightily take off from the Pain and Terror of those Tortures which
they daily saw inflicted upon others, and were at last condemned to themselves.
This made the great Champions of the Church, when they mounted the Stage, to be
more concerned for their Fellow Sufferers, lest through Weakness or Tenderness
of Body, they should be tempted to renounce their Faith (as not being used to
such Ascetick Discipline), than for any miseries they saw prepared for
themselves. Of which we have a notable Instance in the case of Blandina, a
Martyr of France; though by an admirable Fortitude she frustrated the Fears of
her Friends, as well as the Expectation of her Enemies. And of much greater
necessity was their Contempt of the things of this life, for engaging them to
maintain their Profession with Resolution and Constancy, amidst the
Persecutions they lay under. For men that are Wedded to the World, are very
loath to be Divorced from it; and there is nothing more difficult, than for such
to follow Christ, who are fast tied to Riches, and Honor, and Pleasures. The
First Christians looked upon these things as little better than the
Encumbrances of life; and like true Sojourners therefore upon Earth, they
desired nothing more, than just enough to bear their Charges to Heaven. So if
Persecution seized their Estates, it was but like robbing them of an upper
Garment, which they had little need of, and which they were ready enough to
throw off of their own accord; and it could be no doubtful Choice to such,
whether they should part with this, or a good Conscience, which they knew was a
Treasure to them to all Eternity. If Persecution reached their Lives also, it
brought them but the sooner to their Journey's end, they knew; and they had
little reason to be otherwise than contented with this, who proposed so small a
share to themselves in the Comforts and Enjoyments of this World.

30. Nor do I less admire God's Gracious Providence in ordering things at this
rate, on account of the Gentiles of those times; there being no means more
likely than this, for Converting them: For these were a sort of Principles
which the Philosophy of that Age ran very much upon; and we no where meet with
greater Examples of Severity of Manners, as to Temperance, and Mortification,
and Contempt of the World, than the Schools of the Heathens would at least
pretend to in those times. The Stoics were extremely rigid this way, who bid
Defiance to all the Comforts of Sense; and looked upon it as a great part of
Wisdom, to be mean and sordid in their Habit, pale in their Looks, and poor in
their Purses. The Platonists, little inferior to these in Strictness of
Discipline, who talked as if they lived out of their Bodies, upon Air and
Contemplation alone; Concerning whose Austerities, there are highly remarkable
Instances to be produced, in the Lives of Epictetus among the Stoics, and
Plotinus among the Platonists. Though it may seem more considerable, perhaps,
to instance in the Emperor Julian the Apostate; a man of high Birth, and great
Power at last, and consequently much exposed to Temptations of Luxury and
Softness; who yet to the last, we are told, was wont to lie upon a hard course
Quilt, and rise continually in the middle of the night; to forbid all
Delicacies to be brought into his Camp, and to feed upon the Common Soldiers
Provisions; which things he himself glories in, and professes to have learned
them from his Heathen Masters. Now the Primitive Christians being to Converse
and Dispute with such people as these, how could they more effectually
recommend the Gospel to them, than by showing themselves Examples of like
Severity with what they practiced? Had they not done this, Christianity would
certainly have been thought as loose and scandalous a Profession, as it was
counted Foolish by these vain Pretenders to Wisdom and Virtue. And confidering
how mightily such shows of Holiness are apt to take among the Vulgar, the
Philosophers of those times would have had the greatest advantage by this
means, of confirming the people in their Gentile Superstitions, whilst they
compared their own lives, with the lives of the Christians. And therefore in
process of time, when Persecution being ceased, the Primitive Christians began
to allow themselves a greater Liberty about these things, we find the Apostate
Julian making it the great subject of his Raillery upon the Antiochians, (whom
we must suppose to be generally Christians, by Nazianzen's writing in their
vindication), that the chief ground of their offense at him, was the Roughness
of his Beard, and the Austerity of his Life; that he made War continually with
his Belly, and delighted not in Dancing and Shows, as they did. And it is to
the same purpose what he tells us of Constantine the Great, the first Christian
Emperor, that finding none among the gods like himself, and so fit for him to
converse with, he betook himself to Luxury and Intemperance, as his Tutelar
Deities, with whom he lived very contentedly; and recommended his Sons
afterward to their care. A little innocent freedom, we must think, in the
Primitive Christians, was enough to occasion such malicious Reflections from
their Adversaries: And this made it necessary for them to depart from their
Right (as it were) in this respect; and to strain the Bow not a little the
other way, that their Enemies might have no pretense (if possible) to speak
reproachfully of them or their Religion.

31. But then our Savior did not design that his Church should continue in the
Wilderness always; and God no more envies a Canaan of Worldly Felicity to us,
than he did of old to his people the Jews. The Primitive Christians Examples
are certainly an excellent Argument for whetting peoples Industry, and
provoking Emulation: For if they endured so great hardship for the sake of
Christ, it is a great shame for men nowadays to refuse Obedience to the more
easy and rational Precepts of the Gospel. But Christ's Example is the only
obligatory Pattern to us; and since we find nothing there of those Austerities
which the Primitive Christians observed, we have little reason sure, by adding
these of our own accord, Mat. 11.30.
to make Christ's easy yoke heavier than he designed. There were special
Reasons, we see, that moved God's Providence to incline the Primitive
Christians to do what they did of this nature, which are now ceased in a great
measure: For God be praised, we live not in such an Age as they did, where our
Lives, our Liberties, and Estates, are in danger of being taken from us every
minute; but these are guarded by Laws, and secured to us by a Wonderful
Providence; and there is no reason we should despise such a Blessing as this,
but use that with Comfort, and Thanks to God, which he has given us to enjoy in
Safety. Nor do we live among such persons whom we ought to consider, as the
Primitive Christians did the Heathens, lest they take offense at our just
Liberty: For if any are offended amongst us, it is their own fault, having the
Scriptures in their hands to read (which the Heathen had not) to inform them
better. Those Scriptures which will teach them, either that a greater Liberty
is allowed by Christ than the Primitive Christians used, or at least that they
ought not to think the worse of Religion for other men's failings in it; nor yet
to censure and condemn others for taking greater freedom than themselves
approve of, unless they can plainly make it out to be contrary to the Precepts
of the Gospel. To abstain from little Indifferent things, rather than offend
our weak Brother, is certainly a very reasonable Duty: But in such things as
these, which affect the whole Course of our lives, and are of mighty concern to
the good of men, if other men's Weakness, and not the Scriptures, must be a Rule
of walking to us, it will be impossible to know where to fix our Duty. Thus I
think the Objection about the Primitive Christians Example is sufficiently
answered.

32. Another Objection that may be made against this Discourse is, That our
Savior's Doctrine, as it is contained in the History of his Life, is not a
sufficient measure of Perfection, and therefore not fit to be proposed by it
self as a Rule of Life; because our Savior in many things condescended to his
Disciples Weakness, leading them by Precepts suited to their Infant Estate, as
they were yet but Novices in Religion; and reserving others of a more sublime
nature for aftertimes, when the Spirit being poured out in extraordinary
measures, they were more advanced in Knowledge and the fear of God: Which may
seem to be implied in that Saying of our Savior's to his Disciples, John 16.12.
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; howbeit,
when he, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth. But
that this is no Objection against us, will easily be made appear, when we
consider in the first place, that the substance of it is false and groundless
in it self, as far as it relates to matters of Practice generally necessary to
Salvation, with which alone we have to do. For it is plain, our Savior
prescribes Practical Doctrines to his Disciples, of as great Perfection as any
contained in his Religion: Such is that of cutting off their right hands, Mat.
5.29, 30.
and pulling out their right eyes when they offended them: Such is that of
loving their enemies, -- 44.
and doing good to them that hated them. Such, lastly, Mat. 16.24.
is that of taking up their cross, and forsaking father and mother, life and
estate, for the Gospel. For I think there is no greater Argument of the
Perfection of any Precept, than the Difficulty of it; as is evidently implied
in that Saying of our Savior's to the young man, Mat. 19.21.
If thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have, and give it to the poor. And
I am sure there are no Precepts in the Gospel more difficult than these; and
therefore had our Savior thought his Disciples unfit to bear any Doctrines of
a Practical nature, no question but he would have concealed these as soon as
any others, being the most likely to discourage his Disciples from following
him: Besides that no greater Perfection can be supposed, than those Sayings of
our Savior's to his Disciples do expressly enjoin, That they should be holy as
God is holy, Mat. 5.48.
and perfect as their heavenly Father is perfect. Wherefore also that Passage
of St. John must necessarily be interpreted to refer only to some extraordinary
matters which concerned the Economy of Christ's Church in those times: Such
was the calling in of the Gentiles; a matter that the Apostles were so hardly
brought to believe, that it required a special Revelation from God to ascertain
it to them. Such also was the Abolishing the Ceremonial Law of Moses, which
occasioned such violent Contests for a long time in the Church. These indeed
were things that we may suppose the Apostles ill able to bear, at the time our
Savior spoke, as being possessed with strong Prejudices against them from
their youth up: And it might well require an extraordinary Effusion of the
Spirit to guide them into such Truths, which after all, they could scarce be
persuaded to believe. This Interpretation is the rather to be received, because
our Savior tells his Disciples in the foregoing Chapter, John 15.15.
that he had made known unto them all things that he had heard of his Father;
it being very hard to reconcile this with the other place, if by all things
here, is not to be meant all things necessary to Salvation.

33. A Third and last Objection that I shall mention, against this Discourse,
may be drawn from those places of Scripture wherein the ways of Salvation are
represented as very difficult, and hard to be found; particularly, that Saying
of our Savior's, where he exhorts his Disciples to strive to enter in at the
strait gate, Mat. 7.13, 14.
because narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it:
This seeming contrary to what is intimated all along in this Discourse; the
main drift of which has been, to make Religion appear easy and natural to men.
Now to answer this Objection, our chief business will be to reconcile this
Saying of our Savior's with that other of his, where he declares his yoke to
be easy, and his burden light; this last making no less for every thing I have
said, than the other does against it. And it will be no hard matter to do this,
by considering, That Christ's Yoke is indeed easy in it self; the Precepts of
his Religion are no other than such as men assisted by God's Grace may even
with Comfort and Pleasure perform. But as the easiest Yoke may become hard by
fretting and striving against it; so Christ's Religion is made difficult to
men, through Prejudices and evil Habits, which put them upon endeavors of
shaking it off, the better to satisfy some unruly Passions and Lusts, which
gain the dominion over them. And this is that alone which straitens the Gate to
Heaven; this makes the way thither seem rough, and melancholy, and desolate, a
very Wilderness to many that tread therein. Otherwise, far be it from God to
delight himself in seeing men struggling with difficulties which he himself has
made. He that courts and importunes us to come to Happiness so earnestly as he
does, what an odd Notion of him must it imply, to make the means of attaining
this hard; as if he designed it on purpose that few might arrive at it? No,
there are no Difficulties in the way to Heaven, but what we make to our selves
by our own gross fault. Without this, the Road to Heaven would be as void of
Briars and Thorns, as Heaven it self is; The ways of wisdom being ways of
pleasantness, as Solomon speaks, and all her paths are peace: But then the
Difficulties which men have brought upon themselves in the ways of Godliness,
through their own Corruptions, are certainly none of the least: And these are
such as the greatest Pretenders to Perfection may find abundant cause to be
sensible of, tho they aim at nothing higher than what is prescribed in this
Discourse: For even to be Just and Righteous in our Dealings, Chaste in our
Actions and Thoughts, Humble and Charitable in our Conversations, (if we
consult Experience, and not the nature of the things themselves) are not such
easy Duties, but that many who reckon themselves great Proficients in Grace,
are found notoriously to fail in them. At least, there are few, it is to be
feared, that make a Conscience of these or any other Duties, so far as they
ought in reason to do. And therefore considering the Hypocrisy of the world on
one hand, and the too gross Immorality of it on the other, it were well if
there were not too great grounds for that Saying of our Savior, That narrow is
the way to life, and few there be that find it. Though still it is to be hoped,
the Few there mentioned are no inconsiderable Number, only as opposed to the
vast Company of Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Profane persons, who proudly
despise the Means of Salvation which Christ has offered to them. And for those
who have a Savior to trust in, and a Merciful God to fly to, who make
allowances for the common Infirmities of Human Nature, we trust that a wide
Gate of Salvation may be opened to such, as long as with Faith and Sincerity
they endeavor to walk in the way of God's Commands, and pretend not to act the
Cripple before him.

34. Wherefore, in short, the Sum of this Discourse is, That the Religion of
Christ, according to his Precepts and Example (and we need no better Rule to
judge of it by) is a most admirably Wise, Gracious, and Manlike Religion; such
as accomplishes Human Nature in the highest degrees it is capable of in this
life; imposing nothing mean or servile upon us: Such as looks upon Ceremonies
only as things indifferent; neither refusing what is Decent, or commanded by
just Authority, nor yet encouraging Vain or Superstitious Observancies: Such as
commends a Sober and a Rational Piety to us; a Piety that consists not in high
Notions, or wild Expressions of Zeal, but in Worshipping and Serving God with
Diligence and Sincerity: Such as takes off from the Exorbitancies of our
Passions and Lusts, so as to make us most easy to our selves, and most like to
God, without debarring us the innocent Comforts of this life. Such, lastly, as
engages us to be good natured, and to throw off those selfish and unnatural
Dispositions, which are the Ruin of Society, and a Reproach to Mankind: Than
which, as I think there can no Ideas of Religion be framed more Excellent, so
let us study to conform our Lives to these, and I question not but we become
True Followers of Christ Jesus.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the HYPOCRISY OF THE PHARISEES.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees.
THOUGH Hypocrisy be often objected by our Savior against the Pharisees, yet I
could never be of the opinion, That they were gross downright Hypocrites; such,
I mean, as take a Form of Godliness upon them, only for Secular Interest, to
serve designs of Knavery and Injustice, and who know themselves to be
Hypocrites all the while. I have so much Charity for Human Nature, as to hope
there are few such Creatures as these in the World; these being but one Remove
from Atheists: For sure, did men believe that there was a God who governed the
world, they durst never affront him so directly, as to make use of his Name and
Religion to cloak the most profligate Designs. The greatest Impostors in the
world, I believe, may have acted out of Principles of Conscience: And I take
Mahomet himself to have had much more of the Enthusiast in him, than the
Hypocrite. Nor ought it to be thought strange, that such horrid Doctrines and
Practices as many of these have been the Authors of, should be the effects of a
good Intention: For there is nothing so absurd, which a crazed head, or
vitiated understanding will not believe to be right sometimes. With what
strange Assurance will some Madmen fancy themselves Kings and Emperors, and
not be beaten out of their Conceit by all that men can say; but turn even their
Rags and their Chains, and every thing else that can be objected to them, into
Ensigns of Majesty. It is the same unhappy Influence that rules in the heads of
most Enthusiasts. And though the Heads of some of them may not be turned at
this rate, yet there are many ways of debauching Conscience, and stifling
Natural Light in such; and when strong Affections and Lusts meet with weak or
prejudiced Judgments, it is no hard matter for such to persuade themselves by
degrees into the belief of whatever almost they please. It was certainly a most
perverse piece of Stupidity in the Jews, after all the Miracles and Good Works
that our Savior wrought among them, to believe him worthy to be Crucified at
last: Luke 23.34.
And yet our Savior himself imputes this grossest of Crimes to Weakness, and
not to Malice; and St. Peter in some measure excuses, not only the People, but
their Rulers also, Act. 3.17.
upon this account: Of such strange force were the Prejudices of Education,
Honor, and Worldly Interest, for perverting the Understandings of these men.
But if in such a case as this, men could refuse to hearken to the strongest
Evidences of Reason and Sense, no wonder that in any other case they can stop
their ears to the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely.

2. That the Pharisees did really act in the main upon Principles of Religion
and Conscience, we have good ground to think, when we consider that Character
our Savior gives of them, That they were spiritually proud, and strangely
opinionative of their Righteousness; by which they fancied they could merit
Salvation at God's hands: Luke 18.11.
As we find one of them therefore justifying himself before God in the Temple;
and another very confidently telling our Savior, Mat. 19.20.
That he had kept all the commandments from his youth up: For sure it is
impossible to think that men who serve not God with Sincerity, should flatter
themselves at this rate into opinions of their Righteousness; especially, that
such opinions should stick by them at the Day of Judgment: As our Savior
plainly points at this sort of men, when he tells us, Mat. 7.22.
That many shall come to him at that day, and say, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name done many
wondrous works? For how absurd is it to think, that Hypocrites can have the
Impudence to plead at this rate before Christ, at such a time when they cannot
but be sensible the thoughts of their hearts are all open and revealed to him?
Without doubt the utmost shame and confusion of face shall belong to such then:
Such are conscious to themselves of their own Wickedness; they know that what
good things they did in this life, were not done in Sincerity of heart; and it
is not a fit time surely then to urge those things in their Vindication, which
being done in Hypocrisy, have been condemned long since with the severest
Sentence by their Judge: Nor can I well perceive the force of that Declaration
of our Savior's, Mat 5.20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven; if the
Pharisees were downright Hypocrites: For what a mighty business is this, that
Christ should require the Righteousness of his Disciples to be greater than
that of those who were little better than Atheists? Who were all false and
impious at bottom; who had nothing in them of that Holiness they pretended to?
Who does not perceive the small Emphasis, or rather Vanity of such a
Declaration? Besides, that our Savior's after-Discourse is a plain Comment
upon this Text; wherein he shows his meaning to be, That his Disciples
Righteousness ought to exceed the Pharisees Righteousness, not in Sincerity,
but in Perfection of Obedience: And that by spiritualizing the Law of Moses,
and reforming those Corruptions which the Scribes and Pharisees had brought
into it by their Traditions.

3. Nor is it a sufficient Argument against this, That our Savior describes
the Pharisees so often by the Character of gross Hypocrites; as that they did
all things to be seen of men; Mat. 23.5 Mat. 23.27. Luke 11.44. Mat. 23.14.
that they were whited sepulchers, and graves which appeared not; that for a
pretense they made long prayers. For it is usual in Scripture for God to judge
otherwise of men's actions, than they themselves think or design: And if in
outward appearance any action be vicious, and so of bad Example, God will take
it many times in the worst sense, and impute it as done on purpose, and of
malice, though there were no such thing in the person's Intentions. Thus in the
case of Idolatry, God tells the Israelites, That they worshipped stocks and
stones for their God, Isa. 44.17.
and cried to those senseless things for help; whereas indeed it was only in
outward appearance they did this; and they worshipped God all this while under
the Similitude of those Graven Images they fell down before. Thus also men are
said in Scripture to deny God, Prove. 30.7. Phil. 3.19.
and to make gods of their bellies and their wealth, when they serve those
chiefly; not that they disbelieve the true God, or think their bellies and
their wealth to be gods really; but only that their outward actions look as if
their inward thoughts were of this nature: In like manner as the Pharisees are
styled Hypocrites by our Savior; not as tho they were such in a strict sense
of the word, but because they acted like Hypocrites. Their Religion indeed was
just such a sort of Religion, as we may suppose that of Hypocrites would be; a
Religion that busied it self only about such Duties as were most apt to gain
Applause and Admiration from the world; making light of other matters that were
of no less weight in themselves: Such a Religion, as taught them to make long
prayers, Mat. 23.14. Mat. 7.12. Mat. 23.23.
but to devour widows houses; to give gifts to the Temple, but to let their
Parents starve; to be very sober in their Coversations, but false and cruel in
their Dealings; to talk Scripture much, but to be proud and uncharitable in
their Applications of it. In short, for what there was of it, their Religion
was sincere enough; and it was not of direct intent, but by accident only, that
their Piety and Temperance proved such a cloak for their Knavery and
Oppression. But in regard men's Credulity was as much abused by their Sanctified
Behavior, as if they had designed it on purpose to draw them in; and Religion
was no less scandalized by it; therefore does our Savior interpret all they
did, of downright Hypocrisy.

4. I confess we read of one sort of Pharisees, that were called Sichemite
Pharisees, because they were supposed to take that Profession upon themselves
for worldly advantage; as Sichem Circumcised himself for the sake of Dinah: But
then these were but one Sect among seven of them, that Drusius reckons up; and
these of so small esteem among their own Party, as well as among the People,
compared with the rest, that they cannot reasonably be supposed to include the
main Body of the Pharisees, whom our Savior calls Hypocrites without
distinction. Besides that supposing these to be gross Hypocrites, this strongly
implies the other Sects not to have been so; the Exception confirming the Rule:
Nor could our Savior therefore in justice fix this Character of Hypocrites
upon the Pharisees, on account of these alone, whilst there were so many Sects
among them that deserved it not; no more than a Jew or Turh, suppose, can with
just reason charge Christians as being generally Atheists, tho there are many
of them in the world, whose words and actions give too great occasion for such
a Scandal: And still there is nothing that has been said about the Pharisees in
general, but is as applicable to these, as any others: For tho Worldly
Advantage was the great thing they minded, and so their Religion seemed but a
Pretense; yet no question but they might satisfy their Consciences in this
with most Hypocrites now-a days, That whatever others might think of them,
God's Glory indeed was the main thing they aimed at in their Practice of
Religion; and if they throve and prospered by this, if men admired them for
their Religious Strictnesses, and Worldly Profit flowed in by such means, this
was none of their fault, they might say; rather it was the peculiar Blessing of
God to them, for their Love and Fear of his Name.

5. And we have less reason to wonder, that the Pharisees could satisfy their
Consciences in the Practice of such gross sins as our Savior charges them
with, when we consider that odd Maxim, that is reported to have been generally
received by the Jewish Doctors, viz. That it is necessary for every man to
bestow his Diligence more especially about some one Precept of the Law; and
that if he be faithful and successful in this, it is enough to atone for his
Transgressions of all other Duties: For by this the Pharisees had liberty to
choose or let alone what Commandments they thought fit: And they might well
think it a notable pitch of Perfection to be careful in observing the better
half of their Law, (as they did) when the keeping one single Precept was so
Meritorious before God. Now the Pharisees darling sins were Covetousness and
Pride; and to secure themselves in the quiet possession of these, there were no
Duties they could better spare, in way of Composition with God, than Piety and
Temperance. Piety (such as theirs was) serving them with many opportunies for
gratifying their Pride; and Temperance being a frugal Virtue, which regulated
Expenses, for obliging their Covetousness: And therefore, lest an ordinary
practice of such Duties might not make the Merit of them sufficient, they were
willing to raise the Value of them by extraordinary Strictnesses: Mat 9 14.
They prayed long therefore, and fasted often, and made a mighty bustle in
washing pans and cups, Mark 7.4. Luke 11.42.
and tithing Mint and Cummin, to make their Piety more complete; and so
over-scrupulous were they (we have heard) in their Rules of Temperance, that
they could fasten the Names of Wine-bibber and Glutton even upon our Savior.
To which Duties they added a severe abstinence from Lascivious Acts, as things
of so scandalous a nature, they knew, that one trip in these was enough to ruin
their Reputation, by which their Pride and Covetousness were maintained. Nor do
I think it a contemptible Argument of the Pharisees Sincerity in these Duties,
that our Savior no where condemns them for any secret failings in them: For
Hypocrites, who design only a show of Religion, value not what sins they commit
in private: But our Savior, who knew the Pharisees hearts much better than
they themselves did, does in a great measure acquit them of this, by objecting
no such thing against them. The only considerable place unmentioned that I
know, relating to this, Mat. 23 3, 4.
is that Saying of his, That the Phari sees said, and did not; and that they
bound heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, which they themselves would not touch
with one of their fingers: But this plainly refers, not to their inward
thoughts, but their outward acts; as is evident from our Savior's commanding
his Disciples there, not to do after their works; and so is no proof of such
Hypocrisy being in them, as I have been speaking of: And indeed all of this
nature that can be concluded directly from this place, is only, That the
Pharisees sitting in Moses's seat, and so being Doctors of the Law, pressed
many Duties of Religion upon the People, which they themselves practiced not:
But sure, however reprovable the Ministers or Governors of any Church are, for
not observing those Duties they teach; yet ought they not to be looked upon
always as Hypocrites for this; many not having Grace to practice those things
they teach, though they may believe them sincerely enough to be right; and
especially such as these being obliged by virtue of their Office to inculcate
the Duties of Religion upon others, whatever their own failings may be. And
therefore, though our Savior condemns the Pharisees in this place, for laying
heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, which themselves would not touch; this
argues not the Hypocrisy, but the vanity and unreasonableness of their
Doctrines, in straining the Duties of Religion to impracticable heights, and
condemning others uncharitably for every lesser slip, when themselves were
daily guilty of much greater Crimes.

6. Wherefore, in fine, a man may be a Hypocrite, I think, tho he knows it not
himself; and it is not only to design contrary to his Professions of Holiness,
but to do contrary to them, that ranks him among such persons: And this I take
to be the nature of the Pharisees Hypocrisy: The Pharisees were such persons as
wise Agur speaks of, Prove. 30.12.
who were pure in their own eyes, and yet were not washed from their
filthiness: Men that appeared not only to others, but to themselves, very
Righteous persons: And they had no small reason to think thus of themselves,
had Piety and Temperance, and the like Duties, been the only things required of
us by God: But their great fault was, that resting altogether in Performances
of this nature, they became careless of other Duties no less necessary to
Salvation; such more especially are those that are called Social Virtues: For
they neglected those weighty matters of the Law (our Savior says) Judgment,
Mat. 23.23.
Mercy, and Faith; where by Judgment, he means Justice; by Mercy, Charity; by
Faith, Faithfulness in dealing; by all of these, the whole of our Duty toward
our Neighbor: These the Pharisees made little account of, as Duties of an
inferior rank, which even Heathens and Sinners (for so their Spiritual Pride
prompted them to call every one almost that was not of their own Sect)
practiced. But whatever the Pharisees might think of such Duties, Mat. 22.36.
our Savior looks upon them as no other than the one half of Religion; and
this of such esteem in his sight, that the most specious Holiness was but as a
piece of Pageantry and mock show with him, when such substantial Duties were
neglected. It is by these therefore, that he has taught us to know Hypocrites,
as by their fruits; Mat. 7.16.
and by the same marks he himself judges of the Pharisees; because these fruits
of Righteousness appeared not in their lives; but how fair or promising soever
the Tree might seem, they were either wholly barren in Good Works, or else
produced Fruits quite contrary to expectation, Fruits that were noxious and
fatal to such who conversed with them; therefore does our Savior pronounce
them to be Hypocrites; Mat. 23.14.
therefore does he declare that they shall receive the greater damnation. And
this Notion of the Pharisees Hypocrisy, as I take it to be most just and true
in it self, so does it best agree with that common Notion we have of a
Pharisaical Righteousness; whereby we don't mean a Counterfeit one, but a vain
and empty one, that consists in forms of godliness, denying the power thereof;
which ought to show it self in Good Works.

7. Nor ought this to be reckoned a vain Subject of Discourse nowa days; for
though the Pharisees have long since been dead and rotten in their Graves, yet
are their Principles and Practices still stirring among us; and there are many,
it is to be seared, to whom the Name of a Pharisee is sufficiently odious, who
yet, by mistaking the Nature of the Pharisees Hypocrisy, reckon it a great
Perfection in Religion to imitate them in their most distinguishing Qualities:
For we live in an Age wherein the greatest Pretenders to Religion are so taken
up with shows of Holiness, that they mind little else; ard this with no less
Satisfaction to themselves, than Applause and Admiration from the people.
Insomuch, that if Christ were to appear again upon earth with those innocent
freedoms he allowed himself in here, and a strict Pharisee at the same time,
with long prayers, and a face disfigured, and eyelids continually lift up, and
a brow knit at every little liberty men took, (tho without offense to God), it
is little to be questioned, if some were to be the Judges, which would be
reckoned the greater Saint of the two. Our Savior's Modesty and Good Works
would in all likelihood weigh as little among such, for turning the scale on
his side, as the Pharisees Pride and Injustice would hinder it from turning the
other way. Such sins as these being reckoned at worst but specks in God's
Children, which God will not be extreme to mark; and such therefore as shall
make a better show among some people, when gilded over by a specious Holiness,
than the Virtues of other men, whose Conversations are not altogether so
Formal. As long as such Principles and Practices as these are thus taking in
the world, it cannot certainly be unseasonable to show the dangerousness of
them; which I think sufficiently appears in this Case of the Pharisees; for it
was these chiefly, we see, that occasioned those many Woes which our Savior
pronounces against them. They contented themselves with a halfface Religion,
which looked fair toward God, but was full of Pride and the like Deformities
on the other side, carrying Guile and Oppression in it toward their Neighbor.
And our Savior is so far from approving this, that he looks upon them as no
other than Hypocrites for it. So odious in his esteem were these Vices of
theirs, which many make so light of, that not their Fastings and Prayers, not
their Attendance upon Ordinances, not all their Zeal and Strictnesses in other
parts of Religion, could recommend them to one good word from him, when
attended with such Moral Defects as these. Certainly a plain Argument of the
Excellency of Moral Precepts; and such as might be sufficient to make those
ashamed who upbraid our Church with insisting upon such Precepts, and pretend
to make distinctions betwixt Preaching Christ and these: As if to Preach
Christ, were any thing else than to Preach those Duties which Christ has
commanded; and as if there were any Duties that are urged upon men's Practice by
Christ, under more pressing Circumstances than these. Tho God forbid here, that
I should be thought any ways to vilify the Duties of real Piety, so as to
prefer Moral Duties before them, much less to reckon them of small weight in
themselves: For when all is done, To Love the Lord our God with all our heart
and all our souls, Mat. 22.38.
is the first and great commandment. And this is that, under Christ, which
sanctifies every Moral work we do; These being altogether vain and fruitless in
the way to Salvation, when not acted with a design of pleasing God, and setting
forth his Glory thereby: But what I have said, is only to show, That to Love
our Neighbor as our selves, is that second commandment which is like unto the
first; Ibid. 39.
and that without doing this Will of our Heavenly Father, there is no entering
into the Kingdom of God: For as our Savior tells the Pharisees in a somewhat
parallel case, Tho the former ought to be done, this latter ought by no means
to be left undone; and there is no less danger in omitting one than the other.

FINIS.

