A TREATISE OF Growth in Grace, IN SUNDRY SERMONS: Preached by that lately
eminent Servant of JESUS CHRIST, SAMUEL SLATER, late of St. KATHERINES near the
TOWER.

Psalm. 92. 12, 13, 14. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm tree; he
shall grow like a Cedar in Libanon, etc.

Hosea 14. 5. I will be as the dew unto Israel; he shall grow as the Lilly, and
cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

Heb. 13. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the Word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation.

London, Printed for R. Boulter, at the Turks Head in Cornhil, over againgst
the Royal Exchange, 1671.

To the Reader.
READER,
THE Subject of this Book is Growth in Grace, a noble Subject, yea the most
noble; for what is more excellent and desirable than Grace, and Growth in it?
Thereby our Election, likeness unto God, union with Christ, inhabitation of the
Spirit, ripeness and readiness for Glory, are clearly evidenced unto us. This
is therefore the principal Argument wherewith a gracious Soul should be taken,
and lay out the principallest of its time and strength in getting thereof, and
growing therein: It argues ignobleness of spirit to set any limit or measure to
Grace and Holiness, shorter than what the Spirit of God it self has set, viz.
The measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; whosoever does it, blunts the
edge of desires and endeavors, and will sit down content with one grain of
Grace. The Reverend, laborious and judicious Preacher of these Sermons, whose
Growth in Grace was well known, would have you, not only gracious, but
eminently gracious, Cedars, not shrubs, which will tend to your greater
advantage than can be expressed: Be pleased therefore to read, and seriously
consider, what is herein tendered unto you, and you will find your hearts so
warmed thereby, that you will be of the Authors mind, concerning the great Duty
of growing in Grace; which that you may be, and so do, is the Prayer of him who
desires your Perfection.

SERMON. I.
2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: To him be Glory, both now and for ever, Amen.
WHen the Apostle had cautioned the holy persons that he deals withal
concerning their stedfastness, and stability; he subjoyns ^in the words that I
have read) a further duty, and brings it in with a but; importing that it was
not enough for them for to keep their stedfastness; not sufficient to the
discharge of them, that they lost no ground, that they did not go back, that
there were not a retrograde motion: But they must look onward, says he, you
must be careful that you do not fall from your stedfastness. I but that is not
all, you must not only be sted^st, and settled in your condition and state, but
you must be upon your advances; you must be careful of this, that you grow; not
only that you do not decay, but that you increase: not only that you do not
abate, but that you do advance: not only that you hold your own, but that you
get more and more of the Grace which you are already partaker of. A great duty,
which I would speak something to: and the point is clearly and plainly from the
Text this,

Doctr. That they that are called to be partakers of Grace, must be careful of
this, that they grow in Grace. They that have Grace (have it in the truth of
it) must not rest in that; No, they must not: but their duty is to grow in
Grace.

Now will you consider a little this burden of duty: It is properly to be laid
upon the shoulder and back of a Saint. It is a duty properly belonging to such
as have Grace to perform. It were a vain thing for to persuade a man that has
no life in him, for to look to his health, to the improvement of his strength.
It is as vain a thing for to persuade a man that is dead in sins and trespasses,
that is a stranger to Grace, to persuade him to abound in Grace, to grow in
Grace: There must be Generation, before there can be Augmentation: there must
be life before there can be growth. And therefore that which is properly to be
urged upon such as have no Grace, is that they would look about them, and so
far as may be get in with God. Though it is true, it is impossible for any
person that is a stranger to Grace, to perform any act of Grace, in order to
the partaking of Grace: but we must wait upon God, using exhortations, and see
how the Lord will please to come in, and set them home upon the heart. But
such, it is their duty, whether they can do it or no: It Is their duty to look
out after Grace, to have it, that so having it, they may increase in it. But
otherwise, for increase and growth in Grace, that is not a duty so properly to
be charged upon persons that are strangers to it: And let such consider with
themselves, how sad their condition is: Such as have no Grace at all, how sad
their condition is upon this account, That they are not in a capacity for to
have such a duty imposed and charged upon them.

But secondly, Consider that this duty of growing in Grace: It is most properly
belonging to them to perform, that are already partakers of Grace: That have
sparks stricken by God, their duty is that they nourish and cherish their
sparks, and do labor to bring it up to a flame. Grace, it is a seed of Gods
casting into the soul, and sometimes it is very inconsiderable as to the bulk
and magnitude of it, but like a grain of Mustard Seed: I but it ^mproveable,
and it is a duty incumbent upon them that have this Seed cast into them, to
improve it, that it may grow up to a great tree.

It is a duty. It Is most true also that it is a privilege. It is the privilege
of a Saint and Believer, that he shall grow. They that are planted in the house
of the Lord (as we had it in the Psalm that we sung), they shall flourish in
the Courts of our God: They shall spring, flourish as the Palm Tree, grow as
the Cedars in Lebanon. This is the privilege: this is one branch of the
Covenant that God has made with his people. I but you must know, that these
privileges they are not granted to us, that we should be careless and
sloathful, but rather to quicken us up to diligence in duty: And indeed our
duties do lie much in privileges; that which is a privilege, is also a duty:
As to instance,

It Is the privilege of a believer, that he shall be kept through the power of
God through Faith unto unto Salvation. But it is withal, the duty of a Believer
to keep himself. He that is born of God, he keeps himself, and the wicked one
touches him not: And Gods keeping of his Saints, is by the means of their care
and diligence for to keep themselves.

It is the privilege of a Believer, a Covenant privilege, that he shall not
depart from God. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me: But it is also the duty of a child of God, to do his utmost
endeavor, and to use his greatest diligence and care, that he never do depart
from God: And by that care of his, not to depart from God, God does bring over
to him the comfort and benefit of the Covenant-priviledg, that he shall not
depart from him. And truly we cannot reckon upon the comfort and benefit of ^e
privilege, any further than we are careful to answer to our duty. God will be
true to his promise; and he discovers his faithfulness in performing his
promise of working up the hearts of his people to a care of doing their duty.
So far this particular.

It is the privilege of a Saint, that he shall grow: Shall he? I but its his
duty to grow: God has made it both a privilege and a duty* and if so be that
we shall have the comfort of the privilege, we must make Conscience of
performing the duty, and make it our business from day to day to be growing in
Grace.

Grow in Grace,] Truly it is a strange kind of Riddle, and I do profess I would
be seriously minded in what I speak now, speaking to a point that does very
nearly concern all that do pretend to Grace and holiness. I say, that I am
speaking to a point which I think is as misterious, one of them, as mo^ that
concern practical godliness. And I am apt to think there is as little of
judiciousness discovered in the part of Godly persons, of those that are truly
godly; as little of judicial observance discovering it self about this thing,
as about any one thing that concerns practical Godliness. Growth in Grace; our
Consciences are able to witness with us, or against us, whether we study this
matter, whether we bestow any serious thoughts about it, yea or no: whether we
understand it, and know what belongs to this growth in Grace, and are able to
give any good account of it: I doubt there are many who are right in the main,
that are at a very great loss conc^rning the right understanding of this
matter, and are not able to give any comfortable account; a judicious account
concerning themselves, and how far they are responsible to God concerning this
thing: Judge in your selves whether this be not the height of your godliness,
and your utmost reach in your profession. You have solicitous thoughts about
Grace about the in-being, indwelling, implantation of Grace in you. You may
have, and must have, if you be gracious, such solicitous thoughts. Exercise
your selves with serious considerations to such a purpose: My soul, is there
any grace of God in thee, or art thou a stranger to it? Is there any saving
work upon thee yea or no? I know this, that every one that has a saving
impress upon his Spirit, will be exercising himself to this purpose, and labor
to understand himself concerning this matter, whether he have Grace yea or no.
But as to this duty in the Text, concerning growth in Grace, alas how few are
there that busy their heads about it, or are able judiciously to manage and
perform a search into themselves concerning it, or to give a good account about
this mat^er. I shall speak more to that afterward, God assisting: Now I give a
hint of it, and do speak this the rather, because it being given us in
Commission to preach this Doctrine, and to press this duty. I speak the rather
in this sort, that you may come to have more serious thoughts concerning that
which I have to assert from this Text, and to press upon you as a duty, that we
are to grow in Grace. And to settle this upon your apprehensions, That it is as
much a duty for persons to increase in Faith, as it is for to have Faith: it is
as much a duty for to grow in Grace, as for to press after Grace, though it may
be we do not so reckon upon it. But I can tell you, the same God that has
commanded the one, has commanded the other: We are under as strong an
obligation that we may grow in Grace, as to use our diligence that we may come
to be made partakers of Grace.

It is a duty for those that have Grace, to grow in it. What Is the meaning of
that? Its true, there is a metaphor in the phrase, its taken from living
things, that having life, so there is a growth. Dead things cannot grow,
straws, sticks, and stubble, these things they are dead things, and they cannot
grow. But there must be a supposition of life where there is a growth.

Now to grow, what is it? Why plainly thus; when you hear this is a duty that
is incumbent upon you, to grow in Grace; you must not only be good, but very
good, be better and better, and endeavor to exceed your selves. Good to day,
better to morrow: Gracious this year, far more gracious the next year:
Acquainted with God now, more than acquaintance with God in process of time.
Grow in Grace, that you may excel your selves: Not only be better than others,
better than others that have no Grace; nay, better than others that have Grace,
that you may go beyond them: and know, your duty is, that you may go beyond
your selves; that you may be more in Faith, more in Repentance, more in Love,
more in holiness, more in the fear of God; that you may go from strength to
strength: that you may Mutare vires, as the phrase is in the 40. Isai. They
that wait upon the Lord, they shall renew their strength: they shall change
their strength: they shall go from strength to strength; from one strength to
another: this is to grow in Grace. To be as good for God, as good for heaven,
as possibly we can; reckoning upon this, we can never be too fit for heaven, we
can never be too holy for the enjoyment of the inheritance that is
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away: this is your duty, you that
are the subjects of grace. Such of you as God has bestowed any grace upon,
this is your duty, to grow in grace. And that it is a duty, it appears all
along in Scripture. How often are we called upon to increase with the increase
of God, to increase more and more; to abound, and be upon our advancements.
This is that which the Scripture does press upon us very much.

And it is a duty with respect to Grace: Not only with respect to Gifts: It Is
true indeed, such as have the gifts of the Spirit, they should endeavor to
grow in them; as the Apostle speaks, that they should abound in knowledge, and
in utterance, and the like. Not only in gifts, for that's a duty, to grow in
gifts, in knowledge, and in utterance: but especially to grow in grace.

And it is a duty that is incumbent upon all that are gracious: They that are
Babes, they must grow, that so they may come to be strong men. They that are
strong men, they must grow still, that they may come to be stronger and
stronger; that the feeble, according to that expression in the 12th of
Zechariah, may be as David, and that David may be as the Angel of God: this is
that that is required of us. Weak Believers, they must grow, grow strong
Believers: Strong Believers must labor to grow still, grow stronger and
stronger in their believing. Christians, Professors duty is to grow strong in
grace; and not only so, but Ministers, the dispensers of the Mysteries of God,
its as much their duty, as the duty of the Professors, to be upon their growth
in grace. Give diligence, says the Apostle to Timothy 1 Ep. 1. 4. Give
attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine; that thy profiting may
appear to all.

But what are the requisites of this growth? That I shall speak to in a few
words, what a growth it must be.

1. It must be a perceivable growth: It should be so. The growth of a Saint in
grace, it should be a perceivable growth, a visible growth, a growth that may
be perceived and apprehended, a Judgment may be made upon it: Such a growth the
Apostle speaks of in that place I mentioned. Give attendance to these and these
courses, that thy profiting may appear to all. Why truly the growth or a
Believer in grace, we should endeavor that it may be a perceivable growth: As
a man by observation can say, I set such a plant in my Garden or Orchard, and I
do perceive that within such a time it is grown so much higher, and stronger.
And so for children, there is a perceivable growth in them; you may observe how
they grow in process of time. Such a growth we should endeavor after, that it
may be perceived by others, by our selves; that we may be able to give an
account of it, and say, as David speaks, In the day whereon I did call uprn
thee, thou did answer me, and thou did strengthen me with strength in my
soul.

2. As a perceivable growth so it should be a proportionable growth. If we will
approve our selves in this matter, our growth in grace, it must be a
proportionable growth; proportionable to time which God affords us. What! so
long under the Ministry of the Gospel, and in the profession of godliness so
long standing; proportionable to the time of our standing, should be our
increases. Why then we should be of a greater growth than others that are but
of a later Plantation. The Apostle speaks to that purpose in Heb. 5. For the
time, says he, you might have been teachers of others, you might have come to
this, to have been fit to feed upon stronger meat. But, says he, you had need
to be taught the very first principles, and to be fed nith milk. And this he
speaks to their shame, and in a way of blame.

And then secondly, A proportionable growth there must be in grace,
proportionable to the means that God has been pleased to afford: Such and such
large allowances, and not answer them: Why it will turn to the shame and
reproach of a Professor, let him be what he will (...), if his improvements do
not hold some proportion to his enjoyments: If he do not in some measure answer
his growth, to the time, and the means, it turns to his dishonor.

And Thirdly, If it be right, it must be a fructifying growth, a growth with
fruit: so as still we must grow more and more fruitful; fruitful in all the
duties of godliness; that as we get more in says, more in love, increase more
in holiness, and in spiritual strength; so we are the more in spiritual
fruitfulness, do more for God. Would it be to the satisfaction of an Orchard
Planter, to have a tree, that when it was young, and of lesser growth, bring
forth, it may be twenty Apples in a year, and when it comes to be of seven
years growth more, to bring forth no more Apples; this-will not be to his
satisfaction. So for a Christian that is but of a younger Plantation, to bring
forth such and such fruit, and then when he has been seven and seven years
longer in the profession of Christianity, to vi^ld as little, nay it may be
less fruit to God then he did in his beginning: Truly this is not well, there
must be fruitfulness, and a growth in fruitfulness.

And then it must be a lasting and continuing growth. I tell you Brethren,
think of it how we will, the truth is, if it be well with us, we must grow as
long as we are on this side Heaven, but that indeed is no place of growth. Mark
that; when once a Saint comes to Heaven, he comes to his perfection, he comes
to have a consistency: then he shall be as good as God would have him to be,
and as good as his heart can desire to be: But while we are on this side
Heaven, there must be growing, or else it is not right with us.

You see I have endeavored with as much plainness as possibly I can to settle
this upon your hearts, concerning growth in grace; That it is a duty: Of what
interpretation it is: And what a growth it is that God requires. Now for the
Reasons of it.

Grow in Grace: Why it must needs be so. Why Brethren how else will God be
glorified by us; how can persons that have grace, think that they can glorify
God, if they do not grow in it? I tell you, Believers and Saints, they are Gods
children; they are children of Gods begetting; they are begotten of an immortal
seed through the Word, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 1. Why now consider, is it
for the honor of a Father, to have a child begotten by him that proves a very
dwarf; abides and continues in the same proportion and stature that he was born
in: there is no increase, either in understanding, or in stature, or in
strength, but a poor creature, a very Babe; so born, and so continues. Is it
for the honor of God to have such kind of children? To beget children to
himself by Grace, and to have them stand at a stay, and to have no growth.
Believers are the planting of the Lord: Observe that place in the 61. of Isai.
ver. 3. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, etc. And he has anointed me, To
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes; the
Oil of Joy for mourning; the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness;
that they might be called Trees of Righteousness, The Planting of the Lord,
that he might be Glorified. Mark here, they are the planting of the Lord, and
plants being planted, there is such a course taken with them, that they may
come to grow to bulky-trees: That they may be Trees of Righteousness, that God
may he glorified: That God may have the honor of his Plantation, and say, This
Plant I set in my Vineyard; It was little, and slender, and small, at the first
Plantation, but see how its grown, grown up to a bulky Tree. This is his glory,
this is the glory of the Planter, to see his Plant growing up, and becoming
bulky, a Tree of Righteousness. What honor is it to God, to have a Professor
planted, and continuing a poor slender twig, and nothing of strength, or
stature.

2. Our Duty is to grow; to grow in Grace. Why Breth^en, Grace is not worthily
dealt withal, nor do we answer the purpose of God in bestowing it upon us, if
we do not grow in it. Why its given as a stock to Trade withal. Five Talents
given to one; to what purpose? That he might employ them, and improve them;
that he might grow in his state; and so two Talants. And it was to the prais.
and honor of the servants that they were able to give an account of their
Improvement. Grace is given as a stock to trade withal; and it is such a stock
as is Improvable to most blessed purposes. Grace has an aptitude to grow, and
we deal unworthily wi^h the Grace of God. Faith is vesy apt to grow; Love,
Holiness, every Grace, very apt to grow: And if we keep this Grace, and do not
advance in it, we walk most unworthily of it.

3. And then consider further, That this is the very scope and purpose of the
Ordinances which God has appointed in his Church. One of the main Intents and
purposes of God in setting up a Ministry in the Church, is, Not only that
people might be planted and brought over to Grace, but that they might grow and
increase unto a goodly stature. Observe that passage in Ephesians. 4. The Apostle
gives us a clear account to this purpose: He gave some Apostles some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we
all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. This
is the scope of the Ministry. Judge now what a strange apprehension that is
which some have had, and it may be have still; That now they are above
Ordinances: They are come to such a pitch, as they need give no more attendance
to the Ordinances, when as this is the very scope of them, Till we come to the
fullness of the stature. So that I say, this is one special end of God in giving
the Ordinances, that Grace being wrought, it might be improved, and that there
might be an increase, and an advance in it. And Brethren, what shall we think,
that God has provided that there should be Precept upon Precept, Line upon
Line, Sermon after Sermon, Sabbath after Sabbath; Ordinance after Ordinance, in
the succession of them, and all to this purpose, that his people might hold
their own only, and stand at a stay, and not be a jot the better.

4. And then let us consider thus with our selves, Truly the times are such,
and it may be will appear to be more and more such, that as touching converting
work, truly we see little of that; as if God had upon the matter his number:
Nothing to what has formerly discovered it self in the way of the Gospel, and
Gospel Ministry: Alas what should we do with the Ministry, if while there is
little or nothing of converting work, there be nothing of increasing work; what
should we do Preaching? You will say (it may be) you are converted to God, and
brought over to Faith and Grace. Well, if you will rest in this condition, and
look no further, and press no higher, and not endeavor after increase, what
should we continue Preaching, and for what purpose should God continue his
servants and Ministry, and Ordinances to a people, if they will not mind their
growth? And what encouragement can we have to attend this service, if we
Preach, and Preach, and Preach; and still you continue what you were.

5. And then withal, we have a Head, a glorious Head, our Lord Jesus Christ;
and our duty is to grow, that we may come to hold some proportion to the Head;
to come to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

6. And then consider, That this Life is not the time of perfection. God
requires we be perfect, Be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. Are we
come to perfection? then indeed we may discharge our selves of the Duty; but
till we come to be perfect, truly we had need be pressing on, and be still upon
our growth.

SERMON. II.
I Shall now proceed further in this Argument concerning growth in Grace: And
before I come to make use of this point, I think it very requisite to give you
some account of the Reasons which this Chapter (besides what might be drawn up
from the whole Epistle) which I have spent so much time upon. The Reasons that
it holds forth unto you, and with respect unto which, the Apostle does give
this in charge, and thus require of Professors, that they grow in Grace. And if
the things be but well weighed, truly we shall find that there are very
pressing Reasons and Arguments to be drawn from this very Chapter, to promote
this cause, and to quicken Professors to diligence and care, that they may
answer this, though that is laid upon them. And be pleased now to take a brief
account of some of the particulars which lie before us in the Chapter.

1. First of all, The Apostle speaks of the last days, ver. 4. He intimates to
us, that there are days which shall be the terminating days of time. Days
which shall put an end (by their expiration) to time. And so it shall come to
pass, that time shall be no more; there are the last days. And forasmuch as
this charge that is given here, To grow in Grace, does in a special manner
refer to such times and days, which shall be the last days, the concluding
days: Truly there is very great reason that Professors that are reserved for
these last days, should look well to their growth. Alas, if so be that the
Corn be not of a considerable growth, if the Harvest is near at hand, when the
growing time comes to beat an end, what hope is there to be had concerning it.
If so be that Professors that have the last days coming upon them, shall not
be found to be in a growing condition, and be careful to answer their duty this
way, how will they be able to comport with these last days.

2. The Apostle intimates to us, That in these last days there shall come
scoffers. (You must understand that these things refer to these latter ages,
and this latter time of the world that we are fallen into). There shall come
scoffers, that shall do what they can to scoff others out of their Religion,
and make a very mock of Godliness, and upbraid the Servants of God with their
hopes and expectations. Now upon this account it is most rational, that the
Apostle should thus give in charge, That Professors look to their growth in
Grace, that they may be able, being well improved in the Grace that is bestowed
upon them, they may be enabled to bear up against all the scorns, and scoffs,
and derisions that they may meet withal from men of profane spirits; lest
otherwise, through want, or weakness in Grace, they bedasht out of countenance,
and so either desert their cause, or act unworthily in the management of it:
that's a second thing. Truly its a great trial, the trial of mocking and
scoffing; When men shall meet with such kind of dealing at the hands of
profane wretches; when they shall flout and jeer at them for their profession,
and for the hopes that they bear upon; truly its a great trial, and it requires
a considerable strength of Grace to be able to bear up under such a trial. Well
may the Apostle therefore charge this upon Christians and Believers, that they
look to their growth in Grace, because there are last times, and because there
will come scoffers in those last times.

3. Consider this withal, That these scoffers, they are such as shall walk
after their own lusts: And Lusts they are violent, where they have their
predominancy, and carry on in a very sharp impetuous manner; and if so be there
be not a considerable improvement in Grace, an advance in Grace, Professors, if
they be but weaklings, will not be well able to stand before the violence of
ungodly men, that are under the power of their own lusts.

4. Consider, That in these last days there shall be scoffers, walking after
their own Lusts, that shall engage to a dispute against that great Promise of
the coming of the Lord Jesus; That Promise which is one of the main foundations
whereupon Believers have to bottom, and found their hope and confidence
toward God. Ho: disputes there are against the promise of the coming of the
Lord Jesus; and there will be an endeavoring to invalidate the promise, and to
shake the hope, and the faith, and confidence of Believers concerning this
promise of his coming. Now, upon this account, (in the next place,) It is most
rational that the Apostle should press upon Believers, a care of growth in
Grace, that so they may be able in the strength of that Grace which they have
received, and which is well improved in them, to hear up against all the
shakings, and that they may be able for to break the force of whatsoever
Argument may be urged against this blessed promise.

5. The Apostle gives us an account concerning most stupendous providence,
stupendous and amazing providence that should be ordered out: For, says he;
The Heavens shall pass away with a noise, the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat; and the Earth, with the works therein, shall be burned up. Now, upon this
account, it is most properly chargeable upon Believers, that they look to their
Grace, and to their growth in Grace; that being corroborated and well
strengthened in the Grace which they have received, they may be enabled to bear
up under the most astonishing and stupendous providence: that when others
shall say, (as Balaam speaks) Alas, who shall live when God does this? who
shall live! why, a Believer, a Saint of God, being well grown, having his Grace
well improved, may be able to say, I doubt it not, but by the help of the Grace
of God in Christ, I shall be able to bear up, and lift up my head with joy, and
stand with boldness before God, when others may fall under deepest
despondences, and be under the power of astonishment, upon the account of such
stupendous providence.

6. I add, That the Apostle gives an account concerning a promise, which shall
be assuredly performed in due time; of having new heavens, and a new earth,
wherein dwells righteousness: And forasmuch as there is such a promise, which
is of surest accomplishment; truly it is very requisite, that Believers that
were planted under the hope and expectation of having such a promise performed,
that they should look unto their growth in Grace, that they come to be so
improved in their Faith, and Godliness, that they may carry a suitableness unto
such a time, and such a state as that: That they may be able for to bear up
under the contemplation of the Glory that shall shine forth from these new
heavens, and this new earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. You must think,
that a little, small, inconsiderable portion of Grace, will not be so
answerable unto such a time, and such a state, as God has by promise engaged
himself for to advance his people to; so that, in that respect, the Apostle
does most fitly press this growth in Grace.

7. God, though he have made promises of his coming, and his coming to make a
new heaven, and a new earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell; yet
notwithstanding he has put a long date upon these promises, and it will be
long before such time as these promises shall have their accomplishment: Why,
God is not slack concerning his promise, but yet for all that, he takes a long
date, and so it appears; for it is now about 1600 years since this Epistle was
written, and these things communicated to the Churches and Saints, for the
benefit of their souls. Now, in this regard, well might the Apostle require, on
the part of Believers and Saints, a growth in Grace, that they may be enabled
patiently to wait upon God, and to run through all the varieties of providence
which should be ordered out upon them, and undergo all the difficulties and
hardships which they were or are to be put upon, in order to the enjoyment of
the promises which God has made; which will not well be done without a
considerable growth in Grace: so that, let that be considered of; that this
growth in Grace, it is most properly chargeable upon Believers, upon this
account, that God is pleased for to take a long day, and to hold his people
long in expectation of the accomplishment of the promises that he has made.
And then,

8. I add this; That, as in all times, there have been, so there will be in
these latter times, such as shall have their errors, dangerous errors, errors
that are proper for wicked men, Errors of the wicked: by means of which errors,
the Saints may be brought into great danger of falling from their own
steadfastness, according to what the Apostle does also express, toward the
latter end of this Chapter, and as I have discoursed largely upon. There will
be errors of the wicked, which will endanger the Saints, as to their
steadfastness; and upon this account, the Apostle does most fitly enjoin this
duty of growth in Grace. So that now, these 8 things being duly weighed and
considered of, we may clearly see how properly the Apostle does in the close of
this Epistle, give this in charge unto the Saints and Believers, that they look
to their growth in Grace. These things I do subjoyn to the Discourse I
maintained the last day.

Applic. And now I shall come to the Application of all. Truly, there is a
great latitude wherein I might proceed. I might have proceeded in the Doctrinal
part, and so might in the Application, and Use making of this point: but I
shall contract my self as much as I can.

First of all, we may gather from hence; That, forasmuch as it is a duty
charged upon those that have Grace, that they do grow in Grace: We may infer
from the premises, that Christians and Believers are not perfect at once; they
have not their perfection in a moment. The womb of Gods decrees, and of the
promises, do not bring forth perfect births, that are perfect at once. A Nation
may be born in a day, a Saint may be born in a moment; but he is not born a
perfect Saint in a moment: Believers have not their perfection at once. It is
otherwise in the second Creation than it was in the first; Adam was created a
perfect man, perfect in righteousness and holiness at the first: it is not so in
the second Creation, it is not so in the Regeneration. In the first Generation
it was thus; God makes the womb to travel and bring forth, and the births were
perfect births; it is not so in the Regeneration: Perfect births there are,
though they are such as shall be brought in due time to their perfection. It Is
a saying of one, No man is perfectly wicked at first; so, no man is exactly and
perfectly godly at once: Grace, it comes into the soul by Gradatem, by degrees:
now a little, and then a little: the light of a Saint, it is like the light of
the day, that breaks out more and more, until it comes unto the perfect day;
thus it is in Grace. But take this withal, we speak of Grace as it is inherent,
Grace, as it is a quality implanted in the soul. There is this difference to be
put between Justification and Sanctification, and so between Adoption and
Sanctification. Justification, perfect in a moment; it does not admit of
degrees; a man is not more justified at one time than another: It Is true, a
Believer may be more clear in the apprehension of his Justification, he may
come to have more comfortable assurance of his Justification at one time than
another. But Justification, it is once, and together, and it is perfect: A
justified man is as much justified upon the first act of believing and closing
with Christ, as ever he shall be all his days, though his justification is not
so fully manifested. -- And so Adoption, a child of God, that is to be made
partaker of the Adoption; he is as truly a child of God at first, as in process
of time. But it is not so as touching Sanctification, Sanctification it comes
in in a gradual way: sanctified a Believer ^s, and is more and more sanctified;
he is made more holy, he is brought to Faith, and comes to have his improvement
in Faith: And so it is true of all other the inherent Graces, they are brought
on by degrees.

2. I infer thus, That if it be the duty of Christians and Believers to grow in
Grace; this is a duty, and according to the will of God. Then certainly, it is
no duty to grow in sin, but rather the contrary; we have Gods allowance, and
his command for it, that there be a growth in Grace: Why, it is contrary then
unto the will and command of God, that any person should grow in sin: you have
no command for that: nay, there is no allowance for men to be any thing in sin:
it is the will of God that we be not sinful; it is the express command of God
that we do not sin: then certainly, we must reckon upon it, that it is
altogether contrary to the will and command of God, that persons should grow in
sin: and yet, alas, how much is there of such a monstrous, hellish growth in
the World? We may observe how men grow from bad to worse; they grow bigger and
bigger, and more bulky in their wickednesses and prophanenesses from day to
day, according to what the Apostle fore-tells in the last days, 2. Tim. 3.
Evil men and deceivers shall wax worse and worse: They are bad enough, when
they are at the lowest; and yet, as if it were not sufficient, they must be
upon their advancings and improvements in wickedness; thus it is with many. A
woeful growth, to see men shooting up a-pace in wickedness, increasing in their
ungodliness, growing up in pride and profaneness, and coming up to a height in
impiety. Thus it is, but woe be to them who are found to be persons of such a
growth, that grow in sin, that grow most strong to act their impieties, and to
carry on their mischievous designs, and bear up in ways of ungodliness. As
touching such, I say this, That they will know in time, that their growth is
stinted, and their measure is determined. Grant it, that they do fill up the
ephah, they shall do no more than so (...) and when the ephah is once full, the
talent of lead shall be surely laid upon it, to sink it down into everlasting
destruction. But,

3. Consider this, It is a duty charged upon us, and especially such as are
partakers of the Grace of Christ, that they grow in Grace: Let us now reflect
upon our selves; especially such of us, concerning whom it may be presumed, and
hoped, that the Grace of God is in them. Truly it is a great duty, and it is
that that God expects the performance of from us; and it is that which I am sent
this morning for to deal with you about: you that are the sons and daughters of
Grace, you that are partakers of the Calling of God according to his purpose:
it is that which lies upon you, to bethink your selves concerning this matter;
it is a duty clearly lying before you in the Text, it is required of you; God
has given it in charge, that you grow in Grace: You are as much bound to grow
in Grace, as you are bound to have Grace: it is as much required of you, that
you increase in Faith, as that you be in the Faith: it is as much required of
you, that you endeavor perfecting of holiness, as that you be partakers of
holiness; this is your duty, and this is that which the Lord does in his word
up and down, require at your hands. Then consider, you that are, and may be
presumed and hoped for, to be the sons and daughters of Grace; (as I was
saying,) Let me beseech you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, that you would but
bethink your selves, and consider; Do you persuade your selves in your
consciences, and have you some good ground to be so persuaded, that the Grace
of God is in you, in the truth of it; that God has kindled a spark, that God
has made a plantation, that he has made some impress upon your spirits; are
you so persuaded? Will you then consider with your selves, that this duty lies
upon your hand; it is incumbent upon you, you are charged with it, that you
grow, that you do not rest in this, that you have a spark, but that you improve
it to a flame; that it be not only a plantation, but that it be an
augmentation: this is the will of God, this is that that is required of you.
The Father that has begotten you by Grace, and begotten you to Grace, has
begotten you, not that you should always be babes in Grace, no, he has not;
he would have you to be upon your growth, and increase, and that you may
increase with all the increase of God; this is your duty, and you cannot deny
it, you must acknowledge it, the text does charge it upon you, (besides many
other Scriptures) that you grow in Grace.

I, but is it so? can you give a good account of it? Nay, consider whether your
consciences have not this to blame you for, and to use very sharp discipline
upon you, in regard, in that of a truth, you do not much intend this matter,
you do not much mind growth in Grace: Truly, I am very apt to think, that there
are many professors of the Gospel; who, it may be, and we may comfortably hope
they are sound in the main, have the root of the matter in them, and yet
entertain very little thoughts of the matter concerning their growth. The great
business that they engage themselves unto is this, that they may labor to make
as sure work as they can, that there be the truth of Grace in their hearts,
that there be the root of the matter; that there be a spark from Heaven struck
into them, and that is all. Consider now whether that be not justly chargeable
upon us; if we can but make it out that there is a change wrought, that there
is something of the Grace of God in us, that there is a quickening power that
has been put forth upon us, that we are passed from death to life, that we are
not wholly under the power of darkness; but that we have got an escape from
under that black regiment under which we were held before, and which we
belonged unto: if we can but make this out, we are apt to think that all is
well enough: if so be that we can but find that we have a Faith, though it be
but as a grain of mustard seed; if we have but a Faith of adherence, that we
can but hang upon Christ for life and salvation, we are apt to please our
selves in that condition, and not driving on for increasing and* improvements
in the Grace that we have. Truly Brethren, this is a matter that would be
seriously weighed; and I speak now of a growth in Grace: many may be found that
are studious of a growth in gifts, very much set to this, to make advances in
their knowledge, in their parts, and abilities; that they may be accomplished
for such and such services, and for discourses; and maintain controversies, and
disputes, according as immergent occasions may engage them: But, as for this
growth in Grace, O consider whether this be not chargeable upon us, that we do
not so much mind that, nor do not commune with our own hearts, and enter into a
serious search with our selves; O my soul, how is it with thee? Thou pretendest
to be brought over to Christ, and to have a plantation into Christ, and thou
reckon'st upon so long standing in Christianity; thou have been so long in
Faith, and brought over to Holiness: O but my soul, what progress have thou
made? what advances are there? what increases are there? what account can
thou give this way? O, do we thus commune with our own hearts? What am I better
this year than I was the last? I have lived so long under such and such
precious, powerful, and plentiful means; God gives me the showers and dews from
Heaven, from Sabbath to Sabbath, distilling and dropping down upon me: I have
precept upon precept, and line upon line; but where is my growth? what am I the
better? how do I credit the means and ordinances that I do attend upon, by my
prosiciency? Truly, Brethren, consider well of it, it is a serious matter, and
that that we should be very solicitous about, and so as persons that may be
able to give a good account of our selves: I tell you, that it is an argument
of a low spirit, a spirit not so well becoming a Saint in Christ, one of the
called of God according to his purpose; for to be contented (as I have had
occasion sometimes to speak) with Ruben's blessing: I allude to that passage of
Moses concerning Reuben, in the 33 Deuteronomy. Let Reuben live, and not dye; as if he
should say, It was a judgment indeed upon him, that he should not excel,
because he had gone up to his Fathers couch; he should have been the excellency
of dignity, and the excellency of power; but he miscarried, and prejudiced
himself with respect to his advancement: but yet that blessing he has, That he
shall live, and not die: And so many, (it may be) They can be content to set
down with Reuben's blessing, so they can but live, and may not dye, and damn:
If they can but make it out that they have so much Grace as will secure them
from eternal perishing, that they shall not go down to hell, that they are
passed from death to life, and shall never come into condemnation. If they can
but make it out, that there is something of the Grace of God in them, though it
be never so small, so as that they shall not be put upon the left hand in the
great day; this is all they look after. A low spirit, unbecoming a Saint of
God, unbecoming the Gospel of Grace, which we are called unto the fellowship
of, which does so strictly and solemnly charge upon us, that we be upon our
improvement: O, Brethren, as if so be that this were a spirit becoming a Saint
of God! To look no further than this, that there be a securing from hell, and
from eternal perishing; whereas we should set our hearts upon this, that we may
not only have so much Grace as may distinguish us from the World, and by which
we may make it appear that we are not of the World; but we should labor
according to the spirit of the Gospel, to be so advanced in Grace, that we may
be the honor of God, and that we may carry on the cause of Godliness in an
honorable, and in a crediting way. We should labor after so much Faith, and
so much Love, and so much Holiness, and so much of the Fear of God, that we may
go on strenuously, and that we may be found to praise and honor, and credit
the cause of the Gospel, and may not shame the ordinances that we attend upon,
and are admitted to the participation of: O Brethren, this is a thing
altogether unbecoming the spirit of a Saint. When men are at this point, if
they have but enough to keep life and soul together; if they have but bread to
eat, and clothes to put on, though the fare be mean, and the clothing be
course; yet, if they have but enough of that, but so much, I say, as will keep
life and soul together, they can be content. Indeed, such a spirit, in respect
of the World, is to be approved on: When we can be contented with a lower
portion here in the World, this is commendable in respect of a worldly state
here: But, as to a state of Grace and Holiness, it is that which is no way to
be approved of; that persons that have something of the Grace of God in them,
should rest contented in their lower measures: Truly, this is that which we
have cause to be deeply humbled for: O! how many (to their shame may it be
spoken) are indeed the shame of the Gospel, and of the Ordinances, that it
should be said of them quite contrary to that which our Savior speaks
concerning the Woman of Canaan, O Woman, great is thy Faith. Truly Brethren, it
may be said of many of us, O man, O woman, Great is thy unbelief. Great is thy
faith; nay, Great is thy unbelief. Great is thy holiness; nay truly, thy
holiness is very little; thy love its very low. This is that we have cause to
be deeply humbled for, that we are not more in our improvements and advances of
Faith and Godliness, suitable to the command that is here given, that we grow in
Grace.

And yet further, this is that which I would say, It were not altogether so
much to be lamented if this were all, though there is cause enough of being
humbled and abased before God upon this account, that we are not more upon our
advancement. But alas, how much sadder is it, when we shall find persons upon
their declining and decaying, instead of growing in Grace; truly it may be
feared concerning such, that they are rather upon their decayings in Grace; not
the men and women that once they were, for love to God, for zeal for God,
delight in Ordinances, breathings after Christ, delighting in Communion of
Saints, close walking with God. O these retrograde motions! these backward
motions! (that's the meaning of the word) these drawings back and declinings; O
these are to be deeply laid to heart! When this shall be said concerning one
that seemed to be full of light, and love, and zeal, and resolution for God,
that he shall come to be upon his abatements, and not look like the person that
he seemed once to be. When the account rises up concerning a Soul, according to
that in the Parable of the unjust Steward; He takes an account, How much owe
thou? fourscore; put down fifty. When there comes to be such a falling in the
account; when we cannot make out such a state as once we could; when there is
(Ephesus-like) a falling off, a decaying in our first Love, a cooling in our
zeal for God; O Brethren, this is not to answer the duty of the Text: The Text
requires growing in Grace. O how shall we be able to stand before this charge?
when Conscience shall witness to us that we are rather upon our declining?
Truly these things would be seriously thought of, especially in such a day,
wherein we had never more need to look to our condition and state Godward; not
knowing what times we may fall into, what trials we may be put to. O we had
need to look to it, and according to the charge that was given to Ephesus, to
Repent; do our first works to recover our selves, and labor not only to hold
our own, but to be upon our improvements. And therefore that's the main thing I
would drive at, and which I would conclude this Discourse withal. I would deal
with you in a way of persuasion and exhortation, and press it with as much
earnestness as. I could, that as many of you that are the sons and daughters of
Grace, that can give any good account of the truth of the Grace of God that is
in you; that there is the true Grace of God in you, and that it is the true
Grace of God wherein you stand; that you would conscientiously apply to your
duty, and remember that this is the charge that God has laid upon you, that
you grow in Grace; and that you be still endeavoring this, that you be better
and better, that's the interpretation that I gave of the Text, and of the duty:
That you be still upon your advancings; if you have Faith, and Love, and
Holiness, and the fear of God, and Meekness; and if you have any thing of
Godliness, that you would labor to have more of it, that you may not be
always weaklings in Grace: Oh, this is that that we should set our hearts upon.

And does not the very thing it self invite you to it? Why, Brethren; can you
have too much of God? can you have too much of Christ? can you have too much of
Faith and Holiness? you may have too much of the World, but you can never have
too much of God and Grace, till you come to such a pitch of godliness, that you
need not make any further advances: It was otherwise with Paul, and he gives
another account of himself; though, alas, how far short are we of him, and of
that Faith and Grace that was attained by him? Yet he professes, though he was
not behind the chiefest Apostles, yet he says this concerning himself; that he
did not account himself to have attained; but he forgets what is behind, and he
reaches to that which is before, and presses toward the mark, for the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. -- I said before, I say again, you can
never be too good for God, you can never be too good for Christ, you can never
be too ripe for Heaven: when you come to the issue and close of all, you will
find that you have no more than needs must: the wise Virgins, they found that
they had nothing of their oil to spare; when the foolish Virgins came to them,
O, let us buy of you, and be supplied by you: no, say they, lest we be at a
loss for our selves. When you have gotten as much Faith and Grace, and
spiritual strength and holiness, by the means and ordinances that you do
attend, you will find all little enough: And therefore, O, this is that should
make us set on with diligence and care, that we may answer the duty of the
Text, and be upon our Increasings, and Growth in Grace.

SERMON. III.
THere must not only be life, but growth in Christianity; and this is the
burden which the Text lays upon us; That we grow in Grace.

Now, letting pass the things that were insisted upon, shall we buckle to this,
as our business at present. My endeavor shall be to drive home this
Exhortation, and to fasten it as a nail in a sure place: If you will but give
due regard unto that which shall be charged upon you, and urged in the name of
the Lord: Is so be that you will but labor to stand convinced of this as your
duty, and upon convincement set up the conscientious practice of it;
undoubtedly, this labor this morning will not be in vain. -- And that the
thing which shall be spoken, and pressed upon you, may be the more succesful; I
would beseech you to consider what a lovely duty it is, to endeavor a growth
in Grace: what a becoming thing it is, for men and women that are called to the
fellowship of the Gospel, and to the participation of the Grace of the Gospel;
to be most vigorous in endeavoring this, that they may be upon their growth.
We love to see our children grow; the husbandman loves to see his corn spring
up; and grow; men, in the course of their trading, they set their hearts upon
this, that they may grow upon their estates, more big and bulky. Why, is there
any thing in this World, wherein a growth is more lovely to see, than Grace and
Holiness is? What a sad thing is it, to see poor creatures take a great deal of
pains, and are frequent in their attendance upon the Gospel, and the Ordinances
of it; there is not an opportunity that they can well take hold of, but they do;
yet to see them in a kind of withering state, lean, pale, and ill-favored; in
a languishing condition, and little or nothing appearing of any proficiency, of
any spiritual growth? Indeed, it is a thing that would be laid to heart by
professors, that they are not able to give a better account of their
improvements in Grace and Holiness; that there should be so much Preaching,
such frequent hearing Sermons, they are eaten up (and it is well if so, if they
be eaten,) and one would think well digested, and yet still leanness appears;
one corruption or other eats out the strength of all, and keeps poor creatures
under. Truly, this is a sad consideration, that we should hear Sermon after
Sermon, and enjoy Ordinance after Ordinance, and yet come to look upon
professors, even concerning whom, there may be a well-grounded confidence, that
the heart is right in the main, and yet still in a kind of withering condition;
lean, poor, and bare, little more (as I may so speak) than skin and bone.
Truly, this is that that should be laid to heart: And alas, Brethren, do but
think seriously, to what purpose is it to attend the Ordinances, and not to be
bettered by them: you would think it a sad condition, for a person to feed
every day, feed to the full, with large provision, varieties set before him to
partake of; and yet after all his full feedings, there is nothing of strength
and fatness, and growth, and increase; no bettering by their provisions;
Surely, surely, this should set close upon our hearts, to think thus, Lord, why
is it thus with me? I hear many a Sermon, and attend Christ in Ordinances, have
many blessed opportunities for spiritual advantage; and yet I have got little
or nothing; others see it not, I can give no account of it, it may be as much
kept at an under, by my pride, by my passion, by one corruption or other, as
apt to be overpowered by every temptation, as if I did not give any attendance
upon God, in any of his Ordinances. This meditation I desire may settle upon
our hearts, and that we would be communing with our selves about this matter:
as Rebecca said upon occasion of the struggling in her womb; If it be so, why am
I thus? If it be so that there is such allowance given, such a provision made
in so ample a manner; if it be so, Lord, why am I thus? why am I not more in
Faith? why am I not more in love to thee? O, Christ, and ways of Holiness, why
am I not more in spiritual strength? why am I not able to give a better
account? what do I make hearing, the end of hearing? and duty, the end of duty?
and do I rest in Ordinances? Are not the Ordinances given to profit withal, and
to improve by? This is proper for us, if we will deal truly in the matters of
God, and concernments of our souls: this indeed, is proper work for you and me
to be upon the daily performance of. This I speak now in more general manner,
and to this purpose, that you might give the more due regard unto the things
that I am further to communicate to you concerning growth in Grace, which is
the Duty of the Text.

Now this is that which I have to press upon you, That you would reckon upon it
as a duty, and accordingly with Conscience and care apply it. Set your hearts
upon this, that you may grow; Grow in Grace. I think (as I said before) it will
be the properest course that I can take for to speak to some particulars; and I
will speak especially to the main Grace, the Captain-Grace, the Leading-Grace,
and that's the Grace of Faith. Think thus, that when you are called upon to grow
in Grace, to be sure, this is the mind and meaning of God, and of his Spirit,
that you should grow in Faith, that you should set your hearts to this, that
having Faith, you may increase in it: This is your duty, even a duty incumbent
upon every one that has any thing of true saving Faith in him, to do his
utmost that he may come to have a growth in that Faith: O that this might be
considered of by you that are Believers! Have you Faith? it is good for to make
an inquiry, and to search into your selves, whether you have Faith ye or no.
Have you, look to the growth of it; it is a child of Gods begetting, and it is
a child that's committed to your trust to see to the nourishing of it, that it
be well nursed by you. Has God given you Faith in the spark, your duty is to
look to it that it be improved to a flame. Is it a seed that God has sown in
your hearts, suppose it be but as a grain of Mustard Seed, it is a duty that
lies upon you to look well to it, that this little grain, this seed that is
sown, be attended, and that there be an improvement of it. This is your duty,
that having Faith, you increase in Faith, that there be a due improvement of
it, that you may come to be, not only Babes in Faith, but strong men in Faith;
this is that which (I say) is our duty, and this I would press upon you.

Grow in Grace: Grow in the Grace of Faith: And this I would have you to
consider, that all other growth in the other Graces, they have a dependence
upon this growth in Faith. If Faith be in well-liking, other Graces will be in
a good condition. Truly I think it is mostly thus, that the Christian is as his
Faith is: If his Faith be in good plight, his other Graces will be so too. If
there be a flourishing Faith, there will be a flaming Love, and there will be
an abounding, and an increase in other Graces. Faith, it has an influence upon
all other the Graces of the Spirit: Grow in that, and grow in all.

Now if you ask, But how would you have us to grow, or to what pitch and
proportion would you have us to arrive? You persuade us to a growth in Faith,
what growth is it that you press us to? Will you now but a little weigh these
things that I have to communicate.

I tell you thus, your growth in Faith, if so be that you will answer your
duty, it must first be a growth, practically answering to the degrees of Faith,
that you come up to the degrees of Faith, and to as high a degree of Faith as
you can.

2. That in a practical way you may answer the testimonies that are given of
Faith.

3. That in a practical way you may answer the eminent and signal examples and
patterns of Faith.

4. That in a practical way you may perform the acts, and express the fruits
and effects of Faith; all this in a practical way. And then shall you answer
the duty, and approve your selves to be such as are persons of a well grown
Faith.

First of all, when I persuade you to grow in Grace, in the Grace of Faith,
interpret thus; That every believing soul is to look unto, and to press after
such a growth, as that there may be an attainment of Faith, and of Faith in the
degrees of it; Thus, we distinguish of a weak Faith, and of a strong Faith: We
distinguish of a Faith of Adherence, and of a Faith of Evidence and Assurance.
We speak of Believers; some that are poor in Faith, others that are rich in
Faith, according to the Apostles expression in James, The poor of this world,
rich in Faith. We distinguish of a living Faith, and of a lively Faith. We
distinguish of a combating Faith, and of a conquering Faith. Of a conflicting
Faith, and of a triumphing Faith; such distinctions there are. Now our duty is
to press after such a growth, that we may be in the advancing, and come up to
the highest degree that we can attain unto. Our Savior complained of the
Disciples, O ye of little Faith. Importing thus much, that their duty was for
to be much in Faith, and to have a great Faith, a well grown Faith; such a
Faith as the Woman of Canaan, (of whom I shall speak) O woman, great is thy
Faith.

There are that are poor in Faith, they have but a poor degree and measure of
Faith, but even as much of it as will keep life and soul together (as I may so
speak) all that they can do is but to keep in life. I but now our duty is to
look after an inrichment in Faith, that we may live like rich men, live at a
high rate, that we may spend, and spend very largely. This is our duty.

That we have a lively Faith, a Faith so improved, as that its quick, and
active, and nimble, and can put on vigorously, in the ways of Grace and
holiness; this is our duty.

To grow from one degree to another, to be stronger and stronger; to proceed
from Faith of Adherence, unto Faith of Assurance. Not only to have the Faith of
Recumbency, that we can hang upon Christ, and roll our selves upon him for
Salvation; but that we may come to have a Faith of Confidence: that we may not
only be persuaded of the truth of Promises, but that we may be persuaded of our
personal interest and propriety in Promises. And that we are not only persuaded
of the truth of them, but of our title to them; that we may not only be able to
say, that, This is a faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came into the World to
save sinners; but that we may be able by Faith to say, I and this Jesus came to
save me, as much as any other sinners in the World. That we may not be only
able to say, He loved his People, and gave himself for his people; but we may
be able by a well-improved Faith to say, yea, he loved me, and he gave himself
for me. Thus could Paul say, such was Paul's Faith.

A Faith of Assurance, when we cannot only reflect with fears and difficulties,
but we can trample upon them, and triumph over them, and say with the Apostle,
I am persuaded, that neither height, nor depth, nor length, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be
able to separate me from the love of God that is in Christ. Such a growth we
should have, that we may come to bear up with a holy confidence toward God,
that we may be able to say, I know whom I have believed, and I know that my
Redeemer lives. We know, that if this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. This is
the Faith that we should press after, a Faith of such a size as this; of such a
proportion as this, and not rest contented with this, That we can hang upon
Christ, (though its a great Mercy to have the least degree of Faith) yet this
we should be pressing to, that we may come to a holy confidence toward God.
This is our duty, and that that we should endeavor to, that we may come to be
of such a grown Faith: that's the first thing.

2. Our duty is to grow in Faith, and to be of such a growth in Faith, as that
we may answer the high, and honorable, and glorious testimonies that are given
of Faith, that we may be able to give in our Justification of such testimonies,
and say, thus and thus is Faith testified of, it is a true testimony, I am able
to prove it, I am able to speak it out of my own person, and from my own
experience. Its our blessed Sayiours speech, Wisdom is justified of her
children: If we will approve our selves to be the children of Wisdom, we
should look after this in a special manner, that we may be able to justify the
sayings of Wisdom. Now what are the sayings of Wisdom concerning Faith, the
testimonies that are given of it. Mark, the Apostle in the 11th chapter of his
Epistle to the Hebrews, he tells us, That Faith is the substance of things
hoped for; it is the evidence of things that are not seen. Is this a true
testimony? It may be you will say, you believe this, that this is a truth
concerning Faith. I, but what of that, Is it a truth in you? Is your Faith such
a Faith? Are you able to subscribe to this, and to say, yea, blessed be God I
can speak this from my own experience, and say, Faith is to me the substance of
things that are hoped for; Faith is in me, the evidence of things that are not
seen. If so be that your Faith be not grown up to such a pitch and proportion;
truly, you are not come into the stature that you should attain unto. You have
a Faith that looks to promises, and lives upon the expectation that begets a
kind of hope in you, that such and such things shall be done: I, but can you
say that your Faith is the substance of them, that your Faith is the evidence
of them, and the substance? Why, your Faith, it is such a Faith, and of such a
growth, and it is so improved unto such a strength, that things that are but in
expectation, they are to your Faith, as if so be that they were in actual
execution. Your Faith is such a Faith, (I am sure it should be so) that it
giv^s a being to things that are not in being: it is the (...), as the Apostle
uses the word; it is the substance, or the subsistence of things that are hoped
for. Why, this is to my Faith, as if it were in actual being. As God made a
promise to Abraham, that he should have a son, Abraham believes the promise: it
was long before that promise was performed: I, but yet Abraham's Faith did give
a hearing to this promise; Abraham went on in that confidence, he staggered not
at the promise, through unbelief, but his Faith was in that strength, that
there was, as if there had been a birth already; his Faith gave a being to the
promise. God made a promise to the people, that they should come to the Land of
Canaan, and that it should be their inheritance. Now, the Faith of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, was the (...); it gave a being to the promise, and they
were, as if they had had it while they lived: the actual possession of the
promised Land, they, and their seed.

It is the evidence of things that are not seen. I see not, and yet I enjoy; I
see not, and yet I see. Faith, where it comes to be well improved, it comes to
be the evidence of things that are not seen: Things not seen, and yet they are
as if they were before mine eyes. Things not seen; Nay, when the contrary is
seen, as now, a man has destruction before his eyes, and yet his Faith makes
him to see Salvation; according to that eminent instance in Moses; when they
came to the Red Sea, and there was nothing but death, Fear not, says he, stand
still, and see the salvation of God: See it, why, there was nothing to be seen,
but destruction before their eyes; and yet, by Faith, Moses comes to see the
Salvation of God. It is the evidence of things that are not seen: O, Brethren,
it is a poor Faith, a poor beggarly Faith, (if I may so speak of any degree of
Faith;) for Faith, in the lowest degree, is better than all the jewels and
diamonds in the World, they are not to be mentioned with it: but, compared with
a due improved Faith, truly, it is but a poor beggarly Faith, that depends upon
sense. This I would see, as Thomas; what, says Thomas, you report to me, that
Jesus, my Lord and Master, is risen from the dead; but, for my part, unless I
may see him, and feel the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I
will not believe. O, it was an ignoble Faith, a poor beggarly Faith: they will
believe no further than they can see. Truly, such persons will hardly believe
to the saving of their souls; and our Savior, he deals with him about it: O,
Thomas, Thomas, thou have seen, and believed; but, I tell thee Thomas, they are
the blessed persons that have not seen, and yet believe. Why, it is a noble
Faith, for to give a man the evidence of that that he does not see; and this is
the Faith that we should press after. I see nothing that has a tendency to
such or such a mercy, I see nothing, but rather the contrary: as in the case of
Joseph, there is a promise concerning his advancement, he says nothing that
has any tendency in it, but rather the contrary; he is cast into Prison, and
irons enter into his soul; he is brought into a miserable condition, and yet
notwithstanding, his Faith was the evidence of things not seen; he could see a
Golden-Chain, that afterward he came to wear; he could see a Golden-chain in a
chain of Iron; the iron entered into his soul, and yet the chain of Gold is
about his Faith; Faith puts it about the neck, this is the Faith: A Faith of
such a growth, that it may evidence to us the things that are not seen. Now, I
say, when we can give an account of such a testimony, and come in with the
justification of experience, and say, It Is thus testified of Faith, and it is a
true testimony; for my Faith is so to me; my Faith is the substance of things
hoped for, my Faith is the evidence of things that are not seen: God has made
a promise concerning a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness: He has made a promise of new Jerusalem, that it should come
down from heaven, as a Bride made ready for her husband: Now, I see nothing to
such a purpose, I see nothing but confusion; and yet for all that, I can see
Glory; I can see Glory in all the confusion of the World.

Again, consider, Secondly, This is the testimony that's given of Faith: I, this
is the victory that overcomes the World, even your Faith. The Apostle gives
this testimony of Faith; 1 Epist. of Ioh. 5. he uses these words, This is the
victory, says he, that overcomes the World, even your Faith. Why, now
consider, what growth it is that we should press after in believing; our duty
is, to grow in Grace, in the Grace of Faith; and to grow to such a point and
proportion, that our Faith may be our victory: our Faith, why, you will say, it
is our conflict: we have a conflicting Faith: I, bu^ your Faith is your
victory; and your Faith should be so improved, as that you may be able to give
this account of it; my Faith is my victory, and I am more than a Conqueror; as
the Apostle says in Romans 8. says he, What shall separate, tribulation,
distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword? Why, says he, In all
these things, he does not say, after all these things, but, in all these
things; in persecution, in tribulation, in distress, in famine, in nakedness,
what, in sword! yea, in all these things, we are more than Conquerors. This is
a mavelous thing, but yet, this is the testimony that is given of Faith: and
this is that which the Faith of a Believer, if it be duly improved, will spring
up to, to make the believing soul more than a Conqueror: and, in all these
things, this is the victory. -- The victory; why, before the battle be done,
before the fight be finished, and ended? yet, notwithstanding, that is a victory
that a believing soul may, by the strength of his Faith duly improved, he may
cry, Victoria, even while they are in the fight; yet. Victory, Victory: In all
these things, more than Conquerors. This is the Victory: so is a well improved
Faith; and such should the Faith of a Believer be, and of such a growth, that
it should be his Victory. I am hampred with lusts, corruptions, temptations,
and heavily pressed with them, and miserably yoked; and the poor soul cries out
with the Apostle; O wretched man that I am; what a tedious, wearysome life have
I of it? I cannot be quiet not a day to an end, and yet triumph, and say, I
thank God, through Jesus Christ; and so sing, Victoria: this is the Faith.
These things may seem to be somewhat hard things for Faith: and alas, poor
creatures, we are apt to startle at such kind of measures, and statures, when
they are propounded to us thus to press after. But this is the account, that
there is such an improvement to be made of it, and such an improvement* we
should endeavor after, and such a growth, as we may come to this: to have
Faith to be our Victory; my Faith is my Victory, and I see my Victory in every
stroke I strike; and this is the growth that we should propound to our selves.

Shall I tell you yet further? I am signifying to you, that our Faith should be
of such a growth, as that it may be, the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen; that it may be the Victory that overcomes the
World; while the World seems to trample us down under feet, with the scorns,
and reproaches, and hard usages of it; yet, a Believer can say, I thank God, I
have the World more under feet a thousand times, than I am under it: it seems
to trample upon me, but I trample upon it: The Apostle speaks to that purpose;
I Glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; by which, says he, I am
crucified to the World: I, and the World is as much crucified unto me, as I am
to it, for its heart; and I can set as light by it, as it sets by me: I can
scorn the scorns, and despise the despisings of the World; and this our Faith
will come to; and if we be not a-wanting to our selves, I would say this to the
weakest Believer in the Congregation; his Faith will, and shall come to this,
To be the evidence of things not seen, To be the Victory that overcomes the
World.

Yet further, I add this, This is the report and testimony that is given to the
Faith of a Believer: By Faith, there has been the subduing of Kingdoms,
working righteousness, obtaining promises, quenching violence of fire, growing
strong out of weakness, turning to flight the Armies of aliens, opening of
heaven, binding up of heaven; what not? O, the mighty things that are testified
to be within the power of Faith, to be obtained! This is the testimony that is
given of Faith. Now, our Faith should be of such a growth, and so improved,
that we may be able to justify these testimonies in our own experience.

By Faith, they subdued Kingdoms, so the Apostle speaks, in Heb. 11. What
Kingdoms did Moses and Joshua subdue by Faith? A Believers Faith should be of
such a growth, as that it may subdue Kingdoms. Truly, he that can subdue a
kingdom of the Devil within him, may be able to subdue all the Kingdoms of the
World in a spiritual way.

Subdue Kingdoms, and vanquish Armies; says David, Though 10000 should encamp
against me, in this will I be confident. Such a Faith as that, it will do
wonders, work miracles; such a Faith, as has a kind of omnipotency in it, and
can do all things through God in Christ: my Faith in Christ is that, whereby I
am able to do all things: Now, such a Faith we should labor to grow to, as may
have such a mighty arm and power, as it is able to carry all before it. That Is
the second thing.

3. The Faith of a Believer, it should be of such a growth, as that there may
be an answering in a practical way, unto those eminent examples of persons that
have been of a well-grown Faith. Consider what patterns there are.

Abraham, he was a man of Faith; and what was his Faith? what was his pitch,
and stature, and proportion? I gave you something of account before, but shall
further express it. Abraham, he was a man of such a Faith, as that God
testified concerning him: O, Abraham, he believed God, and it was accounted to
him for Righteousness. When he had all the difficulties and discouragements
that could be from resting upon the promise that God had made; yet, says the
Text, He believed God. God promises to him, that he should have a son, though
his body was dead, and Sarahs body was dead; and, according to nature, there
was no possibility that things should be brought to pass: yet Abraham, he
considers neither one thing nor another, but he does eye the promise; has God
said it? It shall be done, I shall have a son, because God has promised me a
son: and, though I am 100 years old, and Sarah 90 years old, yet, God has said
it: there is death in the body, but there is life in the promise, and I rest upon
it. It Is the promise of a faithful God, I will trust his word. Abraham believed
God, and staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but was strong in
Faith, giving Glory to God; and he becomes the friend of God; he would believe
any thing that God speaks; and he would perform any thing that God did require;
and so discovered himself in the way of his Faith, to be the friend of God.
Now, I say, such a Faith was Abraham's; and what should hinder, but that we
should be of such a Faith; Surely, Brethren, this is our duty, to be as good as
Abraham was: what should hinder? why, have not we as good Gospel, as good
Ordinances, as precious means as ever Abraham had? And, what should hinder, but
that we should be of as good a Faith as Abraham was? Such a Believer was he, as
you heard of, startled at nothing that God had promised; but he would believe
him, and take him at his word.

Such a Believer was Moses, that (as I told you) he could stand up for God, and
bear up with a holy confidence concerning his Salvation, when there was nothing
but destruction before his eyes: Fear not, says he, fear not; why? there is
nothing but matter of fear before us. Stand still, why? if we stand still, our
enemies will be upon the back of us, and confound us: The Egyptians are come
out, and are pursuing us with all the spite and rage that may be, And see the
Salvation of God; why, we can see nothing but destruction before us: I, but
says Moses, Salvation is before your eyes, and you may, by Faith, see, and
behold it. Here was a well-improved Faith, and to this pitch should we grow.

O, What a Faith did the woman of Canaan discover? when, notwithstanding all
the discouragements that she had from the Lord Jesus, one and another,
concerning the cause she was then in management of; yet, notwithstanding, she
sticks to him. O, when Christ told her he was not sent, but to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel; and it was not meet to take the childrens bread, and
cast it to dogs; and she might reckon upon her self, as a dog: why, I am come
for the benefit of the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and thou art a
Canaanite; and what have thou to do to make application to me? Yet,
notwithstanding, she sticks to him, and holds her own, and is resolved she will
not give over till she has a blessing. -- Now, mark the testimony that Christ
gives of her; O woman, great is thy Faith. Now, here is a pattern for us, that
nothing of discouragement should beat us off, but that we might bear up with a
holy confidence: and, wherefore are these things written? but, that we might
write after these Copies. But we stick in principles, and rest in lower
measures; and it is a shame we are not more in advances, that we do not answer
Scripture-testimonies, nor answer Scripture-patterns and examples.

I might instance to you in the Thessalonian-Church, a Scripture that formerly
I spent much time about; O, says he, we are bound to thank God for you,
Brethren; for your Faith, it grows exceedingly; it is an overgrown Faith,
(...). Thus now should it be with us.

But then there is a fourth thing, which will take up more time than all the
rest. We should endeavor such a growth in Faith, and that in a practical way,
as that we may not only answer the degrees of Faith, nor the testimonies of
Faith, and the examples and presidents of Faith; but fourthly, that we may have
such a Faith of such a growth, as that we might produce the acts, and the
effects of it. And here sundry particulars there are.

Such a Faith we should have, and of such a growth our Faith should be, that we
may come to have clear sights and apprehensions of God: to say, he is an
Invisible God and who can behold him? and an Infinite Majesty, and at an
infinite distance, and who can enjoy him? -- Who? -- why, a man of a
well-improved Faith, may live, as if he were in heaven. The Saints of God, that
have had their Faith well improved, have given proof of it, and have been able
to give a justification of it. I tell you this, that Faith is capable of such
an improvement, as that he may live in heaven while he is upon earth, and be in
daily converses with God; see him, behold him, and talk with him, as a man
would talk with his friend: Faith may come to this; as it is said of Moses, he
saw him that was invisible. Enoch, by his Faith, could walk with God every day,
as a man with his friend. And so a Believer may walk with God, and converse
with God, even in the management of his worldly affairs; he may run up to
heaven, and speak with God, and Jesus Christ, and have a holy familiarity with
God, and have sweet thoughts of God. O, comfortable thoughts, the meditation of
God! O, sweet unto him, as the Prophet speaks in the 104 Psalm. my meditations
of him shall be sweet. He is a terrible God, I, but I can meditate terror. The
Faith of a Believer duly improved, and being of a light growth; it will make
him able to meditate terror, and to think of the terrible things of God, the
terrible acts of God, the terribleness of Gods Majesty: Indeed, there is a
terribleness in Gods Majesty; I, but the Faith of a Believer, being duly
improved, and of a due growth; it will be able to meditate terror, as the
Prophet has the expression, in Isa. 39. and so to enjoy sweet communion with
God in every days course: it is, as if there were no distance, but heaven and
earth were in a very contiguity, and they were just near, close together; there
is, as it were, but a wall between heaven and earth. O, he can be, as a man
would be with his next neighbor, that, knock at the wall, and your neighbor
hears you, and you can talk together day and night. And so, the Faith of a
Believer is capable of such a growth, as he may come to enjoy God, and sweet
communion with God.

And so, of Christ; when we make him not only the object of our desires, but
the object of our claim: he is my Jesus, and as much mine, as any man's in the
World. We should not only breath out after Christ, but that we may bear up with
a holy confidence, and make a bold claim of interest in him, and say, I am my
beloveds, and my beloved is mine. I bear upon it, I challenge an interest in
him; and I will dispute the case with any that shall come in in a way of
opposition to me. He loved sinners, He loved the World, He loves me. He gave
himself for sinners, He has given himself for me; He is as much my Christ as
any man's in the World. This is the well-grown Faith.

SERMON. IV.
LOok to your growth in Faith, that you be not weak in it; and let it appear
this way: See to it, that you have such a Faith, so improved, of such a growth,
that you may be able at once to appeal from the Law, as a ridged exacter, and
yet to apply to the Law, as a gracious, wise, and holy director. When Faith
comes to be planted in the soul, it is not therefore planted, that the heart
should, upon the coming in of Faith, turn head against the Law: No, not against
the Law. Indeed, it was never in the heart of God, that Believers, that are
brought off from the Law, as a covenant of works, and are dead to it, by the
body of Christ, should have their hearts set against it, that they should rise
up in opposition to it, and be possessed with prejudices against it: No, God
forbid it should be so. I speak of the Law, considered as a covenant of works.
True it is, the Faith of a Believer carries him from the Law; so, as not to
rest upon it; so, as not to seek righteousness by it; but yet withal, while it
does make an appeal from the Law, as a ridged exactor, and was made, before
Grace appeared, to tremble and quake at the consideration of it, as a fiery
Law: while he looks upon it as a most severe, and ridged exctor, and quits it,
appeals from it; yet, the Faith of a Believer, duly improved, will own the same
Law; as it is a wise, righteous, and holy director. And that Law and Covenant,
which out of the hand of Faith was, and would have been a stinging Serpent, as
the ^od of ^ses, when it was out of his hand, a stinging ^pent, and such as
would make a man to fly from the presence of, in regard of its stinging power:
yet, the very same Law in the hand of Faith, as it is a rule of Righteousness,
it is a rod in the hand, and of precious use: and this is that wherein the
growth of Faith will discover it self; when we can thus jadiciously manage the
apprehensions of the Law, so as to appeal from it, and yet to apply to it: To
rejoice in a freedom from it, and from its severity; and yet rejoice in holding
a compliance, and correspondency with it, as it is a gracious, holy rule, that
God has given us to conform unto. And this is another thing which I offer to
you, to be judiciously considered of, that you may show forth the growth of
your Faith in this way.

Yet further, grow in Grace, grow in Faith; and how shall it appear? -- Thus,
grow in Faith, so as, that while you remember former guilts, deep and dreadful
guilts, that have been contracted upon you; while, upon review of former cursed
carriages and practices; upon review, and upon reflection: you can remember
deep contracted guilt upon your consciences, under which, it may be, you
labor, as under an unsupportable burden: yet, at that very time, when the
remembrance of former dreadful guilt contracted, is revived; yet you can, at
the very same time, bear up with a holy confidence toward God, upon the
account of that rich and glorious Grace which has appeared by our Lord Jesus
Christ; -- while with freedom, and as becomes a Gospel Spirit of ingenuity, you
can draw up a charge against your selves, and say, I was a Persecuter, (as Paul
speaks) I was a Blasphemer, I was Injurious, I was a notorious Drunkard, I was
a profane, cursed Swearer, I was hellishly vicious; thus and thus I was, and
thus and thus I do acknowledge: I remember well how the case stood with me,
what a cursed course I took, and how I run on in the rode to hell and
destruction, without any fear and control, and how fast I was ripening sor
hell and destruction: I remember this, and yet I can remember it without
despondency; I cannot remember it without a breaking and bleeding soul, to think
that ever I should carry it so toward the Lord; and yet withal, I can bear up
in a rejoicing spirit, upon the account of super-abounding Grace. While you can
charge your selves so, as it may be none in the World can make the like charge
upon you: Yet notwithstanding, you can make a bold challenge, and say with the
Apostle, in Romans 8. who shall lay any thing to my charge? This is an excellent
thing, and an argument of a well-improved, and well-grown Faith, when it comes
to this: and indeed, it is no other than a Faith of good growth, that will
enable to this. Poor weaklings in Faith and Grace, when they come to remember
their former cursed carriage; O, how apt to fall under deepest despondencies,
and to be possessed with horror and astonishment, and to be disputing against
themselves, and concerning their estate; and ready to conclude, alas, how is it
possible, that ever such a miserable misereant as I, should find Grace to
releeve (...)? favor with God, forgiveness of sins? Surely, this burden will
sink my soul; this guilt will press me down to hell, such deep and dreadful
guilt; O, such stains upon my conscience, what can fetch them out? what
plaster broad enough to cover such sores? what price great enough to say such
debts? A poor weakling in Faith, is apt to argue thus, to the sinking, and
overwhelming of his spirit. But, it is the Faith that is well-grown, that will
enable the soul at this same time, eying guilt, and eying Grace; seeing the
Plague, and seeing the plaster; and taking knowlodge of the super abundance of
the Grace of Christ above his contracted guilt; for to bear up with a holy
confidence, and (as I said before) to charge, and challenge; to charge it self,
and yet challenge the accuser, and say, who shall be able to lay any thing unto
my charge? I know whom I have believed, I know whither I have sled for refuge,
I know where I have anchored, I know upon what foundation I have built my hope
and confidence upon; here is the well-grown Faith, a Faith which will give the
greatest Glory to God: When a man can look upon all the evils that ever were
committed by him, with a melting, dissolving soul; yet notwithstanding, bear up
with boldness, and say, I, but I know, that not any thing of this, shall ever
be laid to my charge; and, I know whom I have believed. Will you but weigh
these things, and consider of them, and know, that this is the Faith which we
are to press after.

And so, (which follows upon the former) such a growth in Faith should we press
after, as that, while we see the corruptions that are in us, and sadly complain
of the pressures under which we lie, and how miserably we are yoked while we do
so; and see cause to cry out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am; -- by
reason of what? -- by reason of a law in my members rebelling against the law
of my mind: O miserable wretch! what darkness is in my understanding? what
perverseness in my will? what inordinacy in my affections? what a crabbed,
perverse nature have I? O, what a rebelling soul is there in me? when I would
do good, evil is present; and so the poor soul labors, and makes sad
complaints and moans in the ears of God: yet notwithstanding, at the same time,
can say, with the Apostle; but, though it be thus, yet, blessed be God, I thank
God, through Jesus Christ, though I serve, with my flesh, the law of sin; yet,
with my spirit, I serve the Lord Jesus Christ: though there be a rebelling law,
yet I find another law, a law in my mind, that makes opposition to that
rebelling law; and I find principles of Grace and Holiness, acting most
vigorously in opposition to those principles: And, though they tugg, and
wrestle, and struggle with me, yet I am utterly set against compliance with
them, and am resolved upon this, that I will never make any league with them;
but i will do the utmost I can for to ruin them, to be the death of them: I
thank God, through Jesus Christ. This is now the Faith that we should press
after; that we may thus bear up with courage and resolution; and while we see
our own blemishes, yet we can rejoice, to think what a beauty is upon us,
through Jesus Christ. We can see blemishes, and yet we can see perfection of
beauty, that we are made comely, through the comelyness which by Grace is put
upon us.

Then again, such a growth in Faith our duty is to press after, and to
endeavor to, as that we may be able to say, I am never more fearful to sin
against God, than when I am least fearful for to be condemned by God. O, it is a
blessed proof of a well-grown Faith; and such a Faith should we endeavor to;
and a Faith of such a growth, that we may say, Through the Grace of God, I can
say, I am most fearful to sin, and to do any thing that is displeasing to God;
-- and when so, -- O, especially then, when I am least fearful to be punished,
and plagued for it. The less I have of the fear of hell and damnation, and the
more I have of a holy confidence toward God, that I shall be everlastingly
saved; the more am I fearful with a holy, filial fear, to do any thing that may
be displeasing to my God; here is the well-grown Faith; and it argues much
feebleness in the Faith of a Christian, and it gives occasion to, sometimes to
question the truth of it: When persons, upon the apprehension of their
justified state, they are ready to take liberty to sin. You know how the
Apostle argues against this; Shall we continue in sin, because Grace has
abounded? God forbid. Nay, the Faith of a Believer well improved, will fortify
his spirit against such a temptation, and against the assaults of the Devil and
corruption, and say, Seeing the Grace of God has appeared to me, and magnified
it self upon me in a pardoning way, in a renewing way; that Grace I reckon
upon, as that that shall abide upon me, and shall engage it self to perfect all
the concerns, Justification, Sanctification, everlasting Salvation: this makes
a holy fear to flourish in my soul, that I may not in any thing carry it
unbecomingly, and unsutably to such a state. This is the well-grown Faith that
we should press after.

Yet further, when I press you to a growth in Grace, and especially, in the
Grace of Faith; thus you shall be able to judge of it. We should endeavor to
be of such a growth, as that, whatsoever Grace is implanted in us, and to what
degree soever; whatsoever our accomplishments are in the renewed state, and
according to the new creature, whatsoever there is of inherent Grace, and of
gracious abilities; yet we can so look upon our inherent Graces, and spiritual
Abilities, as to keep off from placing any confidencee in them, but still keep
a full relyance upon the Lord Jesus Christ. This is our duty, that whatsoever
is of Grace inherent in us, yet, that it be not trusted unto, Grace in the
soul, is but a creature; it is one of the best pieces indeed of all Gods
creation that ever were made by him; yet it is but a creature, and being a
creature, it is not to be trusted: A man must not trust in his trust; he must
trust with his Faith, but he must not trust to his Faith: he must not trust to
any spiritual strength or abilities that he has in him, but still keep a
dependence upon Christ: reckon upon Christ, as the strength that will be
sufficient for him. It was the answer that was given to Paul, when he was under
those sore buffetings; says he, Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee. Paul's
Grace was not sufficient any further, than it was made sufficient by Christ's
Grace. It is not the water in the Cistern, that will serve the turn, but the
water in the Fountain: dependence upon the Cistern, will be found to be a vain
thing; the Cistern may be exhausted, but the Fountain cannot. You know how it
was with Adam, when he had the Grace of Creation, it failed him. Peter, when he
was strong in himself, you know what his confidence in himself issued in; and
therefore, I say, such confidences, even in our own Graces, are to be accursed:
the Lord rejects such confidences, and so should we. We should use our Graces,
but trust not to them, but still keep a dependence upon the Lord Jesus;
according to the Apostles charge to Timothy, Be thou strong in the Grace that
is in Christ Jesus: And truly, this is that that will not be performed, but by
a well-grown Faith: when we can thus do, see the Grace of God in us, prize it,
bless him for it; employ it, make use of it, and yet notwithstanding, keep
hands off from it, from trusting upon it; and keep a full dependence upon the
Lord Jesus Christ; that is another thing.

Again, grow in Grace, grow in Faith, it is your duty; -- and to what purpose?
to such a purpose, that while we do, and perform duties with greatest delight,
as indeed, Faith will carry us to that; it will make a man delight in the Law
of God, and in the ways of Holiness, and performance of holy duties, account
it meat and drink to be in the practice of them; yet, while we are in the
performance of duty, that even then, when we have done, to lay them by, and
say, this is not my foundation, O Lord, I have done thus and thus. It may be,
much in preaching, much in prayer, much in alms, much in acts of mortification,
much in such and such services: I, but Lord, when I have done all; I do
profess, that I have done nothing to purpose, nothing to my justification; I so
do duties as if I were to be justified by them; yet I so trust upon Christ, as
if I were not to meddle with my duty at all: O, this is precious Faith, and
well-improved Faith, when we can do service and duty to God; and yet, when we
have done all, we can take off from all, lay all at the foot of Jesus, and say,
O Lord, this shall never be my Righteousness; I will endeavor to be as
righteous, and holy, and gracious as I can; but, Lord, when I have done all I
can, I am resolved to lay all by, and will make mention of thy righteousness,
and of thine only; and, I am resolved, I will never plead any righteousness of
my own, any duties and services of my performance, I will never plead them
before thee, as my Righteousness; I may plead them as evidences, as Hezekiah
does; Remember Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart; but I will never plead them as my righteousness, which I will stick to,
and bear upon them before the tribunal of God; no, I will throw them all away,
when they offer themselves to come in upon such an account. Alas poor, weak
Believers! O, how apt are they to keep hands upon their duties and services;
and when a day of temptation, and dissertion, and perplexity begins to seize
upon them, they begin to turn their eyes to what they have been, and done: I,
but the Faith of a Believer, when it comes to its due growth, will otherwise
carry the soul, and make it to keep its dependence upon the Lord Jesus.

Again, your duty is to grow in Grace, and especially in Faith; and such a
growth, as that while you give attendance upon an Ordinance, you can see the
authority of God stamped upon it; and upon the account of that authority which
is stamped, you give the attendance, and you reckon upon it as a blessed
expedient which God has provided for your souls advantage; and you reckon upon
gracious communications from God by it, as by such an expedient of his own
appointment; you reckon upon it, and come to it with such a persuasion; O, this
is Gods appointing, and in this way has he ordered that I should wait upon
him, and I know his appointments are not in vain; therefore I rest not in the
Ordinance, but look to the God of the Ordinance; and I follow after the
enjoyment of God in his Ordinances: it is nothing to me to have the word
preached, other Ordinances dispensed, they are nothing to me, without the
enjoyment of God: I look upon God in them, and I expect a blessing from God by
them: truly, this is an argument of a well-grown Faith. Alas poor weaklings
that we are, we come in a formal manner, (too commonly so) and with too much of
a carnal frame of spirit, too much in a complemental way, look upon an
Ordinance as if there were no more to be reckoned to it, than what of strength,
and duty, and benefit of man can put upon it, look to the instrument, and have
not an eye to God: O, without question, Beloved, our preaching would be to
better purpose, and our hearing and praying, and our eating and drinking at the
Lords Table, would be to better purpose, and with more fruit and benefit. If we
could look more to God in an Ordinance, and come with such a thought as this, O
Lord, this is the way that thou have laid out for me to wait upon thee in,
these are the means that thou have appointed to do my soul good by, and upon
this account, because they are thy appointments; I apply to them, and expect
benefit and profit by them. Now, I say, when we manage our attendance in such a
manner, we are then in the fairest way to have the fruit and benefit of them:
and how will this be, but by a well-improved Faith? and the truth on it is, the
strength of Faith, and the growth and increase of Faith, will very much
discover it self this way. When we come to appear before God in Ordinances, we
have such a Faith as carries us to God. Why, I have been with God this day, I
have been in the presence of God, I look upon these Ordinances as the blessed
Symboles of his presence, and upon that account it is, that I attend them, and
expect from them.

And then again, I press you, that you would grow in Grace, and grow in the
Grace of Faith: -- why, what growth would you require? -- such a growth as
this; that your Faith may come to be of such a growth, that you may not be
staggered concerning the promises of God, how cross soever that providence
seem to run to them: O, this is a proof of a well-grown Faith. You know, that
its an ordinary thing with God, in the course of his dealings and
dispensations, when he has made a promise, and put his people upon the hopes,
and expectation of having it performed, to order out so in the course of his
providence, as if he would quite null his promise: the providence seem to
speak flat contradiction to the promise. It was Abraham's case; a promise he had
of a son, but the providence of God ordered it out, that he runs out till he be
100 years old, and Sarah was old to; so that there was an impossibility, as to
nature, that ever there should be such a thing brought to pass; and here was
now the temptation: Now, if Abraham had been but of a weak Faith, how apt had
he been to be staggering, and sorely shaken, as touching the promise; surely,
this will never be; I, bat being of a well-grown Faith, as the Apostle
testifies of him, he considered not his own body, nor the deadness of Sarahs
womb; he staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but being strong in
Faith, he gave Glory to God. -- So the Lord dealt with Joseph; but the word of
the Lord tries him, and while it tries him, he trusts upon it: the irons enter
into his soul, and by that providence: O, what a seening contradiction was
there to the promise? he that was designed to wear a chain of Gold about his
neck, must go with chains of Irons about his legs, and those irons must enter
into his soul. What does this speak, but the vanity of the promise, and that it
was a thing not to be reckoned upon, no account to be made of it? and yet
notwithstanding, he being of a well-improved Faith, under all these cross
providence, that spoke contradiction to the promise; yet he keeps in a humble
dependence upon God. And while the word of the Lord tried him, he trusts the
word; he did not try the word, but he trusted the word, and so being of a
well-grown Faith, he bears up with a holy confidence toward God, as touching
the things that he had promised.

And so likewise, promises concerning the Church of God, and a more blessed
enjoyment that Saints shall have in the World; God has engaged himself by
promise very much to such a purpose; and providence: do seem to give the lie to
the promise; (...) things are ordered out, as if such things ^uld never be
brought to pass: Now, a poor, ^ak Believer, he will be apt to give all for
naught, and to conclude, as David did, I said in my haste, all men are liars;
these are but vain words: we speak of this and that, of a new Jerusalem coming
down from Heaven, as a Bride made ready for her husband, and of the Church^
Glory and beauty, and of Babilons downfall; and yet Babylon sits as a Queen, and
says, I shall never see sorrow nor widowhood: Now, a poor, weak Believer, will
be ready to give up the account, and to say, We must never look for these
things; I, but a strong Believer, it bears up the soul in a holy confidence
toward God: well, let God take what course he will, I am sure that the womb of
the promise shall never be sound to be a miscarrying womb; that is another thing.

Yet further, I press you to growth in Grace, particularly to a growth in
Faith, that you may not, upon every occasion, be cast into a discomposure of
spirit, upon every occasion of trouble that you meet withal: when there are
such providence ordered out, as are startling, and amazing, and astonishing;
such a Faith you are to press to: that when sinners in Zion are afraid, and
fearfulness surpriseth the hypocrites; -- and likewise, when poor, weak
Believers are apt to tremble and quake, and at a loss, and know not what to do;
that you may come to say, my heart is fixed, I trust in God, these things move
me not: this is an argument of a well-grown Faith; when we are not upon every
occasion of any sudden fears, in a discomposure of spirit, yet well-grown Faith
will bring a fixedness. I, it is an argument of a Faith not well improved, and
not of so good a growth as it should be, when we are upon, every occasion,
surprised with fear, and horror, and astonishment, and ready to scatter this
way and that way, and know not what to do. I refer to that passage in the 107
Psalm. his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, he shall not be moved for any
evil tidings; when a man can say, as the Prophet in the Psalm, which is
reckoned to Luther, because of his making so much use of it: God is our refuge
and strength, a present help in the time of trouble; we will not fear, though
the mountains be troubled, and though all things be in a confusion; the Lord of
Hosts is with us, and the God of Jacob is our refuge: this is the Faith we
should endeavor to, and Faith of such a growth, we should press after.

Again, such a Faith, as in a day of affliction and tribulation, we may live;
I, and live cheerly and comfortably, I, and in a full condition. The just shall
live by Faith, and the just shall live in fullness, if so be that Faith be but
of a due growth. I am come, that ye might have life, and that you might have it
more abundantly: and the more we improve in Faith, the more abundantly we shall
live, and at a higher rate. Be full in emptiness, -- be rich in poverty, -- be
strong in weakness, -- be free under restraint; and let the condition be what
it will, by having a well-grown Faith, we shall but seem to be afflicted; when
others reckon upon it that we are most really afflicted. O, it is a notable
passage, that of the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 6. says he, we are as unknown, and yet
well known; -- as dying, and behold we live; -- as chastened, and not killed;
-- as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; -- as poor, yet making many rich; -- as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things. I confess, it is a most
wonderful thing, and yet this is that that a well-gro^ Faith will enable to.
That when a child of (...) in the lowest condition, and, according to the
judgment of others, the most really miserable man (mark what I say) that can
be in the World: Yet notwithstanding, he can give this account, I am but, as it
were, thus and thus: this is the noble act of Faith. Sorrowful, O, you are a
company of sorrowful, poor creatures; nay, says the Apostle, we are but, as
sorrowful: O, you are miserably poor, and beggarly; nay, says he, mistake not,
we are but, as poor: indeed, we are rich: you take us to be the most sorrowful,
and poor miserable creatures in the World; we are indeed as such, we seem to be
so, and you take us to be so, you take us to be such as have nothing, as having
nothing, and yet, says he, we possess all things. Why, what a wonderful thing
is this, that the Faith of a Believer should carry to this? and yet this a
well-improved Faith will enable to; and by this we are to discover, that it is
a well-grown Faith. Says the Apostle, I have learned in every estate,
therewith to be content; I can be full, and be hungry; I can abound, and suffer
want: Suffer want! I, says he, I can reckon of a fullness in my want! I have
all, and abound: what a blessed thing was this? And O, how much preciousness is
there in the Grace of Faith! and such a Faith should we endeavor to attain to,
and of such a growth, that we may bear up with rejoicing hearts in tribulation;
in all tribulations, and in the want of all things, make our boast, and say,
with the Prophet, in Hab. 3. Though the Fig Tree shall not blossom, and the
labor of the Olive shall fail, no Calves in the stall, no Grass in the field,
nor Corn in the ground, no Money in the purse, no Bread in the cubbord, every
Brook is dry, and every Prop and Pillar is plucked away; yet, says he,
notwithstanding all this, I will rejoyee in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my Salvation.

SERMON. V.
SAints and Believers, are called Trees of Righteousness: The Planting of the
Lord, that he may be glorified. (I wish that this word may not only sound in
our ears, but sink into our hearts; are they the planting of the Lord, that he
may be glorified? How is it ever like, that God should be glorified by such a
plantation, if so be that his planted ones stand at a stay, and do not make
some considerable growth, answerable to time, and means, and opportunities to
such a purpose. We are therefore to know, that it is as much our duty for to
grow in Grace, as it is to be made partakers of it.

I have been speaking to you concerning growth in Faith; but what was
delivered, I shall less pass, having some further addition to make: something
yet further this morning to offer out unto your consideration; which, if the
Lord be pleased to accompany with his Grace, and the working of his mighty
spirit, will be beneficial to us, to the promoting of this cause that I now am
engaged in.

You that are Believers, that have the Faith of Gods Elect; your duty is to
grow in Faith: Now, do bat weigh, and consider, and take heed, that a deceived
heart do not turn us aside. It will appear, that there is a growing in Faith,
when we come to have a large capacity for the entertaining of the
Gospel-mysteries; when the mystery of the Gospel, and of Godliness, comes to
stand in its proportion, in our hearts and understandings; when we have our
hearts widened, and enlarged, to take in the mystery of the Gospel, so as that
we have not only some weak, low apprehensions of it, which a smaller measure of
Faith will enable to; but, when we come to have a comprehensiveness of heart,
so, as that we can expasiate and enlarge our selves in our meditations, of the
glorious mystery, which, by the Gospel, is made known unto us: When we come to
walk (as it were) in the length, and in the breadth of this mystery; we can
come to view, and surveigh all that glorious workmanship of God, which he has
wrought, in order to the salvation of poor souls: we cannot only darkly
apprehend, but clearly behold the infinite wisdom, and love, and Grace, that
has appeared to us in the contrivance of this great design, concerning the
salvation of sinners. Truly, this will be a clear proof, and demonstration of a
growth in Faith; when our Faith takes in much of God, much of Christ, much of
the mystery; that we can discourse of it judiciously, and affectionately, and
solace our selves in the contemplation of it; we can with open face behold the
glory of God, as it shines in the face of Christ; we can walk up and down in
the length and breadth of the mystery of the Gospel. O, this is a blossed
proof, and will be found to be so, of a souls improvement, and growth in Faith,
and in Grace: Will you but consider of this; when the Gospel, and the mystery
of it, the mystery of Election, Redemption, Justification, Reconciliation of a
sinner to God; the mystery of Grace as it stands in opposition to the works of
the L^; the mystery of the everlasting Covenant, which is ordered in all
things, and sure; when it is not penned up, but has scope in our
understandings; when we can take in this mystery of the new Covenant in the
proportions of it; this is the business of Faith; but it is that which will not
be performed to any good purpose, unless there be some considarable
improvement, and growth in Faith; and therefore it is, that the Apostle does so
earnestly pray on the behalf of the Church of Ephesus, in Ephesians. 1. says he, I
cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers, that the
God of (...) Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give (...) y^ the
spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of bl^; the eyes of your
understandings being enlightened, that y^ may know what is the hope of his
Calling, and what the (...) of the Glory of his inheritance in the Saints; and
what is the exeeceding greatness of his power to us ward, who beli^e according
to the working of his mighty power. O, how earnest was the Apostle, in the
behalf or the Ephesians, to this purpose, and Chap. 3. ver. 14. s^th he, I b^v
my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he could grant unto you
according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his
spirit in the inward man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith: and
says he) that you may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge that you might be filled with all the fullness of ^d:
Two passages they are of Scripture, which are most proper for believing souls
to be well studied in: that part which I read to you, out of the first Chapt.
and this in the third: I say, they are of some proper cognizance ^r men and
woman; that being brought over to the Faith of the Gospel, are studious of
approving themselves unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; that they may
answer their duty concerning these things that are here made mention of; that
there might be (not only as I said before) a weak, and dim, and dark
apprehension of the mystery of the Gospel, the mystery of Christ, the
mystery of the hope of Glory; but, that there might be a comprehension; that
the mystery may stand full, and as much as may be, complete in us, in all the
proportions of it; that the Gospel might not be straightened in our
understandings. Truly friends, this is a great matter, if you would but set
your hearts upon it, and seriously weigh, and ponder what I drive now. Alas,
how little is there of the mystery of the Gospel, that our hearts have already
received? how little of it? And by this means, God is scanted, and shortened in
the love, praise, and honor, that is due to him, and which our hearts would be
enlarged to yield up, if we were but more careful to answer our duty this way.
I do profess, this morning, to you, that are partakers of the Faith of Gods
Elect, that are able to give any account of any saving work upon your hearts,
and that you have any thing of the Faith of the Gospel in you: I do profess
here, and testify to you, in the Name of the Lord, that this does more nearly
concern you for to look unto, that these two Scriptures may be better answered
by you; that you do not please your selves in that streightness of spirit that
is in you, and discovers it self; but, that you be so heightened, that there be
such an enlargement of heart in believing, that you may take in the mystery in
the Glories of it, or else you will not so duly answer that which is required
of you, as touching your growth in Faith, and Grace: Think what you will of it,
this I am sure is a duty that lies upon Believers to perform, that they be of
comprehensive spirits, and that they labor to work out to a more inlargedness
of heart; that they may be so enabled to comprehend, with all the Saints, the
height, and depth, and breadth, and length, or else you will never be able to
give that glory to God, and honor to Christ; never be so much in admirings of
the glorious mystery of the Gospel, as otherwise you would. I would you would
a little think of this point; and, for my part, I do profess, I know nothing
that is more proper for a Minister of the Gospel, a Dispencer of the Mysteries
of God, to be more earnest in pressing, and urging upon Believers, than this
very thing is: But alas, how low spirited are most Believers. Believers, that
it may be have got as much Faith as will secure them from Hell, and bring them
to Heaven: But, as for the mysteries in the glories of it, in the dimentions of
it, in the latitude of it; O, how incapable of a due apprehension of it: Will
you therefore but consider of this? this is one thing, I, it is, it is that
which does mainly concern those that have any thing of the Faith of the Gospel
in them, for to be very solicitous about, and studious to be answerable to. I
leave it with you; but know, that the great God of Heaven, and our Lord Jesus,
has laid this burden upon you and me this morning: As many of us, as are able
to give an account of the Faith of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus lays this burden
upon you this morning, that you look to it, that there be a comprehensiveness
of spirit concerning the mystery of the Gospel; which is Christ in you, the
hope of Glory. And so I let it pass; I leave it with you, to be studied, and
pondered upon; and as you will answer it to Christ another day. Take heed, that
this particular, among the rest, be not slightly passed over.

Again, your duty is, to grow in Grace and Faith, and so will you make it
appear that you do grow. When you come to have such a Faith, as is not only a
living Faith, but a lively Faith, an active, stirring Faith within you; when
you come to have such a Faith, as that you do not only live by it, but that you
live richly by it: there is many a man that lives, and gets a livelihood; he
has bread for the day, he has to supply his necessities, but he lives at a
low, poor rate; he is not able to rise up to those expenses that others are
able to b^ar. So there are (I say) many Believers; they live, they g^t bread
for the day; they get a subsistence by their Faith; but they live poorly, at a
low rate, they do not keep a good house, they do not spend like rich men. There
are that are rich in Faith, as the Apostle uses the expression, in the second
Epist. of James, that are rich in Faith; that is it that we should press to, to
such a growth in Faith, that we may live like rich men, keep a good hoase, and
maintain a full table; that we may feed highly from day to day: there is
mention of the rich man in the Gospel, that was clothed in Purple, and fared
deliciously every day: thus it might have been and yet the man not culpable, if
he had fared thus with a heavenly mind, and had not set his heart upon these
things, as if they were the only portion for souls to sit down satisfied
withal. No doubt, God does allow persons, that have a larger portion of the
World than others have, to go better clad, and to feed at a higher rate than
others do, that have not such estate. This man, it is said, he was clothed in
Purple, and fared deliciously every day: why, truly Brethren, there are such
Believers to be found, though, I think, the number of them is very small: there
are such, of whom it may be thus testified, and it is an honorable testimony
of them, that they are clothed in Purple, in Scarlet, and they fare deliciously
every day; they go clothed in Princely Robes, they are clothed in the Scarlet
Robe of Jesus Christ, in the Robe of Righteousness, which has been died in his
own blood; and they walk like Princes Sons and Daughters, and they fare
deliciously every day; they keep a continual feast, feed upon the marrow and
fatness of the Gospel; they rejoice in hope of the glory of God: these are the
persons of a well-grown Faith, and it is their honor so to be; thus they live:
Thus to bear up in pomp and state, to live like Kings children, and for to
spend largely, knowing that their estate will bear them out. They have such a
Faith in Christ, and in the Covenant, as will bring in sufficient to defray
their expenses from day to day, that they shall never be at a loss, they have
that which will make a supply to them: this is the Faith, and these are the
persons that are rich in Faith. Now, such a growth in Faith, is our duty to
press after, as that we may be able, not only to live, but that we may live at
a high rate, feed fully, and largely, and be feasted upon Christ, feasted upon
the Promises, the blessings of the Covenant; feeding upon the hope of the Glory
that shall be revealed, feeding to the full, without any fear of a surfe^: This
is the well-grown Faith, and such a Faith, Brethren and Friends, we are to
press after.

Such a Faith is not only a conflicting, but it is a conquering, and a
triumphing Faith; this is the well grown Faith; that they may not only be able
to give this account of themselves, that they have a Faith which inables them
to sight with corruptions, and lusts, and to grapple with Principalities, and
Powers; but such a Faith, as inables them to bear up in a triumphing way; and
to say, In all these things, in tribulation, in distress, in persecution, in
famine, in nakedness, (as I said in a former Exercise:) In all these things, we
are more than Conquerors, through him that has loved us. When we can say, with
the Apostle rejoycingly, O, blessed be God, as in 2 C^. (...). that makes us
always to triumph in Christ, such a Faith we should press after, that may
enable us to bear up, to live at a high rate, and to bear up with holy
Rejoycings and Triumphings in God. Such a Faith as the Apostle speaks of, in 1.
Pet. 1. having not seen, you love him; and believing, you rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory. Will you consider of this now, as a further
addition to all the rest? Grow in Faith, so grow, as that the mystery of the
Gospel may stand in its full proportion; that you may be able to comprehend,
with all the Saints, the height, and depth, and length, and breadth, that the
Gospel-mysterie may not be straightened in your spirits. -- So grow in Faith, as
that you may live high, and may maintain your self in an honorable, and
creditable manner; that you may live like the child of the great King of Heaven
and Earth; that you may feed upon delicacies every day; that you may come to be
filled by believing, with all joy, and peace, and comfort; that you may suck,
and be satisfied with the breasts of Consolation: This is the Faith that we
should endeavor a growing in.

I add yet further; you that are partakers of the Faith of the Gospel, your
duty is, to grow in Grace and Faith; and so shall it appear that you do, when
you can bear up with fixed, and established, and well-setled spirits, under the
most amazing, and stupendous providence that are ordered out: and whatsoever
difficulties you meet withal; whatsoever discouragements there are before you,
you may be enabled to hold on in your way, and not be over-powred by them: this
is an argument of a well-grown Faith, when nothing beats us off; Let him kill
me, says Job, i will trust in him still. The woman of Canaan, whatsoever
discouragements there were seeingly, she resolved upon it, not to let her hold
go, not to susfer her suit to fall: this is the Faith, and of such a
proportion, that we should press after; so to grow in Faith, that nothing may
drive us from our hold, nor make us to fall under discouragements.

Again, your duty is, to grow in Faith; such a growth in Faith, as that you may
come to be less selfish, and more for God; more pure in your aims at the Glory
of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ: Truly, this will evidence a growth in
Faith, and this is the Faith so evidenced, that you should endeavor to grow
in. It is usual with poor Believers, in their f^rst setting out upon the way of
Faith, and believing, it is usual with them; and truly, it is a gracious
indulgence of God toward them, he bears with them in it: It is usual (I say)
with poor, weak Believers, at their first beginning, to be mainly solicitous
about their own Salvation; they stand under convictions of their obnoxiousness
unto the wrath of God, to the curse of the Law, and have some apprehensions of
the dreadful condition of the damned in Hell, and what it is to be eternally
separated from God, everlastingly excommunicated from fellowship with him, and
his people; and when they think of these things, O! what shall become of me to
all eternity? what a miserable wretch shall I be, if I should live and dye out
of the favor of God, and not be reconciled unto him by his Christ? if so be
that guilt should lie upon my conscience; if so be that the wrath of God should
still abide upon me; O! what a cursed wretch shall I be to all eternity? O!
what shall I do, that I may escape this curse, and condemnation, and come to be
made partakers of Christ, and of the Salvation that is by him? This is usually
at the first the work of a poor soul, beginning now to look out after Christ,
and pursuing after an interest in the grace and blessing of the Gospel; the
blessing of Salvation, and much what the souls acting is upon a selfish
account: Fain would it be secured, as touching its estate, and that it should
be kept from eternal perishing; and this does very much sway in the heart of a
poor, weak Believer, that he does not so much mind the glory of God, and the
honor of Christ, and the exaltation of the grace of the Gospel: but fain would
he be said, as the poor Jailer, when he came to be convinced; O sirs; he comes
trembling and quaking before Paul and Sylas; O sirs, what shall I do to be
saved? how shall I do to escape the wrath to come? Men and Brethren, say the
people, in Acts 2. when they were pricked at their hearts, upon the
convincement that they lay under, concerning Christ, and that they had
contracted the guilt of his blood upon their consciences; O sirs, what shall we
do? I feel a load of guilt upon me, and I see a hell before me, and I am in
danger to sink down into the bottomless lake; O sirs, what shall I do? O pity,
pity a poor soul, in danger of being swallowed up in destruction: these are
the workings of a poor Believer, that is taken up mainly with solicitousness
about his own safety. And, I say, the Lord is pleased to deal very favorably
with this poor creature: and indeed, God does allow this, that his people
should be solicitous about their own Salvation: Self-love, upon such an
account, does not fall under Gospel-condemnation. But now, this is not the
advanced Faith, the improved Faith, this does not argue so much a well-grown
Faith, as when a soul comes to this, for to pursue life and salvation, and to
follow after a portion in the Glory that is to come; -- upon what account? --
why, upon the account of this; -- By my Salvation, God shall be eternally
glorified, by my being one of his pardoned ones, his reconciled ones; the Grace
of our Lord Jesus shall be exalted, by my being delivered from the curse of the
Law, and from the condemnation of Hell: by my being delivered, I shall come to
stand as a living, and a lasting monument of free Love, of glorious Grace: and
this is the rejoicing of my heart, to think, that I shall escape the vengeance
of Hell, the wrath to come, and everlasting condemnation, and so be with the
Saints and Angels in Heaven for ever, to sound forth the praises of God, and to
ascribe Honor, and Glory, and Salvation, and Blessing, and Dominion, and
Power, to the Lamb, that lives for evermore: Ah, here is the well-grown Faith;
when a soul comes to work off (as it were) from self, it looks not so much upon
self; my Salvation, O! what is my Salvation to the Glory of God? why, God shall
be Glorified in my being eternally saved. If I should perish, and go to Hell,
what! I should be tormented there; is that all? -- Nay, God will be
dishonored: Hell is a place that knows no love, knows no subjection, knows no
fear of God; it is a place where God is continually blasphemed, and shall be to
all eternity. O, I would not come there, nor go to Hell, upon any terms; not
so much, because I would not be tortnented there, but rather thus, I would not
perish, and damn, because I would not have God dishonored by me: I would not
be like those damned souls, and those damned devils; I would not be among them
that hate God, and will hate him to all eternity, and do nothing but curse him,
and blaspheme him, and speak dishonourably of him: O, I would not go to Hell,
because of Blasphemies there: I would go to Heaven, because there is exalting,
and magnifying, and blessing of God there. When a soul comes to this, to have
Faith to be so improved, as that he eyes the Glory of God more than his own
Salvation: and this you are to know, that Gods Glory is the ultimate end of all
his actions, all his purposes and decrees, and all his providential
dispensations. The Glory of God is that, which (I say) is the ultimate end: God
has this in design, that he may be eternally glorified in the Salvation, and
damnation both of men and Angels. Now, that that is Gods utmost end, should be
our utmost end; and the Faith which is of due growth, will enable to this; to
say, I would be saved principally, that God may be Glorified: I would not be
damned, principally, because I would not have God to be dishonored. When
self-interest, and self-concernment begins to wear off, and Gods Glory stand
fully in our eye; and when we are upon this design, that God may be Glorified
in our eternal well-being, this will be a proof of a well-grown Faith.

Further, your duty is, to grow in Faith; it is your duty; and thus should you
grow, to this point, and proportion; That you, by being exercised in Godliness,
may come to mind the welfare of others more than ever you did. At the first
beginning, when God first sets in with a soul; alas, it has scarce any charity
to spare from it self: it is love, and charity, and care, will searce look
without doors, scarce step over the threshold; but altogether solicitous about
its own concernments, that it may be well with it self: I, but now, when Faith
comes to be well improved, and to be a well-grown Faith, then there comes to be
an eving of others; What shall I do to be saved? Nay, what shall I do, that my
Brother may be saved? my Sister saved? my Wife? my Husband? that my Friends and
Acquaintance may be saved? O! now God has given me some hope, that Hell shall
never be my portion, that I shall not go down to destruction: I, but what if my
Brother should go to Hell, and I go to Heaven? what if my Husband should go do^
to Eternal Vengeance, and I get into Glory? O Lord, what will become of such a
near relation? Alas, it is not enough to me now, that I am secure, as touching
my eternal estate, and that I have hope toward God, that I shall escape the
vengeance to come: But now, I begin to think with my self; O, such a soul lies
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity: Such a child, such a
one in near relation, that is wallowing in the blood of his own soul: O! what
shall become of him? what shall I do to be saved? what shall I do, that my
Brethren may be saved; and that my Relations may escape the vengeance to come?
The woman of Samaria, when she came to have some comfortable communion with
Christ, she begins to be solicitous about her neighbors, and goes to them, and
says, O, I have met with Jesus, and, come, see a man that has told me all
that ever I did; is not this the Christ? Truly Brethren, a Believer, when he
comes to be of a well-improved Faith, he would not be alone in his mercy, he
would not eat his morsels alone, he would not go to Heaven without company: and
I tell you, that this is an argument of a well-improved Faith. When our Faith
it goes abroad, our solicitousness, it is not only for our selves, but others;
when our Charity goes out of doors, and we are now projecting, and casting
about how we may promote others eternal welfare: when Paul could say, I am
persuaded, that neither Height, nor Depth, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Life, nor Death, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be able to
separate from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus: when Paul comes to
this Plerophoria, when he comes to be thus improved in his Faith; says he, in
Romans 9. Brethen, I would have you to know, that I say the truth in Christ, I
lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have
great heavyness, and continual sorrow in my heart: -- Why, what man! Did
thou not write but just now, that thou wast persuaded, that neither Death, nor
Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, etc. should be able to
separate from the Love of Christ Jesus our Lord: Why, Paul, will you speak to
such a purpose as this then, that you have great heaviness, and continual
sorrow in your heart? Why, you should be full of joy: who should rejoice in all
the World, if they do not, nor should not, that have a confident persuasion
that they shall go to Heaven, and be eternally blessed with God, and live in
everlasting communion with him? Do you say you have great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in your heart? Why, the business of Faith, is to fill the soul
with joy and peace in believing; and, do you talk of sorrow and heaviness in
your heart? -- why, what should be the matter? -- O, Brethren, he had now a
well-grown Faith, his Faith was improved exceedingly, that he was now sure that
all was well between God and him; he was sure to go to Heaven himself, and that
nothing should be able to separate. And now his heart begins to turn upon his
poor Brethren; I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart. I
profess, says he, I could set down, so far as it might be without sinning
against God; yea, I could be contented, to be cut off from the comfortable and
rejoicing part of Salvation; I could be contented, even to be cut off from the
comfortable communion, not, that he would be in a state of guilt and sin, and
wrath, and under the hatred of God: But, I could be contented, says he, to be
even cut off from that sweet enjoyment that Saints have in their glorified
estate, for my Brethrens sake, according to the flesh. Now, says he, it is the
sorrow of my heart, while I am full of joy and comfort, in respect of my own
condition; I am full of heaviness, and continual sorrow there is upon me; that
my Brethren, that are the seed of Abraham, that they should be strangers to
this Grace, and like to be shut out from the Salvation which I am now sure of;
and then is the Faith of a Believer, a well-grown Faith, when it comes to be
solicitous of others welfare.

And for those that are brought over to Faith, but are weaklings in Faith; when
there is a bearing with their weaknesses, and infirmities, a studying to please
them in all things, for their profit, and a friendly deportment; when there is
not a gr^ng upon them, nor a galling of them by any unbecoming carriage: Says
the Apostle, in Romans 15. We that are strong, that are strong in Faith, ought to
bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves: for, let
let every one of us please his neighbor, for his good to edification: for even
Christ pleased not himself, but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that
reproached thee, fall on me. We that are strong; we that come to have a
well-grown Faith, we should look with a tender, and com^ eye, and heart, upon
tender Brethren, (...) not so much insist upon what will be to the ^ing of our
selves, but what will be to the plea^ of our weak Brethren, so far as is
consistent (...) their profit, and the edification of our souls. (...) thus
with Christ, and it should be thus with (...) this will be a proof of our
growth in Faith.

Further, our duty is, to grow in Grace, and to grow in Faith; and such a
growth should we press after, that we may be able for to use, and enjoy the
World, and the good things of it, with heavenly minds; so, as that we come to
value our selves, not so much by what we are in the World, as by what we are in
in the Covenant, and by what estate we have in the Covenant: not to make so
much matter of it, that we are able to give an account of such and such an
estate in Land, and Houses, and worldly Possessions; but to value our selves
upon this accout, that we are able for to make out an estate in the Covenant,
and that all our outward enjoyments are held by a Covenant; and that is it that
gives us the comfort of our enjoyments: Such an estate I have, I, but, blessed
be God, I have it by a spiritual title; Christ is mine, and I am Christ's, and
so all things become mine; I have a spiritual title, and I hold all by virtue
of a Covenant in Christ. I would not value the World; I would not value my
outward condition, my riches; if they be thousands, and ten thousands in the
World, I should look upon them but as a beggarly portion, if I had them not
upon a spiritual account, and upon the account of an interest in Christ: O, God
that has given me Christ, he has given me with him, all these things. When a
man can look upon his estate, be it never so large and copious; to look upon
it, as that which his heart would be dead to: if it were not, that he could
look upon these things that he does enjoy, as upon a Covenant Conveyance.

And when a soul comes to this, to use the World with a heavenly mind, manage
the affairs of the World; I, but with dependence upon God: When a man in the
way of his Calling, and management of his affairs here below, goes on with
diligence and care; I, but with a humble dependence upon God: and, while he
does his duty, he can trust God with the success. Let the times be hard, and
trading dead, and little in-comes, no matter, i will open my shop, and i will
attend the providence of God; and whether little or much come in, I am not
solicitous about that; I am resolved upon this, I will do my duty, and wait
upon God; and I know, it must be his blessing must be the portion for me to
live upon: And it is not the in-come of the World, that I set my heart so much
upon; but i will do my duty, and leave the success to God. -- -- There are two or
three things more, but, for the present, only weigh what has been said; and
consider, that I have been speaking to you to this purpose; that you, that are
the Sons and Daughters of Faith, look to it, that there be a growth in Faith:
-- -- And, such a growth, as that the mystery of the everlasting Gospel stand
fast in you, that you may be able to comprehend with all the Saints, the
height, and depth, and length, and breadth: -- -- That you may grow up to such
a Faith; no, that you may not only live by it, but live at a high rate; that
you may not only live by it, but live honorably, that you may fare deliciously
every day. -- -- Such a Faith, as is not only a conflicting, but a conquering,
and triumphing Faith. -- -- Such a Faith, as brings you off more from self, and
makes you seek God more, his Glory more. -- -- Such a Faith, as makes you to be
studious, not only of your own eternal welfare, but of the welfare of
others. -- -- Such a Faith, as makes you to value your selves, not according to
your worldly enjoyments; but that you value what you enjoy, according to a
Covenant of Grace, and your self according to that account. And this way truly,
you may give good proof, that you are persons that answer the duty in the Text,
which the Apostle requires; That we grow in Grace. --

SERMON. VI.
I Shall only add a Particular or two about Growth in Faith.

Your duty is, to endeavor to such a growth in Faith, that you may be able to
meditate Terror. It is one thing for to be possessed with terror, to be
apprehensive of terror, and to be amazed and astonished through terror upon us;
another thing to be able to make terror the matter of our meditation: One thing
for to be apprehensive of that which is matter of terror, and to be affrighted
with it, and ready to sink under the apprehensions of it: another thing, for to
have not only the apprehensions, but to have the heart bearing up with a holy
confidence, without being in the least discomposure; to have a fixedness of
soul, a setledness of heart; and not to be startled, and to be ready to run
this way, and that way and even to be at our wits ends, not knowing in the
World what course to take. Now, this is one of the great privileges which
belongs to Believers, and to the Saints of God, to be able to meditate terror;
you have the expression in Isa. 33. 18. There it is held forth unto us, as a
Saints and Believers privilege; that hearts shall meditate terror: And it is
not every Faith that will bring a Saint into the actual possession of free
usage of this privilege. (I would you would labor to have a fixed heart now
upon what I speak, and be in a due composure.) I say this, It is not every
degree of Faith, that will bring the soul into the actual and free possession,
and usage of this privilege that I now speak of: For, to make that which is
matter of terror and amazement; that which is apt to sink and swallow up the
hearts and spirits of others, to make it the matter of our joyful and
comfortable meditation; it is not every Faith, every degree of Faith. It Is true
indeed, every Faith in the lowest degree, has a tendency to it: every Faith
does more or less, make proposition to a carnal and slavish fear. But it is
found in experience, that where Faith is but low and weak, it is apt to be
over-top'd, and over-powred, by base, carnal, slavish fear; it is found in
common experience. But it must be a well-improved Faith, a Faith well grown,
that inables the soul to bear up boldly and resolutely, when there is matter of
fear before it. The Prophet speaks, in Psalm. 112. concerning the righteous man,
That he has his heart fixed; he is so advanced in his Faith, as that he is
come to a fixedness; his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. -- And then it
follows, He shall not be afraid for any evil tidings; that that is matter of
terror and astonishment to others, he can with a sweet composure of spirit,
meditate of, muse upon, and be in the thoughts of; this is a great matter, and
a lovely privilege, and that which we should set our hearts upon: Such a
Faith, of such a growth, we should endeavor after, that we may be able to
meditate terror. -- -- There is a terribleness in God, -- in his Name, -- The
Lord is of terrible Majesty, -- Terribleness in his presence; when that
Proclamation was made, in Isa. 6. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts; the
Prophet cries out now, Woe is me. When there was a Proclamation of God upon
Mount Synai, in thunder and lightning: When there was that dreadful voice, O,
the people cry out, let us hear no more the voice of God, left we die. Now, a
well-improved Faith will be able for to meditate of this terror, I, and to
dwell with that God in holy meditation, and to converse with that God that is
of such terrible Majesty: Who shall dwell with devouring fire? who shall dwell
with everlasting burnings? that is, as terrible as devouring fire, as dreadful
as everlasting burning; who shall dwell with him? who shall be able to bear up
at the thoughts of him? why, a soul that is well improved in his Faith, will be
enabled so to do: Such a Faith, of such a growth, we should endeavor after, as
that we may be able thus to meditate the terror of God; not be afraid of him.
True it is, it is a duty that is incumbent upon us, to have our hearts in a
holy awe, but withal, to bear up in a holy boldness, and not to be swallowed up
with fear, upon the manifestations of the terribleness of God.

So there is a terribleness in the Law, in the Covenant of works that God made,
and which he made a dreadful discovery of upon Si^ai: A fiery Law it is, and so
called, in Deuteronomy. 33. It Is a terrible Law, that flashes fire and vengeance in
the face of an ungodly sinner, of a guilty wretch: I, but now, the Faith of a
Believer well improved, will enable him for to meditate with sweet composure of
spirit, upon this terrible Law; and with a rejoicing spirit, think of the
ridgedness, and sevear requiries of it; knowing, that it has taken sanctuary
at a Covenant which is full of mercy and comfort, and does sweetly revive and
succor the soul, under the dreadfullest representations that can be made to it
of its own guilt.

There is a terribleness in Death, and it is called the King of Terrors: And
how many are there, that are not able to bear the thoughts of it? not able to
stand before the thoughts of their dying? I, how many are there, poor
creatures, that, when the thoughts of Death do but arise in them, they are
ready to be swallowed up of it; and they do all that ever they can to fortify
themselves against those thoughts; as it is a common thing for persons to do:
they cannot endure to be put upon the serious consideration of their dying day,
and having a dissolution made between soul and body. Whence is this? but either
from the total want, or a very great weakness that is in their Faith? -- either
their want, that they have none at all, and then, no marvel, that the thoughts
of Death be terrible to them; why, they are under the guilt of sin, and they
must go to Hell when they dye. O, it is a sad thing, and I would there might be
a fixedness of heart upon this; it is a sad thing to think of it, that there
should be nothing but a little breath between a poor creature and eternal
destruction; and if that be but withheld for a quarter of an hour, the soul
goes down to eternity: if God take away their breath, they dye, and return to
dust; and when they dye, they dye in a state of guilt, and so damn to eternity:
Now, no marvel, that such persons cannot endure to meditate such terror. -- --
And then others, that are weak in their Faith, and are not comfortably settled
in their confidence concerning the Grace of Christ in them, and their
reconciled state: No marvel, if they be shaken and perplexed about it, when
they come to have the thoughts of death. Now, Faith improved to a good degree,
will enable a soul to meditate this terror, to think of it, I, with a holy
rejoicing, and content: to think that a day will come, that will make a
dissolution between the soul and body, that so upon that dissolution, there may
be a more full enjoyment of the Lord Jesus, according to what the Apostle
speaks, in Phil. 1. having a desire. I desire to depart; when a man's Faith will
enable the soul to this, to look upon death, as a thing to be desired: not only
as that which there is a necessity lying upon the creature to undergo; not only
so, there is a necessity lies upon me, it being enacted, so that a soul dies
out of a necessity, he cannot help it; if he could help it, he would be glad
with all his heart, to keep off the stroke of death; but he dies out of choice:
this is the Faith that we should press after; and this is that, that Faith well
improved, will enable to meditate this terror, and to bear up under the
apprehensions of it; reckoning upon this, That, as to live, is Christ, so, to
dye it will be gain, as the Apostle speaks; and therefore he professes, that
he has a desire rather to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of
all.

And then again, there is a terribleness in judgment, so it is called, in 2
Car. 5. The terror of the Lord; the day which is appointed, wherein God will
judge the World in Righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, even the
Lord Jesus. And all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, that ever were, from the
beginning of the Creation, to the time of that appearing of his, shall all be
convented, and made to stand before his Judgementseat: and we, that are here
this morning, shall all stand before this Judgment; and shall give an account
to God of our preaching, and bearing, and how we have carried our selves in the
Assemblies, and under the dispensations of the Ordinances, when there shall be
an appearing before the great Judge of all the World. Truly, this day is a
terrible thing, and it is called, (as I said) The terror of the Lord. Now, I
say, this is a terror that a Faith-less soul will not be able to meditate, he
is not able to bear up under the thoughts of it, and therefore does all that it
can to drive them away, black, melancholy thoughts, thoughts of death, and of
judgment: Such thoughts as these cannot be endured to set a foot over the
threshold, nor to come under the roof of the house: no, we will have nothing to
do with such black thoughts. -- -- And then, those that are weak in Faith, they
are ready to be startled at the apprehensions of this: It Is a terror to them,
to think of a day of Judgment: I, but I say, that a well-improved Faith, a
Faith that is of a good growth, it will enable to meditate this terror, and to
bring the soul to the free usage and possession of this blessed privilege that
belongs unto Believers. A person of a well-grown Faith, will be able to think
of this with joy and gladness: be glad to think of the day wherein the Lord
Jesus shall appear in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: A man of a well-grown
Faith, will be able to meditate this terror, and to rejoice at the thoughts of
it: It is the day of his gladness, therefore to this purpose, our Savior
says, when these and these things shall come, do you lift up your ^eads: When
men's hearts shall fail them with looking after those things that shall come
upon the earth; and when others shall cry out with Balaam, Alas, who shall
live? what will become of us now? It is an amazing thing to think, when the
Heavens shall be raised, and the Lord shall appear with his mighty Angels, to
think what startling there will be, and running this way, and that way! O! what
a dreadful day is this? I am not able to stand before this Judge of all the
World. O, it is an amazing thing to think, what skreeking and crying there will
be on the part of ungodly sinners, that are strangers to Christ and Grace! But,
a poor soul, that is well improved in Faith and Grace, he will be able to bear
up with boldness: and our Savior speaks to that purpose; when men's hearts
shall fail them, and grow dead as a stone within them, and they shall be fall
of astonishment, upon the appearing of the Lord Jesus. Then lift up your heads
with joy, the day of your Redemption draws nigh: So that this is another
thing that a well-grown Faith will enable to. To meditate terror, the terror of
God, -- The terror of the Law, -- The terror of Death, -- The terror of
Judgment. O beloved, this is the Faith that we should press to; and this
growth in Faith, that you may be enabled to have the free usage of this blessed
privilege; and that when others shall be overwhelmed in their spirits, you
may be able to bear up with comfort. You hear of this, as that wherein we are
to evidence a growth in Faith, when we are able to meditate Terror.

Lastly, This I would only say, such a Faith we should press to, such a growth
in Faith; and that we may be a^, not only to look for, but to long after the
serious appearing of Christ, which follows upon the former. O, it is not every
Faith that will enable to this, to be in holy longings after the coming of the
Lord Jesus: Y^u come behind (says the Apostle) in no gift, waiting for that
coming of Christ, waiting for it, and hastening to it: It is that which a
well-grown Faith will enable to; and such a degree of Faith, our duty is to
endeavor after, that we may be able to say, with the Spouse, even so come Lord
Jesus, come quickly. And thus I have spoken to you concerning Faith, when the
Apostle calls upon us to grow in Grace. I have pressed the duty, with respect to
this particular Grace of Faith: and this know, (as I said in the beginning of
the discourse,) That truly, the growth of other Graces, does very much depend
upon the growth of Faith: and the reason why we are so low and poor in other
Graces, it is, because our Faith is not better improved, and raised up to a
higher pitch.

But yet, I would speak something concerning two or three other Graces; and so
endeavor to fasten this charge of the Apostle upon you. Your duty is, (if you
have Grace) to grow in Grace: do but think of it seriously, and study to answer
the duty of the Text; Grow in Grace; Grow in Faith.

I, and know, that it is your duty to grow in Love; In Love to God, in Love to
Christ, in Love to the Truth, in Love to the Saints, in Love with Heaven; this
is that that you should set your hearts unto. Have you any thing of the Love of
God in you? If you know that; it is your duty to improve in that Love, as you
are taught of God to Love; so you are taught of God, to increase, and abound in
Love. If there be a spark of Love in you to God, you should labor to bless God
for that; but labor withal, that that spark may be blown up into a flame.

Are you able to say, with Peter, if the question should be put to you, as it
was to him; Simon, Son of J^nah, Love thou me? You should be thinking with
your selves, if Christ should put such a question to you; such a one, Thomas,
John, Brother, Sister, do thou love me? that you may be able to say, without
check of conscience; Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. It were very good
for every one of us, to be putting this question to our own hearts; O my soul,
do thou love God indeed? art thou able to make a bold profession of thy love
to God? Does not thy conscience tell thee, that thou lie, when thou say
thou love him, and his Christ, and his Spirit, and his ways? Do thou
indeed love him? If we can say with boldness, and without check, and control
of conscience; Lord, thou know that I love thee.

Then I would say this to thee; Do thou love him? O, labor to love him more
and more; to love him with a more entire love, with a more intensive love. Love
him with such a love, that whatsoever duties he requires of thee, thou may
cheerfully apply to them. O Lord, I love thee, and I so love thee, that I think
nothing too much to do for thee; so love thee, as that I think nothing too much
to suffer for thee. If thou call me to duty, O Lord, I love thee so dearly,
that I stick at nothing of duty. O Lord, I love thee with such an entire, and
an intensive love, that I think nothing too much to suffer for thee: such a
love we should press to, and improve to such a flame, that we may be able to
say, all this is come upon us, (as the Church speaks, in Ps. 44.) yet have we
not departed from thee, no^ have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant: this is the
Love, a flaming Love to God, to Christ, to the Truth, to ways of Holiness;
such a Love, as no waters may be able to quench.

And then thirdly, Grow in Grace, -- in what Grace? O Christians, if so be that
you have any Fear of God in you, look to it that that fear be a growing Fear: I
speak now of a holy fear, a child-like fear, a fear of Reverence, a fear that
is consistent with love: The Fear of God, it is a Grace which you should
endeavor to grow in; that it may be said of you, that you Fear God; I, you
fear God above many. It Is an excellent testimony that is given concerning one,
in the book of Neh. The testimony is given of him, that he feared God, and he
feared God above many. Now, such a fear, that we may go beyond others in their
fear: others have a fear of God, to such or such a degree, I, but the fear in
such a one, is far passing the fear of others: -- -- Such a fear of God we
should endeavor to come to, that when a temptation comes upon us, and it comes
with the greatest advantages, (consider of it) and we have the fairest
opportunities to commit the sin that we are tempted to: such a fear we should
endeavor to be possessed withal, that we may break the force, and power of the
temptation, that it may not, in the least, fasten upon us. Such a fear there
was in Joseph, when the temptation was upon him so strong, and comes upon him
with so much advantage, the fear of God was so strong upon his heart, that he
was enabled to bid defiance to the temptation, and to quit himself in an
honorable manner. --

Such a Fear of God, so improved, and grown up to such a degree, that when
there are difficult duties before us to perform; and such duties, as we shall
be in danger by performing of them, to fall into deep and dreadful sufferings:
Such a Fear, as, let the danger be what it will, that I may expose my self to,
in case I perform the duty; yet, the Fear of God is so strong upon my heart, as
that, notwithstanding all the danger, the duty shall be done. This was the case
of Obadiah; there was a duty incumbent upon him, and which he had opportunity
to perform, concerning the Prophets of the Lord; He takes 100 of them, and gets
them into a Cave, and there he feeds them by 50 in a Cave; this was a very
difficult, and a dangerous duty; it was as much as his life amounted to, in
case that Iezabel should have come to the knowledge of it. I, but
notwithstanding the difficulty, and the danger; such was the fear of God in
him, that he was enabled to the performance of this duty; and therefore he
could speak boldly to Eliah, in 1 Kin. 18. I, thy Servant, fear the Lord; and
that with such a fear, thot when Iezabel slew the Prophets of the Lord, I hid
100 of them by 50 in a Cave. --

Such a fear we should labor to be possessed withal, as that, when we are apt to
be ensnared, and inslaved by the fear of men, the fear of God may break the
force of that fear. Solomon tell us, In the fear of man, there is a snare, and
how apt are people to be ensnared by it? I, but now, if the Fear of God were
but well improved, it would break the snare, and swallow up the fear of man. In
the fear of man there is a snare; But, in the fear of the Lord, there is strong
confidence: these are two Proverbs that are worthy of our meditation: now, this
is the fear that we should press after. As in the case of the three Children,
that were required, upon pain of being cast into a Fiery Furnace, they must
fall down, and worship the Golden Image: there was the fear of the King; I, but
there was the fear of God so improved upon their hearts, that they would not be
inslaved, nor ensnared by the Kings fear. And so the Disciples of our Lord,
when the charge was given them, that they should preach no more in this Name;
they labored to put them into a Fear, and to overawe them, that they should
let their cause fall, and appear no more in the Name of Jesus: I, but mark how
their spirits are kept up, having the Fear of God strong upon their hearts;
they were enabled to break the snare, and to go on in the way of their duty.
Such a Fear of God we should labor to be possessed withal, to grow up to such a
degree, that duties, though difficult and dangerous, may be performed; -- and
sins may be resisted; -- and that the fear of man may be conquered. Such a fear
we should endeavor to grow in.

And then, as our duty is to grow in the Grace of Faith, of Love, and of the
Fear of God; So our duty is, to endeavor a growth in Holiness. It is a mercy
to have the least impress of Holiness upon our spirits: I, but our duty is, to
grow in Holiness: If we be holy, we should endeavor to be more holy; according
to that, in Rev. 22. Le^ him that is Righteous, be Righteous still; let him be
more Righteous: Let him that is Holy, be Holy still: Let him be holy, and holy,
and more and more holy; and let him labor to better his Holiness, and to grow
up to a higher degree. We are not only to look to the beginning of Holiness,
but to the progress, and to the increases of it; according to what the Apostle
charges, 2 Cor. 7. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all
pollution of flesh and spirit. Is there some filthyness cleansed away? I, but
see that you cleanse your selves from all filthyness of flesh and spirit. Is
there Holiness begun in you? I, but see that you perfect Holiness in the Fear
of God: this is our duty, thus to grow in Holiness; I, and so to be holy, even
as God is holy, according to what the Lord requires: not, that we can come to
such a perfection; I, but, according to the state of a creature, we should
endeavor to be holy, as God is holy. As he is holy, as a God; so, we should
labor to be holy, according to the state and measure of a creature. We should
endeavor after the highest degree of Holiness.

Grow in Holiness, and to such a pitch of Holiness, as that it may be said of
us, according to what our Savior speaks of the Spouse, Thou art all fair, my
Love, and there is no spot in thee. Our duty is, to endeavor after such a
degree of Holiness, as, that there may be no blemish; but that we may be
presented before God, at last, with exceeding joy.

Such a Holiness we should endeavor to press after, as that we may be sensible
of the least measure of corruption: where there is but a little Grace,
corruptions and lusts, in the stirrings of them, are not so easily perceived:
But, where there is most Grace, there is most life; and where there is most
life, there is most spiritual sense and feeling: and there are none so sensible
of corruption, and stirrings of lust, as those that have the most Grace in
them: there are secret motions of sin and corruption, which, it may be, a
person that has but a lower measure and degree of Grace and Faith, will not
take any great notice of; The motions, and inward boylings of lusts and
corruptions; the lust of Uncleanness, or of Pride, or Covetounsess: There Is
many a stirring lust, that a soul, that either is in total want of Grace, or
has but Grace in a lower measure or degree, takes no great knowledge of. I,
but when there comes to be a growth in Grace, to a good degree; O, then every
stirring of lust and corruption, will be perceived, and the soul will be up
against it, and endeavor a suppressing of it. Such a growth in Grace and
Holiness, that there may be a sense of every lust and corruption; a lust cannot
stir in the soul, but the soul is upon the back of it, and endeavors to use
all severity against it.

Such a growth in Holiness we should endeavor to, that we may be most
cordially complyant with all the Counsels of God; and the more the will of God
is manifested, and made known to us, the more we delight in it: the more it is
made to appear in the latitude of it, and in the strictness of it, the more our
hearts are upon compliance with it. Such a Holiness we should endeavor to
press after, as that we may be able to say; there is a ^ecret heart rising
against every bubling of corruption.

Such a Holiness we should press after, as that we can take the greatest
delight in communion with God.

Such a Holiness, as that we can long after. Heaven; and that, because of the
Holiness of it.

Such a degree of Holiness, as that we may be able to say, we are even weary of
living here in this lower World, because of the corruptions, and lusts, and
profaneness, and abominable impieties that are committed here.

O, this is the Holiness that we should endeavor to; such a degree of
Holiness, as that we may be made every day more and more suitable to God, and
fitted to hold communion with the blessed God: For this know, that the more
Holiness, the more conformity to God; -- and the more Holiness, the more
fitness for the most intimate communion with God. And thus, in these, and all
other Graces, we should endeavor to gorw; according to the charge of the
Apostle here; But grow in Grace. I have thus been laboring with you, according
to my ability, and pressing upon you to this purpose; a growth in Grace, a
growth in Faith, a growth in Love, a growth in the Fear of God, a growth in
Holiness, and so in other Graces, which I might insist upon. But I shall
satisfy my self, in having thus dealt with you, concerning these particulars.

And in the General, according to the expression of the Text; Brethren, this is
your duty; you that are sons and daughters of Grace, this is the duty that is
incumbent upon you, and which is required of you: -- You that l^ave Grace, your
duty is, to grow in Grace, and endeavor such a growth in Grace, that sin may
be almost quite gone out of you: thus it is, so much as you have of Grace, so
much there is of a riddance of sin; so much as there is a remaining of sin, so
much there is of the want of Grace. Now, this is our duty, to endeavor such a
growth in Grace, as that there may be much of Grace, and but little of sin;
that the house of David may grow stronger and stronger, and may appear so to
do, by the house of Saul, its growing every day weaker and weaker.

Oh Christians, so should you labor to grow, and to grow to such a degree, to
such a measure and proportion of Grace, that you may be able to say, Truly, the
case stands so with me; heretofore it stood thus with me, that I could scarce
tell how to do a duty, and to turn my hand upon any holy duty; but now, through
the Grace of God, and his blessing upon the means I have used, I am come to
that pass now, that I can scarce tell now how to commit a sin: this is the
growth we should press after: I can do nothing against the truth, I could do
little for the truth; I can do little or nothing against the truth: I had
strength to sin, and I was very weak to duty, weak for prayer, and weak for
believing, and weak for conflicting with corruptions: I, but now Grace is so
improved in me, that now I am able to do any thing, I am able to do all things,
through Christ, and by his Grace in me: I cannot sin for my heart, as once I
could: this is the growth that we should press after.

I, such a growth in grace we should endeavor to, as that we may be, upon all
occasions, commanded by the Scripture, and by Scripture-arguments and reasons,
and swayed with them, whatsoever arguments come to the contrary. Truly, this is
an argument of a soul well improved in Grace, and in the things of God; when
Gods arguments will bear sway with it, all other arguments, they signify
little or nothing; but an argument drawn from the Command of God, from the Love
of God, and from Grace; such an argument will prevail. I shall sin against God,
if I neglect this duty; -- if I commit this, I shall dishonor Gods; -- I shall
offend my Brother; -- I shall wound my Conscience; I shall walk unsuitably to
the Name that is called upon me, to my holy Profession; -- I shall walk
unanswerably to the Grace that I am planted under: when such arguments as these
are of a prevailing power, it is an argument that the Kingdom of God is come
with power into our souls, when Christ's arguments are the swaying, and the
prevailing arguments with us. Thus now, I have been driving this business; for
my own part, I profess to you, (and the Lord help us to consider wisely of it,)
I hope I may say, in regard of the Grace of God implanted, it does as much
concern me, as any one of you; that I press on you to a growth in Grace; it is
as much my duty as yours, and as much your duty as mine; and it will be a woeful
account that we shall give another day, if you and I shall appear before the
Lord Jesus Christ, and shall have this charged upon us: you preached indeed a
growth in Grace, and you that were the hearers, you heard concerning a growth
in Grace; but neither Preacher nor Hearer, set your selves to answer your duty.
Now, ow shall we give account of this? if you will go away with mere notions,
and rest in this; for I tell you, there is a great deal of danger that you lie
open to, in passing over Sermons of this nature, making no great matter of
them. You have heard the Discourse, and have been called upon to this purpose;
Grow in Grace, and in the mean time, please your selves with this conceit;
well, it matters not, it is a mysterious thing, we know not what to think of
the matter, whether there be such a growth as is spoken of; we will look to
this, to see that there be Grace in the truth of it, and so put off the matter
of growth: I tell you, that this is dangerous. We must, as we will approve our
selves to God, and walk worthy of the provision he has made to us; it is our
duty, that as we have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so, to walk in him, grow
up in him that is the head, and increase with the increase of God; and hold
some proportion to time, and means, and ordinances, and pains that God takes
with us; and that our profiting may appear unto all men.

SERMON. VII.
IT is our duty, as you have heard, to grow in Grace; and so to grow, that our
profiting may appear unto all: And it is that which concerns both Preachers and
Hearers, and all sorts of Professors of Godlyness; that they endeavor this,
that their profiting may appear, appear to themselves, appear one to another.

And if you will ask me how we shall make it to appear that we do profit, that
there is an improvement, that we do grow in Grace; how shall we make it appear?
-- supposing that there is a willingness, and the heart is brought to this,
that it may be made to appear, you may, without any great difficulty, attain to
a resolution this way.

Do not you know how men make it appear, that they have more strength of body
than others? they make it appear by greater activities, and by doing more, and
greater services.

You know how men make it appear, that they are richer than they were; that
they are increased in their estates; why, they will, (if they be ingenious, and
be not base, and sordid, and slaves to their enjoyments,) make it appear in a
suitableness in their deportment, and carriages, and expenses, and layings out:
they will fare better, and they will go better apparelled, and they will be
more ready to give, and they will drive greater trades: you know this as well
as I, and better to; you know how men make it appear that they are richer men,
of more able estates: -- why, and do not you know how you may make it appear
that you are better men in Christ? that you are better in Godlyness? that you
have more Grace than you had? Surely, you cannot but reach this apprehension,
and know how you may make it appear that you are so, that you are better in
Faith and Godlyness. Wicked men, they do make it clearly to appear, that they
are worse than once they were; they will act more vigorously for the Devil, and
in opposition to God, and to the ways of Godlyness: Wicked men, they make it
clearly to appear, that they do grow worse and worse; they are more profane,
more proud; they discover themselves so to be, by rising higher and higher in
their impieties, and insolences against God; and discovering themselves
without shame, and any check, without any startling at it, discovering
themselves that they are resolved upon it, for to go on with a high hand in
their evil way. -- Why now, cannot you tell, you that are the sons and
daughters of Grace, that have the Grace of God in you, the Truth in you, and
whose duty it is to grow in Grace? Cannot you tell how you may make it appear
that you do grow in Grace? you should show your growth, manifest it to others,
and to your selves, by being more active for God, and for Godlyness; -- speak
more for God, -- plead more for the cause of God, -- be more spiritual in your
discourses when you meet one with another, that others may find, that certainly
there is a good stock of Grace within, because there is such large expense
without. When you shall come to be more in holy discourses one with another,
and laboring to help one another heavenward; and be communicating one with
another, in order to the furtherance of one another in the ways of Godlyness;
strengthen the hands one of another in God. When you shall come to make it
appear, that you have more courage, and boldness, and resolution for ways of
Holiness; when you are more fruitful in the duties of Godlyness, and frequent
in them. Thus you should endeavor to make it appear, that you are persons,
that of a truth do grow in Grace; that you may give occasion, one to another,
to say, with rejoicing hearts; now, blessed be God, that such a one comes on
a-pace, shoots up a-main, grows up to a goodly stature: this is that that we
should set our hearts unto.

What can I speak that is more proper for to be spoken to those that are called
to the participation of the Grace of the Gospel? O, let not these words which I
have spoken to this purpose, let them not pass away, as if so be that we were
discoursing of a very fable. Ah consider! that I am speaking about growth in
Grace; and about the making of this growth visibly to appear; that it may
appear to God, -- appear to others, -- appear to our selves; that our
Consciences may be able for to witness with us, that of a truth there is a
growth: This is your duty; and this is my business this morning, in part, thus
to press upon you; not doubting, but that I speak to such as have received the
Grace of God in truth. Consider, that this Text does charge it upon you, that
you look to your growth. And thus you have, according to the Apostles Counsel,
and Expression, you have (and no more than needs) precept upon precept, and
line upon line, here a little, and there a little; and I have done thus; I am
dropping, and di stilling in you, and working as I can; but the Lord work, and
transmit it from your ears to your hearts, this word which does speak to you,
that you grow in Grace, and that you manifest a growth.

If so be that you ask me now; I but what course shall we take? what may we do
in order to this?

I would you were well ripened by virtue of that which has been already
performed in managing of this argument: I would to God that your hearts and
minds were well ripened for the giving in of some directions to such a purpose:
And I wish with all my heart, that you and I had but our hearts brought to
this, to make a conscientious improvement of what we do already know: for I
cannot but think, concerning many of you, that have been long hearers of
Sermons, and professors of the Gospel of Gods Grace; that you, having heard
often concerning growth in Grace, that you are able to say, why, such an
expedient has been over and over, time after time propounded to me; I have had
such a direction, and such a direction. I cannot but be persuaded, that you are
able to suggest to your selves what course is to be taken in order to spiritual
growth; but all the matter is this, to make improvement of what we know, and to
look to it, that we do not suffer our knowledge to lie dead upon our hands: but
that which is the mischief of all, and does us the greatest spoil in Religion,
is this; That when we hear Sermons, and have Gods directions given, and Wisdoms
Counsels concerning a course to be taken for our souls good; when we come to
hear these things, we let them lie dead upon our hands, and never set our
selves to make a business of it, but resolve our Religion and Godlyness into a
mere formality, or mostly do; and do not set our selves in good earnest about
the business that God calls for at our hands. Let me ask you now these
Questions, being that I am to give you some directions how you may come to grow
in Grace.

Did you never hear that this has been an expedient that has been propounded,
a means prescribed, that you should take heed of worldly intanglements, of
setting your hearts upon the World, of loving the World, and the things of the
World? Did you never hear that this has been a means propounded to you? I am
persuaded that you have been taught to know, that if you would grow in Grace,
you must take heed of setting your heart upon the World, of loving the World,
and the things of the World.

I, but consider now, what will your Consciences answer? Have I been careful to
walk according to this direction? have I set my heart upon this, in order to
growth in Grace, for to keep as loose as I can? use it, but not set my heart
upon it? Truly, this is a proper thing for to look to. Alas, Brethren, if you
have not known it to purpose, labor to know it, that the World is a great
enemy both to the plantation, (the World I mean, when the heart comes to close
with it, and with the things of it,) it is a very great enemy both to the
plantation, and likewise to the augmentation of Grace: It hinders Grace from
taking root, and it hinders Grace after it is rooted, from springing up: It Is a
very great enemy to increase, and growth in Grace.

And this know, It is a very hard matter to find a man that grows very rich in
the World, that the same man does grow very rich in Grace: It is possible so to
be; but I profess, I do think it is a very rare thing to find, that a man that
grows exceeding rich in the World, and is very eagerly set to advance in his
worldly state; that that man, though he may have Grace in truth; yet, it is rare
to find such a man to grow up to any considerable pitch of Grace and Godlyness.
Therefore, let that be considered. --

And then secondly, Will you but do this? If there be but a desire to grow in
Grace, (as I am sure there is cause for it,) will you but set your hearts to
this; take heed there be not any secret corresponding with, and favoring of
any thing that is sensual and naught. Take heed of any lust, not only of a
willing allowance, but of any favor, any friendly respect unto it; for truly,
this is a great enemy to growth in Grace. Take heed of favoring your self in
any corruption, whether it be Pride, or Covetousness, or Self-love, or
Uncleanness, or a passionate spirit; take heed of bearing the least favor to
these; but be as severe against them as you can; use as strict discipline upon
your lusts and corruptions as you can. O, it is this that does do us a great
deal of mischief, and does very much prejudice the soul; that there is not a
more through repenting, and breaking off our corruptions and lusts. Amnon's
lustful love to his Sister Thamar, it made him look lean from day to day: (I
allude to it,) O, says he to him, why do thou, being the Kings Son, look
lean from day to day? O, says he, I love my Sister Thamar. Why are Christians,
that are the Kings Sons and Daughters, lean from day to day? O! there is
something amiss! something lies within! some lust and corruption, that is not
fully subdued! This is that that causes leanness in their faces.

And then thirdly, have not you been directed to this? That you would take heed
of entertaining conceits of your own perfection; that you would take heed of
swelling thoughts, of what you have already attained, so as to fancy to your
selves a perfection. Keep your hearts in this apprehension, as Paul does; I
have not yet attained, I am not yet perfect, I am not so good as I should be;
and I am not so good as I am resolved to be; and thereupon you will, by Grace,
come to this resolve as Paul did. I have not yet attained, I am not yet
perfect; why then, I will forget what is behind, and I will reach to that which
is before. Your duty is, to take knowledge of whatsoever Grace you have already
received: I, but so take notice of it, to be thankful, as that you do not rest
in it, and say, it is enough, and I will look after no more: But so bless God
for what is already bestowed upon you, that you still be pressing on for a
larger supply, and that you may come to be more and more improved in the Grace
that is begun.

Fourthly, I would add this, in order to your growth, that you may do according
to your duty; you and I, that we may grow in Grace: Will you but seriously
propound this to your selves, make it your business, and resolve upon it, that
you will do your utmost to grow in Grace, and to be every day better and
better? Natural growth, that comes on, whether we mind it or no. The child
that is conceived in the womb, it minds not its growth; -- when its born, and in
its infancy, it minds not its growth; I, but yet there is a growth, and nature
carries it on: I, but it is not so in Grace. Growth in Grace must be minded,
and it must be attained, and we must propound it to our selves, that we may
grow. And truly, I am persuaded, if so be that Christians would but go to work
like rational creatures, like men that understood themselves in a religiously
rational way; if so be that they would but go to work as those that do with
religious reason weigh and consider, that this is their duty to grow; and
propound it, and make it their design, and resolve upon it, to make a business
of it, that they may grow in Grace; I am very consident of it, that there would
be better growth: You know whether this be propounded by you, that you may be
better in your Faith, and Love, and Holiness; that you may have more of God,
and of Christ, more of the Kingdom of God, more of the power of the Gospel, be
more in expressing these things: Your Consciences can tell you whether you
propound these things to your selves, whether you can say; Truly, I am not so
good as I would be; I would be better, and, by the Grace of God, I will be
better; I will endeavor to better my condition, and to express more of the
in-dwelling of Christ in me. Undoubtedly, if you would but resolve to make it a
business, it would be better with you than it is.

5. If you desire to grow in Grace, do but study what Grace is, and if you have
it, what it is in you; why, is it not a lovely thing? Do you know what Grace
is? a dramn of it is worth a 10000 Worlds! O, a little Faith, a little Love, a
little of the Grace of God, it is more precious than all the p^arls and jewels
in the whole World; there is nothing comparable to it. Now, if you have a little
of this precious commodity, why should not your hearts be set to this, that you
may have more of it? And truly, this would be a good conducement to the raising
up of your hearts to an endeavor this way: why, this Grace is a precious
thing; a little I have gotten of it, and it is so precious, that I will not be
contented with this little, but I will labor to have as much of it as I can:
more love, O, more love! never, never, never too much of that.

Sixthly, If you would grow in Grace, look to your union with Christ; He is the
head, and you are the members, if you are Believers: Now, the body grows by
influence from the head. Truly, our growth, it springs up from union with
Christ; If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, then it shall be well,
if so be that you hold the head: It Is an excellent expression you have in 2
Collos. the Apostle uses that expression, of holding the head; by virtue of
which holding the head, there comes to be an increasing with all the increase
of God: When thou art well skilled in this mystery of holding the head, in a
dependence upon Christ, drawing every day from the Lord Jesus, not contenting
himself with what he has received, but is still drawing and sucking from
Christ, the breasts of Christ. He is in the proper way of proficiency, and
improvement in Grace. These are not empty notions; no, they are the things of
the spirit of God; the spirit of Wisdom does suggest them to you, and therefore
let them be accordingly regarded and heeded by you.

Seventhly, your duty is, to grow, and to grow in Grace: In order to that, I
will tell you what will be a a good conducement; labor to make it sure that
you have Grace in the truth of it, and be very much in that inquiry into your
selves; so, as that you may be clear in this, that you have the true Grace of
God in you; that it is the true Grace of God wherein you stand. This is a good
conducement to proficiency, and growth in Grace, when you come to know that
there is a work begun: For mark you, if so be that a man be about a building,
and do question whether the foundation be well laid yea or no; truly, he can
never go on so clearly, and so dexterously in the carrying on of the building.
But if so be that he be well persuaded, sufficiently satisfied concerning this,
that the foundation is well laid; this will strengthen his hands for to go on
in the work. -- If so be that a man be upon a journey, and question whether he
be in the right way or no; he has begun the journey, and he is doubting
whether he be in the right way yea or no; this will put him to a puzzel, and
make him to be fluctuating, and hesitating; had I best go on, I doubt whether I
be in the right way yea or no? this will cause slackness of his motion; but if
he be sure that he is in the way, this will be much to the encouraging of him
to make a further progress. So if I find, and am sure that this be the right
way, that I have Grace in the truth of it; this will cause us to labor after
the growth in Grace.

Eighthly, You are to be upon the Faithful and diligent exercise of what you
have: The reason why we have no more Faith is, because we are not more upon the
exercise of that Faith which we have: We speak of trusting in God; Alas, how
few are there of us, that do any thing to purpose in the exercise of our trust,
and believing? exercising Faith upon Christ, and upon the Covenant of God in
Christ, concerning pardon of sin, sanctification: why, for want of exercising
what Grace we have already received; w^ improve no more; -- the promise is a
faithful promise, and God will be true to it; He that has, to him shall be
given: He that has, -- what is that? he that has, and uses; for we must needs
understand it in that sense: He speaks of the man that had the Talent, and had
employed it, had gained five talents; he had employed his talent, says Christ,
give him the other talent; for to him that has, that is, that has, and does
use, and employ what he has, to him shall be given. If we would now but set
our selves seriously, and consideringly upon this business, and exercise, and
employ what Grace God has given, we may be confident of it, that God will come
in with the inlargeings of his spirit.

Ninthly, Our duty is, in order to growth in Grace; to be constant in our
attendance upon such means which God has appointed for such a purpose; Word,
and Ministry, and other Gospel Ordinances, as we lie fair for the enjoyment of
them. Truly, these means are provided for this very purpose, that Christians
may grow: God has set up a ministry in the World, not only to bring persons,
that were strangers to Grace, to the participation of it; but that, being
brought to partake of Grace, they may come to be increased in Grace: Christ
ascended up on high, and gave gifts unto men, for the perfecting of the Saints,
as well as for the planting of the Saints: and this is our duty, when we have
sound the power of the Gospel upon our hearts, to bring us from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God; When we have found the efficacy of
the ordinances to begin Grace, our duty is to attend them still; that that
Grace being begun, may by the same means, be increased unto the day of
perfection. This is the will of God, and we may be confident of this, that when
Christians come to Gods means, propounding Gods ends, (mark what I say) and
accordingly, wisely, judiciously, and conscientiously applying to the means, to
such ends and purposes; they may be confident of it, that God will come in with
a blessing: for God does delight to crown his own means, to prosper his own
prescriptions; he loves to see his meat that he gives his children, to prove
their nourishment, their physic to promote their health; God loves to see his
means that he provides for the good of souls, to see them succesful. Consider,
can you think so dishonourably of God, of the most blessed God; that he should
provide a Ministry, continue it in the World, continue his people in their
attendance upon it? what, merely that they might keep on in a formalizing
course, and be never the better. Or, can we think so dishonourably of God, as,
that he would go and tie us to hear, and attend the Ministry of his Gospel, and
Grace, and withhold his blessing, while we do conscienciously and judiciously
apply our selves to such means? -- Can we think so dishonourably of God, as
that he will suspend his working? Ah Brethren! the Lord delights to meet them
with his blessing, that remember him in his ways: Do but think of that passage
in Isa. 64. and look that Text full in the face, and hear what it speaks to
you; Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness; those that
remember thee in thy ways: mark it, Thou meetest them; -- to what purpose? --
why, to prosper them, to command thy blessing upon them. I, undoubtedly, if we
did but propound this to our selves, when we come to attend the Ordinances;
think thus with our selves, why God has set up this Ministry in the World,
that his peoples souls might prosper, that they might thrive, that they might
grow rich, that they might improve in Knowledge, and Faith, and Holiness, and
Love, (and the like;) God has given this, that there might be the perfecting
of the Saints, the perfecting of my Soul. I go to this means, I attend this
Ministry, and I will attend in expectation of a blessing of God upon it; I will
wait upon God, and I will expect his blessing, and reckon upon it, that I shall
be the better for these means; it is God's means, and he loves to be found in
his own way, and to bless and prosper his own appointments. Oh, this is that
would conduce exceeding much to proficiency in Faith and Godlyness, if we would
but go this way to work. But I tell you, Friends, our formality spoils us; it is
a most lamentable thing to consider, what formalizing spirits many of us have:
Will you but mind this that I say? I would I might not have that occasion that
sometimes we have in the way of our preaching, to speak to such a purpose;
people come together, and profess to pray, (as that is one part of our public
ministry;) yet, how many are there of you, that scarce ever close with one
petition in a whole prayer; your eyes are wandering, and thoughts are roving.
Do not your consciences tell you, that of a truth, you make nothing of this
duty? but you can gaze, and wander, and look this way, and that way, and
discover to others an unfixed heart, and that you mind not the business that
you are transacting. What Is this, but formalizing? as if we came to set out a
prayer, and not to bear a part in prayer. -- -- And so for hearing; with what a
formalizing spirit are we many times? we can hear, as if we were not at all
concerned in any thing that is spoken; never considering of the ordinances in
reference to God, as that that has the stamp of his Authority upon it: O this,
if the Lord be not the more merciful, it will be the ruin of our souls, This
Plague Formality. We have got a course of going to Church, (as you use to say)
and keep on a course, and go in account for prosessors; but in the mean time,
the heart little with God, if any thing at all, not raised up to God, not set
to enjoyment of God, and of holding communion with the Lord Jesus, never come
to settle upon this thought; why, this is Gods means, that he has provided for
my improving in Faith and Godliness. I do profess, for my own part, I do not
know, in all the World, what to speak more to the purpose, as touching this
Agument, which is an Argument, that does most nearly concern all that are
partakers of the Grace of the Lord Jesus, for to look after.

10. Your duty is, to grow in Grace: Now, that you may do so, I would offer
this to your consideration; (Do but rationally weigh these things that I now
offer to you;) You that have Grace, your duty is, to grow in Grace; That you
may do so, study Heaven, and the Glory that is to be revealed: I tell you, I
look upon it, as that that is beyond all controversy, that well raised
apprehensions of Heaven, the Glorious estate there, will make us to put spurs
to it, and set on with diligence and care. If we did but know the
interpretation of Heaven, what Heaven is; we get a notion of Heaven, but know
not what it is; what it is to be in Heaven, what it is to enjoy God in Glory,
what it is to be with Christ and Angels, what it is to be in the possession of
those blessed mansions above! If we did but study Heaven more, certainly, it
would make us put on with more diligence, look about us, and set us upon a
vigorous performance of Grace, and that we may increase in it. Consider a
little, -- you that have Grace; you are entitled to Heaven, it is your
inheritance, the portion which your Father has set out for you: I, but what is
this Inheritance? -- It is an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades
not away. -- There is in Heaven the vision of God, the most Glorious God; --
There is a Communion, an everlasting Communion with God, and with the Lamb, a
following of the Lamb for evermore. -- There is the enjoyment of sweetest
communion with Christ, and with Angels, and glorified Saints: -- There is such
Glory, as eye has not seen, ear has not heard, it cannot enter into the heart
of man to conceive: It is an amazing thing, what the state of Heaven is! what
the Glory that is there to be enjoyed! -- There is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore! If so be that a man would but think of this; O! is
Heaven such a place! such a holy, pure place! is there so much of the Glory of
God appearing there! This will make a man to argue thus with himself; Good
Lord, what manner of person should I be, that I may be fit for to come there,
that I may be fit to set ^y foot upon that holy Ground! O, what manner of
person ought I to be! how shall I endeavor to be purged, and cleansed,
according to that which the Apostle speaks in the 1 Epist. Joh. 3. says he, He
that has this hope in him, he purifies himself, as God is pure. Such and such
a thing is Heaven, there is such glory and beauty there, such glorious objects
to behold, and such delights and pleasures to be enjoyed! what manner of person
ought I to be, that I may be meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the
Saints in light? Certainly, the thoughts of Heaven being well digested, will
make us to set on, and be a conducement to an advance in Grace and Holiness.

11. Lastly, your duty is, to grow in Grace: Suppose you have it in the
beginnings of it; O, bless God for what you have; but withal, pray that you may
have more: Prayer does net obtain the first Grace: You do not ^et the first
Grace by prayer; for a man cannot pray, to speak of prayer according to the
proper use of it; there is no man can pray till he have Grace. There may be
something done in the strength of a common conviction; a person, that is
convinced of his cursed estate, and terrified upon the conviction and
apprehension; he may come to send out some kind of desires; O, I would it were
better with me for all that; I see my condition is very bad, and sad, and
naught: But a true desire after Grace, cannot be, till there be something of
Grace in truth, The first Grace, it comes not upon our prayer; but to be sure,
the after Grace is to be fetched in in the way, and by the means of prayer; and
therefore we are to ply the Throne of Grace, as the Apostle exhorts, Let us ^me
boldly to the Throne of Grace; Throne of Grace, to the God of Grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find Grace; that we may find more Grace, Heb. 4. O Lord,
thou have styled thy self a God of Grace; and thou have made a Covenant of
Grace; and thou have ordered out thy Son, as a Fountain full of Grace; and thou
have made promises of Grace: O Lord, bestow more Grace; O Lord, hold not thy
hand: the Disciples, they cry out, O Lord, increase our Faith: the poor man in
the Gospel, breaks out with tears, Lord, I believe, O Lord, help my unbelief.
Lord, I have a little love to thee, O, let my love increase; Lord, let my Faith
increase; Lord, let my Holiness be more and more increased; Lord, let there be
more and more: You have a promise, Open thy mouth wide, I will fill it. These
things now I have suggested to you, and have endeavored to commend them in as
pressing a way as I can, that so you may perform your duty, as touching growth
in Grace.

I would now have spoken something by way of encouraging Arguments; only thus
at present.

I would have you to consider what a mercy it is, that God will make this the
matter of your duty; you, that are gracious persons, upon whom he has bestowed
any Grace: what a mercy of God it is, that he should make this one of your
duties, and require this of you as a point of duty, that you should grow in
Grace: as if a great man should say to a poor, one that he has set his love
upon, Friend, I have freely given thee 100 l. as a stock to begin the World,
now, go thy ways, and employ this 100 l. and see what improvement thou can
make of it: and I require this of thee, that thou do advance in thy estate; and
if thou need 100 l. more, or three or four hundred pound more, come to me,
and I will supply thee still; for I would have thee to grow rich: you would
think this were a high act of courtesy and kindness, if a man should do so:
Friend, I charge you, see that you grow rich; you have so much in stock, and I
will supply you still with more and more: but only do you look to this, that
you grow rich. Thus God does in respect of Grace. Indeed, he does not deal thus
with us, as to the World: there are many, they will be rich in the World, and
they decree, and resolve upon it, that they will be rich; I, sometimes, whether
God will or no. They carry the matter, as if they would be rich whether God
will or no. They would be rich, rich in the World, and they have no warrant,
for God has not required this of any man, that they should grow rich in the
World: He requires they should do their duty; and if he will come in with a
blessing, so; they ought to be thankful: but he does not command them to be
rich in the World; but there are, that will be rich, and resolve to be rich,
and so they run themselves into snares and temptations, and many hurtful and
noisome lusts, that drown men's souls in destruction. I, but here is the Grace of
God to his poor servants; His will is, that they should be rich in Grace, and
he does encourage thereunto, by promising that he will prosper you in your way:
He has given you such a stock, he will give you more, provided that you do but
your duty; and it is his mercy, that he has made it the matter of your duty,
to grow in Grace.

2. And then reckon upon this for your encouragement, and the quickening of you
in your endeavors this way: To be sure, grow as much as you can, you will
never grow too good for God; you can never have too much Grace, you can never
have too much Faith, nor Love, nor Holiness; Godliness knows no bounds: You can
never have too much of God, and Christ, and Holiness. When the foolish Virgins
saw themselves at a loss, as touching their oil, and come to the wise, to buy
of them; nay, say they, spare us there, we have none to part withal, we will
keep what we have gotten, lest we should not have enough for us and you. And so
make account of this, that when you have grown as high in Grace as you can, you
will have no over-pluss, you will have none to spare.

SERMON. VIII.
IT is God's great mercy, that there are any in the World which have any Grace
in them, and that God should make such a pleasant and precious plant to take
root, and spring up in such a soil as the soul is, so barren of all good, and
so unapt to receive any good. Now, as it is God's mercy that any have Grace; so
it is their duty that have it, for to grow in it: and this duty you have been
over and over charged with. But I shall now come to what remains to be spoken
concerning this Argument, which I shall give a brief account of; and then come
to what follows in the Text.

2. The further encouragements unto the lively and vigorous prosecution of this
matter; a strenuous endeavor to grow in Grace; the encouragements, they are
very great; and I desire that you may know the force, and power, and virtue of
them in your own hearts.

3. If so be that you do indeed make it your business, and do endeavor this,
to grow in Grace, and shall do so, (as you are very like to do it, if you
endeavor after it,) you will have this advantage, you will not be altogether
so apt to be unsettled in your apprehensions concerning your state; you will not
be so much upon the questioning point concerning the truth and reality of the
Grace of God in you, as many are: when you come to be of some considerable
growth in Grace, when you come to have much Faith, and much Love, and much
Holiness, much of the Fear of God, you will not be so apt to be questioning the
point, and fluctuating in your souls concerning your Grace; but you will be
able to bear up against temptations of that kind, and ready to make your
confident avouchments, and say, if you be questioned about your Faith; Yea
Lord, thou know I do believe. -- Be questioned about your Love, as Peter
was, Simon, love thou me? Yea Lord, thou know I love thee. And truly, this
is a great advantage that will come over to us by improvement in Grace; for the
truth, and soundness of Grace, it does appear by its growth: it is a clear
demonstration that a plant lives, w^n it grows: it may live, and yet there be
no discovery of its growth; but when there is a growth, there is a plain
demonstration, that the plant is alive: and this benefit will come over, by
growing in Grace. And, while poor weaklings in Grace, that are of low
seize, and are apt to please themselves in their lower measures, will be
apt to be shaken by every wind of temptation, and be put upon the questioning
point upon every occasion, whether there be any Grace in them, yea or no. They
that have but a little Faith, a little Grace; they will be apt ever and anon,
to be fluctuating in their spirits, and doubting within themselves, whether
there be any thing of God, and Christ, and Grace in them. Wellgrown Christians,
will be able to bear up with a holy confidence, that of a truth, the Grace of
God is in them.

4. This encouragement we have to endeavor a growth in Grace; God will be the
more glorified, Christ will be the more magnified, the Gospel will be the more
credited; the more we have of Grace, we shall be able to quit our selves
honorably in our way of duty, in our way of, suffering: Herein is our Father
Glorified, that we have much fruit, and bring forth much fruit.

5. God will glory in such, and make his boast of them, as he did of Job; Do
thou not see my servant Job, that there is not a man like him in the earth, an
upright, and a perfect man, one that seareth God, and escheweth evil? The Lord
does make a holy boast of his eminent servant, that was so raised up in Grace,
and Holiness: And you know what our Savior speaks concerning the woman of
Canaan; O woman, great is thy Faith! be it unto thee, even as thou will. Truly,
there is very much in that to consider of: men and women of advanced Faith and
Grace; O! how Christ does Glory in them! and what is it that he can deny them
Be it unto thee even as thou wilt; draw thy requests, and I will under-write
them, I will say amen to them: what, can God deny a soul that is improved in
Grace? of all others, such are like to have the highest communications from
God: for this we may well think, that God will order out his communications of
mercy and comfort to his people, according to their capacities; the larger the
vessel is, the more liquor it takes in, and accordingly, the more shall there
be communicated unto it. Narrow hearts are like to have but little, because
they can receive but little; they are little in capacity, and are like to be
accordingly; but little in the communication that shall be made unto them.

6. This will be our encouragement to endeavor a growth in Grace; we shall by
this means credit the Gospel, credit the Ordinances, encourage the Ministry,
and strengthen the hands of those that are faithful in their work; whose
ambition should be to see those that wait upon God in the way of Ministry, to
be improving, and thriving, and growing Heavenward: O, how much is it to the
honor of the Gospel, and to the credit of the Ministry, and encouragement of
the servants of Christ; when they can see those that wait upon God in their
way, to be upon an improvement. It Is the comfort of a Nurse, to see the child
thrive and prosper; it is the comfort of a Minister, to see the people that wait
upon his Ministry, to be increased with the increase of God; bettered by every
Sermon, bettered by every Ordinance that is dispensed unto them: Surely, if
Paul were on earth, and had to deal with such kind of persons, that were good
proficients, he would glory in them, and make his boast of them: so he does of
the Thessalonians, in the 2 Epist. 1 Chap. where having spoken of them, of
their Faith, and Charity; we glory in you, (says he) in the Churches of Christ.

7. Consider thus for encouragement, for an endeavoring after a growth in
Grace; such persons are not so likely to be startled and affrighted, and
unsettled upon occasion of amazing, terrifying, and astonishing providence: and
when there are frowns in the face of providence, which others are not well
able to behold; improved souls, such as are well underlaid with Grace, and are
of a considerable growth, they are of all others, the most likely to bear up
with courage and confidence, and holy resolution, and to outface all
difficulties and dangers; and to say, as the three Children, O King, we are not
careful to answer thee in this matter. When poor weaklings are apt to fly
before an enemy, and to shrink at the sight of a trouble, and to have their
hearts desponding, and fall down within them; well improved souls, that are
advanced in Grace, they are likely to bear up with courage and confidence, and
to behave themselves as Caleb did: when others of the searchers were sent to
see the Land, their hearts begin to fail them at the sons of Anack; Come, says
Joshua, let not us fear them, they are bread for us, we shall feed upon them,
they shall do us no hurt, their strength is departed from them, and the Lord is
with us, to work out salvation for us. Such a man is one that God would glory
in, that will not startel at troubles when they fasten on him, but bears up
with resolution of spirit; and such are like to do so; that are well improved
in Grace, as Caleb was.

8. Consider this, that if you do grow, and increase; you are likely, when you
come to dye; to dye with the greatest comfort, and joy, and boldness toward
God. Truly, we may well think, that those that have the greatest Faith, and the
greatest Love, and the greatest measure of Holiness, they are like to dye with
the greatest comfort and triumph. I do not say that it is always so; God may,
and does, it is like, sometimes, for ends and purposes best known to himself,
suffer some of his most eminent Saints for to dye, and pass away, not
altogether with that splendour, and with those clear apprehensions of his Love;
sometimes he is pleased so to order out for holy purposes. But we may well
think, that in all probability, they that have gotten the most Grace, are like
to have the greatest comfort in the day of death; and according to their
sowing, so shall their reaping be: they having sown plentifully, when the
Harvest comes; truly, they shall be sure to reap plentifully.

9. Consider this; That whereas it is said, that Christ, in the day of
Judgment, will come to be admired in all them that do believe: Surely, he will
be most of all admired in them that have been most in their believing of him;
-- he will be most admired in them that have done most in their advances and
improvements in Faith and Godlyness. And truly, these things being duly
considered, they may be well reckoned upon as so many incentives and
provocations to this duty which we are charged withal in the Text; that we do
endeavor, to grow in Grace. And, if there be any that are able to give any
good account of their improvement, and increasing, through the blessing of God
upon them; if any of you can find that you have been made to increase, and that
there is a growth in Grace; you may know it, and your duty is, to make a
thankful acknowledgement of it: As David does, in Psalm. 138. In the day when I
cried, thou answered'st me, and strengthened'st me with strength in my soul.
Truly, we should be willing and free to acknowledge the incomes of God, and the
increases of God in us; and how the Lord is pleased for to bring us on from a
lower measure to a higher, and to give us an advance in Faith and Godlyness.
Truly, we should take knowledge of it, and be free to make acknowledgement of
it, to the glory and praise of Him that is the giver of all. And for such of
you as are above, that are of a higher stature than others of your Brethren,
that are better grown Christians, more improved in Knowledge, in Faith, in
Holiness, in Love, in Godlyness, and Grace; to such of you, I have only this to
say:

First of all, consider, that all you have, is of free donation; your first
Grace, and your second Grace; the first degrees, and the after-degrees; they
are all of Grace; and therefore your duty is, to attribute nothing to your
selves, but to give the Glory of all to God: By the Grace of God, I am that I
am, says Paul. If so be that I have more Faith than my Brother, more Grace,
more Knowledge, more Holiness; I have no reason to boast of it; I have much
reason to bless God for it, but not to boast; for what have I, that I have not
received? I have received the first Grace: and my endeavors have been used,
and put forth to such a purpose; yet it is not so much to be reckoned to my
endeavor, as to the blessing of God upon my endeavors; and so God in all, is
to be glorified; in all, and for all; for the first Grace, and for the after
Grace; for the beginnings of Grace, and for the increases of Grace: O, the God
of Grace is to be magnified, and we are to carry it very humbly; to take heed
of any proud swellings of heart, because you may come to be above your
Brethren, taller than they by head and shoulders: do not overlook weaker
Brethren, but carry it humbly, and tenderly toward them; as the Apostle says,
We that are strong, ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak, this is a
becoming thing for a well-grown Saint, to carry it with all meekness and
tenderness, and in all lowlyness of mind toward those that are his inferiors,
and short of him, in respect of his spiritual stature in Christ: Despise not,
O, despise not the small things in others; if God have given you a larger
measure of his Spirit and Grace; but rather improve your strength for them that
have not come to your pitch: if so be that you be stronger than they, let them
have the benefit of your strength, knowing that they have an interest in your
Graces; and they should have the fruit and benefit of them together with you.

And then withal, such as may be improved in Grace, and of a good growth, let
such yet for all that, not rest in that which they have attained; but still (as
Paul professes concerning himself) be forgetting what is behind, and reaching
out to that which is before, pressing toward the mark; because whatsoever you
have, yet you may have more; and till you be perfect in Christ, you must never
cease your endeavors, but be still pressing on after larger measures, and that
you may come to your perfection, and to the full stature that you are appointed
to in Christ.

And then withal, reckon upon this as your duty; such as are well grown in
Grace and Godlyness; do not reckon upon it, that you will now have freedom from
temptations; nay, rather look for the greater temptations, because that God
does usually lay the greatest burdens upon the strongest shoulders, Weaker
Christians, they shall have their temptations proportionable to their strength:
men of greater strength and abilities in Grace, must reckon upon it to be put
the harder to it, and to have the greater trials, considering that they have
received a greater measure of Grace than others have.

And now Beloved, I have done with this point, wherein I have been somewhat
large, and have laid out the best of my endeavor, that I might be so
discoursed of, as that you might come to be the more benefited by what I have
had to speak. --

You have heard, that they that have Grace, it is required of them, and charged
upon them, that they be upon their growth. Now remember, O remember, that this
is the charge of God upon you; you, that are the sons and daughters of Grace,
that are called of God to the participation of Grace, remember that this is
your duty, and God does require it of you. O now, shall all that has been
preached to you from one morning to another, pass away? Let me but put it to
your Consciences now; truly, I am apt to think, that in the carrying on of this
Discourse concerning growth in Grace; I am apt to think, that there are some of
you, how many, I know not: But I am apt to think, that there are of you, that
have had some convincement upon your Consciences; and that you may have cause
to smite upon your hearts, and to say, O wretch that I am, that I should be no
better in Grace, that my estate in Grace should be so low! I am apt to think,
that you have had some touches upon your spirits, upon this account; -- and
that withal, you have been upon some resolves to set upon the business, and to
endeavor a growth to a higher degree; and that you may be better Christians
than you have been. I am apt to think, that you have had some movings upon your
hearts; has it been so, and will you let the cause fall again? will you please
your selves? nay, dare you please your selves in your lower measure, having
been convinced, and awakened, and made to apprehend what a blessed thing it is,
to be upon increases with the increase of God? Hearing so much encouragement,
what encouragement there is to endeavor a growth in Grace; dare you let this
matter fall down again, and your hearts flag within, and not set to it with all
your might; that you might come to be improved Christians? I beseech you,
consider well of it, and know, that God, he takes notice of every message that
he sends unto you, of every Sermon that he provides to be preached unto you:
And, O that this were but well considered, that the Great God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, they have an eye upon us, and observe how we carry our selves
after we have heard such a Sermon, such a duty; God takes notice whether we
walk in any suitableness to what is urged, and charged upon us. I tell you
Brethren, that God will not be Complemented withal; O, will we make it a matter
of mere complement, to come early in a morning, and hear a Sermon, and when we
have heard it, go away; and when we have had our task set us, never set about
it. Truly, give me leave to say this to you; you that are Masters and
Mistresses, you would not very well like a servant, if he should only give you
the hearing; when you come, and lay him out his work, and say, my servant, this
business I would have done, and that business I would have done, and your
servant is present with you, and gives you very patient hearing, and does
privately attend to your charge; but when you have given your command, and laid
your charge upon your servant, and said, I require this of you, that you do
such a piece of service at such a time; this is the work of this day; and when
they have given you the hearing, they go away, and never set about their
business, nay, scarce ever, think of it after; I know you would not like well
of such a servant, but think him more fit to be turned out of your service, for
to go and slight all that you require of them, and charge upon them in way of
duty and service. Why, can you think in your Consciences, that God will take
content in such kind of servants that come to attend upon him, and to receive
his charge, and have the signification made to them of their duty; as our
Savior says, you call me Lord and Master, and you say well, for so I am. Now,
you come here, and hear the will of your Lord; and among other things, he
requires this of you, that you set upon this great work, of growth in Grace:
Now, if you come to the Ordinances, and hear what his good will and pleasure is
concerning Faith; and when you go away, never regard what your duty is, nor
what your Master requires of you; but you let all alone, and rest in your
hearing, and never go about the work and business that is required of you; do
you think that God and Christ will be well pleased with this? O, is it likely
that Christ will say to you, in the great day of account; Well done, good and
Faithful servant, faithful servant, faithful servant? why, this was all, thou
gave me the hearing, but thou did not go about my business. I tell you
Brethren, our Preaching will come in as a witness against you; and your hearing
will be to your greater condemnation: And therefore I beseech you, that you
would not receive the Grace of God in vain. And so I have given now a dispatch
unto this part of the Text, which concerns Growth in Grace.

The next thing that follows to be considered of, is this; Grow in Grace; And
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.


Here we have to consider of a further Inquiry, a further Command: Grow in
Grace; Grow in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And truly, I
am apt to conceive, that there is a dependence of one upon the other; and that
in order unto growth in Grace. Christians and Believers are required to grow in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. This I conceive is intended
in this conjunction, and connection of these two Requiries: As if the Apo^le
should have said, Grow in Grace; and, that you may so do, Grow in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Now, before I come to the second
observation, there is a question, which, I think, may be very properly moved,
upon occasion of these two Requiries, thus ordered out in the Text. This
Question (I say) I conceive, may be very fitly moved. When the Apostle requires
that there be a growth in Grace; then he comes to require a growth in Knowledge.

It may be questioned from hence; Is not Knowledge Grace? and does not the
Apostle require a growth in Knowledge, when he requires a growth in Grace? why
should he make this a distinct requiry from the former? May not we conceive
that Knowledge is a Grace; and then requiring growth in Grace, he requires
growth in Knowledge?

A little to answer this: First, I would say thus, That it is not to be
questioned, but that Knowledge is a Gift, and a gift that is very highly to be
accounted of: But every Gift is not a Grace. Indeed, every Grace is a Gift; but
every Gift is not a Grace: understanding by Grace (as usually it is to be
taken) that Grace, which is a fruit and effect of Election; a fruit and effect
of special Love; understanding by Grace, sanctifying, and saving Grace: so
every Gift is not a Grace: every Gift may be called a Grace in this sense, as
it comes from Grace, from common Grace: it is a common Grace, that God does
bestow meat and drink upon us; it is a common Grace and favor of God, that
gives us meat to eat, clothing to put on; that he gives us the use of Reason,
that he gives us common Understanding, that we may carry our selves like men,
like rational creatures; this is a common Gift, a common Grace: And so for
knowledge, it is a Gift; I, and it is a Gift that comes from common Grace, and
a common Grace it may be reckoned to be.

But, if we speak of special Grace, a distinguishing Grace, Grace that is to
Salvation: Truly, so every Gift is not a Grace. And it is true concerning
Knowledge; Knowledge is a Gift; and yet speaking of Grace strictly, Knowledge
is not a Grace. But only we must distinguish of Knowledge.

There is a more common Knowledge; there is a notional Knowledge, a Knowledge
of an enlightened understanding, eradi^ated by the common light of the spirit,
by a common work of the spirit; I say, that this is not a Grace: this (as you
shall hear) may be had, and yet persons may perish for all this, and damn
eternally: they may go down well accomplished (as to their Knowledge) to hell.

But then, there is a Knowledge, that is not only a brain-Knowledge, but a
heart-Knowledge; I will give them a heart to know me. Truly, there is Grace
there: to be sure, if the Knowledge be not Grace, yet there is Grace in the
Knowledge, and with the Knowledge: When God gives a man a heart to know him,
that is a Covenant-blessing, and of Covenant-conveyance; and it is a conveyance
to none but those that have a special favor: but otherwise, Knowledge in it
self considered, though it be a Gift, yet not a Grace: For, mark you;

First of all, you have had many knowing persons (as I was saying) that were
never partakers of the Grace of God, true, saving Grace. Balaam prophecies of
himself, that he was the man whose eyes were opened, and he knew the visions of
God; Balaam speaks it of himself, he was a man that had very much insight in
the mysteries of God, and the things that concern the Church of God, and the
enemies of the Church; and yet a wretch, a covetous wretch, that perished in
his way of covetousness, and did discover a madness of spirit; the madness of
his heart was eager in the pursuit of the ways of unrighteousness: Thus
Balaam, and yet a knowing man, his eyes were opened, he saw the visions of God,
he was acquainted with the counsels of God, and yet a very wretch, and fell at
length under damnation. What was he the better for his Knowledge?

Persons may know much; I, they may have all Knowledge, and yet for all that,
they may be without Charity, without Love: so the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 13. says
he, Though I speak with the tongues of Men and Angels; and, though I have all
Knowledge, and have not Love, I am nothing, it profits me nothing. Now, by this
it appears, that there is a Knowledge, that is another thing than Grace.

And then consider, that Knowledge is that which a man may have, and be
swelled, and puffed up with it; so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. We know that we
have all Knowledge; Knowledge (says he) puffs up; Charity edifies; now,
Grace does not do so, Grace does not puff up.

And then again, persons may have Knowledge, and yet notwithstanding all their
Knowledge, after that they have escaped the pollutions of the World, they may
come to be entangled again in their former corruptions, be brought again into
their former woeful bondage, and the latter end of them may be worse than ever
their beginning was; so the Apostle, in 2 Pet. 2. says he, If after they have
escaped the pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, (the best knowledge in the World,) they had this
knowledge, and escaped the pollutions of the World, and they are entangled
again, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning; for
it had been better with them not to have known the way of righteousness, than
after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them. Here Is clearly now, (according to this account the Apostle gives) held
forth, that persons may have the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: they may come to have such a Knowledge, whereby they escape the
pollutions of the World, and yet they may come to be entangled, and overcome;
so that it may be worse with them than ever it was before.

They may know the way of Righteousness, and yet for all that, turn from the
holy Commandment delivered to them; and so become like the Dog, to his vomit;
and like the Sow, to her wallowing again in the mire. By all this (I say) it
appears, that there is a Knowledge, and knowledge of the best things; Knowledge
of the Lord and Savior; and yet notwithstanding, persons may perift, and
perish the more dreadfully.

And I add that place in Heb. 10. where the Apostle speaks to this purpose;
says he, If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth;
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. There may
be a receiving of the knowledge of the truth, and yet a wilful sinning, and so
a fearful expectation, and nothing but that remaining for them; a fearful
expectation of Judgment, and fiery Indignation. Now, all this considered, --
Knowledge, I, and knowledge of the best things, -- it may be had; and yet
persons under the power of the Devil; -- persons, that after their escape from
worldly intanglements, may be brought again into sorer bondage; their latter
end worse than their beginning; and they may fall under the deep and more
dreadful damnation.

Now, the improvement that we are to make of this, is only thus; O, let us take
heed of resting in our Knowledge, and bearing upon this, that we are knowing
men, and knowing women, able to discourse of the things of God, and the
mysteries of Religion: O, take heed of this, considering what has been now
spoken to you, that you may have a great measure of Knowledge, and yet be mere
strangers unto saving Grace: far be it from me, to speak a tittle to the
disparagement of Knowledge; but rather most vigorously to press your pursuance
of it, and that you endeavor after it, (as I shall perform to that purpose
afterward) know, that it is not good that the mind be without knowledge, says
Solomon; nay, the heart cannot be good without Knowledge; you cannot believe
without Knowledge, you cannot pray without Knowledge, you cannot live without
Knowledge; you must have Knowledge, or else you will never be saved: O
Ignorance! it is of it self a damning sin: -- only thus, -- rest not in your
Knowledge; rest not in this, that you have a light in your head, but look to
it, that you have Grace in your hearts --

Look to this that you know, and know to love; -- -- and know so, as that you
may believe, -- -- and live: if you know these things (says our SAVIOR) happy
are ye if you do them. If you know the truth, and know it in truth of heart,
(as the Apostle speaks) Since ye know the Grace of God in truth, know it to be
the truth, and know it in the truth of your hearts: O, this is that that we
should mind.

Truly, that you may know for practice; and the truth is, you know no more to
purpose, than you know to practice. And it is of sad consideration, that which
I have now to speak unto you: it is of sad consideration, that that knowledge
which men and women attain to of God, and Christ, and Gospel-mysteries, if so
be that it be not reduced to practice; if there be not a due improvement of it;
if there be a Science, and not Conseience: a Science, and not a Conscience to
make use of the knowledge: it is of sad consideration, that that I have now to
say.

The day will come, when all the Knowledge that you have gotten of Christ, and
of the mysteries of the Gospel, of the Kingdom of God, that knowledge will turn
upon you, and it will be to your everlasting torment: O, tremble at the thought
of it! This is the torment, and will eternally be the torment of the damned in
Hell, that they had knowledge, great measures of knowledge; and yet
notwithstanding, did not improve their knowledge, did not reduce it to
practice: they had light, but did not live up to their light: they knew the
will of God, O, but they were not conscientiously careful to perform and do the
will of God. O this, this will be the torment; the Conscience of a man will be
an eternal fury to him, and it will everlastingly torment him; when it shall
tell him, Did not thou know, that Christ was given to save sinners, and to
save from sin? Did not thou know, that the Grace of God, that brings
Salvation, it did teach to deny all ungodlyness, and worldly lusts? thou
know this: thou know that it was thy duty to live thus and thus; to walk
with God, -- to deny thy self, -- to cross thy corruptions: it was thy duty to
study to approve thy self to God, and to keep a clear Conscience; -- It was thy
duty to own Christ in an hour of temptation; did not thou know this to be
thy duty? Conscience will thus charge upon thee; and then you shall know it. O!
how did this torment Judas on this side Hell, before he came there? Oh! I know
my Master was an innocent person; and yet notwithstanding, contrary to my
knowledge, I went, and betrayed him into the hands of sinners. -- -- O, how did
this torment Esau on this side Hell? he knew that the Birthright, and the
Blessing, were things to be highly valued: the temptation comes upon him, he
was a little pinched with hunger, and Jacob takes the advantage (there was a
mystery of Providence in it) of his exigence, and gets away his Birthright
from him: But when the time comes that the Blessing was gone; then Esau knows.
O, this knowledge torments him, that he knew the Birthright, what it was, and
how it ought to be accounted of; and yet notwithstanding, he past it away for a
trifle: O, Conscience will torment another day: when a man shall come to have
his knowledge set a work; I know that Christ was a precious Christ; -- that
Grace, it was better than Gold; I had conviction upon my Conscience, and yet
notwithstanding, I chose the World rather than Christ; I preferred my lusts and
corruptions before the Lord Jesus: I knew this to be my duty, but I made no
conscience of performing my duty. Well, the Lord set these things home upon
every one of us, and that we may be wise for our souls, and take heed of
resting in what we know; but look to it, that we have such a Knowledge as is
accompanied with Grace; such a Knowledge as is sanctified to us by Grace. And
this now I speak upon occasion of this Question.

SERMON. IX.
2 Pet. 3. 18. And in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
THree things seem to lie in the Text. First, that it is God's will, and Saints
duty; As to grow in Grace, so, to grow in Knowledge.

2. That it is the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which is the
special Knowledge wherein Saints and Believers ought to grow.

3. They that mind growth in Grace, must in order thereunto, endeavor a growth
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

First of all, it is the good will of God, and a Saints duty, to grow in
Knowledge. God would have his people to be a knowing people, a wellknowing
people: God does take no pleasure in a people that pretend to Him, and profess
his Name, and are yet under a black vail of ignorance; they are not a people
for His purpose.

Believers, they are said to be light; you were sometimes darkness, but now are
ye light in the Lord. The light of a Believer, it should be a growing light; he
should be like the Sun, that shines out more and more unto the perfect day. It
is not enough to know, but it is our duty to follow on to know: you have that
expression in Hos. 6. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord.
It Is not enough to begin to know, to set foot upon the way of knowledge; but we
must travel on in that way; follow on to know the Lord.

This was that which the Apostle Paul does earnestly pray for in the behalf of
the Church of Collos. Chap. 1. ver. 9. That they might be filled in the
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding; and that
they might be fruitful, and walk in all well-pleasing, increasing in the
knowledge of God. This is the will of God, and this is the duty of a Saint, and
Believer.

I speak of growth in Knowledge; you will understand it to be meant of Divine
Knowledge, Religious Knowledge. There is a knowledge of humane things; a
knowledge of Arts and Sciences; knowledge and skill in mysteries and trades;
knowledge in civil affairs; a knowledge that concerns worldly negotiations, and
transactions of affairs in Kingdoms and Nations here below. But this, though it
be a useful knowledge in its kind; yet this is not the knowledge that we have
now under consideration: but it is a Divine Knowledge, a Scripture Knowledge, a
Knowledge of the things of God, and that concern Religion: and in such
Knowledge, it is our duty to endeavor a growth.

And it may very well be required of those that do know, that they still know
more and more; that they that have any Knowledge, should endeavor a growth in
that Knowledge: in general, this reason may well pass for it. We do know but in
part, when we know at the most: when we have the most of Knowledge, yet alas,
how little is it that we know, in comparison of what is to be known? I remember
there is an expression to such a purpose, in Job, how little a matter is known
of God? and of the things of God? Ah! Oh little, that truly gracious souls have
been, and will be apt to be much in sad complaining, that they know so little
as they do. I find the holy man, in Prove. 30. complaining there; O, says he, I
have not in me the understanding of man; I have not (says he) attained the
knowledge of the holy: So foolish was I, (says another) and ignorant, I was
even as a beast before thee. Such complaints holy men have powered out before
the Lord: therefore, being we know but in part, and it is such an
inconsiderable part that we have of knowledge; that truly, it may well be
required of us, that we endeavor a growth. -- -- But I shall offer to you,
(and yet but briefly, because I drive at the next things most specially) some
further considerations; which, if you do but well and seriously ponder, you
will see strong reason to indear Knowledge, and to endeavor a growth in
Knowledge.

First of all, (besides the general account that I have given you, that we know
but in part: but now thus more particularly;) The more that we grow in
Knowledge, the more shall we resemble God; for God is a God of Knowledge;
that is the title that is given him, in 1 Samuel 2. The Lord is a God of
Knowledge; and he then accounts his people to be in a due resemblance of him,
when they come to be a knowing people: the Image of God, it is consistent in
Knowledge, as well as in Righteousness, and Grace. The Apostle speaks
concerning the renewing of the mind, which is renewed after God, in Knowledge;
and we never come to resemble God as we ought, unless we come to be a people
well furnished with the Knowledge of God, and the things of God.

2. I add this further; it may well be required, that there be a growth in
Knowledge, because it is a part of the rich treasure which is laid up in
Christ, for the inrichment of the souls of his redeemed ones. The Apostle tells
us, that in Christ are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; so that
Knowledge is one part of the rich treasure which is hid in Christ; and the more
we grow in Knowledge, the larger share we have in that rich treasure that is in
Christ. Reason then there is, that there should be an endeavoring of a growth
in Knowledge.

3. And then add yet further, the more we grow in Knowledge, the more able
shall be to discern of sin, and make a judgment upon that. How often are those
things that are no sins, judged to be sins; and those things that are sins,
judged to be none at all? And whence is it, but through a defectiveness in
Knowledge? Sometimes, and often it comes to pass, that tender Consciences, for
want of due light; tender and scrupulous Consciences, they are wonderful apt
for to make those things to be sins, which God and his Law never makes. And so
sometimes with hypocrites, as in our Saviors time; O, what a matter was it
among the Pharisees, to eat with unwashen hands, which was no sin? and to drink
in unwashen cups; and this and that? Thus it is sometimes with hypocrites: and
I might instance in sundry particulars. -- And so in the case of scrupulous
Consciences; how many are there that are apt to reckon those things to be sins,
and startle at, which indeed are no sins? As now, many, through tenderness of
Conscience, are fearful to take that liberty in meats and drinks, which Christ
has purchased for them. How many, out of a tenderness, and scrupulousness of
Conscience, though necessity have required it, have been afraid to take any
bodily refreshing, in the day wherein they were to partake of the supper of the
Lord, before they have eaten at that table, afraid, lest they should sin
against God, in taking something for necessary refreshing of the body: a sin in
their account, which is no sin in it self at all? So I might instance in sundry
particulars. -- So, on the contrary; How many are there, that reckon those to
be duties, which are very dreadful provocations of the Great Majesty of Heaven:
Mark what our Savior speaks, in Job. 16. the begin. They shall cast you out of
the Synagogues; they shall excommunicate you: I, the time will come, when they
that kill you, will think they do God service; so far from looking upon it as a
sin, to revile, reproach, excommunicate, imprison, and kill the Servants of
Christ, and those that bear, and hold forth his name; so far from reckoning
these things to be sin, that they look upon them as good service to God. Say we
not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? Why, they were so far
from reckoning it to be a sin, that they look upon it as a duty. Now, whence is
this, but through ignorance: Sometimes indeed it is through wilful ignorance,
but mostly through gross ignorance* and our Savior gives this reason; These
things shall they do, because they know neither the Father nor me; they know us
not, they do not know who are the people of God; they will reckon you to be the
base spawn of Hell, the childern of the Devil; though themselves are so, yet
they will reckon you to be so: they reckon upon you to be the scumm, and
off-scowring of the World. Now, because they know not me, nor my Father,
therefore they will do these things; and they reckon upon it, that they do God
very good service. And this was the case of Paul; I verily thought, says he,
That I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus; says he, I
thought it was my duty to cry down the Name of Christ, and to cry down the
Doctrine of Christ, and to cry down the Professors of the Gospel of Christ: I
verily thought with my self, that I ought to do these things: I did not look
upon these things to be sin; says he, I was a Persecuter, and a Blasphemer,
and Injurious; I, but I did not know that it was persecution, and blasphemy,
and injury; I did these things ignorantly, says he, it was for want of
Knowledge, because I was not laid in with Knowledge as I should have been, that
I did these things: So that we had need then, to grow in Knowledge; for the
more we grow in Knowledge, the more able shall we be to make a judgment of sin.

And so on the contrary, a judgment of Graces: The more we grow in Knowledge,
the better shall we be to make a judgment of Graces. Alas, how many are there,
that through want of Knowledge; not being duly informed and improved in their
knowledge, they do run upon most gross and dangerous mistakes; take that to be
saving Grace, which indeed is nothing so; and that to be Holiness, which is
nothing else but a very show and resemblance of Holiness; that to be love of
God and of Christ, and faith in God, which is nothing so. O the dangerous
mistakes which poor souls do run upon; they do verily think that they do
Believe, and that they have Repented, and that they trust in God, and bear a
love to Christ, and that they bear a love to Godliness; they are strong in that
persuasion, and yet they run upon dangerous mistakes, and all because there is
a deficiency in their Knowledge: They are not so duly improved in knowledge, as
that they be able to make a judgment of Sin and of Grace.

And so for Duties. We had need to endeavor a growth in Knowledge, that so we
may be the better able to judge of Duties, when they are Duties, performed
according to God. Alas, how many think they perform Duties in most acceptable
manner to God, when they do no other than offer the Sacrifice of fools: They
think they pray, and pray pleasing; and hear, and hear in a right manner; come
to the Table of the Lord, and think they do excellent good service to Jesus
Christ, and that which he will accept of, when in the mean while they do
profane his Name, and offer indignity to him; they wound him again, they
Crucify him, they become guilty of his very Body and Blood, and yet all the
while they think that they quit themselves in a very fair, commendable and
comely manner, and all because of a want of Knowledge; they do not understand
the mystery of the Gospel, and of Godliness, and of Gospel Worship; they do not
understand the way of the Lord, therefore in that regard there is great reason
that Christians should endeavor a growth in Knowledge.

4. I add yet further: Well it may be required of Believers that they grow in
Knowledge, because by their growth in Knowledge they shall be the better able
to manage their affections and passions. Alas, Brethren, we may know, and it
may be do in sad experience, what unruly things affections and passions are,
and how apt, like untamed Horses, to ride over Hedge and Ditch, and to be kept
within no due bounds -- and why this -- For want of Knowledge, because there is
not the bridle of Knowledge and Understanding to rein the affections and
passions. As now to instance: Alas, how many are there that are inordinate in
their Love? In their love to Creatures, to Children, Husbands, Wives, and all
for Want of Knowledge, because they do not know the true state of these things,
and how their love ought to be managed -- And so for Fear: O, how apt is our
Fear to go beyond its bounds -- And our Desires; how apt are we, how irregular
and inordinate in them -- And so in our Zeal; Zeal like fire, that is very
useful while it is kept in its place; but when it comes to break up to the top
of the House, that threatens firing of all. Now all this is for want of the due
knowledge of God and Christ, and of the state of things about which our
affections are exercised and employed; and therefore you shall find this, That
God does require in his Word, that our affections should be managed with
knowledge, and judgment. -- I tell you Brethren, the best love, is a judicious
love; a love with knowledge: and therefore you shall find, in 1 Phil. the
Apostle prays, and requires, that their love might ab^nd it all knowledge, and
in all judgment. Why, it is nothing for a man to have an ignorant blind love,
an injudicious love; God does not value such a love: It is the knowing Love,
the well created Love, the Love that a man can give a reason of, the judicious
Love; that is the Love which God values: That your Love may abound in all
Knowledge.

And so likewise Zeal; the Apostle speaks concerning his Brethren, They have a
Zeal of God: O, they are mighty hot and zealous! But; says he, Their Zeal is
not according to Knowledge -- And so for Desire. Truly, by having a well
improved Knowledge, a Knowledge that is well grown, we shall be the better able
to manage these affections of Love, Zeal, Delight, Desire, Fear and Joy; all
the Affections, they will be the better ordered, in case that our Knowledge be
well improved: And that is another Reason.

5. Again, Well may it be required of Christians that they grow in Knowledge,
because by their growing in Knowledge they shall be the better able for to
order their Words, Speeches and Discourses. O, what irregularities are there in
the Tongue! The Tongue is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. I, but from
hence it comes very much; it is for want of a well digested knowledge; apt we
are to sin and offend in wanton speeches, lustful, lascivious speeches, and by
language of swearing (and the like.) O, the manifold evils that break out from
the Tongue! And truly much what upon that account, because there is not
knowledge to regulate the Tongue, so as that we may come to understand what is
fit Language for us to speak.

6. Well may it be required, that we endeavor a growth in Knowledge; for the
more Christians grow in knowledge, the more fit will they be for to judge of
Gods providential Dispensations. Alas, how often do we misinterpret God and his
dealings, and pass very hard and sharp censures upon them? we are apt to do so,
and to deal very dishonourably with God concerning his dealings and
Dispensations -- And why -- It is for want of Knowledge; It is a people that do
err in their heart; they were ever and anon quarrelling with God, according to
that passage that you have in Psalm. 45. Forty years long was I grieved with
this Generation; they tempted me, proved me, and saw my works; and they were
censuring me for this and that, because I brought them out of Egypt, and
carried them into the Wilderness. And says he, It is a people that do err in
their heart: And the reason is this; They have not known my ways. It is
through ignorance, and for want of a due Information concerning me, that they
run upon these dangerous ways. And this was Job's case, though other ways a
knowing man, yet not altogether so completed in his Knowledge as he should
have been: But the Lord comes upon him, and expestulates the case with him; Who
is that that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? Words, I words, hard
words, censorious passages drop from his mouth; I, but they are words without
knowledge. That Is another thing; we shall be better able to judge of
Providence, though they be very mysterious, when we come to be well improved
in our Knowledge concerning God, whose ways are in the Sea, and whose paths
are in the great deeps; and by knowing aright concerning God, we shall be the
be^ able to make a judgment of his Dispensations.

7. Well may it be required of Christians and Believers, that they grow in
Knowledge, because that by growing in knowledge they shall be the better able
for to manage all those Places, and Conditions, and Relations which they are
planted under -- As now; Those that are Fathers, Mothers, Masters, Servants,
Husbands, Wives, there is very much lies upon them to do, each in their place,
station and relation, that they may beautify them, and have the blessing of
God upon them in those Relations under which they are planted. There is very
much lies upon us, and I beseech you consider well of it: I say, that much of
the power of Godliness, it lies in the well managing of our particular Places
and Relations; when men are godly, as Husbands, as Wives, as Masters, as
Servants, as Parents, as Children; much of Godliness does lie in the well
managing of these Relations: And when we are conscientiously careful to fill up
these Relations, truly we then beautify them, and we adorn our holy Profession
-- I, but how shall this come to pass, unless that we be a People of a well
improved Knowledge? Alas, if we do not know our Duties in our Places, what
belongs to me as a Husband, as a Wife, as a Father, as a Child, as a Master; if
I have not a well improved Knowledge concerning my Duty in my Relation, I shall
never be able to perform it. Truly thus it is, and therefore you shall find
that the Apostle in 1 Pet. 3. he requires this on the Husbands part, That he
should dwell with the Wife as a man of Knowledge, that he may know how to go in
and out before his Yoke Fellow, and before his Family. And so a Wife, a Woman
of Knowledge, that she may carry her self toward her Husband in a becoming
manner, and toward her Family-A Master, a man of Knowledge, that he may
understand w^ is his Duty as a Master, and carry it accordingly -- A Servant, a
man of Knowledge, a woman of Knowledge -- And so a Father, a Child; they should
labor after the knowledge of their Duties in their Places and Relations, that
accordingly they may carry themselves: So that now, lay all these several
Particulars that I have propounded to you together, and truly you cannot but
stand convinced surely of this, That it is God's will, and it is Saints Duty,
and well may it be required of them as their Duty, that they endeavor to
indear Knowledge, and endeavor a growth in their Knowledge: I Brethren, that
is it which firstly I have been sent to communicate unto you, That your Duty is
to grow in Knowledge upon all these accounts; -- upon the account that you know
but in part, and it is but a little part: -- And then, the more you grow in
Knowledge, the more you have of the Image of God. -- The more you grow in
Knowledge, the more will you have of that rich Treasure that is laid up in Jesus
Christ. -- And then, the more you grow in Knowledge, the more fit will you be
to make a Judgment of sins; what are sins, and what are not sins: -- The more
able will you be to make a Judgment of Graces; what are such, and what are not:
-- The more able will you be to judge, of Duties; what are Duties, and when
duly managed: -- The more able will you be to manage your passions and
affections, which for want of Knowledge are many times inordinate and
exorbitant: -- The more able will you be to rule your tongues and speeches: --
The more able will you be to make a Judgment of the Providence of God, and to
carry it becomingly under them: -- The more able will you be to manage those
Places and Relations under which you are planted. Now, do but weigh these
things well, and you will see reason to seek out for Knowledge, that if you
know, yet you had need to follow on to know more and more: But that is not all.

I propound 2ly. That as it is a Duty incumbent upon a Christian to endeavor a
growth in Knowledge; so especially in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Oh, this is the growth, this is the Knowledge which is especially
to be endeared; and a growth wherein is in special manner to be endeavored!
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, however it be in respect of
other knowledge; yet that Knowledge you had need look to, that you may be
Profi^ionts in.

Why, First of all (that I may convince you now of this;) If it be the good
will of God, that you may come under the power of an effectual convincement as
to this, That this Knowledge you are to endeavor a growth in, I may very fitly
make use of that which I gave in the former Doctrine. -- I told you, that we
know but in part: O Brethren, we know Christ but in part; as we know little of
God, as touching his infinite glorious Essence and Being. O, we know but little
of Christ; O, it is a Mystery. The Knowledge of Christ is a Mystery; Oh, it is
a hidden Mystery, it was kept hid from Ages and Generations: Oh, it is a
Mystery which God was pleased to keep secret in his own bosom for many
thousands of years; some little whispering there was of it upon the fall of
Man, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: And what a pittance
was here? Though infinite mercy appeared in making this little appearance, The
seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: Then afterward a little more
of this; but a Mystery, and still a Mystery, and an unsearchable Mystery; a
Mystery which they that are most insighted in, will have cause to say, Alas,
how little a thing is known of him? and what a depth is here? and how scant and
short is our line, that we are not able to fathom the depth? O, it is such a
Knowledge, the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, as that all those Dimensions
are most properly reckoned to it; heights, and depths, and breadths, and
lengths; and yet it is a Knowledge that passes knowledge: Such is the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. We had need then to be endeavoring a
growth in it, and to resolve thus; I have not attained, nor know nothing as I
ought to know, I am not yet sufficiently skilled in this Mystery; If Paul that
was such a knowing man were alive at this day, he would be still pursuing after
this Knowledge, the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I, but what account is to be given of this Knowledge, that we should be so set
to endeavor a growth in it* Consider (besides) that that I have now spoken as
touching the smallness of that measure attained. Consider yet further:

First of all, There is great reason that Christians and Believers should
endeavor a growth in this Knowledge: First, It is the most excellent Knowledge
that ever was discovered to the World; and you have the Apostles word for it,
who was able to make a Judgment of Knowledge and Knowledge, Phil. 3. 8. O,
says he, I do here give my Judgment; and, says he, This is my standing
Judgment: I am an Hebrew of the Hebrews, of the seed of Abraham; I am an
Israelite, of the Tribe of Benjamin; as touching the Law, a Pharisee: -- And he
was a man that could speak with Tongues more than all the Apostles: -- And he
was a man of profound Knowledge; Though I be rude in speech, yet not in
knowledge. Why, he had a vast portion of Knowledge; yet when he comes to
compare one thing with another, For my part, says he, I account all things but
loss and dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. All
but l^ss and dung, such an excellency there is in the knowledge of Christ; and
truly, all other knowledge may well be looked upon as inconsiderable knowledge,
and all other Enjoyments in the World, but even accounted as loss and dung,
compared with the Knowledge of Christ.

Consider the Subject of this Knowledge, Christ himself.

Consider him in his Person; The brightness of his Father's Glory, the express
Image of his Person; one that was in the Form of God, thought it no robbery to
be equal with God.

Consider him, yet, notwithstanding this account of him, as one that has a
transcendent love to his Father, love to the World, that he was most willing to
comply with his Fathers pleasure, in taking upon him the nature of Man: The
Lord, to become a Servant; the Prince of Life, to become subject to Death. O,
the blessed and only Potentate, to be made a Curse; -- he that knew no sin,
becomes willing to be made sin; -- he that was the Lord of all, to become a
Servant of all. What shall I say? The consideration of the subject of this
Knowledge, it commends it to us as the most excellent Knowledge that ever was
communicated to the World.

And then consider but this Lord Jesus Christ, as in his Person, so in his
Qualifications; in his Love, in his Meekness, in his Fatience, in his Humility,
in his Gentleness, in his Holiness and Righteousness, in every respect.

Consider him in his Office; such a Priest, such a Prophet, such a King, as the
World never had the like.

Consider him in his Actions and Performances; consider him in his miraculous
Actions, in his moral Actions; consider him in his military Actions and
Performances, such a Savior, of such wonderful power: And of such
A^chievements and Accomplishments, as the like was never heard of in the World;
that he should rout Hell it self, all the Devils in Hell: It was a great matter
in David to come into the Camp, and to get the Victory over a Giant, a Goliath,
that was yet but a man: But for this Captain, this noble Soldier, to come into
the Camp, and to engage against all the powers of Hell and Darkness, all the
Devils in Hell, that were all of them in Arms against him, and yet he routs
them, and makes a spoil of them, and leads them, a company of base slaves,
after him; he makes a show of them openly, and triumphed over them in his
Cross, he gets a Conquest. This is the most noble Captain, and the most worthy
Soldier that ever the World had. Consider him (I say) in those military
Performances, -- moral Performances, -- miraculous Performances; the wonderful
cures that he wrought, such a Physician that the World never had the like;
could Cure with a look, with a word, with a touch; he could cure Bodies, Souls.
There Is never a Physician in the World could purge a sin out of a man's
Conscience; I, but Christ can purge the Soul from sin. Now Brethren, I can at
present but name these things; and then to come to tell you what an excellent
Knowledge the Knowledge of Jesus Christ is.

As in respect of the subject of it, so in respect of the benefit and
usefulness of it; never any knowledge in the World will profit like unto this
knowledge. Here I have many things to say; but I only at present give you but a
little touch of them: -- -- The Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, O, it is
the most profitable, and useful, and beneficial Knowledge. Mark, by the Law,
comes the knowledge of sin: So the Apostle, in Romans 7. I had not known sin,
except the Law had said thus and thus: I, but when a man comes to know his
plague, and disease, what is he the nearer, if he does not know his remedy? If
you should now be tried; as indeed it is necessary you should, if you have not
been brought to it. If you should be brought to know what vicious natures you
have, what cursed corruptions, made to see what deep and dreadful guilt you
have contracted upon you; if you should come to have the discovery made, as
those that God has a favor to: they have such dis^overies made to them, the
spirit of God comes (...) as a convincing spirit: if you should come to have
the knowledge of your sins; O, now I am made to see, and know, that I am a
vile, damned wretch! I come to know my sin, and I know no more; I see I am a
most plaguie creature. Now, if you should know no more, this is the way to
become stark mad, and to fall under most dreadful despair, as Iudis did; and
you know what course hetook. But now, the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, is the knnowledg that relieves us concerning the knowledge of sin:
O, I know my plague; I, but by my knowledge of Christ, I come to know my
plaster: I know my disease, but by the knowledge of Christ, I come to know my
remedy.

The knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I will tell you what a
knowledge it is: It is a heartbreaking knowledge; -- a soul-humbling
knowledge; -- it is a sin-killing knowledge; -- it is a Grace-quickening
knowledge, -- O, it is a love-flaming knowledge; -- and it is such a knowledge,
as will draw out the heart to Christ; -- such a knowledge, as will make men
willing to do any thing, to suffer any* thing for the name and sake of the Lord
Jesus Christ. O, it is excellent knowledge, precious knowledge, useful
knowledge, the most beneficial knowledge. The Apostle professes, (as I said
before,) that he accounted all things but loss and dung, for the excellency of
this knowledge.

The enlargement of these things I cannot give you; nor come to Application;
but only thus; -- Will you but set your hearts to a due consideration of the
things that have been spoken? Certainly, (...) ^ou have but an ear to hear, and
a heart to un^tand, and consider of these things; how rationally you are
required to grow in knowledge, and especially in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ: if you do but weigh these things, and the account given, why we
should endeavor such a growth; you will be able to conclude what is for you to
do: -- not to slight this knowledge, but to endeavor after it; and that you
may know Christ, know him in his Name, and Nature, and O^ices; -- and know him,
not only (for that is the thing that I would close up withal) with an historical
and notional knowledge. Peradventure you may say as the Apostle speaks: We have
all knowledge; I, it may be so; a great deal of knowledge there may be in the
head, and yet nothing of true saving knowledge in the heart: but it is not a
notional knowledge, but a heart-knowledge, an in-working knowledge; such a
knowledge as is opperative to such purposes as I have hinted to you. This is
the knowledge that we should pursue, and endeavor a growth in.

SERMON. X.
I Would add to that which has been spoken of; this to be further considered.

The knowledge of Christ, it is a most excellent knowledge; it is such a
knowledge, as the Angels, the Glorious Angels, are exceedingly devoted to the
inquiring into; they are very much set to this, that they may come to
understand this knowledge concerning Christ. The Apostle Peter, in his 1 Epist.
Chapter 1. gives you this account concerning them; speaking there of the Revel.
ver. 11, 12. The spirit did testify beforehand, the sufferings of Christ, and
the Glory which should follow, unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us, they did minister the things which are now reported
unto you, by them that have preached the Gospel unto you, which the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven; Which things (mark you,) the Angels desire to look into.
Do but consider that, which things of the Gospel concerning Christ, his
sufferings, and Glory, the Angels desire to look into; they are very close
Students in this knowledge, and most strongly set to be acquainted with these
mysteries; the mystery of the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
A knowledge therefore, that our hearts shoud ^e very strongly set to increase
in, and for to get more acquaintance with.

And this I would further say; that for ^e Apostle Paul, who was a man of
excellent parts, and of very great knowledge; a man of much learning; and was
as able to make a judgment of knowledge, as any man, and for to discern
betvveen knowledge and knowledge. The Apostle Paul, he was (as I hinted
before) very high in his esteem of this knowledge; and if so be that it had
been convenient for him to have boasted, truly, he would have made his boast
of his knowledge in the mystery of Christ: Though I (says he) be rude in
speech, yet not in knowledge; and (says he) I would have you to know my
knowledge in the mystery of Christ. So in Ephesians. 3. vvriting that Epistle to
them, he expresses himself to this purpose; Whereby, when you come to read,
you may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ.

Further, it is a knowledge that we should endeavor to grow up in; it is
the most beneficial and profitable knowledge: it is the most beneficial
knowledge in all the World; -- It is a heart-humbling knowledge; -- It is a
sin-killing knowledge; -- It is a conscience-quieting knowledge.

And here I might add sundry other particulars, that you might come to know
how to value the knowledge of Christ: and so, how much it concerns us to
endeavor after a growth and increase in it.

It is a svveetning knowledge; it svveetens a man's spirit under all the
bitterness that it may meet (...) ^al: -- It svveetens afflictions; -- it
svveetens temptations, and whatsoever may be to the im^ering of a man's spirit.
O, the knowledge of (...) Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! it will bring the*
soul into a condition to relish svveetness, in it!

And then, it is a sanctifying knowledge; it is a knowledge that sanctifies the
understanding. There is another knowledge which men are apt to be lifted up
through the attainment of, and lifted up with; which is a knowledge, that does
rather tend to the corrupting, and depraving of the understanding: but the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, it does sanctify the understanding, -- and
perfects the understanding: -- it sanctifies all other knowledge that we may
come to attain unto. And much might be spoken to that purpose.

But I add yet further, that we may stand the more fully convinced of our duty
this way, to endeavor a growth in the knowledge of Christ; Consider thus;
Believers, they are most strongly bound to place their whole trust and
confidence in Christ; and that in order to their being everlastingly saved:
Blessed are all they that trust in Christ. It is He (I say) upon whom a
Believers trust and confidence is to be placed in the fullest strength of it;
and other confidences than what are placed in any but in Christ, God will curse
them, and confound them: Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm: but, blessed is the man whose trust is in Christ. It is Christ
whom we are to trust with our lives, -- with our souls, -- with our
consciences, -- with our peace, -- with our comforts, -- with our eternal
concernments: Thus it is, -- it is Christ that we are to trust upon for
Righteousness unto Justification, and everlasting life.

It is Christ upon whom we are to place our hope and confidence toward God.

It is Christ who is the foundation, upon whom we are to lay the whole weight
of our souls for eternity. Now then consider, how strongly the Argument will
grow up from hence: if so be that Believers be so much bound, to place their
trust in Christ; to pitch, and fix their confidence upon Christ; they had need
know him well: this will follow upon it. I tell you Brethren, you had need to
know (reason will suggest this to you) that man well, whom you trust your lives
withal; all your estates, and worldly interests withal; lest, putting your
confidence in an unfaithful man, or one that will not be responsible to you
concerning the trust you place in him, you be utterly undone, and fall under
sad and shameful disappointments. Will you trust your selves, in case of
sickness, with one that you never knew, or have but little knowledge of; do not
know whether he have proportionable wisdom, and understanding, and skill to
manage such an undertaking as your health, and recovery from some deadly
disease amounts unto? Nay, you will say, I will know him well, before I will
trust him with such a concernment. -- -- If so be that you have a Suit in Law,
which your whole Estate depends upon the well issuing of; you will endeavor
this; to know him well whom you trust your Cause with, lest it should miscarry,
by means of his ill management of it: this we all will yield unto, as a
rational thing. Why now, I pray consider; you are bound to trust Christ with
your lives, with your souls; they are woefully diseased, and He must be your
Physician; and you are bound to make your application unto him for health and
cure. Truly, you had need to know him; it is your duty to be well acquainted
with him, that so you may come with the more boldness, to place your trust and
confidence in Him, and to say; Well, I dare venture my life in his hand; I know
him well; I know his wisdom; I know his skill; I am so well acquainted with his
sufficiency, that, if I had a thousand lives, I would put them all into his
hand. -- -- You are to trust him for your eternal inheritance, and for to plead
your Cause; to answer all the Suits that are to be commenced against you by the
Devil, by your Consciences; it is He that must plead your Cause; you are bound
to this, to trust Him with your Cause. Now, it stands you upon much therefore,
to know him well, and be well improved in your knowledge of Christ: forasmuch
as you are to commit the cause of your souls to Him.

Consider further; You are bound to place your most entire and intensive love
upon Christ: this is the bond the Lord sets upon every believing soul; to love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and to love him with the most entire and intensive
love. Consider this; you are bound to love him above your lives, above your
souls; you are bound to love him more than you love your Father, your Mother,
your Wife, your Children, your Estates, every thing in the World that is most
near and dear unto you: this obligation and bond, the Gospel puts Believers
under; -- they are bound (I say) to love the Lord Jesus, with a supreme love,
and to give this account of themselves; such as the Prophet does of himself, in
Ps. 33. O Lord, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and whom is there on earth,
that I love, and desire in comparison of thee? This is your duty, the duty of a
Believer, for to have the strength of his love let out upon Christ. -- -- It Is
our duty to love him with a Conjugal love; love him so, as to own him for our
Beloved, and to refuse all other beloveds in comparison of him: this is our
duty. Now, mark you; Will not then the Argument flow strongly from hence, we
have reason then to know him well, and labor to improve in the knowledge of
him: Christ does not care for a blind love, He does not make much account of
the love that is set upon him by those that know him not: it is a judicious
love that Christ makes account of. Now therefore, it concerns you to endeavor
a growth in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; that knowing
him well, our hearts may break out, and burn in love to him; and that so he may
come to have the strength of our affections let out upon him. There Is never a
wise woman in the World, that will let out her love upon a man that she knows
not, or has little knowledge of; I will know him well, whether he be a proper
object for me to place my love upon. Now, thus the case stands between Christ
and a believing soul; and therefore we had need endeavor an improvement in the
knowledge of Christ, that so we may come to have our hearts the more free to
let out our love upon him; and say, O, I know him, I know him so well, that no
beloved for my purpose, besides himself: Choose him, I will choose him above
all the World. This was the course that the Daughters of Jerusalem took, in
Cant. 2. When the Spouse was giving in charge to them concerning her Beloved,
say they, What is thy beloved more than another beloved? Why, says she, My
beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand: she speaks as one
that had a full knowledge of him, and upon that account her heart was so
strongly drawn out to him: thus it was with her. Now, in Chap. 6. having
obtained the knowledge of her Beloved, that he was so choice and precious a
one; their hearts begin to flame out, and to be in love with him: O, whither is
thy Beloved gone; O thou fairest among women; whither is thy beloved gone, that
we may seek him with thee? for, as he is thy Beloved; so shall he be our
Beloved: now we come to know more of him, now are our hearts inflamed with the
love of him, and our desires carried out more strongly after him.

Again, we had need endeavor a growth in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Whereas they are bound to trust in him, and to set their love
upon him, so they are under this obligation, for to captivate their judgments
to him, so as to yield up themselves in all obedience and duty to be at his
beck and bidding, and to comport with him in all his requiries, and to do
whatsoever he commands them, without disputing his commands: this is a
Believers duty: Whatsoever he requires of them, without any more ado, to follow
him resolvedly in every way that he leads them into: If any man will be my
Disciple, let him deny himself, and follow me, and hearken to my commands; such
service and duty every believing soul stands bound to the performance of. Now
consider, if so be that one will go, and bind himself to such a Master, whose
will he must follow, whose commands he must obey, and with whose requiries he
must comport: truly, he had need to know him well, that he is such a one, as
will require nothing but that which is just and righteous, and that which is
fit for him to comply withal. Now, the case stands thus between Christ and a
Believer: therefore he had need endeavor to be well-knowing of Christ, what a
one he is, that he is most righteous and just in all his requiries, and that he
will put us upon no service but what is for his honor, and for our benefit;
that so knowing what a one he is, we may be the more free to yield up our
selves unto, and without any further dispute, to apply to his counsels and
commands.

And then I add this further; it is a duty that lies upon Believers; as to
place their trust in Christ, and to set their love upon Christ, and to yield up
themselves in duty and obedience to Christ; so likewise, to encourage
themselves to suffering for Christ, let the suffering be what it will; to
suffer loss, suffer shame, suffer pain, any thing that Christ does call them
out to the suffering of; they are bound for to comport with him in, and to
yield up themselves unto; the bearing of whatsoever burden he lays upon them:
If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his cross:
let the Cross be what it will, if it be the Cross of Christ, truly, it must be
taken up; this is incumbent upon every Believer, as his duty; startle at
nothing of difficulty, danger, and sufferings, that we may be put upon for the
sake of Jesus Christ.

Willing to suffer the spoiling of Goods, the loss of our Estates, to suffer
shame for his Name, to suffer death, if he call us to it. Now, consider then,
how strongly the Argument will rise from hence: truly, it is to good purpose,
that we should endeavor to grow in the knowledge of Christ. Truly, I had need
look well to it, whom I suffer for; if so be that I know, that if I will engage
in such a Relation, either as a Wife, or as a Servant, I shall be sure to
undergo a great deal of suffering upon the account of the Relation under which
I pass: truly, I had need well to know the persons, on whose sake, and behalf,
and account, I am like to suffer so much; whether I shall not have cause to be
ashamed of my suffering. Now, in this regard, it concerns the Saints and people
of God, to endeavor after a well-improved knowledge of Christ; that so, when
they come to suffer for his Name, and Truth, and Gospel, and ways, they may
bear up with confidence and boldness, and not be ashamed; and say, as the
Apostle speaks, (and it is an excellent passage to this purpose) 2 Timothy 1. I
suffer these things, (says he) but I am not ashamed: I suffer as an evil doer,
unto bonds, and I undergo these and these reproaches and scorns, for the sake
of Christ: I suffer these things, but I am not ashamed; O, I know in whom I
have believed, I know who it is for whom I suffer; I suffer on the behalf, and
for the sake of such a one, as will make up all to me; I shall never have cause
to be ashamed of the shame, and of the pain, and of the reproaches and scorns
that I undergo for the sake of Jesus Christ. No, this was that that made the
Apostles, in Acts 5. to go away from the Council rejoicing, that they were
accounted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. And
truly Brethren, in these regards now, there is very great reason that B^leevers
should study the knowledge of Christ, and labor to be well improved in it; --
and that, in regard of their trust, -- and of their love, -- and of their duty,
-- and of their suffering, which they are to resolve upon for the sake of Jesus
Christ. Alas, it is the madness of the World, that they will put their trust,
and place their confidence in those things which they have no knowledge of:
they have no knowledge of them, that they will be responsible to them, nor
answer their expectation; and so it is the dishonor of men; as it was in the
case of the Israelites; they would put their trust and confidence in Egypt, a
broken reed; they knew not Egypt, they knew not what disappointments were in
Egypt. It is the dishonor of men, that they will pass their love, and place
their affections upon those things they know not, do service to those things
they know not, be willing to suffer for those they know not: Did men know what
vain things, riches, pleasures, worldly interests were, and what little account
there is to be made of them; did they but know them within and without, through
and through; they would never carry it toward them as they do; never place
their trust, and set their hearts so much upon them. And it is that that will
be the shame and confusion of worldly minded persons (the Lord give us wisdom
to consider of it in time) at last; when they shall come to see what the object
is, that they have placed their trust, and set their hearts upon. O beast! O
mad wretch that I was, that I should go and put my trust in a thing that cannot
profit me, that can stand me in no stead! I trusted in my uncertain riches;
uncertain they were, and altogether irresponsible to the confidence that I
placed in them: I set my love upon this and that; this base and beggarly lust:
O, it is base things, and worthy to be hated: I spent my time, and laid out my
strength for such and such things; I thought they would be very contentful in
the enjoyment: But, alas! I find I have laid out my money for that I see is no
bread, and for that will yield me no profit at all. This will be the
consutation of the World.

Yet further, That we may stand the more fully convinced of this as our Duty,
to endeavor a growth in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
The very Knowledge it self, or the subject matter of this Knowledge does
exceeding strongly and loudly bespeak a Believers endeavor this way. The
subject matter of this Knowledge I told you before, That Christ is the subject
matter; and that speaks the excellency of the Knowledge. -- But now, besides,
The subject matter of this Knowledge duly weighed and considered, it does
bespeak a Believers endeavors after the Improvement of this Knowledge. For
consider, -- The Knowledge of Christ, it is Knowledge in a Mystery; and the
Mystery concerning Christ, it is such a Mystery, as has heights, and depths,
and breadths, and lengths; it has all dimensions: I, and beyond comprehension.
That Scripture, which in the carrying on of this Discours^, I may have occasion
to give you a more full account of than now I can; but I hint at it now upon
the account that I am speaking: In Ephesians 3. The Apostle prays, That they might
comprehend with all the Saints, what is the height, and depth, and breadth, and
length: And, says he, That you may know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge. There is, says he, in the Knowledge of Christ, heights, and depths,
and breadths, and lengths, and particularly in the knowledge of his Love; and
it is such a Love as passes Knowledge. Now, do but argue thus: Is there such a
Mystery? Are there such depths in this Knowledge? T^n certainly we had need to
set to it, that we do endeavor for to grow up in this Knowledge, that we may
be as comprehensive of it as possible we can; this is our Duty: As now to
instance in some Particulars.

The Apostle speaks concerning this Mystery, in Col. 1. speaking there of the
Mystery; Which (says he) is Christ in you, the hope of Glory. O, Brethren, do
you know the meaning of this? It may be you think you do; but I say (I am
sufficiently warranted to say) If any man think he knows any thing, he knows
nothing as he ought. Do you know the interpretation of this, Christ in you, the
hope of Glory? This is the Mystery; the Apostle calls it so: You may be apt to
think you can reach the bottom of this; Christ, and Christ in you; and Christ
in you, the hope of Glory. Alas, we are apt to put our selves off with a little
sip of the Cup; we go as it were with the top of the lip, and give a touch upon
that which would cover head and shoulders and all; we might stand under these
waters they are so deep: Such a word as this, it bespeaks our search, and
disquisition, and inquiry, and to set in with God. O, but Lord, What Is the
meaning of this, Christ in you, and Christ in you the hope of Glory? This
bespeaks our endeavor after the Knowledge of Christ.

Here I might fall upon sundry other Particulars, as this belongs to the
Knowledge of Christ, according to the Apostles account, in Ephesians. 3. he speaks
there of the Mystery which was kept secret from Ages and Generations: And,
says he, Was not so made known as it is now to his holy Apostles and Prophets
by the Spirit. -- What Is this Mystery? That the Gentiles should be
fellow-Heirs of the same Body, partakers of his Promise in Christ by the
Gospel: That is a Mystery; and this bespeaks our endeavor after a growth in
knowledge, even the Knowledge of Christ; for this belongs to the Knowledge of
Christ. Christ will be considered as mystical Christ; he will be made up of Jew
and Gentile, the middle Wall being broken down; a Mystery hidden from Ages and
Generations; but it is made known: I, but how little a thing is known, even of
this?

And then I add withal, The Mystery; it was the mystery concerning the
Gentiles, that they should come in to be fellow-Heirs.

It Is the Mystery, with respect to the Jews: So the Apostle calls it, in Romans
11. This Mystery I would not have you ignorant of, lest you should be wise in
your own conceits, that blindness in part is happened to the Jews, until the
fullness of the Gentiles come in, and then all Israel shall be saved: Here Is a
Mystery. Now, these Mysteries bespeak our serious endeavor, that we may come
to grow in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And then the Mystery concerning the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus; -- the
Administration of it; -- the delivery of it, upon the Administration of it, to
the Father. The Apostle holds forth these Mysteries:

The Mystery of the Kingdom; the new Heavens, and the new Earth, wherein
dwells Righteousness, which belongs to the Knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And then the delivering up of the Kingdom to the Father, that God may be All
in all, when Christ has performed the Administration of the Kingdom. Now, I
say, these are Mysteries belonging to the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, which do all of them loudly bespeak our most sedulous endeavors
after a growth in this blessed Knowledge.

And to add no more, consider that passage of the Apostle, in 1 Timothy 3. the
latter end, Great is the mystery of godliness: -- What Is that? God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the
Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory. Have we
comprehended? have we attained? The Apostle Paul was far from thinking so,
according to that account of him; N^ as if I had already attained, or were
already perfect. What, have we got to the bottom of these Mysteries? Are we
able to fathom the depth of them? O, how little a thing do we know of these
things. It was a good saying of one of the Ancients; Many things, because of
the customary mentioning of them, they are slighted, which if they were but
seriously weighed would cause admiration to astonishment. God manifested in the
flesh: Why, it is a Mystery that we may bestow a whole Age of a thousand years
in studying, and never be able to come to the full understanding of: Angels
desire to look into these things. Now, upon these accounts, upon the account of
the subject matter of the Knowledge of Christ, it may well be required of
Believers, that they do their utmost endeavor, that they may grow in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I shall close up for the present only with this one Argument further: It is
the Saints duty to endeavor a Knowledge in the growth of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; for otherwise, truly, we do not answer the provision that God
has made to such a purpose; we walk unworthy of the Goodness and Grace of God
which has discovered it self this way, in order to such a growth. For, mark
you; In the beginning of the World, upon the fall of Adam, the Gospel it was
but whispered: Whisper, there was something darkly, secretly, and couchantly
(if I may so speak) was hinted out; The seed of the Woman shall break the
Serpents head; here was all the Gospel was given out at first: Afterward there
began to be a little more discovery made of it to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: --
Afterward in Moses time, and in Moses days, there came to be a little more
full explanation: -- afterward in the times of the Prophets, clearer and
clearer discoveries. -- But in the time of the Gospel, when Christ came, then
the Day star arises, nay, the Sun of Righteousness breaks out, and now we have
clearer and clearer discoveries of the Mystery concerning our Lord Jesus. --
And mark you, when Christ goes to Heaven, he sends a token of his love to his
Church and People, a Book of Mysteries, of Mysteries concerning the Knowledge
of himself; and provides this very Book, that we might come to be well improved
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. -- Now, consider this;
For as much as the Lord has in his Wisdom, out of his rich bounty has been
pleased thus to provide and to order out, that there should be such means and
helps for our Improvement in the knowledge of Christ; truly we walk unworthy of
this provision, if we do not put on with all industriousness, to such a
purpose, that we may grow in the Knowledge of God. Let me but express my self
thus; If so be you have a Vessel moving upon the waters, if the water be
shallow, and it be a low water, the Vessel is ready to touch upon the ground;
but if so be the water grow higher and higher, and the Tide comes in and
springs up, then the Vessel rises higher and higher: So should it be with the
souls of Believers, being that God has made a stream come in more strongly,
and the Tide to rise higher (as he has done) in the course of holy Scripture;
truly the endeavor of a Christian should be suitable to such provision, he
should endeavor to be upon his Improvements, and to grow in the Knowledge of
Christ. These things being thus accounted to you, in order to your
convincement, that we should endeavor a growth in the Knowledge of our Lord
and Savior.

I should now come to tell you, what this Knowledge is, for the nature of it: I
must tell you this, That truly there are many have the Knowledge of Christ, and
are grown up to a great measure of it; and yet for all that, their Knowledge
will be their confutation at last.

I must tell you this, That howsoever we may be apt to lift up our selves in
high conceits of our Knowledge, yet the very Devils are exceeding much in their
Knowledge of Christ: We know thee, who thou art, The holy one of God. I tell
you, There Is never a Devil that is now under the chains of darkness, but they
can speak most learnedly concerning the Lord Jesus, concerning his Person, --
concerning his Nature, -- concerning his Office: And how many learned men are
there that are able to discourse concerning Christ, concerning his Incarnation,
and concerning his Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension, and this and that,
and are able to enlarge themselves this way, and yet they do (many of them) go
down with their Knowledge to Hell: Therefore it is necessary for us to be well
instructed in this Point, that we may know what this Knowledge is. -- I would
have spoken something to it; only thus:

It is not a notional Knowledge: Take heed of a notional historical Knowledge,
a Knowledge that you attain unto merely by common report, and by a common
eradiation of the Understanding; but look to it, that it be a Heart-knowledge,
a cordial Knowledge, -- a practical Knowledge, -- such a Knowledge as is a
transforming Knowledge: For the truth on it is, If any man think he knows any
thing of Christ, he knows nothing as he ought to know, if his Knowledge don't
transform him. This is the ruin of souls, They know much of Christ, they are
able to discourse of the Doctrine of Justification, and Sanctification, and of
Adoption, and other Mysteries of the Gospel, and all lies floating in the
brain, and that is nothing of its effectual operation upon the heart and
conscience of a sinner. This is that that I would a little further speak to you
about, that so we may not mistake our selves, and go with a Knowledge that lies
dead upon our hands, and so come to fall under the deep and most dreadful ruin.

SERMON. XI.
I Was speaking concerning this Knowledge, for the kind of it: Now I would
strengthen this cause I have in hand, concerning the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; I would strengthen the cause what I could, and I shall do
my best endeavor, that you may be as fully convinced as may be, How much it
concerns Believers and Saints to grow in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Besides all that has been already spoken to the purpose, which
indeed does carry very convincing light with it, and is beyond all gainsaying.
There is besides all that has been already spoken, some things further to be
held forth unto you, whereby you may yet stand more fully convinced of it, That
the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus, is a Knowledge that we should vigorously
endeavor a growth and Improvement in.

As now to instance. Having spoken the last time of things that concern us, in
reference to Christ; so I shall now further communicate those things to you
that concern this matter, in reference to our selves. If so be we be but that
we profess to be, if we be such as have the faith of the Gospel, and are
planted under the hopes of the Gospel; truly, it does very much concern us, in
respect of our selves, to endeavor vigorously a growth in the Knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and that in these several respects, which I
would entreat you seriously to weigh and consider. As,

First, Our Duty is, to endeavor a growth in th* Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

First, That we may be men and women of more able Judgments, be more Judicious
and able to manage our Judgment of things.

2. That we may have the more benefit and comfort of our Consciences, and with
respect to our consciences; our duty is to endeavor a growth in the Knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

3. With respect unto Gospel Grace, and that there may be an increase in it.

4. With respect unto Gospel-priviledges, and Benefits, and Comforts.

5. With respect to Gospel-duties.

6. With respect unto a Gospel-conversation. In the general, these things I now
do further offer to your consideration, and shall endeavor to give some
insight into them, and what they do import, that so if the Lord will please to
prosper my endeavors among you, that you may come to set on more strenuously,
with strength, and endeavor after a growth in the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Consider first, It is required of us (such as profess Godliness and the Faith
of the Gospel) that they be a wise, judicious and understanding People. Be not,
says the Apostle, unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is. It Is
that which has been earnestly prayed for. So David, Thy hands have made me,
and fashioned me, give me understanding. -- How earnest was Solomon in that
behalf, that he would give him a wise and an understanding heart? How earnest
was Paul with God on the behalf of the Church of the Ephesians, That their
understandings might be enlightened? -- God would have his People to be like
himself; he is a judicious God, a God of Judgment; and he would have his People
to be an understanding and judicious People, of discerning spirits, able to
make a right Judgment of persons and persons, of things and things: This is the
Will of God. -- Now consider, There is no Knowledge in all the World, that
contributes so much to this, that we may come to be a wise, understanding and
judicious People, as the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ does. I remember
what Moses speaks, in Deuteronomy. 4. That they should be acknowledged upon the
account of those Laws, and Statutes, and Testimonies which were given them;
they should be acknowledged to be a wise and an understanding People. Why?
Truly they were of high accomplishment, as touching their wisdom and
understanding, and judgment; and that upon the account of those Revelations
that God did make to them. O, but how much higher will the advance be of a
People, in wisdom, and understanding, and judgment, that are well instructed
in, and acquainted with the Mysteries of Christ, and the things that are to be
known concerning him. Consider now, What was the teaching of the Old Testament,
to the teaching that was to be had under the New Testament, the
Gospel-teaching; when the time came that the Mystery which had been kept
secret, from Ages and Generations, should be broken open, and laid out to the
full of it? Oh, what an advantage was there then, for a People to come to good
judgment and understanding! No Knowledge in all the World (I say) contributes
so much to the purpose, of making Men and Women wise and judicious, as does the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

By this Knowledge well improved (for I speak of that) I speak of the Knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ, considered as well improved, when there is a
considerable growth and increase in it: I speak of this Knowledge in the
improvement and increase in it, as the most precious Knowledge, most beneficial
to such a purpose, for to accomplish men and women for being a judicious
understanding People, of discerning spirits. Consider,

First of all, By the means of this Knowledge, we shall be the better able to
make a judgment of ourselves, our persons, and conditions, and states. Alas,
beloved, What woeful mistakes are we apt to run upon, concerning our conditions
Godward! How many are there that think themselves to be something, when they
are nothing at all; judge themselves to be of a right Gospel Spirit, when they
are nothing so at all? -- How many are there that account themselves to be
right in point of Religion and Godliness, well accomplished, and that they are
such as will pass in account with God, for good, and sound, and upright men,
right in the Mystery of the Gospel; whom God will reject and protest against,
and profess of them, that he has no pleasure in them? -- Then on the other
hand, There are many poor souls that pass a very sad judgment upon themselves,
and are apt to give themselves for stark naught, that they are not to be
accounted of with God, that have deserved rather to be rejected of him; when
yet for all that, they are in his account, no other than noble Vines, a holy, a
right seed; as the Prophet Jeremiah uses the expression. Now, the reason of
these mistakes, in point of Judgment, concerning our selves and Estates; it
must needs arise, e^pecially, either from the total want, or from a great
deficiency in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For, mark
you; You must know that we are never so well able to judge of the Writing, as
when we are well knowing of the Copy after which the Writing is to be drawn: We
can never so well make a Judgment of the fashion of a thing, unless we know the
due pattern after which it is to be cast; they that see the Copy, will be the
better able to judge of the Writing that is to be drawn after the Copy; they
that understand the state of the Mold, will be the better able to judge of the
Vessel, whether it be right cast and fashioned, suitable to the Mold. Now,
consider thus: Our Lord Jesus Christ, he is the Copy after which a Believer, a
Christian is to be drawn up: He is the Mold into which a Christian is to be
fashioned. The Apostle tells us, in Romans 8. That those whom God has
predestined, he has predestined to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Thus it is, it is the
great design of God concerning all his People that he will own; that they be
conformed and fashioned according to Christ: And such as is the constitution of
Christ, such must be the constitution of a Christian. Now, when we come to
know, and to know to good purpose, the things that concern Christ; when we come
to be made able to answer the Mysteries of the Gospel concerning Christ, what a
Christ he is, of what a make and constitution. (Pray consider well:) The more
we know of this Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the better able
shall we be to make a Judgment of our selves, and to escape those dangerous
mistakes concerning our condition and state, which we are apt to run upon; when
we come to know, and to know to some good degree what Christ is; what he is for
his Nature, and Disposition, and Qualifications, and Constitution; and that he
is not made after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the power of an
endless Life: That he is constituted a Priest after such a manner; and so a
Prophet, a King. When we come to know this to some purpose, the Constitution of
Christ, what make he is of, how God has ordered him, who is the Pattern and
the Copy after which a Christian is to be drawn up; the more we understand and
know of this, the better able shall we be to make a Judgment of our selves and
states, when we come to compare our selves with our Savior Jesus Christ; when
we can find, that as in the Print, there is letter for letter, there is Grace
for Grace; there is stamp for stamp, Impression for Impression; when we can
find this, when we come to know the original Copy, and then come to compare our
selves with the Copy, the Writing that is drawn up in our own hearts; -- when
we come to understand what Constitution Christ is of, and understand that to
some purpose, and then come to consider how it is with our selves; then shall
we be the better able to make a Judgment of our condition and state, and to
say, I know that my heart is right, I know that my state is good, I am able
to avouch it, I can give a Judgment of my self upon this account, because I
find the conformity to Christ my Head; I see there is an answering to the
Copy, and that I am drawn up according to the Pattern. O Brethren, consider
well of this: We are said to be made Kings and Priests unto God our Father.
Why, now, Kings and Priests? we are such as Christ, who was a King and a
Priest; not after the Law (as I said before) of a carnal Commandment, but
after the power of an endless Life; when we come to find the power of an
endless Life in us, a sutableness unto Christ; when it is otherwise, it is but a
pretense. As it may be said according to that, in Rev. 2. They say they are
Jews and are not; they are of the Synagogue of Satan; and so will many be found
to be so, that do not correspond to Christ, and do not answer Christ as the
Pattern. This is that therefore, that we are to know and consider, That it is
necessary that Believers and Saints should be well acquainted with the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, because by that Knowledge we
are to regulate our Judgments concerning our own persons. And so the Church, as
in Rev. 2. beforementioned.

And so again, The like is to be said concerning Doctrines, and concerning
Worships; concerning the Doctrines that are held forth, and concerning the
Worships that are performed. Why, Brethren, there are many Doctrines preached
in the World, that are no better than chaff to the Wheat; and no other than
dross to the Gold. What is the chaff to the wheat? as the Prophet Jeremiah
speaks: And what is the dross to the Gold? Now, how should we judge, but by the
help of the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? The more we improve
in that Knowledge, the better able shall we be to make a Judgment of Doctrines.

And so likewise of Worships: Such Worships as shall have acceptance with God.
Why? they must be Worships that are according to Christ; and the more we
improve in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the more able
shall we be to make a Judgment of these things. O! Christ, he is a spiritual
Christ: Though we have known him (says the Apostle) after the flesh, yet
henceforth know we him so no more: He was made after the power of an endless
Life, and not after the Law of a carnal Commandment; and his Worship is drawn
up, not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the power of an
endless Life, suitable to himself. O, consider of this, and take heed of carnal
hearts, and of carnal Services, that hold no correspondency with our Lord Jesus
Christ; so that upon this account, you may see and stand convinced of it, That
it concerns us very much to endeavor a growth and increase in the Knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, because by the means of that Knowledge, we
are enabled to make a Judgment of Churches, and their Constitutions; -- we are
enabled to make a Judgment of Doctrines and of Worships, which are to be
performed.

(...) Yet further. The Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, is a Knowledge that
Christians and Believers should endeavor a growth in, and that as with respect
unto their Judgments, that they may come to be well accomplished, and to become
a judicious People. So likewise 2ly. In regard of their Conscience: Conscience,
truly it is a great word, and I wish that the interpretation of it were better
known. The interpretation of Conscience; I tell you Brethren, That every man
and woman has a Conscience within them, and this Conscience is either his
cordial Friend, or it will be his dreadful Enemy; it will either be a Friend or
a Fury; either his best Friend on earth, or his greatest Enemy on earth;
Conscience will be a Friend if it be right, but God is a greater Friend;
Conscience will be an Enemy, I, but God is a greater Enemy: If our heart
condemn us, faith the Apostle, God is greater than our heart, and he knows all
things. -- But, on earth, there is not a greater Friend, nor is there a greater
Enemy than a man's Conscience. I tell you this, That your Consciences, when you
come to know them, and to be acquainted with them, and when they come to be
awakened and set on work, your Consciences will either create a Heaven within
you, or else they will create a Hell within you. Truly, Conscience will do
thus; It will either make your life to be a Heaven, or else it will make it to
be a Hell. I Will give you two Instances, and I think that more remarkable
Instances cannot be given. -- To instance in Paul and Judas: There was never
man (I think) in the World, that was able to speak more from experience
concerning his Conscience, and how it befriended him, than Paul was; never man
better studied in Conscience; never man more befriended by Conscience, and he
knew the benefit of it, and was exceedingly rejoiced in it: And there was never
man that was more terrified by his Conscience (I think) than Judas was, and no
man more able to speak to the terror of his Conscience, than he was. Paul makes
his boast of his Conscience: This is our rejoicing, The testimony of our
Conscience. And, Men and brethren, I have lived in all good Conscience: And
still upon every occasion, My Conscience bears me witness. O, this Conscience
of Paul, it sung within his bosom, like a bird of Paradise! O, this good
Conscience of Paul, notwithstanding all the troubles and persecutions he meets
with, his Conscience befriends him, and does keep him up in heart, and he is
cheered with it, under all the troubles and disquietments that he meets with in
this World. Thus it was with him, as to his Conscience.

And as for Judas, his Conscience was a Fury within him, when he came to be
awakened and had the guilt of blood upon him: O, how Conscience rages! it
creates a Hell within him, and he is in Hell before he comes there; as many
are, and will be, when God comes to awake their Consciences. Now, thus it was
with Judas, and he was so hurried, and agaster'd, and amazed, and afrighted,
that he was a Magor-missabib, a terror to himself. Thus it was with Judas, and
that by reason of his awakened Conscience, laboring under the guilt of his
iniquities and impieties that he had committed. Well, this is Conscience, the
best friend on Earth, or the greatest and dreadfullest enemy on Earth. A man
had better have all the World against him, than have his Conscience against
him; and if all the World be against a man, yet, if his Conscience be for him,
if his Conscience will befriend him; it will enable him to bear up with comfort
notwithstanding.

I, but now consider, that it is by the well-improvement of the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; it is by the well-improvement of that
knowledge, and by endeavoring an advance, and a growth and increase in that:
this is the thing that I drive at; it is by this means, and upon this account,
that the Conscience comes to be set to rights, and is enabled to do the part of
a dear and cordial Friend, which it will never do upon other terms. I Will tell
you what, your Consciences will never do the part of a friend to you to any
purpose, but rather storm against you, and make you to become as
Magor-missabibs, terrors to your selves; unless you be well instructed in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Men and women may daub with
their Consciences, and sooth up themselves, and lay their Conscience upon a
pillow, when it is sick, and distempered, and ill at ease, and would be breaking
out: men may take this and that course to still their Conscience for a little
while; O, but there will never, never be any true quieted peace, nor any kindly
settlement of it, nor any friendlyness of it to us, if we be not well
understanding in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It is
clearly by the advancement that we make in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, that we come to have our Consciences set right, and to
perform the office of a dear and cordial friend to us. Alas Brethren, consider
thus; men and women may have gone on in a fair and plausible profession of
Christianity for many years, and have been in good account for Christians, and
have had friendly respect from the Godly: but when they come to fall under a
temptation, an awakening and stinging temptation; or when they come to lie upon
their deathbeds, and have a representation made to them of their condition and
state, they are in a most restless condition, they do not know what in the
World will become of them; but they are like unto the raging Sea: and this is
like to prove the condition of many poor creatures, that make a fair
profession: the Lord give them wisdom to look into it, they are in a restless
condition, like unto the raging Sea, that casts up mire and dirt, and cannot be
quiet. O, it is true, I have had a profession, and have had a name for a
Christian, and I have b^n installed in Church Priviledges, and I have ^t and
drank with the Saints, and walked in communion with them; but now all this, and
a great deal more of this, that may be accounted, will not quiet the spirit;
and the poor creature cannot tell where to rest, but tumbles and tosses, and
rouls up and down, and knows not what in the World will become of it. Thus it
will be; therefore we had need look about us, and to consider wisely of it. --
Why, what is the reason of this? why truly, principally upon this account;
because the knowledge of Christ was not better studied, and that it was not
pursued more eagerly, according to the true state of it; and the Conscience was
not duly principled with the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And so likewise; there are others, Godly persons; the Godly persons,
concerning whom, it may be very comfortably hoped, that their hearts are right
with God, and that they have the root of the matter in them; and yet, in a day
of temptation; at a great loss, and tossed with tempests, and woefully shattered
and broken; and do not know where to rest the sole of their foot: poor souls,
that are roving, and tossed from post to pillar, and cannot tell how to have
any quiet enjoyments: -- what is the reason of this? O, it is in a special
manner to be reckoned to the want of a due information in the mystery of
Christ; and, because there is not a well-improved knowledge concerning our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. But the poor creature is principled much, what with
principles of Legality, with Legal principles, which will never settle the
Conscience, nor never bring any solid peace unto the Conscience. This is the
reason why many poor creatures are so shattered and broken as they are, and
cannot have a comfortable day; pass a long from time to time, and upon every
occasion, they are under woeful perplexities. -- What Is the reason of this? --
because of Legal principles in their Conscience; by occasion whereof, the
Conscience is ever and anon rising up, and presenting matter of terror to the
poor creatures; and it knows not what to do, nor how to have any comfortable
enjoyment of it self: -- upon this account it is, because we are not well
studied in the mysteries of the Gospel, in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Thus it is; We must know, that all the knowledge
concerning God, considered out of Christ, as he is an Infinite Glorious Being;
as he is a God of Infinite Sovereignty, of Infinite Power; as he is a God that
is Perfect in Knowledge, in Holiness, and Wisdom, and the like: all this
Knowledge, -- and the Knowledge of God in the works of his Creation; -- and the
Knowledge that we have of our selves, and of the state wherein we were created.
The Knowledge of the Covenant, under which we were planted in the beginning of
the Creation: -- The Knowledge of the Law, and of the Sovereignty of that: All
this knowledge will but raise up terror in the soul, and make the Conscience to
rage and storm; nothing of this Knowledge that is able to calm and quiet the
Conscience. No, let a man present to himself never so fully, all his
moralities, and duties, and services, whatsoever he can account concerning
himself: notwithstanding this, Conscience rages still; there is nothing of
satisfaction to the Conscience: Conscience is still all this while like the
raging Sea, and casts out mire and di^t, and cannot be quiet. -- Why? -- Why
because it has nothing to rest upon; nothing that it knows concerning God, his
Infinite Majesty, Glory, Purity, and Holiness, that gives a bottom for the
Conscience to rest upon; but the Conscience rather comes the more to ra^e and
storm; O, he is a Holy God, and my Conscience tells me, that I am a filthy,
loathsome, polluted creature: He is a Righteous and Just God, and I am a
rebellious wretch, that have provoked Him most dreadfully: I have the
representations before me, of such and such moralities, and services: I, but
the Law is a strict Law, and I have not answered it in any thing that I have
done. Now, it is only by the Knowledge of our Lord and Savlour Jesus Christ.
The Knowledge of the Myste^ which was kept secret from Ages and Generation
(...) is only by the knowledge of that Mystery, that the Co^ comes to be
quiet, it comes to find a bottom there: when this Knowledge comes, there is a
plank cast out after the Shipwreck. O, when the soul comes to hear of the Lord
Jesus Christ, that he was sent of God, to be the Savior, to make satisfaction
to his Justice, by the offering up of himself a sacrifice; that he has shed
blood, and the blood of atonement, an available blood: when the Conscience
comes to know this, and this knowledge comes to be wrought in a soul; then
Conscience begins to be quiet. The Apostle argues to this purpose, in Heb. 10.
The Law, says he, having a shadow of good things to come; for it had its
worldly Sanctuary, and its Priesthood, a pompous Priesthood, and the
Sacrifices, and the blood of Bulls, and Goats: I, but, says he, These were
never able to purge the Conscience, and to make the comers thereunto perfect;
to give them peace, and to bring them to the enjoyment of rest; they could find
no rest here; For, says he, if so be that they had been available, then would
they not have ceased to be offered, because the comers to these sacrifices,
being once made perfect, should have had no more Conscience of sins; their
Consciences no more laboring under the apprehension, and the representation of
their former sins, they would have been made perfect, and would have had no
more Conscience of sin. But, says he, every time they come to offer these
Sacrifices, there is a remembrance of sins: -- Why? -- Why because the
knowledge of all this, the performance of all this, would not answer the
exigency of the Conscience, and lay a foundation for the Conscience to bottom
upon. But, says he, Christ, He comes in, and He, by one offering of Himself,
by the shedding of his own blood once, He has perfected for ever, them that
are sanctified; and now the Conscience comes to be quiet. O, this is the
knowledge will quiet the Conscience. Therefore now, judge with your selves,
whether there be not infinite cause, that professors that mind their souls, and
the peace of their hearts, and the comfort of their Consciences; whether it
does not infinitely concern them, to endeavor an increase and growth in the
Knowledge of the Lord Jesus: That so, when Conscience would be upon stirring,
and startling, and stumbling; the soul being well versed in the mystery, and
understanding to good purpose what the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ is,
the soul may be able to relieve it self: Well, be it what it will; let Devils
charge, and let men charge, let them charge to the full; I bless God, I have
the knowledge of Jesus Christ. I understand the mystery concerning my Lord
Jesus: I have endeavored to make a good progression in this knowledge, and to
accommodate it to my purpose. I know who Christ was, what a Priest he was, and
what blood he shed, and what a sacrifice he offered; and I know, that the
Infinite Justice of God, is not able to make any exception against this
sacrifice and blood. God has rescued me, well may my Conscience rescue me: God
is satisfied, well may my Conscience be satisfied. Well now, for my part, I
know not what in all the World to preach to you, that is more material and
momentous than these things. And these two things that I have labored about
this morning; -- as touching a Christians accomplishment, for being wise, and
judicious; and that is, by a due improvement in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. -- And likewise, concerning the Conscience; and how that
comes to be rectified, and set to rights, and to stand a man's Friend in every
time of need; and that he may sweetly enjoy himself, and come to have a Rock to
repose upon in a storm and tempest; how a soul may come to find a rest for it
self in all the tossings and turmoylings in the World: and that it is the
knowledge, or improving in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
I say, these are momentous things, and we should well consider of it; that of
all knowledge, there is none that we should endeavor a growth and increase in,
as the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

SERMON. XII.
I Shall now proceed unto some other things, which will yet more fully evidence
it to us, that it does very much concern believing souls, to endeavor a growth
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The third thing, according to this order, which I propound, is, That by growth
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we shall be advantaged
for a growth in Grace. It seems, and to me, it more than seems, to be employed
in the Conjunction of these two Requiries: Grow in Grace, grow in the Knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It seems to imply thus much; as if so be
the Apostle should have said, Grow in Grace, and that you may do so; see that
you grow in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. They are never
like to come to any eminency in Grace, and to make any considerable advance
(...) Grace, that make little or no progress in the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. And they, that in uprightness of soul, do make it their
business to incease, and grow in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; they are the most likely persons for to make the most considerable
advantage in the Graces of the Spirit of God. There is something in it, that
the Spirit of God, by the ministry of his Apostle Peter, should propound these
two requiries in this Conjunction one with another. Require a growth in Grace;
and in order thereunto, a growth in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. -- -- Now here, first of all, I shall speak a little more generally;
and that, but in a touch: -- -- And then, shall endeavor to evince this, by
giving an account of this in a more particular way.

You are to know, that the first plantation of Grace in the soul, it is made in
the way, and by the means of the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
communicated to the soul through the Spirit: there can be no Grace in the
heart, where there is no Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It is
the Knowledge of Christ, and of the Gospel, and of the Gospel-mysteries
concerning Christ, by the means whereof, Grace comes to be planted in the soul.
The Prophet, in Psalm. 19. gives us this account of the Law of the Lord; that it
is a perfect Law, converting the soul. -- What Law is this? -- -- understand it
of the Law of Grace and Faith: Not of the Law of Works: and there by Law, you
are to understand, the Doctrine of God concerning Christ, held forth in the
Gospel, in the Scriptures of Prophets and Apostles. And he says, that it is
the Law of God, this Law of Faith, this Gospel-Law, which is the blessed
Instrument of converting the soul.

Before Conversion, there is no Grace; when Conversion is wrought, then Grace
takes place in the heart: an unconverted person, is a graceless person, let him
be what he will for his moralities, and plausible conversation: when once
Conversion is wrought, then Grace comes to be in the soul: and this Conversion
is not brought about, but by the Gospel, which holds forth unto us, the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Let a man preach moral Duties
never so clearly and plainly; moral Duties, all the Duties of the moral Law,
considered as it holds forth a Covenant of Works; as it holds forth a Duty to
God, Duty to Man: I say, let a man preach never so clearly and plainly man's
Duty, he will never be able to convert the soul; that is not the converting
Ministry, no, it is not; it is not the quickening Ministry. I remember how the
Apostle argues to the Galatians; Received ye the Spirit (says he) which Spirit
is a Spirit of Grace, by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? That
is the Doctrine of Faith. Why? says he, you did never receive the Spirit,
which is a Spirit of Grace, by the works of the Law, and by the hearing of the
Law; but you received the Spirit, by the hearing of Faith, by hearing the
Doctrine of Faith, the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Doctrine concerning the Lord
Jesus Christ, made known unto you; in that way the Spirit came, and the Spirit
with the Grace of it. It is, therefore, the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that is the blessed instrumental means whereby there comes to be the first
plantation of Grace in the Soul.

I, this that brings men to believe, it is the Gospel; men will never believe to
the saving of their souls, till they come to know Jesus Christ.

They will never repent with a Repentance to salvation, till they come to know
Jesus Christ: All the knowledge in the World will never bring over a soul to
Faith and Repentance, to the Love of God, but the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. When men come once to know the Mystery of the Gospel, to know the
Grace of God in Christ, to know the Mysteries concerning the Salvation and
Redemption of the World by the Lord Jesus; this will bring them to Faith (if
any thing will) this will bring them to Repentance; this is the instrumental
means whereby they come to have their hearts warmed with the Love of God. The
preaching of the Law, as a Covenant of Works, moral Duties, and pressing of
them, without the line of the Gospel, and the Covenant of Grace; without
reference to that, this will but rather provoke and stir up the corruption of a
man: The Law works wrath against a man, works wrath in a man; it raises up
wrath, it irritates those cursed corrupt Principles that are in him. O, this is
a Mystery that we should be well acquainted withal.

O, it is the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel: This is that
that breaks the heart, and makes the heart to work out after God. Never shall
we begin to love God, nor to love Christ, till such time as we come to know the
Doctrines of the Gospel, concerning our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I would
with all my heart that every one of you were but well studied in this Mystery,
that now I am speaking to, That it is the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ held forth in the Gospel, that is the means and instrument to
plant Grace, to make the first Plantation of it in the Soul. As,

2ly. Know, That as it is the means of its first Plantation, so it is the means
and instrument of its Augmentation: I am speaking according to the Doctrine of
the Text, concerning a growth in Grace, and in the Knowledge of Christ. This
growth in Grace, is brought about by a growth in the Knowledge of our Lord
Jesus; the more we know, the more we shall believe, the more we shall repent,
the more we shall love, the more holy shall we be (as I shall show you, God
assisting.) I think this Point will take up a little more time than other
Particulars will, but it will be time well spent.

Now yet further, to clear up this, That it is the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and the increase in that, which does promote an increase
in Grace. You shall find in Scripture, and truly it is worthy your
consideration (to my apprehension) that the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, it is put for all Grace. It Is a considerable thing, that when God
will make a promise of all grace, he does epitomize that promise thus: I will
give them an heart to know me. When God comes to make a promise to his People
concerning Grace, he puts it into this Form, I give them an heart to know me. O
how much is there complicated in that expression, I will give them an heart to
know me! He does not say, an Head to know me. Indeed that is a Gift, but
Knowledge in the heart, is a Grace: It is the beginning of Grace, and that
which contributes to all the Graces; an heart to know me. To know me; -- with
what a kind of Knowledge? with a fidelial Knowledge, a Knowledge of Trust, and
an affectionate Knowledge, a Knowledge of Love, and with a Knowledge of Desire,
and a Knowledge of Submission; I will give them an heart to know me. And you
shall find likewise to this purpose our Savior speaks, Joh. 17. 3. This is
life eternal. Why, This is life eternal, To know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Mark it, This is eternal life in the Causes
of it; this is eternal life in the way and means of it, To know thee, and to
know him whom thou have sent: To know God in Christ; this is eternal life.

Then surely it imports Faith, and it imports Love, and it imports Holiness;
for eternal Life does not come over to a soul, but in the way of Believing, and
in the way of Holiness, and in the way of Love, and in the way of all the
Graces: So that I say, The Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is such a
Knowledge, as under which is comprehended the Graces of the Spirit: And truly
this is a consideration of weight in order to this purpose, that we may come to
be more in our indearings of it, and more in our endeavourings after it.

But now I shall endeavor to make this yet more fully to appear, by an
induction of Particulars; so as that you may stand convinced of this, that the
way to grow in Grace, is to grow in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Consider first of all, That by growth in this Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, we are most happily advantaged for a growth in Faith and
Believing; it is very considerable, and I will commend it to you to be
seriously weighed, That as Knowledge is put for Faith, for justifying Faith,
according to that remarkableScripture that you have in Isa. 53. where the Lord
speaks to this purpose by the Prophet; By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many. Now, do but weigh that passage, and observe this
expression: This is spoken concerning Christ our Lord and Savior. And says
the Prophet, By the knowledge of him shall my righteous servant justify many.
-- Why does the Knowledge of Christ justify? -- Why the Devils know him, and
yet they are not justified? Carnal Professors, they have a Knowledge of him,
and yet they are not justified: I, but that is such a kind of Knowledge, as
that they that have it, shall be justified: And Christ, by the Knowledge of him
shall justify many -- -- Now, what Knowledge is this? -- I^ must needs be
understood of a fiducial Knowledge, a Knowledge of Faith; such a Knowledge as is
a Knowledge of Dependence, a Knowledge of Recumbency and Relyance upon the Lord
Jesus Christ. There Is no other Knowledge whereby Christ can justify souls, but
by such a Knowledge as this: And so I say, The Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ it is put for Faith, and is used to be set forth unto us, The faith
whereby souls are justified, and so everlastingly saved.

But now yet more fully to clear up this, That by growth in the Knowledge of
our Lord Jesus, there comes to be a prosperous and happy growth in Faith.

We will consider first of all, What there is belonging unto a well-grown and
improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and then you will be able clearly
(if so be that there be any spiritualness of understanding) to see how this
Knowledge duly improved, does draw out the says of a Believer, and how it does
most happily influence his Faith, and is as the pouring out of water upon a
Plant, or at the root of a Tree, which makes the Plant to thrive, and grow, and
prosper, and shoot up a main. This will appear that this benefit comes over to
us by our having the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ advantaged in us. Now,
consider what does properly belong to a well improved Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. It is requisite, in order to a due improvement and growth
in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,

First, That he be known as touching his Person, That he is God blessed for
evermore, God with God, in full equality with the Father and the Spirit, and
accounts it no robbery to claim such an equality; as Great as the Father, as
Good as the Father, as Holy as the Father, as Mighty as the Father. Thus it is;
He is God with God. -- And 2ly. That he is not only God with God, but he is
God-Man; that he might be both fit to deal with God for Man, and with Man for
God. That Is the first thing that I propound: I shall make the accommodation of
them by and by; and having propounded the things that belong to this well
improved Knowledge, then I shall come to offer it to your Consideration, how
the Grace of Faith is most happily influenced by this Knowledge thus improved.

2. It belongs to well improved Knowledge, for to know, that this Christ,
God-Man, is the Son of God, the only begotten of the Father, by an act of
eternal Generation.

3. It Is requisite to a well improved Knowledge, That souls do know and
understand, that this Christ, God-Man, the eternal Son of the Father, that he
is the Son of his dearest Love, and did from all eternity lodge in his blessed
bosom, that his heart is infinitely set upon him. And then,

4. It belongs to this Knowledge, That souls do understand, that this Christ,
God-Man, the eternal Son of the Father, the dearly beloved of his Soul, is such
as he does take infinite complacency and contentment in; he is pleased in him,
and delighted in him; upon this very account, because of the willingness which
he has manifested to appear in the behalf of poor Souls. This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; he in whom my soul delights.

5. It is requisite to a well improved Knowledge of Christ, That we understand,
that by an eternal Decree, God has chosen, and appointed, and designed, this
Son, God-Man, this Beloved, this Person so much delighted in; That he has
chosen him according to an eternal purpose and Decree, for to be the great
Mediator between God and Man. This is necessary likewise to be known, that so
there may be a due improvement of the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Lord has declared the decree, Thou art my Son, and I have appointed thee: He
has decreed him, and designed him to such a purpose, according to that decree,
in Isa. 42. Behold (says the Prophet) my servant whom I uphold, mine elect, in
whom my soul delights: He is the chosen of God from all Eternity to such a
purpose.

6. This is necessary to a well improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
That it be known and understood, that this Christ, God-Man, the Son of the
Father, the Beloved of his Soul, the Person that he delights in, that he has
made choice of, is likewise most fully commissioned by the Father, for to
perform the Office of a Mediator, to all those intents and purposes, and in all
such ways, wherein he may accomplish that great Design concerning the
Redemption and Salvation of poor Souls. God has commissioned him, he has
chosen him, called him, and sent him into the world, and sealed him up,
according to Scripture expression, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, and
he has anointed me to preach good tidings: -- Him has God the Father sealed.
As in Ioh. 6. he has a full commission from God sealed up unto him, for such a
purpose. -- He is commissioned of God, being the great Prophet, to teach and
instruct his People in the Mysteries of his Will: A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you, like unto me. He is commissioned of God to be a Priest,
and God has sworn concerning him, according to that, in Psalm. 110. The Lord
has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech. -- And, then he has commissioned and sealed him up to be a King:
The King of his Church, to rule in the hearts of his People, and to ruin his
Enemies. This belongs to well improved Knowledge, That we come to know and
understand that this Jesus Christ, God-Man, is thus commissioned.

7. It belongs to a well improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, That, as
he is thus commissioned, sent and sealed of God to all these intents and
purposes; so likewise he is accomplished by God every way, most completely
accomplished for to bring about the Design that he is commissioned for. The
great God has empowered him, and accomplished him, in the most full manner that
possibly can be; God has not given him the Spirit by measure, the Lord has
given him the fullness of the Spirit, he has given him all fullness: It pleased
the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. Fullness of Wisdom, fullness of
Grace, all fullness of the Spirit; he has all fullness in him.

8. We are to Consider, That this belongs to a well improved Knowledge; that
these accomplishments of Christ, and this provision that is made in him, it is
ordered unto Communication; he is the great Trustee of Heaven and Earth: He
ascended on high, and he r^ived gifts for men. Why, he received them as their
great Trustee; God has committed to him a trust, for the benefit and behoof of
poor Souls. This belongs to a well improved Knowledge in Christ, That all the
fullness that is in him, it is for Communication, that poor Souls might be the
better for it.

9. It belongs to a well improved Knowledge of Christ, That there be a due
understanding of this, that Christ was from the beginning most willing to
comply with the Counsel of God concerning him; and that it was the joy of his
heart to engage himself in the behalf of poor sinners, to make reconciliation
to God as their Peace; to satisfy the Justice of God he was most willing, and
it was the delight of his Soul to be put upon this thing. This belongs to a
well improved Knowledge, to understand, that Christ had no reluctance of
spirit, when this matter was propounded to him; and when the matter was in
debate, Christ came in with no Negatives, made no Objections, but answered
thus: O my Father, it is thy Will, it is my joy; it pleases thee to design me to
such a purpose, O my Father, thy will be done, my heart delights in it: Thou
have prepared me a body; O, I come into the World with that body, and I delight
to do thy Will; Though I fore-apprehend all the sorrow, all the smart, all the
shame, all the sufferings, all the burden, all those pressures that I must
undergo in the managing of this great and glorious work and service; yet I
stick at nothing: O, Father, it is meat and drink to me; I go about this work
and service with as much content and complacency of soul, as ever a hungry man
went to eat his meat. And then,

10. It belongs to a well improved Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, That we know and understand, that according to this Design of God, and
sutably to his accomplishments, and sutably to his willing engaging of himself,
he has laid out himself to the utmost; in a way of doing, in a way of
suffering; -- in a way of doing, fulfilling all righteousness in an active way,
in the course of his life, and conversing here in the world: -- In a way of
suffering; by the offering up of himself a Sacrifice unto God, he has made an
Atonement, he has satisfied infinite Justice, he has pacified infinite
Wrath, he has paid the Debt to the utmost farthing: That now the Justice of
God does make Declaration, that it is fully satisfied in what has been
performed by the Lord Jesus Christ. This is belonging to a well improved
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior. That now which Christ said upon the Cross,
It is finished, God from Heaven declares in the Gospel: O, I have full
satisfaction, I have nothing to object against those poor Souls, that my Son
has engaged for; I have a full payment, to the very utmost farthing.

11. It belongs to a well improved Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, that we understand this: That having performed all that Justice could
require, in a way of doing, -- or in a way of suffering, -- That he rose from
the dead, ascended into Heaven, and that God has given him preferment, that
God has given him the highest preferment, upon his obedience and satisfaction
to his Justice, and upon the performance of this great Work and Service that he
was designed unto; God has advanced him to the highest top of Honor, he has
given him a name above every name; he has set him at his own right Hand, above
all Principalities and Powers.

12. It belongs to the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, That we
know how Jesus Christ, thus advanced on High, and thus raised up to a top of
preferment, how he does improve that preferment: He is now in Heaven, he is at
God's right Hand, he is in fullest Glory. How does he improve this Glory and
Honor that is conferred upon him? -- Improve it; -- He sets his heart upon
this, that there may be an Improvement of all the interest that he has in God;
all that Glory, and Power, and Majesty, and Dominion that he is now invested
withal; he sets his heart upon this, that he may improve this for the benefit
and behoof of his People here upon Earth: He makes it his continual work and
business to be negotiating with God for poor Souls, for whom he has shed his
blood, and on whose behalf he has made satisfaction to infinite Justice; he
does continually appear in Heaven before God, to make intercession for them.

Now, do but lay all this together, and here is the well improved Knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which I have endeavored thus to knit up
together in this compass, and to set out before you: And here is the great
Mystery of the Gospel lying in these things, which I have held out this
morning.

Now, the next thing to do is this, To let you see how all this Knowledge of
ou^ Lord Jesus Christ, in every part and parcel of it, does draw out the heart
and soul of a Believer, and does most happily influence it; so that all this
Knowledge is as a fatning water that does nourish a Plant: Faith being planted
in the soul, and this water of Gospel-Knowledge, concerning our Lord Jesus,
being thus poured upon it, why as a fatning water, it makes the plant of Faith
to grow and shoot up amain. There is never an experienced Christian, that knows
what believing means, and is upon the exercise of Faith, and has set his heart
upon this, that he may make an Improvement of his Faith; there is never an
experienced Believer but is able to set to his Seal, Oh, in this Knowledge thus
wrought out, and thus spread forth before me, in this Knowledge my Faith lives,
and thrives, and prospers, and swims up and down with all delight, as the Fish
in the water. You may easily apprehend now, how a Believers Faith will grow and
increase, and receive strength and nourishment, and shoot up amain, upon the
due consideration of these things that I have suggested.

1. As now, When a poor Believer shall think thus with himself, Why do I
hesitate? Why have I a fluctuating heart? why is not my heart settled and fixed,
and come to be full of confidence in God? Why I consider thus, That that Jesus
which is the object of my Faith, he is God over all, blessed for ever; would I
have a more able Savior than a God: It is not an Angel that I am commanded to
place my trust in; no, it is God, blessed for ever, he that was God with God,
from all Eternity, as great as God, as good as God: Why should I flag in my
spirit? why should I faint? why should I have any miss-givings? Have not I a
God to trust upon?

2. And then, He is God; I, He is God-man: where can I promise my self pity,
bowels, compassion, if not from a man; a man that is in union with God, and in
union with God to this purpose; that he might be accomplished, that he might be
every way most compassionate, and suitable to such an undertaking?

3. And then again, This Jesus is the Son, the Son of the Father; where can I
place my trust and confidence so freely, as upon the King of Heaven's Son? He
is the Son of the Father; nay, he is his dearly Beloved Son; the Father loves
him, delights in him, he delights to hear his Prayer, he pleased him in all
things.

4. Nay, why should not I be strong in my Faith in Christ; forasmuch as this
Jesus, this Son, this beloved Son, this delightful Son, is the person that the
Great God has chosen and designed to such a purpose? and it is the will of
God, that every poor soul should fly to him, and have its recumbency upon him.

5. And then again; when I consider that this Christ is commissioned by the
Father, he is sent into this World upon this account, that he might save, and
make reconciliation.

6. And then, he is every way accomplished: if he were a deficient Christ,
there were something to make my spirit to flag; but he is most fully
accomplished; all power is given to him; he is able to save to the utmost, all
that come unto God by him.

7. And then when I come to consider, and ponder, that it is meat and drink to
Christ, to do the will of his Father; and he, with the greatest content of
heart, performed this work, and made satisfaction to the Justice of God, so^
poor sinners.

8. And then when I come to consider, that this Jesus is now in Heaven, at Gods
Right Hand; God the Father has given him Glory and Honor: O what
encouragement have I to come to him?

9. And then when I consider, that all the trust that is committed to him, all
the treasure that is laid up in him, is for the benefit and behoof of poor
souls; why should not I then be encouraged to let out my heart upon him, and to
have the strongest confidence, that I shall be the better for him? I tell you
Brethren, that all this knowledge does strongly influence the Faith of a
Believer: therefore, well may the Apostle require the knowledge of the Lord
Jesus, in order to a growth in Grace; and in particular, to a growth in Faith.
I would only give in that instance, in 1 Pet. 1. It Is a Text that does fully
suit our present purpose: says he, You by him believe in God, that raised him
up from the dead, and gave him Glory, that your Faith and Hope might be in God:
-- Pray do but weigh this, you believe in God, (says he) who raised Jesus from
the dead; and when he had so done, he gave him Glory: He preferred him to the
greatest Honor and Dignity, set him at his own Right Hand: -- and wherefore
this? That your Faith, (in knowing this) that he that was your great undertaker
here on earth, traveled in the greatness of his strength, that he might
accomplish the work of Redemption and Salvation. This Jesus, after he had done
his work, and suffered what he was to undergo here in the World; God did raise
him again from the dead; and when he had raised him, he takes him to Heaven,
and gives him Glory there; sets him at his own Righthand, advances him to the
highest top of Honor: -- And wherefore thus? That your Faith and Hope might be
in God; that you might come to him with the fullest confidence, and rely upon
him. -- Now, all this that I have accounted to you concerning a well-improved
knowledge in our Lord Jesus Christ; it does exceeding liberally contribute to
the promoting of a Believers Faith and Grace. And, because I can proceed no
further now; if there be any souls, that are strangers to Christ, and to the
Faith of the Gospel; will you but drink of these waters? O, set your hearts,
that you may drink of this blessed Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and see whether these waters will not warm your hearts, and make you to
sparkle out in love to Christ, in longings after Christ! -- And for you, that
are called out to the participation of Grace, and have the Faith of God begun
in you: O, as ever you desire to grow up in the Faith of the Gospel, labor to
be well improved in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: O,
dwell upon the meditation of these Mysteries that I have given you this morning
a hint of. If ever you desire to be well improved in your Faith; it must be, by
your being well improved in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

SERMON. XIII.
I Shall now proceed to what remains;

What has been spoken concerning Faith; and how the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ duly improved, is to the growth of that. The same may be spoken
concerning Gospel- hope; The hope of the Righteous, which is called, a Tree of
Life: -- compared to an Anchor; Sure, and steadfast, entering within the vail,
whither the forerunner has entered. Now, by improving in the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, Hope will grow up to a goodly stature; Hope will come to be as an
Anchor, fixing very fast, so as to keep the ship of the soul safe and secure,
whatever the storms and tempests are that may arise upon it. The more we know
of Christ, the more shall our Hope be strengthened in us: and one special
reason why we hope no more with an unshaken hope, is, because we are not more
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The Apostle, in 1 Pet.
1. speaks concerning this blessed Hope that Believers are begotten to: and they
are begotten to it, (he tells us) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead. The more we are judiciously apprehensive of Christ, of the Resurrection
of Christ, and of the Glory which he is advanced unto; the more will the hope
of a Believer be strengthened in him. And that Scripture which I closed with
the last day, it serves us to this very purpose, 1 Pet. 1. It Is said, that God
the Father has given Honor and Glory to his Son; that our Faith, and our
Hope, might be in God. And therefore must needs be inferred; that the more we
know, and understand concerning Christ, and the Glory that he is now advanced
unto; the more will there be of growth in the hope of a Believer.

3. By growth in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; there will be a growth
in godly Repentance. Repentance; there is such a thing, though it is little
known, and less practiced, according to the true Gospel-nature and state of it:
But, such a thing there is, as Repentance toward God: a precious Grace, which
God works in the hearts of his people; those that he has a purpose to save. It
is of necessary participation; and it is a Grace of necessary exercise: for our
Savior tells us, that except we repent, we shall all perish; there is a
necessity of it; and yet alas, how many are mere strangers to it; know nothing
of the Grace, know nothing of the Practice of it? And, how many of those that
have any sense, or share in it; yet, that are very little in their Repentance,
have but a very low measure and degree, know little of heart-meltings, and
soul-breakings before God; much what strangers unto that sweet frame of spirit
by which Ephraim is set forth unto us, as a blessed pattern and example, in
Jer. 31. 18. where we have this account of him; Thou have established ^e, and I
was chastised; as a Bullock unaccustomed ^o the yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall
be turned: after that I was converted, I repented, and I sm^ upon my thigh.
This was Ephraim's frame; and this is upon Record for our imitation. But alas,
how little do we attain to of this Gospel-Repentance? how little do we express
mostly of such a temper and frame of spirit? Can sin freely, but repent very
hardly. How little does there appear to God of any kindly workings, and
breakings of heart before him, in the sense of all that we daily commit of sin
and trans^ion, in a way of disobedience, and loose walking before the Lord. Why
truly, I may be bold (...), that if so be there were any, place for Repentance
in Heaven, though indeed, it is not a ^ce of Repentance, but of joy, and
everlasting rejoicing. Yet, if Heaven were a place of Repentance; I am
persuaded, that there are very few of those that some to Heaven, that would not
^ll upon the work and business there; and that, because they repented so little
as they did while they were here on earth: if there were any place of
repentance there, it would go to the hearts of many, that they did not take it
more deeply into consideration, their evil dispositions, and sinful
conversations, while they were in the World.

And, what is the reason that Repentance (that blessed Grace) is not more
largely shared in; that it is not more expressed to the life of it: -- why we
may with much confidence conclude upon (...), that this is one of the special
reasons; because we (...) not more of the knowledge of our Lord and (...) Jesus
Christ. (...) Been, if Christ, o^ Lord Jesus, were better known, and the
knowledge of him better digested; I know this, that there would be more soul
meltings, and heart-breakings, (...) kindly manner before God, than ever
otherwise there ^like to be. Consider what the Prophet speaks, i^ ^ech. 12.
says he, They shall look upon him whom they have pi^ed and what then? They
shall look upon him, they shall mind Christ, study Christ; they shall fix their
serious thoughts upon the Lord Jesus Christ; and upon him, a^ one whom they
have pierced: and what will follow? Then shall they mourn over him, as one who
mourns for an only Son; and be in bitterness, as one that is in bitterness
for his firstborn. This will raise up the sorrow; this will break the heart.
When persons come for to know, and consider, and seriously ponder upon the Lord
Jesus Christ; consider of his dying, and dreadful suffering, and woeful
breakings and bruisings, that he was pleased to undergo on the behalf of poor
sinners; and then, their hearts will break within the^. What was that which
made the Converts in Acts 2. for to fall into such a melting frame, and to be
pricked at the heart, and to mourn and lame^ deeply? Why, Peter had been
pre^ching to them the Doctrine concerning our Lord Jesus, and endeavoring to
bring them to the knowledge of him whom they had crucified: You have crucified
the Prince of Life; you have been the murderers and betrayers of him: they
were pricked then at the heart, and cried out; O, men and (...), what shall we
do? O miserable wretches* When a soul shall set it self to know, and understand
the mystery concerning Christ, that the Eternal Son of God, he that was in the
form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, he that was from all
eternity, the delight of his Father; he that was holy, and unblamable, knew no
sin, never was guile found in his mouth; the spotless Lamb* That he should be
hanged as a malefactor! that he should be put to the greatest shame and
ignominy that could be! that he should be under the heat of the wrath of his
Father! that his precious soul should be in such an agony, as that he should be
constrained to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? That he
should undergo such breakings, and bruisings, and woundings! that he should
sweat drops, and clods of blood! that his soul should be exceeding sorrowful
and heavy, unto the very death! And yet this blessed Jesus, one that never
sinned; no, not so much as in a Thought: yet, that all this should be undergone
by him! -- -- And, when a soul shall come to consider, that it self has been
accessory to this horrid murder! it self should have a hand in this bloody
business! that it self should be a party to this prodigious impiety! that it
self should stabb Christ to the very heart! when this comes to be considered;
when a soul comes to be well improved in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of his deep, and dreadful, and dolorous sufferings; this must needs
give an advance to the Grace of Repentance: Why, it would argue a heart harder
than an Adamant, that would not, upon such well digested apprehensions as
these, be in meltings before the Lord, upon the consideration of a crucified
Christ. This is that, which, if it were but well known, and studied, and
seriously pondered upon, would give an advance (I say) unto Repentance. But,
the reason why we are no more in the lively practice of Repentance, is, because
we are no more studied in this Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
I would this were considered of by us, and put to the proof, whether you would
not find it so in experience, that this would make your hearts to break before
the Lord.

4. The Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and a kindly growth in
it; will conduce very much; as of Faith, and Hope, and Repentance; so of Love;
love to God, and love to Christ, and love one to another. The complaint may
justly enough be taken up concerning this, as concerning the other Graces: we
are little in one and other: and truly, it is not to be expected, that they
should be much advanced in Love, that are not advanced in Faith, and Hope, and
in their Repentance toward God. But thus it is; alas, that Love that should be
in us in the flame, it is mostly but in the spark: we have some little glowings
it may be, but not those kindly burnings of Love to God, and Love to Christ;
those inlargements of heart that we should make discovery of: -- and what is the
reason? Why, we may reckon it very much to this, that we are not more improved
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; For the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Christ, well advanced, well grown, and improved, as a most
strong and effectual conducement to the growth in Love. When the Daughters of
Jerusalem had been well instructed concerning the Spouses Beloved, when they
had had an account of him, their hearts were exceedingly taken with him, and
then they would seek him with her: Whither is thy Beloved gone; O thou fairest
among women? Whether is thy Beloved gone, that we may seek him with thee? Thus
it is, if so be that we knew more of Christ, we would be more in the Love of
Christ. Truly, the motions of the Will, they will answer the sanctified light
of the understanding. Now, where there is but little light and Knowledge, it is
not to be expected that there should be very much heat. Did we but know more of
Christ,

First, of the loveliness of Christ, what an amiable person he is. Did we but
thoroughly know what a lovely Christ he is, according to the account that is
given of him in the Canticles, He is the chiefest of ten thousand, altogether
lovely: Take him all over, you will see nothing but loveliness in the Lord
Jesus Christ; he is lovely for his Name, for his Wisdom and Grace, all those
incomparable excellencies that discover themselves in him; consider but of
that: O he is the most lovely Person that ever was in the World, that ever
visibly conversed with the sons of men.

2. Consider him in his loveliness, so in his loveingness (I distinguish so)
his loveliness; the loveliness of his Person, and the lovingness of his Person;
the most loving Christ, of the most loving disposition that ever was in the
World, never any to be compared to Christ for Love; as full of love to poor
souls as ever his heart could hold, next to the love that he bare from all
Eternity to his Father, and to the Spirit, who are co-essential, and coequal,
coeternal with him; next to the love that he bears them, his love is set upon
the sons of men; he takes delight in the habitable parts of the World,
according to the account that is given of him, in Prove. 8. where Christ is set
forth unto us under the term and notion of Wisdom; says he, I was my Fathers
delight, and I came into the habitable parts of the World, and my delights were
with the sons of men: He had his delights from all Eternity with the Father,
and with the Spirit; and yet notwithstanding he was pleased to come out of the
bosom of his Father, and to take up his delights within the habitable parts of
the World, and with the sons of men: And what a condition did he find them in?
A company of ill-looking and unlovely creatures, as ever eye could behold. I
saw thee when thou wast in thy blood, cast out, to the loathing of thy person;
and yet that time was the time of love. I loved thee, and I gave a
demonstration of it, by doing so and so, according to what is expressed, E^. 16.
Why thus it is: -- God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son,
his only beloved Son. -- God the Son, he so loved the world, that he gave
himself for a wicked damned world; a company of wretches that had no love to
him, yet he loves them; and he was out of love to them, willing for to lay down
his life for them. And greater love has no man, as our Savior speaks in the
Gospel, than that a man lay down his life for his friend. For his Friend: I,
but what a love was this then, That one should come and lay down his life for
those that were Enemies? When we were enemies we were reconciled, and when we
had no strength, Christ came and shed his blood; and that by the shedding of
his blood, he might wash away the guilt of his Peoples iniquities: What a love
was this? O well might the Apostle fall upon admirings of it, in Ephesians. 3. he
prays that they might comprehend the heights, and depths, and lengths, and
breadths; and that they might know the love of Christ, which, says he, passes
knowledge. Weigh these things Brethren, and let them not pass away in a slight
manner, That (says he) you might know the heights. Why there are heights, and
depths, and breadths, and lengths in the love of Christ; and it is such a love
as passes knowledge; when we have known all we can of it yet it will transcend
our knowledge; why such a love Christ has impressed. Now consider; O, the the
love of Christ to poor sinners, that he should stick at nothing to do for them,
to suffer for them, to forego for them, to undergo for them: When the business
was under consideration, concerning the Redemption of the World; when it was
propounded to him, My Son, will thou undertake for a damned World, to save a
company of poor souls, that are like to perish eternally, unless that help come
in? Will thou undertake for them? Father, I will do it; I love them, and I will
do them all the good I can. -- I, but Son, If thou will undertake their cause,
thou must bear their guilt, thou must undergo their curse, thou must be put to
shame for them, thou must suffer and dye, and shed thy blood for them. --
Father, I am willing; Father, I delight to do thy Will; thy Law, O Father, is
in my heart. -- Why what a heartbreaking love is this? He sticks at nothing,
he does not engage to a dispute with the Father, and with the Spirit, and say
thus: Why should I undergo this smart, and pain, and torment, for a company of
wretches: Let them damn and perish, let them reap the fruit of their own evil
doings: Father, what have thou to object against me? I never offended thee; Why
should I be made an Offering and a Sacrifice for sin? -- Not a word of this,
but a most willing compliance with the Counsel of God, concerning the saving of
poor souls, and redeeming them from going down into the pit. What love was
here? O admirable love of our Lord Jesus Christ! -- Why now do but consider
this then: This love of Christ, this Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
loveliness of his Person, and the lovingness of his nature and disposition; and
what an enlarged heart of love, as to God, so to poor sinners. -- And consider,
what delight he takes to manifest his Love to us, and what longings there are
in him, that he might have all his People in Heaven, that they might know to
the full, that dear love that he has born to them from all Eternity. Why? If
these things were better known and digested, if we would not only slip and
away, but dwell upon the Meditation of these things, unquestionably it would
contribute most largely unto the promoting of love, we should not be so
dead-hearted unto Christ as we are; our fire of love would burn out more unto
God, unto Christ, than ever it is like to do, if so be that we were but more
improved in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. -- I commend
these things with much confidence, to the Consciences of every one of you,
whether that this Knowledge of our Lord Jesus, this blessed Knowledge, if it
were but more pursued, and if we had but more advancement in it, whether it
would not more improve our Faith, improve our Hope, improve our Repentance,
improve our Love to God, and the Lord Jesus, and of one to another.

And then again, The like we may speak concerning humility and meekness of
Spirit; for it comes to my thoughts, that Proverb of Solomon, to make use of it
here, upon occasion of this account that I give, concerning the Knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Solomon speaks of a gift of Knowledge, which prospers
which way soever it turns. Truly, so is this gift of Knowledge; were it is given
of special Grace, when it is not a notional Knowledge, but a heart-Knowledge,
for such a Knowledge I speak of; such a Knowledge as the Covenant of God's
Grace makes a conveyance of: For alas, I and others may preach a great deal of
light into your heads, and you may come to have the notions of these things,
and be never the nearer; but we speak of a heart-Knowledge of God in Christ
Jesus, according to what the Covenant makes conveyance of (as I said:) And I
say thus; That where there is heart knowledge given, it is such a gift as
prospers which way soever it turns, O the blessed benefit that comes over by
the heart-knowledge of our Lord Jesus, especially when there comes to be a due
improvement of it; as in the other respects, so in respect of meekness, and
humility of spirit. Alas, meekness and humility, it is a lovely Grace; but where
does it appear? we are lofty, and are far from a disposition that way, which
should discover it self. What Is the reason? -- Because of a defect in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. For thus: Had we but more of the Knowledge
of our Lord Jesus, there would not be that frowardness, and perverseness, and
unto wardness; and swelling of heart that commonly discovers it self, if we had
but a well improved, and a well digested Knowledge of our Lord Jesus. For
consider: -- What is there to ^e known of Christ? -- Why, he is another manner
of Christ than we take him to be, than we know him to be, or have a mind to
know: we do not know what a Christ he is, he is another manner of Christ than
you think he was: He was not a proud Christ, he was not a lofty spirited
Christ; he was meek, and gentle, and lovely, and of a most humble frame of a
most graciously condescending spirit: Learn of me (says he) Mat: 11. I am meek
and lowly: And, he gave most convincing proof and demonstration of it all
along, in his course and conversation in the World. Did we but know this, and
had but a more through knowledge of what a kind of Christ he is, it would
conduce to the meeking and humbling of our hearts and spirits, and make us to
argue thus: What a meek and humble Christ, and I a proud swelling-hearted
Wretch* -- why, how will this consist with my Profession? I profess the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and discover little or nothing of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus.
Surely Brethren, this would conduce much to the meekning and humbling of our
hearts.

And so for Patience, That Is another Grace, which we should not only have, but
have it in the increases and the improvements of it; and yet how little
discovers it self; how proud, and passionate, and waspish, and froward are we?
-- What Is the reason of this? -- Because we know no more of Christ, we have not
this heart-knowledge of Christ, to such a degree as we should press after. Did
we but know what a patient Christ he is* O! when he was reviled, he reviled not
again; and when he was reproached he bore it patiently; and he was led as a
Lamb before the Shearer, dumb, and opened not his mouth. Why, did we but
advance more in the hearty knowledge of our Lord Jesus, it would conduce very
much to the working of our hearts to patience, and to a good degree of
Patience. This Knowledge of our Lord Jesus, it would influence the Grace of
Patience, that we should be more conformable to Christ. And the Apostle, in
Heb. 12. he propounds this very consideration in order thereunto: says he, Let
us ^n with patience the race that is set before us: And that we may do so* Let
us look unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith; who for the joy that
was set before, him endured the Cross and despised the shame: He endured the
contradiction of sinners against him, Lest (says he) you be wearied and faint
in your minds. Look to this Jesus, know the temper of his Spirit, and what a
patient Christ he was, and what a heavenly Spirit he discovered: And so I say,
That the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus would contribute most strongly to such a
purpose.

7. And so for Heavenly-mindedness. What Is the reason that we are so apt to
dote upon the World, and upon these lying and vexing vanities here below? --
Why, because we know no more of Christ: If we were but more advanced in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we should be ^ch helped against
earthly-mindedness, and improve more in a heavenly frame of heart, and live
above the World. Why, do not you know what a Christ he was? what a heavenly
Spirit he had? how he lived in the World as a stranger? He set not his heart
upon this and that pleasure and profit, but minded his business; and he had an
eye to the glory that was to be revealed, and so he made it his great design,
that he might improve his time, and honor his Father: And he was at length
able to give this account, Ioh. 17. Father, I have glorified thee on the earth,
I have finished the work thou gave me to do. And now further, Glorify me
with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.
Father, I have lived in the World, not so much by choice, as upon the account
of Duty; and my heart is with thee, and my longing's after Heaven: Father,
glorify me with thy self, and bring me to thy Glory; and thus Christ's heart
was carried out. Now, had we but a well improved Knowledge of this, it would
contribute much to the promoting of a heavenly mind in us, and make us to think
with our selves, Do I know this to have been the gracious frame and spirit of
my Lord Jesus, whom I make a Profession of? And does it not concern me to
endeavor conformity to him, that I may express the like heavenly-mindedness
that Jesus Christ did? -- I might yet speak of other Graces: As,

8. Fear and Reverence of God. It Is a precious Grace, which receives much
increase by a well improved Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Let me but give an
instance of that, in Psalm. 2. where there is an account given of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, That God the Father has set his Son upon his holy hill
of Sion; That he has given the Heathen for his inheritance, the utmost parts
of the earth for his possession; That he has given him a rod of iron, with
which he will break in pieces his rebellious enemies, like a Potters vessel.
This is the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. This Knowledge,
when persons come to be well advanced in, and there comes to be a due
improvement of it, will contribute very largely to the promoting of a holy Fear
and Reverence of God, according to that which follows; Be wise now therefore, O
ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear;
rejoice ye with trembling, Kiss the Son. Kings, and Princes, and great Men, are
very apt to forget themselves; as if so be that there were none above them, as
if so be there were none to check and control them. You know how Pharaoh
carried himself; Who is the Lord? Ah! but there is a Lord above all Lords,
there is a King above all Kings, even the Lord Jesus Christ, whom God has set
to be King upon his holy hill of Sion. And the right Knowledge of Christ, the
well improved and advanced Knowledge of Christ, it will promote a holy fear,
and awe, and reverence of him, and of the great God, who has constituted and
appointed him Lord and King. I might speak largely to this Particular, but I Will
pass it by. Thus I have endeavored to make it appear to you in these
Particulars, How the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus, well improved, how it does
contribute to a growth in Grace.

I would now tell you this further, That the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, it is such a Knowledge as is most beneficial to us, in respect of
Gospel-Duties and Services, and does contribute very much to the lively
management of them: And therefore, it may well be required of Christians and
Believers, that they grow in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that
upon this very account, Because I say, that the more we know of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the more shall we advance in the lively performance of Gospel-worships,
and Duties, and Services, which the Lord requires of us. Alas, Brethren, it is
that which may well be matter of shame and mourning, to think how low we are;
as in Graces, so in gracious Performances, and in holy Services. What Is the
account that is to be given of our daily Services that we perform,
Sabbath-worships and Duties? Alas, what kind of Sabbaths do we keep? and what
kind of Prayers do we perform and offer up to God? what kind of Worships are
they that we present before the Lord* O! if we would but take an account of our
selves, we might see cause enough to fall a weeping over every D^ we perform:
When we come to attend the Ministry of the Word, and to do our Service to God,
it appears by men's carriages, what a looseness of spirit there is, an
unfixedness of spirit on God, and there is not the breathing after the
enjoyments of God, in the way of his Ordinances: -- And so for Prayer, and
other Services: What may be the reason of this? We may well reckon upon this,
It is because we are not more advanced in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, we have not heart-Knowledge so duly improved as it should be,
concerning our Lord Jesus. For, Brethren, this is (...) that we should know
concerning Christ, That his heart was upon his Work and business; and when he
prayed, he prayed as one that was in Heaven. And, O, what wrestlings of spirit
was there on his part with God! He prayed most earnestly, and, O how intent
upon the Duty of Prayer, when he had to do that, and when he was to Preach* O
with what intention of soul was that Service performed! And! when he had the
last (...) to keep* O with desire have I desired to keep this Pass^, O Father,
it is meat and drink to (...) to do thy W^ Thus it was with Christ* Now, if we
had but a well-digested Knowledge of this, it would make us ashamed of our
selves, and make us put on with more activity and vigor of spirit, thinking
with our selves, what a pattern we have in Christ.

And then, if we did but consider, That Christ is the great High Priest of our
holy (...), and that he has engaged himself on the behalf of his People, both
to procure their acceptance, and to vou^hsafe them assistance. Now, consider
but this; And these things we ought to know concerning Jesus our Lord, That it
is his undertaking to procure acceptance, and to give assistance; for now he
has all power in his hands, The power of the Spirit, to give strength to his
People, to enable them to make their prayers and supplications, and to perform
their Worships and Services; I will strengthen thee, I will help thee, I will
uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness; my Grace is sufficient for
thee. Thus Christ has signified concerning himself, for the comfort and
encouragement of his People.

And then withal, this is to be known concerning our Lord Jesus, That he
appears in Heaven before his Father, to promote their acceptance, and to plead
their Cause; and (as the High Priest) to present their Services, and to
sprinkle them with his own blood, and to desire the Fathers acceptance of them.
Now, if this were but duly known concerning Christ, and we had but a well
improved and digested Knowledge concerning this, that now I give you an account
of, O, how much would it conduce to the quickening up our hearts to a lively
performance of our Services, when we shall consider what an example we have in
Christ, of Duty and Service to God: And then, that he has undertaken to afford
assistance, and to procure acceptance; this would make us go on with more life
and vigor in the ways of Godliness.

And then, I would have told you farther, That there is all the reason in the
world Christians should endeavor a growth in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Because, as this Knowledge well improved, conduces to a judiciousness,
and to a well ordering of the Conscience, and to the increase of all the
Graces, and to the promoting of our Duty: so by a well improved Knowledge of
our Lord Jesus, we shall come to have the more kindly relish of
Gospel-priviledges, and suck the sweet of them, and come to know what there is
of comfort and soul-rejoycing to be found in these Privileges.

And then, this Knowledge well improved, O how will it conduce to bear
afflictions, to the incountering temptations, and enable the Soul to the well
ordering of a Gospel-conversation, to the glory of God.

SERMON. XIV.
I Shall pass by what was the last Day hinted to you, only now suggest some few
Particulars more; which, if we were but acquainted with the Knowledge of, we
should quit our selves better than we do, in this Gospel Worship and service of
Prayer.

As now, Did we but know, and seriously ponder upon this, That Christ himself
was very much in this Service, that he was a constant practiser, to his very
Death, of this Duty of Prayer: If this were but well considered, that Christ
was very much given to prayer; and if he could not have opportunities in the
day time, he would fetch it out in the night, and be in the night season
pouring out his soul before his Father. Thus it was with Christ, he was given
to Prayer, and his last breathings were breathings in a way of prayer, into his
Father's bosom.

And then consider this; this is that that is to be known concerning our Lord
Jesus, That he has had a deep experience of prayer, and of the difficulties of
it, and temptations which the soul is subject to meet withal in the management
of prayer; all this is known to Christ: So far as a holy nature could have
personal experience of such difficulties and such temptations, so far has our
Lord Jesus, in his own person, experimented this matter concerning prayer. Now,
the knowledge of this, the well digested knowledge of this, That Christ was a
man of prayer, and that he has had experience of prayer, and knows what there
is of difficulty in prayer, and what sore temptations hang upon prayer, and
what a desperate enemy the Devil is to prayer; he knows all this, and he has a
sense upon his heart, and a knowledge of all the struggling and wrestling in the
hearts and spirits of his praying People here upon earth. This is that that is
to be known concerning our Lord Jesus Christ; he has a deep sense of all the
strugglings and wrestlings of the spirits of his People here on earth, and is
perfectly knowing of all the opposition which they meet withal in the way of
prayer and supplication, and how the Devil does set himself against his Saints,
and what incounters they meet withal from unbelief, and the corruptions that
are within, how apt to fall under deep discouragement and despondency of
spirit: He knows all this, and to this purpose, that he might pity and
compassionate his People. O, this is that which is to be known concerning Jesus
Christ in Heaven, and even now he is in glory, that he has a sense of all this
upon his spirit, and is privy to every prayer that his poor humble
brokenhearted conflicting people do make up to God, and is at Gods right hand
engaged to stand their prayers in stead, and to promote the success of them,
and to take them from their hands, as the blessed high priest of their
profession, and to perfume them in his golden Sencer, with his odours, the
odours of his intercession. This is that that is to be known concerning our
Lord Jesus Christ; and, O how does this knowledge well digested, a soul being
well advanced in it, how will it find this Knowledge largely contributing to
the promoting of this Duty? Do but weigh these things in your Consciences,
whether this (...) not be a very great conducement, to the more lively managing
of our prayers; and that we would not trifle with God, when we are exercised in
such a Service.

And then again, for that noble Gospel-Service and Duty of Praise and Blessing
of God; The more the soul does improve and grow in the Knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, the more will there be of loveliness, and activity,
and inlargedness for the management of that. Truly, Brethren, it is that which
we have all cause to be deeply humbled for, That God blessed for ever has not
more large returns for his People, of praise, and thanks; and blessing, for all
that Grace that he has made to appear unto them; O how little is it that is
done to purpose in such a service! And what is the reason that we are not more
lively to such a purpose? that our hearts are not more enlarged to God, in a
way of blessing, and praising, and thanksgiving to him? We may well reckon it
to this, That we are not more in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; for this Knowledge of Christ our Lord, and of the Mysteries concerning
him, this is the Knowledge that will make the soul to be upon the wing,
mounting up with all inlargements of thankfulness and praise unto God: The more
the soul is taken up with the apprehensions of the Mysteries of the Gospel
concerning the Lord Jesus, the more will it be in admirings of Grace, the more
will it be in magnifyings of the God of all Grace.

Consider, This Knowledge, it is such Wine, as will make the lips of them that
are asleep to speak; ((...) (...) that expression which we have in Cant. 7. he
sp^ks there concerning our Savior) that is so^* and (...) that it would make
the lips of them that are asleep to speak. Oh! The Doctrine concerning our Lord
Jesus, if it were better known, it would spirit the soul, and make it to be
most active to such a purpose. You here have an account concerning the Angels:
There was upon the birth of Christ, an heavenly Host, and they were singing
praises unto God, Glory be to God on high. -- Upon what account? -- upon the
account of Jesus Christ, and the knowledge they had of Jesus Christ, and of
that glorious Mystery concerning Jesus Christ; the Angels were not able to
contain themselves. The Virgin Mary, in Luke 2. when she comes to have an
account of the Mystery concerning her Lord Jesus Christ, and the Grace of God
through him: How does she break out with all enlargement, My soul does magnify
the Lord; my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior; and so all along. O what
blessing and praising of God was there, on the part of a People that were well
instructed in the first establishing Apostolical constitutions! O what
inlargements were there in praising God, and magnifying him! -- And why? --
Upon the account of the Knowledge that they had of the glorious Mystery
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, and the account that was given in the
primitive Persecutions, concerning the Christians, That they would be in their
early singings and praisings of God. This was the account of the Christians,
under dreadful persecution, in the days of Trajan the Emperor, That they would
be early in the morning, singing, and praising, and blessing God. -- And upon
what account? -- Upon the account of this great and glorious Mystery,
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ. O! this is that that would fill the mouth
with Arguments, and it would wisely contrib^te to the promoting of ability
suitable to such Arguments, wherein to enlarge in blessing and praising God, our
hearts would not lie so dead upon us; we would be more lively than we are in
exalting God, magnifying his Name, did we but know more of our Lord Jesus, of
the Mystery which has been kept secret from Ages and Generations: but because
we do but sip of the Cup, have a little smattering Knowledge, and no well
digested Knowledge, and not duly improved, we come off so poorly as we do. O
consider the spirit of the Apostle Paul, how excellently it discovers it self;
as in the beginning of his Epistle to the Ephesians, Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; blessed be God that has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: In Christ; So the Apostle
Peter; O blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that has
begotten us unto a lively hope, of an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and
that fades not away; and all by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Thus the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, O it will spirit the
soul, and make it lively to the uttermost, in publishing the praises of the
most high God. -- I instance only in Ephesians. 3. what the Apostle is praying on
their behalf, That they might be able to comprehend with all Saints, the
height, and depth, and breadth, and length, and know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge; so that you may be filled with all the fullness of God. --
And then mark what follows: Now, says he, unto him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power
that works in us; unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, th^ughout
all ages, world without end, Amen. Paul (...) not hold, his spirit was so full;
he was like a vessel, that must either have a vent, or burst it self: O, he
being upon the meditation of this glorious Mystery concerning Christ, and the
Doctrine of Christ; why, says he, Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly: O how his heart was filled with praises and admirings of God upon
the account of Christ.

And there is one thing more now comes to mind, wherein you may see the spirit
of a Saint in the proper frame of it; when there comes to be a due improvement
of the Knowledge of Christ: when the Apostle Paul, in 1 Timothy 1. had been making
mention of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and comes to express his
knowledge, and sense of that Grace, according to what you have expressed, and
held forth in that Chapter: says he, The Grace of our Lord was exceeding
abundant, with Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus; and so he goes on,
This is a Faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance; that Jesus Christ
came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief: howbeit, for this
cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might show forth all
long suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to
everlasting life. Paul had been thus upon the serious meditation of this
knowledge concerning our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark you now what his spirit rises
up unto, in the close of the Chapter: Now, says he, unto the King eternal,
having but made mention of Christ, and spoken something concerning Christ, and
given some account of his knowledge of the mystery concerning Christ: Mark how
he breaks out into this acknowledgment; Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal,
Invisible, the only wise God, be Honor and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen; and
this comes in only occasionally, in the way of a digression: For he intermits
the prosecution of the Argument he had in hand, and falls upon this by way of a
digression; as if he should say; O, I cannot fall upon the mention of our Lord
Jesus, and of the mystery concerning him; I cannot be upon the meditation of
that knowledge which is to be had of Christ Jesus our Lord; but (says he) my
heart must be breathing out in a way of praise and blessing of God, admiring
the riches of his Grace. -- And thus would it be Brethren, if we were but set
to it, to advance in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: O, it
would enlarge our hearts, as unto prayer, so unto thanksgiving, and blessing of
God.

I add yet further; O, this knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, it
is a knowledge that Christians should endeavor to grow and advance in; for it
is by great growth in this, they will come to be the more happily accomplished
for the performing of the service of Preaching, and Hearing: I join these two
together; Preaching, and Hearing of the Word of God. And you may consider, how
a well-improved knowledge of our Lord Jesus, would conduce most strongly to the
provoking both of ministerial Preaching, and likewise of Christian Hearing, and
attending upon the Doctrine which is to be made known unto us, according to the
Commandment of the Everlasting God.

For Preaching work; O consider now, that the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, that knowledge that is to be had of him, well advanced, and
improved, will contribute exceedingly to the most lively management of this
service. Alas, it is accounted in the World but a low service, and many times,
with too much lowness of spirit, performed by those that profess to be called
to the performance of it. O, but whence is it, but from the want of a
well-grown knowledge of our Lord and Savior: For consider Brethren, this is
that that we are to know concerning our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; that the
Word and Gospel, which is the subject matter of our Preaching, and your
Hearing, (I join these two together, Preaching-work, and Hearing-work:) Now the
word, which is the subject matter of a Ministers Preaching, and of a Beeleevers
Hearing: This word, it comes out of the very heart of God, out of the blessed
bosom of the Eternal God. And as a precious token of that love and respect
that he bears to his Son, he has given out this word out of his own breast and
bosom; he has given it, and committed it as a trust unto his Son. (Will you
consider this,) That this everlasting Gospel, this word of Salvation, which is
the subject matter of our Preaching, and your Hearing; it is given as a
testimony of the Fathers Love; it is given to Christ: observe that expression
in Joh. 17. in the Prayer that our Savior makes unto his Father; says he,
ver. 8. I have given unto them the words which thou gave unto me: thou gave
the words to me first, and then, says Christ, I have given these words unto
them: our Lord professes, before all the World he makes this open profession;
says he, my Doctrine is not mine: It Is not mine, considered as Mediator; but
it is the Doctrine of my Father, which my Father has given me, and which he
has entrusted me with, to make known unto the World, and to communicate to my
Disciples, that by them the World may have the Knowledge of him: Consider this,
that God the Father, the Great Jehovah, He gives this Word, this Doctrine, unto
his Son Jesus Christ. Well, this is that that is to be known concerning our
Lord Jesus Christ; that the Words and Doctrine, is that which is given as a
gift by the Father unto him: and so likewise you have it, in Rev. 1. the
Revelation of Jesus Christ; -- how came it to be his? Consider that; it is
resolved thus, which God gave unto him, to show unto his Servants which must
shortly come to pass: and then he sent, and signified by his Angel unto his
servant John: -- I, but Christ has a Revelation; who gave it him? God gives it
him: God has given Christ all the whole platform, and frame of Doctrine that
concerns the Church of God, his elect ones, and called ones, from the beginning
unto the end of the World; God the Father has given this to the Son.

2. This is that that is to be known concerning Christ; that this Word and
Mystery which is given of the Father to Christ, his ear has been opened to
listen to it, most attent upon it; according to that expression, in Psalm. 40.
Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not: Christ's ear was not much attent
upon that, Sacrifice and offerings thou would not; But mine ear have thou
opened: Thou have opened mine ear to another Doctrine, to another Word, which
concerns the salvation of souls, by a sacrifice that must be offered up by me:
this mine ear is open to. And so you have it, in Isa. 50. The Prophet there
speaks in the person of Christ; he wakeneth morning by morning, and (says he)
he makeneth mine ear to hear, as the Learned; The Lord God has opened mine
ear, and I was not rebellious: The Father gives the word, delivers it him; and
the ear of the Son, our Mediator, is open to him.

3. You are to know concerning Christ, that this Word and Doctrine, which is
the subject matter of our Preaching, and your Hearing, as it is given to Christ
by the Father, and as his, ear is open to it, so it comes with all delight and
complacency into his heart; as you shall find in Psalm. 40. First he says, Thou
have opened mine ear, and not only so, Thou have bored mine ear; and not only
so, but, O Father, thy Law is in mine heart, and I delight to do thy will: O,
this word that thou have given me, it is the joy of my heart, it is the rejoicing
of my soul, that there should be the contrivance of such a word given to me,
and entrusted with me; mine ear hears it as a most melodious sound; my heart
entertains it; O my God, thy Law is in my heart: O, its the joy and rejoicing
of my heart, to think that ever thou should trust me with such a Doctrine as
this.

4. Consider that this word, the Word and Doctrine of the Father, thus given to
Christ, unto which his ear was opened, and to which his heart gave such joyful
entertainment to; This Word and Doctrine; Christ, he comes to be commissioned
from the Father to Preach, and to make it known: He has not only an ear to
hear it, and a heart to embrace it, but he must have likewise a mouth opened to
publish and proclaim it; and this he is commissioned to. This is to be known
concerning our Lord Jesus, that he is commissioned of God, to make a solomn
publication and promulgation of this Word, that it may be made known to the
World. And therefore you have it, in Isa. 50. The Lord has given me, not only
to hear as the Learned, but to speak as the Learned. First, he has the ear of
the Learned to hearken to it; and then it is expressed, that he has the tongue of
the Learned, that he may be able to speak a word in season to a weary soul.
This is the commission that God has given him, that he should Preach, and make
this everlasting Gospel, this word that comes out of the Father, that he should
make it known to the World: and the truth is Brethren, this that I say, is of a
truth to be known, and acknowledged of us: That Preaching work, the Preaching
of the everlasting Gospel, and word of Reconciliation, it is more Christ's work
than the work of any man in the World. True it is, the base, beggarly World,
and the imbased spirits of the people in the World; they look upon
Preaching-work, as a poor, low, mean service; and look upon those that are
employed about it, as persons that are little to be regarded. And this is the
good entertainment that the Ministers of Christ, and of the Gospel, have ever
had in the World. Generally they look upon a Preacher, and upon a Preachers
work, as a poor, low piece of service; the person mean, and his employment
little to be regarded: I, but if matters were well known, this would be
apprehended; that the preaching of the Word, is most properly the work of
Christ himself; He that is the great Mediator, He that was in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God; took upon him the form of a
servant; and he was pleased to accept of a commission from his Father, to be a
Preacher; and to preach the everlasting Gospel. As soon as he had suffered, and
was risen again, he came and preached to the World, as he did to his Disciples
before his Resurrection, and so likewise before his sufferings. He came with
commission from the Father, to preach the Word which was given him out of the
bosom of the Father: That Word, which is the subject matter of our Preaching,
and your Hearing; it is the word which Jesus Christ is engaged to preach, and
publish, and make known to the World: and I say again, it is more Christ's
work, than it is the work of any man in the World: and those that are called
out to this service, they are called out to the work of our Lord Jesus Christ.

5. And then add this further; that this Lord Jesus Christ, he has that
interest in the Father, which none in all the World has besides, to the
purpose of fetching out whatsoever there is of further Mystery, and of
discovery to be made concerning the Counsel of God; the Word, the Doctrine, the
Eternal Counsel, which lay hid in the breast and bosom of God from all
Eternity: that Counsel, that Word, and Doctrine, which has so much of luster
in it; Christ has this privilege above all creatures in Heaven and Earth,
above Angels, Saints glorified in Heaven, militant on Earth; Christ has this
privilege above them all, to fetch out, out of the Fathers treasury, that
which no Angel, nor Saint in Heaven or Earth, has the privilege to meddle
withal; Christ has obtained this of the Father, he has this interest in the
heart of the Father, that he may with boldness come, and take out whatsoever
there is of secret Counsel in the Fathers bosom, that concerns the Church of
God to the end of the World; He may be bold to come and challenge this as his
privilege; Father, if there be any secret yet undiscovered to the World, I
claim the privilege to be acquainted with it, and to have the discovery of it,
and to make it known unto the World. This is the privilege belongs to Christ.

As now to give an Instance, in Rev. 5. where you find there mention made of a
Book in the right hand of him that sat on the Throne, a Book written within
and without, and on the backside sealed with seven seals; a book full of
Mystery, but a closed book; nay, a sealed book, nay, sealed with seven seals:
Hereupon the Proclamation is made with a loud voice by an Angel, Who is worthy
to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof? Here Is a book full of
Mystery, and matters of high concernment to the Church of God, to the end of
the World: Who is worthy in heaven or earth to take this book out of the right
hand of him that sits upon the Throne? The Proclamation is made, and the
account is given. Thus, no man in heaven or earth, nor under the earth, was
able to open the book, nor look thereon, not so much as to look upon it. This
goes to the heart of John, a great Favorite of Christ, a dear Servant of God;
he for his part is astonished at it, and falls a weeping bitterly, That there
should be none found worthy to open the book. -- Mark what follows, -- One of
the Elders said unto me, weep not; behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the
root of David has prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals
thereof; and he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat
upon the Throne. He came and took the book: Here was the privilege of Christ
above Angels and glorified Saints, or any in heaven and earth; there was such a
part of the counsel of God which was hid in his breast and bosom, that none
durst venture upon for to make a search into. The Lion of the tribe of Judah,
the Lord Jesus, the Lamb that was slain, he was worthy; and so they come with
their acclamations afterward; they fall down before the Lamb, having Harps and
golden Vials, and they sing a new song, worthy, worthy is the Lamb that was
slain; thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: And
then they break out into magnifying and praising of God; Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing; and the four beasts said, Amen: and the four
and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever.
Why now this is to be known concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, he has this
privilege to take the book out of the hand, to go into the bosom of the
Father, to open the cabinet of the Fathers most secret counsel; he has this
privilege above all creatures in heaven or in earth. This is to be known
concerning Christ.

6. Yet further, This Word and Doctrine, which is the subject matter of our
preaching, and your hearing; it is such a Doctrine as Christ is marvellously
pleased with the wise judicious publication and preaching of it, and with the
humble attention upon it; and therefore Christ is perfect, and he has promised
to be present to the end of the World in his Churches, and in his
Congregations, and with his Ministry, and with his under Preachers: For as I
said before, preaching work is principally his; Christ is the great Preacher,
and all that are employed in the work, they are but under him, and they do his
work principally; he is present with them, observant of them; he has promised
to give his assistance to them, and to take knowledge of all discouragements
that they meet with; as we see in the case of Paul: When Paul was upon his
preaching work, he meets with very hard usage; the Lord appears to him, and
does as it were clap him upon the shoulder, and says, Be of good cheer Paul,
Thou have testified of me here at Jerusalem, and in such and such a place, I
will stand by thee, and none shall hurt thee. O Christ is present with his
servants, and he delights to see his work graciously and judiciously managed,
and to see his People that attend upon him, to give heed to his Doctrine. The
Lord Jesus he takes Knowledge how his work is entertained, how its preached and
heard, and how people behave themselves under the dispensations of it. Why now,
good now beloved, consider this; These things are the things that we are to
know concerning our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, if this were well considered, would
it not contribute exceedinly to the promoting of preaching and of hearing work?
Those that are called out to this ministration, O if they had but the well
digested Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, would not this spirit them, and
make them to look to the cause they manage? how they manage this trust that is
committed to them from Christ, and how they deal with this blessed Doctrine
that came out of the bosom of the Father; and if you did but consider, that you
come to hear the Word that is given of the Father to Christ, which is in the
heart of Christ, and which he ingages himself to give new life unto; and how he
takes notice what entertainment his Word has, etc. If you did but know this,
certainly there would be other manner of hearing than ordinarily there is. Thus
now I have spoken concerning that.

I shall now go on, and let you know, That by growing in the Knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Believers they come to be exceedingly advanced:
As for the other Services that I have been speaking of, as Gospel-Duties, in
Prayer and Praising God, in Preaching and Hearing the everlasting Word, that
came out of the bosom of the Father: So by the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, we come to be exceedingly advantaged for that great work
of mortification, and of self-denial. To join these two together,
Selfmortifying work, -- Self-denying work. Alas, Brethren, how hardly are we
brought to these Services? And when we set upon them, alas, how awkward, and
how untowardly do we apply to the management of it. -- And why? Alas, because
we are so deficient in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; were there a
well improved Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Did you but know
what a self-denying person he was, and how justly be may require self-denying
at the hands of his People: If we did but consider that this Jesus Christ, he
was from Eternity, God with God; he might have lain warm in the bosom of his
Father, in the dear and blessed bosom of his Father; he might have lain there
and delitiated himself, and kept out of all the storms and tempests of the
World, and might have enjoyed himself with sweetest delight in his Fathers
bosom. O what a self-denying Christ was here! That he should come and leave his
Father's bosom, and be content to expose himself to the difficulties and
hardships of the World, to undergo storms and tempests. Mark what the Apostle
speaks, in Romans 15. Let every one of us please his neighbor, etc. For (says
he) even Christ pleased not himself. He did not set his heart upon pleasing
himself, but that he might please his God, and profit his People here below;
even Christ (says he) pleased not himself. O, a self-denying Christ; and if
this were well known, it would promote self-denying work in us: -- And then
sinmortifying work. O, we are hardly brought to it, to wound and slay our
corruptions, and to be ever and non digging down our Walls, and ever and anon
to be boring in the sides of this or that corruption. This is his hard work to
us; but had we but a well improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to know
that sin and corruption, it is one of the great enemies that he came into the
World to encounter with^l, and to set it under his fear; -- and he was
manifested upon this account, according to that of the Apostle, in 1 John 5.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works
of the Devil: He was nailed upon the Cross, that he might have our old man
crucified with him. Why if we had but a well digested Knowledge of these
things, concerning our Lord Jesus, it would facilitate the business, and make
us set upon it with activity and enlargement of soul.

And so for that great Gospel-Service of resisting the Devil: That Is another
great work that is required of Believers. Now, if we had but a well improved
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, O how would it conduce to the lively
management of that great service, and make us not to be afraid to look all the
powers of darkness in the face. Did we but know that our Lord Jesus has
conquered the Devil, the Prince of the World; he has led him after as a slave,
he has the Devil in a chain, and all the powers of darkness at command:
therefore, upon the knowledge of this, how resolute may a Christian be, to make
opposition to the Prince and powers of darkness, knowing that the Lord Jesus
has spoiled Principalities and Powers.

And then for that great Gospel-Service, of yielding up in the subjection to
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which is the thing that the world does so
much stick at, and make opposition to, and say, We will not have this man to
rule over us: No, let us rather break his bonds asunder, and cast away his
cords from us. Oh, but Brethren, this well improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, it would facilitate this great Service, and make the heart free to come
up to it, willing to give its neck to Christ, and to subject to his yoke and
Government. When we shall come to know this concerning Christ, That God the
Father has anointed him, and set him as King upon his holy hill of Sion, and
that there is a Kingdom appointed to him: and the day will come, when in
despite of Princes, and Powers, and Rulers, and all the mighty ones in the
World, though they combine themselves together, yet God will give the Kingdom
to his Son: The time will come, when the Kingdoms of the World shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.
This is that that is to be known concerning our Lord Jesus Christ; the Lord
shall rule and reign, and all his enemies shall be made his footstool. Now, if
this were well digested, it would make the heart to be free to yield up it self
to him: O, this is the King that I would yield subjection to; but not in a way
of rejecting of Kings and Governors: O, but Christ is my King, and God has
set him at his right hand, and all his enemies shall be made his footstool. Now
I say, the well digested knowledge of these things, would contribute
exceedingly to every Gospel-Duty; O, how would this Knowledge of Christ, be as
oil to the wheels, to make them run most swiftly and speedily in the ways of
God.

There are other things that I would have spoken to, to which I would fain have
given a dispatch. Though indeed we are bucketting-up out of a full Fountain,
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, O, it is the precious
Knowledge that our souls should be delighted to be acquainted with. O, how will
it conduce to help in suffering and resisting of temptations, and afford
comfort in all our privileges.

As Justification, That Is one of the great privileges of the Gospel. Now,
alas, we lose much of the comfort of it, by reason of our not being thoroughly
acquainted with the Mystery concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, because we have
not a well improved Knowledge of Christ. O, did a soul but know this, That its
Justification did depend upon the Justification of Christ; if he be justified,
you shall be such to be justified; and if he be not justified, you will never
be justified, your Justification will come to nothing. Now, the Knowledge of
this, concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, that he is perfectly justified, and
according to a legal Justification. Here Is the comfort of it, That Christ is
justified with a legal justification; God according to the strictness of his
Justice, has given up a Justification of his Son, according to that
expression, Isa. 50. It is God that justifies me: And God justifies Christ
with a legal Justification, and gives him a full acquittance; and gives this
account of him, That he has fulfilled all righteousness. Now, Believers
Justification, which is of Grace, depends upon Christ's Justification, which is
according to the Law, or of his having a Justification according to the Law,
upon the account of his fulfilling of all righteousness. Now, if the soul comes
to know this, That Christ is fully justified with a legal Justification, O how
will this make a Believer to say with triumphing of soul, I know whom I have
believed, I have believed on him who is justified with a legal Justification.

SERMON. XV.
HAving in the close of the last Argument, begun to speak concerning
Gospel-priviledges, and how much our growth in the Knowledge of Christ will
promote the comfort of those Privileges, I shall now proceed a little further
with you in that Argument, in making it more fully clear to you: That as ever
we desire to suck the sweet of Gospel-Priviledges, to have our souls refreshed
with them, as with breasts of consolation, that we may find them to be as
streams from Lebanon, as wine that is able to make the lips of them that are
asleep to speak. It concerns us exceedingly for to endeavor and advance in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall never be able so fully, justly to
value the Privileges of the Gospel, nor so kindly to relish the comforts of
these Privileges, if we do not well understand the Mystery concerning growth
in Grace, and be well improved in the Knowledge of Christ.

I touched a little upon that great benefit that comes over to us, of
Justification: That great Privilege; indeed such a benefit as is beyond all
valuation. O that we would but make it our work and business to search into it,
to labor that we may understand it, what is the proper interpretation of the
Justification of a sinner; the Scriptures speak of it, and they invite us to be
well studied in it; for a sinner, a guilty sinner, chargeable with a world of
wickedness, liable to a hell of wrath and vengeance, deserving to be
everlastingly cursed of God, and to be cast under everlasting destruction, from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: A poor guilty soul
that has been, it may be, for many, many years wallowing in filth and mire of
sin, weltring in blood, and has been soaking and rotting in his dung; such a
poor creature that is laden with iniquities, and whose Conscience lies under
deepest and most dreadful guilt; for such a poor creature, yet to have an eye
of compassion opened upon him, a look of favor, and when he might justly have
expected to hear this dreadful doom and sentence past upon him; thou art a
guilty malefactor, thou have committed high treason against the Crown and
Dignity of the great God, and I judge thee to be suffering of the vengeance of
eternal fire; I adjudge thee to be cast into prison, and to lie under chains,
and to be everlastingly sweltring under the unsupportable weight of my wrath
and indignation. Whereas a poor soul might justly expect to have such a
sentence past upon it, yet for God to say, This poor soul that is guilty of so
much Rebellion against me, I do freely forgive; and all the sins that were
committed by him, from first to last, shall never be charged upon him; nothing
of all that guilt that has been contracted by him, shall be reckoned to him,
but I will discharge him freely, and he shall have no more conscience of sin,
he shall be as if he had never startled a tittle from the perfect rule of
Righteousness: I will give him a full discharge, and he shall stand right in
Court, and be able to make a challenge to men and devils, and say, Who shall
lay any thing to my charge? It is God that justifies. O the pretiousness of
this Gospel-priviledge! And it will be known one day, of what precious import
it is. Why this is Justification, Gospel-Justification; for one that (I say)
has been plunged into the deepest gulf of guilt, to be fully acquitted of all;
and the^ is nothing of all that ever has been done by him, of wickedness and
transgression, that shall be charged upon him, or reckoned unto him. Wh^ ^ow
the comfort of this Privilege it is exceedingly promoted by a well improved
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we do but consider.

First, That the Foundation of a poor sinners Justification, is laid in the
Justification of Christ himself: For if he, who undertook on the behalf of
sinners, had not been justified himself, never had any soul been justified, no
not to the end of the World. The Justification of a sinner, it stands upon the
foundation of the Justification of our Lord Jesus Christ. He was justified
himself, and by his being justified, the sinner comes to be justified.

And his Justification, it is a legal Justification. The Justification of a
sinner is an Evangelical, a Gospel-Justification; but the Justification of
Jesus Christ it is a legal Justification, he is justified by works, he is
justified by the Law, he has fulfilled the Law, both in a way of doing, and in
a way of suffering, both ways: And so his Justification, it is a legal
Justification; and in virtue of this Justification, a poor sinner comes to have
his Justification, which is Evangelical. This is now the advantage that comes
over to a soul by a well improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus; it may bear upon
this, That it is and shall be for ever justified, because its Justification
depends upon the Justification of Jesus Christ, whose Justification comes over
to him in a legal way, and it is perfect and complete, so that strictest Justice
can take no exception against.

And then add this withal, that by the knowledge, of our Lord Jesus ^rist, the
comfort of our Justification is excee^gly promoted, because there is this to be
reckoned to the knowledge of Christ, that he stands engaged to see to it; that
all those, whose cause he has undertaken, and in whose behalf he has engaged
himself; it lies upon him to see to it, that their Justification do proceed,
and that it be vindicated, and it be maintained to them: this is that that we
have to know concerning Jesus Christ, that it lies upon his hand to see to it;
that all those that he has given himself for, may be fully and freely
discharged, that there be nothing objected against them, nor may lie against
them in Court: This is that which lies upon the hand of Christ for to do; and
to this very purpose it is, that he now being ascended on high, and set down on
the Right Hand of the Majesty in Heaven: this is that which he now ingages to;
He appears in Heaven before God, to this very purpose, that he might maintain
the Justification of his people, his believing ones, that he may maintain it to
them, and that they may have the comfort of it. Mark you how the Apostle
reasons to such a purpose, Romans 8. ver. 28, 29. says he, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect; it is God that Iustifies, who shall condemn?
it is Christ that died: -- I, but what of that, that he died; why, if so be
that he be not risen again, how can God be just in justifying? I, but says he,
yea, rather that is risen again; he brings it in with a yea rather, who is even
at the Right Hand of God, and makes Intercession for us: This is a Believers
plea, upon the account of Christ's engaging of himself, by dying, and rising,
and interceding, appearing to make cession; this is the plea; Christ comes to
stand forth before God, on the behalf of his believing ones, that their
Justification may be maintained to them. And truly Brethren, were it not that
the Covenant is ordered in all things, and sure; and that the Mediator of the
Covenant, our Lord Jesus Christ, is thus engaged with the Father, in the behalf
of his Redeemed ones. Alas, what woeful breakings would there be upon our
comforts? I, and what indeed would become of our Justification? A justified
soul repents, and comes to be pardoned, and is acquitted, and the poor soul
turns again to folly, and renews his transgression by performing new acts of
disobedience: what would become now of a soul in such a case? you know how it
was with David, and Peter, and other poor souls; they take a course being
justified, to unjustifie themselves, and for to blot out their pardon, casting
themselves under new guilt: what would become of a poor creature in such a
case? Alas, I had indeed the forgiveness of all my sins past; I, but I have
been upon new transgressions, I have broken with God again; and what if God
should now break with me? I have pardoned thee formerly, but thou have
forfeited thy pardon. I told you thus, sinner, I will discharge thee of all thy
sins that ever were committed by thee; but look thou to it, I will speak peace
to thee, but turn thou no more to folly: so the Prophet speaks in the Psalm,
and Christ to the man, Thou art made whole, I, but go thy ways, and sin no
more; look to it, that thou sin more. -- -- I, but, says the poor soul, alas,
I have sinned again, I have turned to folly, I have broke with God, and what
will become of me now? Why here is now the comfort; Christ, he lives for ever at
God's Right Hand, and he is therefore able to save to the utmost, those that
come unto God by him, Heb. 7. because he ever lives to make intercession: He
pleads with the Father, why Father, my blood is fresh still, I plead my blood
still; the merit of my blood: Father, I shed my blood, to satisfy thy Justice
for all the sins that ever were, or ever should be committed. Father, this poor
creature has broke with thee; I, but my Father, I have not broke with thee;
consult my blood, thou will find, that that blood of mine has made
satisfaction for this, and that, and the other transgression. Thus we are to
conceive concerning our Lord Jesus Christ: and so a poor believing soul,
knowing, and understanding the mystery concerning Jesus Christ, with a
well-improved knowledge, may plead this, and apply still to that blood, and
bear upon the representation which the Lord Jesus makes of his blood and
meritorious sacrifice to the Father: plead this, and bear upon this, and so
shall he come to be maintained in his justified estate. Truly Brethren, these
are the greatest things that ever God did make known to the World, and they are
matters of the highest importance that possibly can be made known unto us, and
therefore we have reason to consider of them, and should set our hearts to
this, that we may come to have a more due apprehension of them: and so the
Apostle argues most preciously, in 1 Ioh. 2. when he had spoken before
concerning the blood of Jesus Christ, that it cleanses from all sin, there is
your Justification: why then, says the Apostle, my little children, These
things write I unto you, that you sin not: You have cleansings by the blood of
Jesus, and free Justification from the guilt of all your transgressions: this
is a blessed Doctrine, as if he should say, and this is that which will fill up
your joy, to think that there has been such a blood shed for you, as cleanses
you from all your sins. Why now it stands you upon to look to it, that you do
not sin against this blood, nor infer upon it, therefore we will be the more
bold to sin; no, God forbid it should be so: therefore, says he, These things
write I unto you, that you sin not: O, but the poor creature may reply, and
say, Alas, you write to us that we sin not; but how can it be but that we sin,
carrying about with us such a body of sin; having such cursed principles, lying
open to so many temptations? How shall we be able to stand, and to keep up from
being prevailed upon by temptation, so, as not to be drawn to sin: I, but then
here is the relief; if it be the purpose and bent of your hearts not to sin, but
to walk suitably to the Grace of the Gospel; why then take comfort in this, If
any man sin, we have an Advocate. If any man sin, why we have had a sacrifice*
I, but that sacrifice now cease to be offered: -- so it does, and Christ will
never offer any more sacrifice, he will never come upon the Cross again; He
will never shed blood more; He will never come into the World again to dye, as
he did at first. The poor soul may argue thus; O, but alas, Christ will never
suffer more; if we sin, and break with God, what shall we do? I but, says he,
Though we have no more sacrifice for sin, no more sacrificings; yet there is a
standing Advocation: there is the comfort, as the Apostle holds it out. -- --
But this is spoken to poor humble souls, whose purpose is not to sin, and yet
through infirmity, sometimes they do miscarry. This is spoken only for the
relief of those, and not to imbolden any proud wretch in a way of wickedness.
Why, if any man sin, though we have no more sacrifice; and indeed, blessed be
God, and to the praise of Jesus Christ be it spoken, there needs no more
sacrificing, he has sacrificed enough, he has done that once for all, which
is sufficient for all; he has done more by once shedding of blood, he has
done that that all the bloods that ever were shed from the beginning of the
World, were never able to accomplish: there is but one sacrifice, I, but there
is a standing Advocation. This is the comfort, and this is that that maintains
the Justification of Believers; I, it does; it maintains the Justification of
Believers, that there is a standing Advocate, a standing Intercession
performed; and Christ still is taking off, as the poor sinner is drawing on:
This now is the benefit that comes by a well-improved Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: but to pass from that.

Consider now what reason there is, that we should endeavor a growth in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Because this Knowledge does so strongly contribute to the promoting of the
comfort of the privilege of Adoption; that is another great privilege of the
Gospel. Adoption, truly this, as the former; and so all other privileges of
the Gospel; alas, we are not affected with it as we ought to be. You would
think it a great matter for a great Monarch, a mighty Potentate in the World,
for to look upon a poor beggarly creature, a beggars child that is cast out, and
has none to look after him; to take him up from the dunghill, from his
beggarly, base, and sordid condition; to take him up, and Adopt him for his
son, and to Estate him in great Possessions, to settle him upon them, and to
own him to such a purpose. It was a great matter for Pharaohs Daughter to Adopt
Moses for her child: poor Moses, whose Father and Mother durst not keep him in
their house; they turned him out, cast him upon the River in a Basket of
Bullrushes; this course was taken with Moses. Pharaohs Daughter she spies the
basket, and finds the Babe, and poor Babe, weeping with tears upon his face in
that condition; and she takes up this Babe, and looking upon it as a lovely
child, she adopts it; though in a perishing condition, yet she takes this child
and adopts it for her own; this shall be my child. This now was a great matter,
and a thing to be reckoned upon as a very high act of Grace. O, but what is
this to that act of Grace, that the great Majesty of heaven performs on the
behalf of poor sinful sons and daughters of men? That he should look upon them
in their most loathsome condition and state, and should please to set his love
upon them, these base born children, beggars brats (for so we are all) a seed
of rebellion; they are a generation of men and women that come from a bitter
root, they are such as the soul of God might abhor; yet for the Lord's sake, O
these beggars brats, these contemptible creatures, these ill-looking deformed
people, yet notwithstanding I will set my love upon them, I will love them
freely, I will adopt them for my children, and they shall be mine, and I will
estate them in great and large Possessions, I will own them, I will not be
ashamed of them, to be called their Father, and to call them my children. A
wonderful thing it is, to consider of the privilege of Adoption. I, but now,
by the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, when it comes to be a well grown
Knowledge, when we come to know that that is to be known concerning Jesus
Christ, this will exceedingly advance the comfort of this privilege of
Adoption: As will appear thus.

First of all, We are to consider that a Believers Adoption, it is founded in
Christ; and the foundation of it, it is laid in the Blood, and Death, and
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. We are said to be the Sons of God by faith in Jesus
Christ, as the Apostle speaks: It Is by faith in Jesus that we come to have this
Adoption; and we are to know, that all that are the adopted of God, they are a
generation that springs out of the very blood and bowels of Jesus Christ.
Methinks it is worthy observing, that which we have in Isa. 53. compared with
Isa. 54. In the 53. you have an account in a Prophetical way, of the sufferings
of Christ, and of his blood sheding. It pleased the Father to bruise him, v.
10. He has put him to grief. Well, what follows upon this? He shall see the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Now mark you, what is this travel?
Observe what follows in Chap. 54. Sing, O barren, thou that did not bear,
break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that did not travel with child;
for more are the children of the desolate, than the children of the married
Wife, says the Lord: Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth
the curtains of thine habitations; spare not, lengthen thy cords, and
strengthen thy stakes; for thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the
left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles. And thus the Prophet goes on.
Here now upon the Sacrifice and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus, there comes to
spring up a numerous Issue, which springs up out of his blood; he shall see his
seed, and be satisfied; there shall be a seed that shall be raised up out of
his very blood and bowels. And so likewise in Psalm. 22. the Prophet having in
the former part set forth unto us the sufferings of Christ, he gives us in the
close of the Psalm, an account of the fruit that springs up out of these
sufferings: Says he, A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord
for a generation; they shall come and declare his righteousness unto a people
that shall be born, that he has done this. He has brought about a seed, he
has raised up out of his own blood and bowels, a seed that shall be accounted
to the Lord for a Generation. O, this is the benefit that comes by Christ. And
mark you this, By the right Knowledge of our Lord Jesus, we have this comfort
concerning Adoption, That as he pleads on the behalf of his People their
Justification, and maintains them in that; so he pleads their Adoption, and his
blood it is that keeps them fast to God, so as they shall never be unchilded
again.

And then again, This is that that we are to know concerning our Lord Jesus
Christ, That it is he that gives them this privilege of Adoption, and puts
them into the actual possession of it, as in that, 1 Ioh. 12. As many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God. He gave them the
privilege to become the Sons of God, and to enjoy this privilege: Why this is
that we are to know concerning our Lord Jesus.

And with all consider this, O, this is that which makes the comfort of
Adoption to spring out, to ^low forth to the refreshing of the souls of the
Saints, to think that their Adoption it is such a privilege, as that upon the
account thereof, as they come for to be Children to the Father, so they come to
be Brethren to Christ. For mark you, Christ himself is a Son; says the
Apostle, Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God. Here Is love indeed; and it appears so to us,
because by being made the Sons of God, we come to be in a condition like unto
Christ? -- For, what is he? He is the Son of the Father, he is the begotten of
the Father, the only begotten, in regard as he is second person; and the first
begotten in respect of his Mediatorship, as he is God-Man: The first born, the
first begotten; the only begotten as he is the second Person; but the first
begotten, and the first born as he is Mediator; as the Prophet speaks in the
Psalms, Thou art my Son, This day have I begotten thee. You are to understand
that of Christ as Mediator, and especially as raised up in the day of his
Resurrection from the dead, This day have I begotten thee; begotten thee by an
act of mighty power, raising thee up; and so he becomes the firstborn among
many Brethren Here Is the comfort of the privilege of Adoption, which we come
to be partakers of, by a well improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Here Is the comfort of our Adoption, that by means hereof we come into a
Brotherhood with Christ. Believers, O what a dignifying privilege is this,
that they come to have a Brotherhood with Jesus Christ! As they have a
filiation in reference to God, so they come to have a Brotherhood with Jesus
Christ; so that he is born to them, and they are Brethren to him (according to
Psalm. 22. we sung this Morning) I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren,
speaking of his People and redeemed ones; and he is pleased so to reckon upon
all his People; they are his Brethren, Go and tell my Brethren. After his
Resurrection he expresses himself to this purpose, Go and tell my Brethren
that I go before them. And O, this is that that does advance the Privilege,
and give them comfort of the privilege of Adoption to souls, to think that
they come into a Brotherhood with Christ Jesus. And as it is said in the Text I
spoke to the other day, That God is not ashamed to be called the God of his
People; God is not ashamed to be called their God, and their Father, and to
call his People his Children: So it is said of Christ, and it is a very
considerable thing, that which the Apostle holds forth in his Epistle to the
Hebrews; says he, Both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are
all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Mark this,
this is the testimony concerning Jesus Christ, That as God is not ashamed to
call them children; truly this language may well astonish us, God the Father is
not ashamed to call his People, poor despicable worms as they are, he is not
ashamed to call them children, and to be called their God and Father: So our
Lord Jesus, is not ashamed to call them Brethren; but is free to say, This is
my Brother, and this is my Sister; as you know what is expressed in the Gospel,
when they came and told him, Thy Mother, and thy Brethren stand without
desiring to speak with thee; -- Why says he, Who are they? you understand my
Brethren according to the flesh: O, but I Will tell you who are my Brethren, and
whom I will never be ashamed to own for Brethren and Sisters; He that hears
my Word, and receives my Doctrine, and comports with my Counsels, and attends
me in the way of the Gospel, That Is my Brother, that is my Mother, and that is my
Sister; I will never be ashamed of that Kindred. He is not ashamed to call them
brethren, saying, I will declare my Name unto my brethren; in the midst of the
Church will I sing praise unto thee. (This refers unto Psalm. 22. and it is a
quotation out of that.) O wonder of Grace and Mercy! That there should be such
a conjunction; I will not be ashamed to call them Brethren, I will declare thy
Name to my Brethren, I will tell them what a Father they have; I know thee
well, thou art my Father and my God; and I will tell them, and declare thy Name
to them, and make it known to them what a Father I have, and have had from all
Eternity; and I will tell them what a Father they shall find thee to be to
them: And this I will tell to them, and sing praise to thee in the Church. O
this will be the joy of my heart, that I have a company of poor Brethren.
Christ was not prided in this, to be the only begotten of the Father; indeed he
gloried in this, to be the only begotten, as second Person. O, but it was his
joy to think that he should have a company of people that should come into the
state of Brotherhood with him; O he joys in this, and shed his blood to
purchase them; and when he comes once to have them given to him, he will say to
them, Friends, you are my Brethren, flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone, we
have one blood, and I will declare my Fathers Name to you, and it shall be my
joy so to do; in the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee. O, a
wonder of Mercy and Grace! that ever it should be thus done to poor sinners; O,
how will this advance the comfort of a Believers Adoption, when we shall come
to consider, that by virtue of this Adoption, he comes to be in a Relation to
God as to a Father, so to Christ as to a Brother. -- A Brother, and what
Brother? that so you may come to understand the blessing of this Privilege;
and if it may be, that we may every one of us, that have any hope toward God,
take shame to our selves, that we should be so spirited, and should not come to
look more into Gospel-priviledges, the privilege of Justification, and of
Adoption; that we should not search into them, and have our hearts more
affected with them. Now I say, that you may come to be the more affected with
this, and to know how the comfort is advanced to us, consider what a Brother
Christ is:

A Brother, not such a Brother as he in the Gospel, Luke 15. when his younger
Brother had played the Prodigal, and had spent his estate upon lend persons, in
a course of riotous living, he comes home and humbles himself to his Father,
and confesses; Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am
no more worthy to be called thy Son. He comes home, and the Father entertains
him, and falls upon his neck and kisseth him, and kills the fatted Calf, and
provides the best robe for him, and calls his Friends together, Let us rejoice
and make merry, This my Son was dead, and is alive, he was lost, and is found;
and they began to be merry. The elder Brother, he comes out of the field, and
hears the music, and these rejoycings, and he begins to take it in
indignation, and his spirit begins to boil within him, and he begins to grumble
at it; O Father (says he) I am thy elder Son, and I have carried it thus and
thus to thee, and thou never did thus to me. Here was a Brother, but a
Brother of somewhat an unbrotherly spirit, toward his repenting and returning
Brother. Is Christ such a Brother? An elder Brother, but a Brother of a sweeter
spirit than this. When a poor younger Brother comes home, and confesses his
miscarriages to his Father, the Father entertains him, and there is joy in
heaven under such a returning soul. Well, does the elder Brother come and pout,
and take on, and discover a spirit of discontent; no, it is the joy of Christ's
heart; O Brother, welcome Brother; well dear Brother, I rejoice in you; I, you
shall have your elder Brothers garments to put on.

A Brother, how a Brother? Truly such a Brother as Joseph was to his Brethren.

A Brother, a Shepherd; the Stone, the Shepherd of Israel, who being himself as
it was with Joseph, he being advanced to honor in Pharaoh's Court, he
entertains his Brethren, and speaks kindly to them at length, after some
reservation of himself; his bowels melt over them, and entertains them, and
uses them kindly, and bestows largely upon them, and rejoices in them: And so
it is with Jesus our elder Brother, our Joseph; he is glad to have his Brethren
about him, and his heart melts over them.

And if so be that Christ's poor Brethren should argue the case as Ioseph's
Brethren did, and say, It may be our Brother, now living in honor, and
prosperity, and glory, it may be he will remember all the unkindness that we
showed him; we sold our Brother Joseph for a slave, and he now being in place
and power, will be avenged on us: Oh, what said Joseph to his Brethren? No, no
my Brethren, my honor is for your advantage, I shall not remember the wrongs
and injuries that you have done me, but I look up to the hand of my God that
sent me into Egypt before you, to preserve seed alive. So it is with Jesus, and
much more if his poor Brethren should begin to have misgivings of heart
concerning him, and think thus: O, our elder Brother, he is now in glory and
honor, and at the Fathers right hand, and will he not remember all the
unkindness we have done him? how we have wounded him, and how unworthy we have
carried it toward him; will he not keep all this in remembrance? No, nothing
of this shall be remembered against his Brethren; but in the midst of the Church
will I sing praise to thee, and I will rejoice with my Brethren; O my Father,
these are Brethren that my soul takes delight and pleasure in.

And then again, Such a Brother is Christ, as indeed is born for adversity; a
Brother is born for adversity: O, Christ was born for adversity, for the
adversities of his People, that he might relieve them; and he was pleased to
come into adversity himself, that he might deliver the souls of his People from
all their adversity: Such a Brother is Christ, an elder Brother.

And such a Brother, as will do the part of a Brother. It belonged to a Brother
under the Law, if his Brother died, to raise up seed to his Brother: Why truly,
Jesus our elder Brother, will raise up seed to his Brethren. And what is the
meaning of that? He will maintain a seed of Grace in their souls, and he will
maintain them. -- I, he will raise up seed, that is, their bodies that lay in
the dust, he will raise up at the last day. Now, what a privilege is this, to
be in Relation to Christ, as to a Brother, by virtue of the Fathers Adoption to
us? -- That Jesus Christ should not be ashamed, to call us his People,
Brethren. These are the fountains of comfort, and do spring from Lebanon; which
if we were but well acquainted in them, would stream out, to the gladding and
refreshing of the souls of Believers. -- Consider the privilege of
Justification, and how the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus promotes the comfort of
that; -- the privilege of Adoption, and how the Knowledge of Jesus Christ it
does promote the comfort of that. A Brother, O a Brother indeed; a Brother,
that though he have a double portion, as the elder Brethren had; yet he will
see to it, that all his Brethren shall become portioners with him; Father, I
will that those thou have given me, be where I am; one house shall hold us
Brethren, and we will have one Inheritance: And though I am the chief among the
Brethren, yet I own them as my Brethren; they shall fare as I fare, and they
shall share as I share; for the substance of the portion, they shall share as I
share, they shall be where I am, they shall see the glory that I have had with
thee; and I cannot be contented to be in heaven, and to live there, without my
Brethren. Here Is the privilege now; and if so be that we were not woefully
implunged in the world, and of imbased spirits, O the thoughts of these things
would make our hearts to spring up within us, in holy admirings of that rich
and glorious Grace which by the Lord Jesus Christ we are called unto the
fellowship of.

SERMON. XVI.
I Shall now acquaint you with another great privilege; and that is,

A freedom from the Law: But understand it in a sound sense: There is a sense
given, according to which, Believers are not freed from the Law, nor is it
their privilege. I remember what the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 9. says he, To
them that were under the Law, as under the Law; and to them that are without
Law, as without Law; as without Law, as under the Law: there are Mysteryes in
these passages worthy the searching into: As under the Law, and yet not under
the Law; as without Law, and yet not without Law; not without Law to God, but
under the Law to Christ. So that in a sound sense, it is a duty, I, and a
privilege too, to be under the Law, under the Law to Christ: it is a privilege
not to be under the Law, according to what the Apostle speaks, in Romans 6. says
he, We are not under the Law, but under Grace: as the being under the Law, does
stand in opposition, (consider that, and that will give some light to the
matter in hand,) as a state under the Law, does stand in opposition to a state
in Grace, to a souls being under Grace: So it is the privilege of every
Believer, every Saint in Christ, not to be under the Law. These things we
should be well acquainted with, and studied in; especially, considering the
time that we have had for improvement in the knowledge of Christ. They are
under the Law to Christ, and yet from under the Law, as such a state imports an
opposition to a state in Grace, that is one of the great privileges which comes
over to Believers by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they are not under the Law.

And the comfort of this privilege is very much advanced by a well improved
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we come to know, and to know to some
purpose (as it is fit we should) what the state was that our Lord Jesus Christ
was put into; he was in a legal state, he was made under the Law, and so stood
under strongest obligations, to perform most perfect obedience to the whole
Law; he was a debtor to the whole Law by voluntary subjection (you must
understand it so) to fulfill it to the utmost tittle of it: Not only to fulfill
the duty and obedience which the Law required, but to satisfy and to answer
the penalty; not only to bear the burden of Duty, but to bear the burden of the
Curse, and that in the behalf, and for the sakes of those which were given him
of the Father. This is a great Point, and worthy to be well studied in, and for
every one that would approve himself to God, and promote his own comfort, to be
well acquainted withal. -- Christ was thus made under the Law, so his state was
a legal state; and by virtue of his thus being made under the Law, upon this
account the Saints of God, and Believers, they come to have their freedom: He
was made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law; this privilege
comes over to us by Christ. Now, when this comes to be well known concerning
Christ, by such as believe in him, O what a sweet enjoyment may they have of
themselves in peace and comfort, when they shall come to know what the Law
requires, and what are the vigorous exactings of it, what are the pressing
burdens that it lays upon a soul, which are most heavy to be born: Nay, they
are indeed unsupportable by any strength that is now in the creature; what
dreadful curses the Law pronounces upon the transgressors of it. Now when a
soul shall come to understand this; and yet withal, understands that Jesus
Christ, he was under the Law; and being so constituted, he has fulfilled it to
the utmost tittle; he has answered all the requiries, and he has undergon all
the penalties, and the Law has nothing to say against him, nothing to charge
upon him. Now, when a Believing soul comes to know this concerning the Lord
Jesus, that he was made under the Law, that the soul might be delivered from
the curse of the Law; this is that that makes the comfort to flow in like
streams from Lebanon; these are the great things of the Gospel, which concerns
us exceedingly to be well instructed in. This I propound now, as one of the
privileges of the Gospel, the comfort whereof comes over to us by a well
improved Knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Consider further, What reason there is that Believers, Christians, should
endeavor to advance a growth in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, upon
this account, That by this Knowledge well improved, we shall come to be very
much advantaged for suffering, suffering with comfort, and with boldness and
courage; and that is a great matter for us to consider of: For it is not so much
the suffering, as the comfortable suffering, and the confident suffering, and
the courageous suffering of a Christian that God is glorified by. Mark you,
It Is not barely the suffering; the damned in Hell, they suffer, and shall
suffer eternally; but what Glory has God from their suffering? Only thus far,
he has the glory of his Justice, in the inflicting of deserved punishment upon
them; he has that glory: but otherwise, there is nothing of glory that is given
to God by them in their sufferings; there is Glory that God fetches and forces
out of them, and he will do so out of every damned wretch, he will force a
Glory to himself out of their sufferings; but there is no Glory that does
result to God out of the sufferings of the damned, as a Glory which they do
actually give up to God. But now, God expects that his People should be active
in a way of glorifying him, when they are under their sufferings; and then is
God glorified, when his People suffer with courage, and with confidence, and
with comfort and rejoicing, and are not of despondent spirits, do not fall
under that.

Why now consider, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, and will approve
themselves in their godliness, they must reckon upon sufferings; there is no
coming to heaven by leaping over the brook; Christ himself is said to drink of
the brook in the way: There is a brook, and it runs with black and bitter
streams, and we must not think to leap over the brook, you must drink of it,
and be plunged into it: Why all that will live godly in Christ, shall suffer.
-- What shall they suffer? what must they reckon upon to suffer? Suffer from
God, suffer from men, suffer from Devils, suffer sometimes through their own
default, from their own Consciences. Wherein now must they reckon to suffer?

Suffer in their souls by divine desertions; -- suffer in their souls by
dreadful temptations; -- suffer in their Consciences by astonishing
apprehensions; I, and sometimes there is their own default from their
Consciences; that is a suffering that Jesus Christ is a mere stranger to, (take
notice of that by the way:) Christ never suffered from his Conscience. And I do
not know whether it may not be peremptorily asserted, that he never suffered in
his Conscience: to be sure, never from his Conscience, his Conscience never put
him to any suffering; his Conscience was always his friend, and his comforter:
He was not knowing to himself of any thing should cause and create the least
trouble to him: Godly men are subject, through their own default, to suffer in
their Consciences, and from their Consciences; -- to suffer in their liberty;
-- in their estates; -- in their names and reputations, by reproaches, and
scorns, and contempts of the World: -- To suffer in their estates, by losses,
and sad breaches upon them: -- subject to suffer to the very loss of their
lives, by fiery trials, and sharpest persecutions.

I, but now, whereas the great matter (as I said before) is to know how a
Believer may suffer, and to suffer comfortably, to suffer courageously, and not
sink under sufferings: Though he drink of the brook in the way, yet that he may
not be drowned in the way; though he drink of it, yet he does not sink to the
bottom of it, but he keeps his head aloft: this is a great matter for us to
study, and to be well acquainted withal. Now consider, O the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, it does contribute most largely to such a
purpose: if so be that Christians, Believers in Christ, had but a well-improved
knowledge of Christ, well digested, (I do not speak as I have told you, and
shall further tell you) of a notional knowledge; to get a head full of notions,
and yet in the mean time, the heart altogether unedified. We can babble over
the Creed, as many do, that place their Religion and such things in it. Though,
I do not speak, but that there may be good use to be made of those old
principles. But this is the misery, that people rest in words and forms; if
they can patter over such and such a form, and say, He was born of the Virgin
Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried; thus they
can say, but in the mean time, know nothing in the World to any purpose: But I
speak of a heartknowledge, a well-digested knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: and this knowledge will contribute very largely to the promoting
of a Christians comfortable undergoing his sufferings, and keeps him up from
sinking under them: and it will appear thus, by considering:

First of all, by knowing this concerning Christ; that this Lord Jesus Christ,
was himself a sufferer; there is very much in this, that he was in the form of
God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God; He that was the brightness
of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person; He was pleased to
put himself into such a condition and state, as that he might be capable of
suffering: As he was the second person, it was impossible for him to suffer;
but he took a body with much complacency and delight, upon this very account,
that he might be in a capacity to suffer, and suffer he did; never Man nor
Angel the like; He suffered to the astonishing of the whole Creation; -- He
suffered from God, -- He suffered from men, -- He suffered from Devils: O the
dreadful sufferings of Jesus Christ! As I said before, so I say it again; He
did not suffer from his Conscience, his heart did not reproach him; His heart
within was clear, he had no terrors, his Conscience, it raised up no terrors in
him; that kind of suffering he was a stranger to. Now consider this; was Christ
Jesus a sufferer, and so deep and dreadful a sufferer? why then a Believer may
comfort himself whatsoever sufferings he falls under: why, blessed be God* my
Lord Jesus Christ was a sufferer before me, he has been in a suffering state,
and I have no reason to startle at it, that my condition is a suffering
condition: I am but now in a way to have conformity to Christ, and that is a
blessed comfort. You must consider a little, what should the Apostle mean, when
he professes, in 1 Cor. 2. that he determined to know nothing but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified: a suffering Christ; Christ, and a suffering Christ! what
should he mean by this, but that he was well and duly apprehensive of the
benefit and comfort, and succor and support, that would spring up to him from
the consideration of a suffering Christ: why, this is by my conformity to
Christ, I account all things (says he) but loss and dung, for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. There you have the very point in hand
held forth: He speaks concerning the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; I
account all things but loss and dung, for the excellency of this knowledge. --
Why? That I might know the fellowship of his sufferings, and be made
conformable unto his death: I tell you Beloved, it is no matter what condition
soever a person come into, if it be but such a condition as wherein Christ has
been before him; only so, as wherein Christ has been as one that has gone
before us, and made it a way for us to walk in. Indeed, the way of his
mediation, the way of his meritorious sacrificing, that is not a way that ever
he walked in, so as to constitute it a way for his people to walk in; they are
never able to live in that way: But the way wherein Christ has been before us,
and the condition which he has been brought into, as a condition in which he
would lead his people into: this is that that will comfort us in any such
condition; let the condition be what it will, Christ has been in this
condition before us: so that now here is the comfort to a Believer, a Saint in
Christ; I suffer thus and thus, as the Apostle speaks, I suffer as an evil
doer, -- so did Christ; Christ was before me: I suffer as an evil doer, unto
bonds, I am persecuted, so was Christ my Lord: -- -- I am reproached, and
scorned, and reviled in the World, so was my Lord Jesus Christ: -- -- I am cast
into Prison, so was my Lord Jesus: -- I am brought to the place of execution,
Christ was hanged as a malefactor. There Is much to support the soul in this
condition. And then,

Secondly, consider this, This is the comfort that slowes out from the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to support in a suffering
state. Christ suffered, nay, but more than this, we are to consider further,
that he suffered penal sufferings, legal sufferings: O this, this has added to
the other, that we are to know concerning Jesus Christ; that he suffered in a
legal way: His obedience was legal obedience, not evangelical obedience, as
ours should be: so his sufferings were legal sufferings; why he suffered upon
the account of Divine Justice; he suffered according to what the strict Justice
of God did and could inflict upon him for sin and transgression; and here was
the bitterness of the cup; a thing that would be seriously weighed, and
considered of by us: He suffered for sinners; he put himself (as it were) into
the state and condition of a sinner, of a malefactor. The guilt of the sins of
his people was set over to him: Thus it was, and upon this account, you must
conceive, that there was not that rejoicing on Christ's part in his sufferings,
as that which sometimes discovers it self even in Believers, who have rejoiced
at the stake, and kissed the stake, and bid it welcome; and have been as full of
joy and rejoycings as their hearts could hold; why there was reason for it: It
was not so with Christ, but he was in an agony, and cries out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Why Brethren, there was reason for it: Alas,
Believers do not sip one drop of that cup, and that is their mercy, and that is
it that gives them comfort upon the consideration of the sufferings of the Lord
Jesus; because the cup that was tempered unto him to drink of, it was a legal
cup; it was a cup that the hand of Divine Justice tempered up for him: Son,
thou have put thy self into the place of sinners, and cursed malefactors, that
have deserved to drink of the wine of my wrath to all eternity: I Will temper a
cup for thee; forasmuch as thou have undertaken to appear on their behalf, thou
shall have a cup to drink off in their steads; and the hand of Justice tempers
up this cup. Now, one drop of this legal cup, would have made all the Nations
drunk, and have been made to spew, and fall; to fall down to Hell; one drop of
this cup of Justice: but Christ must drink it up; He must make, by suffering,
satisfaction to the Infinite Justice of a provoked Majesty. Here Is the business
now: and alas, we are apt to pass over these things slightly, and not consider
what the greatness of the love of Christ is, in undergoing such a task, in
drinking such a cup! But judicious Christians will weigh these things, and
endeavor to understand concerning what was undergone by Jesus Christ. It Is an
astonishing consideration, that it should be thus ordered out concerning our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Now here is the comfort to poor believing souls under all their sufferings;
blessed be God, I suffer not in a legal way; I suffer not from the hand of
Divine Justice; I suffer not in order to satisfaction; that is done to my hand:
Here Is my comfort, As I am not called out to pay debts with duties, I am not
called out to pay debts with sufferings: Here Is the comfort of a Believer,
which flows out from the well-improved knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; that
whatsoever his sufferings be, they are not satisfactory sufferings; they are
not sufferings upon a legal account; but they are sufferings in a way of
fellowship with Christ, as one that did suffer; but not as a sufferer in order
to satisfaction to God's Justice. So that now, upon the account of the
suffering of our Lord Jesus, as a legal sufferer, and as one that took the cup
from the hand of Divine Justice, which was tempered up by that hand; upon this
account the poison is taken out of sufferings; the terror of the bitterness of
death is past; the bitterness of suffering is taken out; the sting of the
suffering is plucked out: what is the sting of the suffering? The sting of death
is sin; the sting of a suffering is sin. There Is nothing that makes suffering
so bitter to a sensible soul, an understanding Christian; there is nothing that
makes it so bitter, as the consideration of guilt: I, but the guilt is taken
away, and so the sting is taken out; the venom of the suffering is gone: The
cup may be bitter, but it is a wholesome cup. This is now a second thing to
consider; whereby you may come to understand, how much a well-improved
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, does contribute to the promoting a
Christians comfortable, and bold, and confident suffering; and you will never
be able to quit your selves in a suffering day, in a suffering state, as
becomes the Gospel, if so be that these considerations concerning Christ, be
not well digested.

3. Yet further; Christians are subject to suffer, and it is your duty to suffer
as Christians, and to bear up with courage and confidence: but how shall that
be, but by the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ? For mark you, This belongs
to the knowledge of our Lord Jesus; that the sufferings of his people, for his
Name, and Truth, and Gospel; those sufferings are by Jesus Christ, made their
great privileges. When a man suffers as an evil doer, as a murderer, or a
thief, or as a busy-body in other men's matters; these kind of sufferings of
persons as evil doers, when they are indeed deservedly inflicted; these
sufferings, they reflect shame and dishonor upon those that undergo them. The
two Thieves upon the Cross, that were crucified together with Christ, and He in
the midst of them; you have the acknowledgement that one of them makes; This
man is upon the Cross with us, He suffers as we suffer, (as to the matter of
suffering,) He is hanged, and so are we; we are here nailed upon the Cross, and
so is He: I, but for all that, here is the difference; we indeed are justly
here; for we suffer the reward of our own evil deeds; so that it is our
dishonor to be hanged up upon the Cross: but this man is hanged indeed as a
malefactor, but he has done nothing worthy of such a death: so it is no
dishonor to a Christian; it is a dishonor to an evil doer to suffer, when he
suffers for his evil deeds; but it is no dishonor to a Christian, when he
suffers as a Christian, and there is no just cause for his sufferings; it is no
dishonor, but it is rather an honor to him; says the Apostle, If any man
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed: Ashamed! he has no cause in the
World why he should be ashamed; let men deal how they will with him, if he
suffer as a Christian: though others seek to put him to shame, he may despise
the shame, as our Savior did; He endured the Cross, but He despised the shame:
Men would cast shame upon Him; I, but Christ shames the shame; He despises the
shame; He puts the shame to shame. Thus did Christ: so a Christian, he
suffering as a Christian, for the sake of Christ, he has reason so to do; to
shame the shame, to despise the shame, to scorn the shame, and the scorns that
are cast upon him; says he, If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed; but let him glorify God in that behalf, for the spirit of God, and of
Glory, rests upon him. And so did the Disciples, in Acts 5. it is said, They
went away from the Counsel, where they had been beaten, and reproached; They
went away rejoicing, that they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the
Name of the Lord Jesus; so that by Jesus Christ, it becomes a matter of
privilege and honor to suffer. This Comfort flows out of the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And take notice of that remarkable passage, in 1 Phil.
To you it is given; given as a gift: To you it is given; -- what is given? --
Not only to believe on his Name, but to suffer for his sake. To you it is
given; I, one would say; a goodly gift indeed, to have suffering given us: -- A
goodly gift; O, that is a wretched spirit, to undervalue this gift: To you it is
given, not only to believe: is it a privilege to have it given us to believe,
to believe unto eternal life and salvation? I, but, says he, To you it is
given, not only to believe, but also to suffer: This is the gift of God, which
he has granted unto you as a privilege; that you should be sufferers for
Christ, and engaged to appear in his Cause, and for his Name, in opposition to
an evil and an adulterous Generation.

Again, by a well-improved knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall come to
understand to the comforting, and the imboldening of the hearts that Christ is
knowing of all the sufferings that his servants undergo: Knowing of them, is
that all? Nay, so knowing of them, as that he is sensible of them, and reckons
them his own sufferings; He has a deep sense: There is a sympathizing with his
people in all their sufferings; if the foot on Earth be trod upon, the Head in
Heaven complains; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? who art thou Lord? I am
Jesus. True it is, thou can not reach my person, me as the head; but thou
reachest me in my members; Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me?

And then consider this withal, That by a wellimproved knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, we shall come to understand, that the sufferings of Christ, they
make way for Glory; having conformity to him in suffering, we may assure our
selves, there shall be conformity to him in Glory: If we suffer with him, we
shall also reign with him; as the Apostle speaks; And the sufferings of this
present time, is not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall follow. So
that now, all this being laid together, we may well conclude upon it, that the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, is worthy to be endeavored after, and that there
may be a growth in it; because it does conduce so much to a comfortable,
confident, courageous, and bold suffering on the behalf of Jesus Christ.

SERMON. XVII.
EVen as I was reading this Text this Morning, I had this Meditation: I was
thinking how often this Text has been read in your hearing, and sounded in
your ears; and is it not good for us (you and me) to consider to what purpose
it has been so often sounded? and whether we have made any Improvement in the
grace of the Gospel, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Shall the Scriptures speak to us in vain? shall we be as if so be we were
hearing of sounding brass, and a tinkling symbal? But however, thus it is, and
this is our duty, to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. I am speaking yet concerning the Knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, and that there ought to be a growth therein; and you
have heard very largely, what convincing Arguments there are, why you should
labor after a well improved Knowledge of him, considering how beneficial this
Knowledge is, and will be, to those that have it. I shall now (...) to
something further that remains, and so (...) on to the Application of this
Point.

There is very great reason, why Christians should endeavor to advance in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in order to the promoting of a
Gospel Conversation, that it may be managed with beauty, and with boldness, to
the credit of the Gospel, and the holy Profession which is made of it: By a
well improved Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, great advantage comes over to
us for such a purpose.

First, here you are to consider this, That a Christian is not to live at a
ghess, and at random; those that will approve themselves in their holy
Profession, must see to it, that their conversations be well ordered; it is he
that orders his conversation aright, that shall see the salvation of God; and
much care and diligence is to be used to this purpose, that the conversation
may be ordered in a due manner, that so we may come to have the comfort, and
joy, and peace at last: They that walk according to rule, Scripture rule, and
Scripture example, they are the persons upon whom there shall be peace and
mercy, as the Apostle speaks in Gal. 6. It is not for men and women professing
Godliness, to live (as I have sometimes said) by rote, but to live and walk by
rule, and by warrantable example. And,

2ly. I offer this to be considered, that Jesus Christ is the most absolute
pattern for a Christian to conform unto, and to take example by him: And this
duty is incumbent upon all that will approve themselves in Godliness, to set
their hearts upon this, that they may be conformed unto Christ; Believers and
Saints are predestined to have a conformity unto the Lord Jesus. And the
Apostle tells us, 1 Ioh. 2. He that says he abides in him ought himself so to
walk, even as Christ walked. It is a very weighty Scripture, and does very much
concern us to be well studied in: He that says he abides in Christ, or that
professes himself for to belong to Christ, and to have a union with Christ, an
interest in Christ, he ought to walk even as he also walked. -- Now, consider
how strongly it follow, upon the premises, That therefore it concerns all that
will approve themselves in their Conversation, to endeavor to be well
acquainted with the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to endeavor an advance
in that Knowledge, to be as well instructed in the Knowledge of Christ as they
can; -- Why? -- Why because it is he who is the Copy after which we are to
write, the pattern to which we are to conform; and how it is likely that any
man should answer the Copy, write congruously to the Copy, which he has little
or no sight and knowledge of; work in any sutableness to the pattern, which he
is in great part a stranger to. This then is the business that we should mind
and consider of, in order to a well regulated Conversation, that there be a
pursuance in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; and particularly, that we know the
manner of his Conversation^ If so be that we would walk as Christ walked, it is
necessary we should know how Christ walked, what steps he trod in, and the
paths wherein he walked. And this I shall give you some account of, as touching
the life and conversation of Christ here upon earth. In the general, consider
thus.

First of all, you are to know and believe, That Jesus Christ was in the World,
though the World knew him not, as the Apostle speaks in Ioh. 1. He was in the
world. The world indeed would not know not take knowledge of him; but this is
that we are to acknowledge and believe, that Jesus Christ was in the World; and
that he lived and conversed here among the sons of men; and he lived such a
life as was most exemplary, and so continues to be; and he has everlastingly
broken the force of such an argument and plea, as poor carnal wretches are apt
to make in their own behalfs, when their vicious, corrupt, carnal, profane
lives are taxed, and they themselves are censured for them. Men are apt to
plead, How is it possible that we should live otherwise in the world, a
wretched world, a world that lies in wickedness? There are so many corrupt
principles, and corrupt examples; how can it be that we can live in such a
world, and live as we ought? -- Why this Plea is fully broken; it was broken
upon the account of the lives and conversations of other godly ones, that have
lived from the beginning of the world. -- The world was stark naught in Enoch's
days, in Noah's days; yet for all that they walked with God, and they ordered
a conversation to the honor of God, and approved themselves in the course of
their walking. -- The world was very bad in Eliah's time, and so in the times
of others; yet for all that they carried themselves very graciously in an evil
world. But this example of our Lord Jesus Christ is that that breaks the force
of such an Argument, why he was in the world, and yet he lived most exactly and
congruously to the whole life of God; and he has taught us by his example,
That it is not so much the place as the principle that we are to mind; the
principle and the constitution: If so be that a person be of a good
constitution, and well principled, he will live well enough in any place. A
godly person will be godly in heaven among Saints and Angels; a godly person
that is truly so, he will be godly on earth, if he be there among profane
persons: And I think I may say, that if it could be that a godly man were in
Hell, he would show his godliness there; I am bold to speak it, that if a child
of God were in Hell, he would love God there, and he would pray there. I
remember, and sometimes upon occasion have spoken to that purpose, That Jonah
when he was in his own apprehension cast off of God, and in the belly of Hell,
as one in the very belly and bowels of Hell; yet there he falls a praying, Out
of the belly of hell cried I. A wicked man, if he could be in heaven, and be
there with his own principles, he would be a wicked man there; and surely for
Hell, a godly man would be a godly man there, Hell changes no natures; nor
indeed does heaven, upon the matter, Heaven does not change nature; Heaven it
self considered as a place of glory, would not change the nature of a wicked
man; the change must be made here on earth. Thus, now having propounded this as
a general, That our Lord Jesus Christ, he did live and converse in the world;
-- but what account is there to be given of his life? what is there belonging
to a well improved Knowledge in the Life and Conversation of Christ? To give
you a brief account of this.

First of all, in the general, The Life and Conversation of Christ, it was a
Scripture conversation. The Lord Jesus, who is now in heaven, he lived in the
world, he lived first and last a Scripture life; and this I speak to the
confutation of the faces of all such as are apt to slight the Scriptures, and
make light of them, that Jesus Christ, while he converst in the world, his
whole life and conversation was a very Scriptural conversation, it was nothing
else but a fulfilling of Scripture. O Beloved, consider of this, as a material
and momentous thing, That the whole life and conversation of Christ was a
Scriptural conversation. How often do you read this passage, Thus and thus
Christ did, thus and thus it was ordered out concerning him, that it might be
fulfilled which was written in the Scriptures. You read this now, over and over
we have it in Scriptures; thus and thus it was done, that it might be fulfilled
which was written in the Scriptures, so that the life of Christ it was a
fulfilling of Scripture: There was never a Scripture in all the Bible, which
Christ could not with boldness look upon, and did not most fully correspond
with, I tell you, it is a serious matter for to consider of; I give a touch
upon it now, I may have occasion by and by to speak something to such a purpose.

It were very good for us to consider, whether we are able to look the
Scriptures in the face; such a Text, such or such a Scripture precept, such or
such a Scripture example, and not blush and be ashamed. I remember (and so may
you) when the Book of the Law was found, and brought to Josiah, and he heard it
read, his heart melts within him, and he is very deeply passionate and he
mourns and humbles his soul before God, to think of the incongruity that was
between the Book, and the carriages, and conversations of the People: So
Brethren, and Beloved, consider but this, put it to your Consciences; Is there
not many a Text i^ Scripture which you are not able to look in the face, not
able to behold with any boldness? You have not the boldness to look such or
such a Text in the face. -- As now your Adulterer, can he look this Text in the
face? Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge; -- the Covetous man, can he
look that Text in the face, which says, The Covetous man, he is an idolater,
he shall never inherit the Kingdom of God? Let your conversations be without
covetousness. Can he look this Text in the face? -- The Hypocrite, the formal
Professor, that pleases himself in a form of Godlyness, and is an enemy to the
power of Godlyness, can he look that Text in the face? 2. Tim. 3. 5. In the
last days, perilous times shall come, and having a form of Godlyness, but
denying the power of it; from such turn aside. -- -- The sensual, licentious
person, can he look this Text in the Face? If you live after the flesh, you
shall dye; but if ye through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, you
shall live; and a thousand more of this kind I might instance in. O Friends, it
is a serious matter that I am now speaking about; whether we can look the
Scriptures in the face without regret of spirit, check and control of
Conscience. Jesus Christ, who is the most absolute pattern, he could do so; His
whole life was a Scripture-life, a fulfilling of Scripture: there was never a
Text in all the Bible, but he had the boldness to look it in the face. This is
that that is to be known concerning the Life of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, and more particularly; it belongs to the knowledge of Christ to know
this; That it was a blameless and in-offensive life: It Is required of
Believers, that they carry it as the Sons of God, blameless and harmless,
without rebuke: O such was exactly the life of Christ, a harmless, blameless,
inoffensive life: He never gave offense to any in all his life, and he was very
careful of doing it; He would rather be abridged of his liberty and
privilege, than he would give offense: as in the case of the Tribute; Simon,
of whom do the Kings of the Earth take Tribute, of your own children, or
strangers? Of Strangers, says Peter: why then I am free from the Tribute; I
but lest we should offend them, go thy ways, and take such a course, that
there may be a payment of the Tribute: Give no offense; He never did give just
offense; much offense was taken at him, but no offense was given by him. This
was the Life of Christ, 2 Timothy 2. last. He offended no man, gave no just
occasion of offense to one or other, neither to Jew or to Gentile.

3. The Life of Christ, it was a convincing Life: His Life carried Life in it:
as the Apostle says, in the first of John, The light was the life of men. O,
Jesus Christ's life, was a light of life! It was a life that held forth light
in it; convincing the World of sin, and righteousness. What is said of Noah and
his Conversation; he condemned the World, by building of the Ark, Heb. 11. It
may most truly be said of our Lord Jesus; He convinced the World, and condemned
it, by his gracious and holy Conversation.

4. Consider, The Life and Conversation of Christ, was a conflicting and
combating Conversation: Conflicting, not with corruption within, that he had
none of; he had no principles of sin in him. The Apostle speaks of himself, I
find a Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, leading me
Captive. There was no such conflict in Christ, nothing of sin in him; the
Prince of the World had no interest in him, so that he was free of that
conflict: But he had men and devils to conflict with: O how much was he in
colluctation, and struggling, and wrestling, and striving with Principalities
and Powers, and with the men of the World! Jerusalem cried out; O Lord, Thou
have made me a man of Contention; truly, so was Christ; I am not come to send
peace but a sword; Contention, yet notwithstanding, the most peaceable person
that ever was in the World. A man of Contention; but how came it to be so;
because his Doctrine and Conversation was so cross and contrary to a wicked and
sinful Generation: Christ's life was a conflicting life, with men and devils.

5. The life of Christ, and his Conversation; it was a fruitful, and a
profitable life: O, what blessed benefit and profit did, and does come over
unto Believers, by the Life and Conversation of Christ. (I cannot insist upon
these particulars, only give you a hint of them.)

6. The Life and Conversation of Christ, it was a holy, nay, a heavenly Life:
It Is said of Enoch, that he walked with God; more true of Christ: The Apostle
says, Their Conversation was in Heaven; much more the Conversation of Christ,
a heavenly Conversation; He lived, and conversed with God from day to day.

7. The Life and Conversation of Christ; it was a painful and laborious life; a
life of labor and hard travel; never was time so well husbanded, so well
spent, as the time that Christ had to spend in the World, not one minute of it
runs out to waste; he went about continually doing good, preaching from place
to place; spending himself in the behalf, and for the behoof and benefit of
poor souls: a laborious life was the life of Christ.

8. The Life of Christ, it was a praying life: O how much was he in prayer and
supplication unto God; He spends a whole night in prayer: when he could not get
to that service in the day, he would be sure to take time for it in the night.
O how much was he in intimate conversings with the Father in the way of prayer.

9. The life of Christ, it was a self-denying life: O most eminent was Christ
for this, that he was of a self-denying spirit; and his life in the whole of
it, a self-denying life; denying himself, Father, not what I will, but what
thou will.

10. The Life of Christ, it was a world-despising life; when they would come by
sorce, and make him a King, he declines it, and withdraws himself, and turns
his back upon all worldly preferments and enjoyments.

11. The Life of Christ, was a God-pleasing, and honoring life; He pleased not
himself, he studied to please his Father, and to profit the souls of his
people: He was for God-pleasing, and manprofiting: and this was the whole tenor
of the Life of Christ. He devoted himself thus, that he might be pleasing to
God, that he might be profitable to man.

12. And to add no more (though other particulars might be brought in;) The
Life of Christ, it was a persevering life; He began well, he continued well, he
ended well. Paul could say of himself, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith; Christ could say it more than any
man; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
truth; I have kept my way without divertion, he held on to the last; having
honored God, he honored him to the death; having loved God and his people, he
loved them to the end; having engaged to glorify God, he glorified him to the
last; His last breath was a holy breathing into the bosom of God. This is the
account that is to be given of the Lord Jesus.

Now consider, O how profitable and beneficial will this knowledge well
improved, be unto Believers! -- -- profitable to shame them! -- -- profitable
to provoke their imitation! -- -- profitable to promote their comfort.

Profitable to shame them: Now, when we come to know what a life Christ lived,
what an exemplary life, what an even thread he spun, what a webb he wove; and
when we come to consider what our life is, what a difference between Christ's
life and our life, whose life should be set before us as a copy to write after:
O how will this cause shame of face, sorrow of heart! I remember the Lord gives
a charge to the Prophet Ezekiel. That he show the pattern to the house of Israel;
and wherefore? -- that they may be ashamed: -- why I showed you the pattern
this morning, of the Life of Christ: and truly, it may well make us ashamed, --
to think Christ lived in the World a Scripture-life: but alas, how far are we
from keeping conformity unto Scriptures in our lives? -- He lived an
in-offensive life: how offensive are many of us in our conversations and
carriages, laying stumbling blocks in the way? -- The Life of Christ was a
conflicting life: what is there in us of conflicting with lusts and
corruptions, and a sinful World? -- The Life of Christ a convincing life, a
condemning life; convincing of sin, condemning of sin: such should our
conversations be. But alas, how little is there of conformity to Christ? -- The
Life of Christ, a praying life; -- -- a laborious life; -- a fruitful life; --
a God-pleasing life; -- a self-denying life: Alas, we may look upon the
pattern, and be ashamed to behold it, because of our incongruity to it. He that
says he abides in Christ, ought himself so to walk, even as he walked: How
many profess to have an abiding in Christ, and yet do not comport with his
example, and conform to the pattern that he has given us for imitation; and so
far as we are awanting to this copy, so far we dishonor the Name of God, and
are awanting to the crediting of our holy profession: O, thus would a well
improved knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ be beneficial to us, to the
humbling and shaming of us; to think, such was Christ, but how unanswerable are
we? A humble Christ, a holy Christ, a heavenly Christ, a self-denying Christ, a
sin-hating Christ, a world-despising Christ, and we express nothing of it.

And how would this promote to duty, and provoke to imitation? O, so would the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus, and of his life well-improved, provoke our
imitation of him, and make us set to it with diligence and care. Did Christ
live thus? then surely, it concerns me to look better to my life and
conversation, that I may be able to give a better account of it than otherwise
I am like to do.

And then to promote the comfort of a Christian, and make him bear up with
boldness in the midst of an evil Generation; when he is able to plead, thus I
am, and I am tuter'd to it by the walking of Jesus Christ.

Now, to draw to a close; The last thing that I will insist upon, as to this
Doctrinal part; there is an account to be given of the life of Christ in
Heaven. You have heard of his Life on earth; but there is belonging to the
knowledge of Christ to consider, what his Life in Heaven is: For this we are to
know, and sad were it with Saints and Believers, if this were not accounted of:
That he that was in a state of death, and he that did rise again; He lives, and
is alive for evermore. Now, if it were not for this, Christians were of all men
in the World, the most miserable; but this our Savior speaks of himself, Rev.
1. 18. I am he that was dead, but I am alive; and behold, I live for evermore,
Amen. I am alive for evermore, Amen. And this he held forth for the comfort of
his people, and to let them know he is alive for evermore; to this purpose, To
see to the accomplishing and fulfilling of all that in the Revelation is made
known for the benefit and comfort of the Church of God, while it is here in its
Militant state, until the day come that it shall be together with him engaged
in everlasting Triumphs over Death, and Devils, and Antichrist, and World, and
Sin and all: This belongs unto the knowledge of our Lord Jesus, to know that he
lives: -- And what is his Life in Heaven? -- briefly thus:

First, it is a Life of Glory; for he is now entered into Glory, and he lives
in the fullest possession of all the Glory that the Father, and Angels, and
Glorified Saints can conferr upon him, and give unto him: He has all the Glory
that Heaven can bestow upon him. The Lord Jesus, he lives now in Glory, and he
prayed for this, Father, I have glorified thee on the Earth; now Father,
glorify thou me with the Glory which I had with thee from the beginning. Jesus
Christ is entered into his Glory, and he is clothed with it now; He is clothed
all over with Majesty and Glory; He lives in Heaven now a life of Glory, and so
has done ever since He was received up into Heaven.

2. His life is a life of Power; all Power is given to him, he has the keys of
Hell, of Life, of Death, he has the keys of Heaven and Hell; all power is
committed to him, and he is invested with it: So that the life of Christ is a
life of Power; he lived here in the world under weakness, as touching his
humanity: but he lives now (as the Apostle speaks) though he was crucified
through weakness, yet he lives by the power of God, 2 Cor. 13.

3. And then, his life is a life of Peace; he had much trouble in the World,
but all his trouble is over, and he is entered into everlasting Peace.

4. The life of Christ in Heaven, it is a life of Rest.

5. It is a life of Joy and Rejoicing: O, Christ is at Gods right hand, and at
the right hand of God; there is fullness of joy, and pleasure for evermore; as
the Prophet speaks, in Psalm. 16.

6. The life of Christ, it is a Kingly life, he lives in the state of a King;
and God has given him a Name above every name, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords: I, and know this,

7. This life of Christ, it is a life of Knowledge and Observation; Christ in
Heaven lives an observing life, he observes all the actions and transactions
that are here below, he knows all the workings in the Nations and Kings of the
World, he knows all the oppositions that are made against him by the powers
here below; -- he knows the state of all the Churches, and all the carriages of
his Churches and People; as in the Revelations, he orders to all the Churches
it should be signified, I know thy Works, and what thy condition and state is.
Christ lives a life of Observation.

8. And he lives a life of Compassion too: O, that is a comfortable
consideration, that the Lord Jesus in Heaven; he lives a life of Compassion, he
has not left his bowels of compassion here behind him, but he is as merciful a
High Priest now as ever he was; he was good in the world, he is as full of
bowels, and of tender love to his poor Church and People, now he is in Heaven,
as he was when he was upon Earth; all his glory in Heaven shall never make him
forget his poor suffering Members here on earth: Saul, Saul, Why persecutest
thou me?

9. The life of Christ in Heaven, it is a life of Satisfaction: And yet withal,

10. It is a life of Expectation; he has fullest satisfaction in respect of
his Father, and of his enjoyments at the right hand of God; he has sweetest
satisfaction concerning all the travel that he did undergo, while he was
conversant here in the World; according to that, Isa. 53. So does Christ; he
now in Heaven looks over all his travel, he considers all the cost and charge
that he was at to redeem the World, and he thinks not one penny too much that he
has paid; (to speak with a holy Reverence) not one penny of all the payment too
much to be laid down to purchase a People, to purchase an Inheritance; he does
not think that there was one drop of his Blood too much to be shed, that he
might redeem a People to himself, and bring them to the possession of an
eternal Inheritance: And yet notwithstanding, the life of Christ in Heaven, is
a life of Expectation, not that his expectation is any way affective to him,
does any way impead the sweetness and comfort of the life that he now lives in
Glory; but it is a life of joyful Expectation. He lives in this double
Expectation; -- First, till all his enemies be made his footstool. -- He lives
in this Expectation, expecting the coming of that time, when all his Saints
that he has redeemed from the World, and purchased with his Blood, be in his
hand, and brought to Glory. Now, this is no disquieting expectation, but a most
joyful expection, that Christ lives in, to see the utter downfall of all his
enemies, and to have them under his feet: And according to that which you in
Heb. 10. 13. says he (speaking concerning the Priests in the old Testament
This man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on
the right hand of God. There Is his life: -- from henceforth expecting till his
enemies be made his footstool: for by one offering he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified. This is now one part of Christ's Expectation, which
he is upon in Heaven, That all his enemies, be they who they will, never so
many, never so mighty, he lives in the expectation of their downfall, and being
brought under his feet; and of this expectation he shall not be disappointed in
the least, no, not in the least. The life of Expectation which Christ does now
live in Heaven, it is such a life as wherein he has a most sweet enjoyment; he
knows he shall be answered in this Expectation of his.

And so likewise his expectation of having all his people that he has
purchased with his blood, given into his actual possession: He prayed for this
in his last prayer, Father, I will, that all those which thou have given me, be
with me where I am, that they may see my glory, and share with me in that glory
which is to be had in heaven. This was his supplication, and suitable is his
expectation, That the time shall come when he shall have all his Saints in his
hand, and not one of them wanting. Now, this is the Knowledge that we are to
have of the life of Christ in heaven; -- a life of Glory, -- a life of Power,
-- a life of Peace, -- a life of Rest, -- a life of Joy and Rejoicing, -- a
Kingly life, -- a life of Observation, -- and a life of Satisfaction, -- and a
life of Expectation; such is the life that Christ lives. Now, O how worthy is
this Knowledge to be pursued, and that every Believer should labor to be well
improved in the Knowledge of this life of Christ in Heaven, both for his
greatest encouragement and comfort, to think that that Jesus who died, now
lives, and lives for evermore in Heaven: -- That he is now in power; he that
was crucified through weakness, he lives through the power of God. -- Why, this
Jesus, he lives now in the fullest enjoyment of all that happiness that can he
conferred upon him, -- and in the expectation of having all his enemies
subdued, -- and all his People brought over to him, that he and they may solace
themselves eternally in the vision and fruition of God, and of one another. O
what a comfort is this now, for to know and consider of: It was the joy of the
heart of Jacob, and made the old man's heart to leap within him, and to revive
again, to hear that his son Joseph was alive, and in honor in Pharaoh's Court.
O how much more joyful will it be, to the rejoicing of the heart of a child of
God, that has set his love upon Christ, to think that his Jesus is in heaven
at God's right hand, in the possession of all that honor and glory which
heaven it self can confer upon him. -- And thus, now I have traveled with you,
and I confess it has been somewhat a long journey that I have traveled in the
handling of this Point, in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus, and how much it
concerns Believers to endeavor a growth and increase in it, considering how
every way the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus will be beneficial to them, to the
promoting of grace, -- inabling to suffer, -- fitting for Duty, -- and for the
promoting of a holy Conversation (and the like.) Now, all that has been
spoken, does issue in this, That the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ is a
Knowledge that our hearts should be exceedingly set upon.

Now for the Improvement of this by way of Use, I shall make short work of
that; but, O that you would but weigh and consider what has been spoken in so
many Sermons that I have preached to you upon this Doctrine; and for the
Application, I shall be brief in that.

Now I would beseech you, consider with your selves, you with whom I have to
deal; will you but consider with your selves, whether I have been in this
matter that I have performed, performing a proper Service, or whether I have
not in your account been employed in a needless work, whether your hearts will
not suggest such a thing to you: You have been preaching to us concerning the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, what have you told us that we knew not
before? and you press upon us that we should endeavor a growth in in this
Knowledge, and be upon our improvements; but alas, what are we the further
advanced in this Knowledge? So that now, if so be that I should come to act and
perform the part of a reprover, possibly there may be such a spirit found, that
you will think, what have you told us? we knew that Christ took upon him the
nature of man, and he came into the world, and lived, and died here, and was
crucified, and buried, and rose again, and ascended into heaven, and sits at
the right hand of God: every common nominal Christian can chatter over these
things, and think with themselves, what needs all this ado about a growth and
increase in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

O but Brethren, I would say to you as the Apostle speaks in a like case, 1
Cor. 8. I know well enough that you have all knowledge; I, and your knowledge
makes you conceited, it puffs you up; But if any man think he knows any thing,
he knows nothing as he ought to know. It were good for you and me to look well
to it, that our light be not found to be darkness, that our knowledge be not
found to be ignorance. This I would have said, that there are clear
demonstrations and convincing Arguments, that some know nothing as they ought
to know; -- others that do know, they are not so improved in their knowledge as
they ought to be. I tell you this, look to it, for of a truth your being so
defective in the faith of the Gospel, your being so apt to fluctuate, and be
turmoyl'd in your consciences, your being so uneven in your walking, your being
so low spirited as you are, your small measures of faith, and love, and hope,
and confidence, and boldness toward God; -- and your aptness to be startled at
every providence, and to be foiled by every temptation: these and such like ^s
do loudly speak it out, that of a truth you ^t know Christ as you ought to know
him; I speak to one and other of us: we shall find, and be able to evidence it,
the conscience will be convinced of it, That we know not as we ought to know,
we have not made that advance in the Knowledge of Christ as we should have
done, because it is thus and thus with us, we have no more love to Christ: did
you know Christ as you ought, you would never dote upon the world as you do,
nor be so enslaved to your corruptions as you are; did you know Christ as you
ought to know, you would live more honorably, and more to the credit of the
Gospel than you do. There are many, many things that will evidence it to us,
that we do not know Christ as we ought to know.

SERMON. XVIII.
HOw Righteous, yea, how Gracious this Requirie is, That believing souls should
grow in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, has been
abundantly demonstrated and made to appear unto you. Wisdom is justified of her
children; if we be Wisdom's children, it will appear, and so it must, by our
justification of Wisdoms sayings, and giving in our justification, we come
under the strongest obligation for to carry it in a sutableness unto what we
profess to be. Now, taking it for granted, that we do acknowledge this to be a
truth, that it is our duty to grow in the Knowledge of Christ, as that which is
the most excellent, and the most beneficial Knowledge; this Knowledge (which as
you heard the last day) will conduce very much to the well regulating of a
Christians conversation, when it comes to be known to purpose, what a life
Christ himself did live while he was in the World; -- what a life Christ lives
now he is in Heaven; which two things were accounted to you at large in several
particulars. That which now remains to be done, is to make application of all
that has been said, and so to press on after the improving of this Doctrine.

Something in the very close of the last Exercise was spoken to you. May I now
without any check from within, appear among you this Morning, as a reprover for
God, and in the behalf of God, and in the behalf of Christ, and not be
accounted needlessly and causlesly to pick a quarrel. I remember what David said
to his quarrelsom Brother, upon occasion of his coming unto the Camp, when he
was inquiring what would be done to the man that should slay the Philistine: He
replies to his quarrelling Brother; What have I done, is there not a cause? So,
if so be there should be any inward secret quarrel at what shall be spoken, in
way of reproof and blame, I would speak as. David did, and say, Is there not a
cause?

The Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is unquestionably, and
undeniably, precious Knowledge, -- excellent Knowledge, -- profitable and
beneficial Knowledge: but, is it prized? is it pursued? will our Consciences
bear us witness, that we are upon our endeavors after it, that we may advance
and improve in it, and that we may answer the duty of this Text, which makes
this charge upon us, that we grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord
Jesus? If our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and he knows
all things. Is there not a Conscience within us that can witness against us,
that this precious Knowledge it was never very precious unto us? This Knowledge
did never come to be pleasant to our souls; so pleasant, as that we could say
with the Apostle, We account all things but loss and dung for the excellency of
the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. May it not, without
breaking the bounds of charity, be thought and judged that there are many, yea,
very many, that profess the Name of Christ, and would be in account for
Godliness, that know little or nothing, and nothing at all to any purpose
concerning the Lord Jesus, and are not at all troubled at it, that they should
be so unacquainted with this Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ? And are there
not such as are apt to think, that they know as much concerning Christ, and the
Mysteries of his Kingdom, as much as need to be known; and so there is no cause
why they should much trouble themselves with such a busisiness as this, for to
be solicitous about the knowing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I would speak this Morning in this part of the Discourse, to two sorts of
persons.

First of all, to such (if such there be among us, possibly there may be some
such, though I hope not altogether so many) that are strangers unto any true
saving Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; peradventure they have some common
notions of Christ, and can (as I said) patter over a form of words, and say, I
believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy
Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered under Pontius Pilate, and was
crucified, dead and buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God; they can patter over such a form of
words, but to little or no purpose in the world, and upon the matter are as
blind as Beetles, as Batts; see nothing, understand nothing to purpose
concerning the Mystery, Which is Christ in his People, the hope of Glory. O
that there were not such to be found, as setting aside the Name of Christ, they
have heard of such a name in the World, by common fame and report, but know no
more of Christ than the very Heathens, and Pagans, and those that never were
within the line of Gospel Communication: I am verily persuaded that there are
such to be found within the territories of this Nation, that can give no more
account of Christ, and of the Mysteries that concern him, than the grossest
Heathens that ever were in the World, excepting common fame of him, and report
that is taken up, which they can give no good account of in all the world; and
so truly, such persons may be sent to School to the Devil (but that he does not
keep a School for Christ, and to teach the Knowledge of Christ) but is a
desperate enemy to it; but otherwise, as touching the ability of the Devil, and
of the damned Spirits, truly there are many, I, many might be sent to School to
the Devil to learn of him: understand me aright; I say, as touching his
ability, for he is notionally, and apprehensively, and indeed by a necessity,
he is very much knowing of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Devils are: We know thee
who thou art, even the holy one of God. This was the profession that the Devils
made; they did know him when he was in the World, and they do know now what he
is, and what account is to be given of him, and that he will appear to their
everlasting confusion and condemnation. Thus it is, these persons are in no
condition to grow in the Knowledge of Christ, for they have not so much as the
first grounds and principles of that Knowledge, but rude and raw, and
altogether unseen in those Mysteries that concern the Lord Jesus Christ: It is
somewhat strange, that persons living in a Land of light, and of
Gospel-discovery, that there should be any found under such gross darkness; but
it is too true, that there are too many in that condition. I have read, and you
have heard it accounted to you (it has been both by my self, and by other
hands) by a learned Divine, of an ancient man, that lived for forty years under
a powerful constant Ministry, and yet when he came to lie upon his deathbed,
and was examined concerning his Knowledge (truly it would make ones heart to
tremble to give the account) of God, and of Christ, and of his Soul, and of his
final estate: I forbear to give you the answers which were made. -- If so be
that we should deal with some, and it may be some of long standing in the
world, and take a course to catechize and examine what they know of Jesus
Christ, of his Person, of his Natures, of his Offices and Administrations, and
of his Sufferings, and of his present state of Glory; it may be we should find
an utter inability to give any tolerable account of these things. -- Now, will
you but consider a little what follows upon this, what the Judgment is that is
to be made concerning such, how sad their condition is, that are unacquainted
with this Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

First, Suppose they have any Knowledge of God, either by nature, or by common
illumination, by what way soever; if there be not the Knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, truly whatever they know of God, will never turn to their
comfort, and benefit, and advantage, but rather prove their torment: He that
sins, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God; whatsoever
Knowledge he may have of him, God he has not, and that Knowledge will prove
his torment; whatsoever a man may know of the infinite Being, the glorious
Majesty of his infinite Wisdom, and Power, and Godhead; whatsoever Knowledge
he has, it will be the torment of the Soul at last, if so be that there be not
a Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. I offer this to be considered of, How can such believe? How shall they
believe on him of whom they have not heard, and whom they have not known? And
if there be no believing, there can be no salvation; for he that believes not
shall be damned.

3. How can they love him? How can they love Christ, that know not Christ? And
what a dreadful sentence is gone out against them that love not the Lord Jesus,
1 Cor. 16. Them that love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let them be Anathema,
Maranatha, accursed. The Lord will come.

4. How can they repent that know not Christ? There can be no true right
repentance, where there is not the Knowledge of Christ; it is the Knowledge of
Christ, and of God in Christ, that brings the heart over to repentance: The
Soul will never come to repent with a repentance unto life, if so be there be
not an apprehension of the Grace of God in our Lord Jesus Christ: -- And then
consider the danger; except we repent, we shall be sure to perish.

5. How apt are such to rise up in opposition to God, to Christ, and the ways
of the Gospel, that know him not? Observe that Scripture, 1 Ioh. 16. The time
will come, when they will excommunicate you, cast you out of their Synagogues,
and they that kill you shall think they do God service in so doing. -- And why?
-- because they know neither the Father nor me; they know not me nor my Father,
and therefore they will do these things to you, and yet they will think they do
God very good service. This is the mischief that follows upon the ignorance of
Christ.

6. Consider this, That sad speech of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 14. If our Gospel be
hid, and Christ who is held forth in the Gospel, why then the Gospel is hid to
them that are lost; in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of
them that believe not.

7. I argue thus, If it be as our Savior speaks, eternal life to know the true
God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ our Lord, Ioh. 17. why then it
follows on the contrary, This is eternal death to be ignorant of the true God,
and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

8. And then I add further, That this will be the aggravation of the guilt of
such persons as minded not the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, never set
their hearts to seek after it; this will be the aggravation, That light did
come into the world, and yet they love darkness rather than light; that there
was a blessed beaming out of the light of the Knowledge of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, and yet no regard at all unto that Knowledge, nor no improvement
of those means whereby that knowledge might be attained: This will be the
condemnation, and the aggravating of the guilt, and the strengthening of the
condemnation.

9. I add yet further, That such persons as are awanting to the Knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ, especially in a day wherein this Knowledge may be had
and attained: I say this; such persons, they lie open to a dreadful stroke of
judgment in this world; according to that which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14.
If any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. It runs in the same form and frame
with that dreadful passage, in Rev. 22. Him that is unjust, let him be unjust
still; let him that is filthy, be filthy still. This is spoken, not in an
approving way, but in a judicial way; Let them that are filthy, be filthy
still: And I have had occasion lately to speak upon this Scripture, that this
Judgment is now in execution amain at this very day; That they that have been
unjust, and formal, and hypocritical, and would not own the holy ways of God
when they were discovered to them, and clearly made known, but dote upon their
own fancies; Judgment is gone out upon them, let them be filthy still, let them
be vain, and formal, and superstitious, and what not; and let them so live, and
so die. So in this form the Apostle gives out the Judgment, If any man be
ignorant; one that lives under the means of light and knowledge of our Lord
Jesus, having a price in his hand to get Knowledge, and has no heart to it,
does not care for the commodity, has it not in any due esteem; he would rather
be acquainted with the mysteries of a Trade, than with the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God; be more acquainted with the politics of the World, than with
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, and so sets light by this Knowledge;
that Judgment, such are in danger to have it go out against them. If any man be
ignorant, and have a mind to be ignorant, and his heart is not touched with the
sense of the knowledge of Christ, nor his affections does not move and stir
within him after that knowledge, that he may come to be made partaker of it; If
any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant, let him go on in his blindness, let
the Devil blindfold him, and hood-wink him; he will not see, he shall not see
till he come to see in a judicial way.

And then I close up this branch of the Discourse thus: Think but this, and let
this be seriously considered of, by all that neglect the good knowledge of
Christ, and do not set their hearts upon it, are not carried out in desire
after an advance in it. The day will come, when they that will not know Christ
now, care not to be acquainted with him, and with the Mysteries of his Kingdom;
the day will come when Christ will know them, I, but so as that he will not
know them. Here Is a paradox, but yet it is a truth; the day will come when
Christ will know them, so as never to know them to all eternity; he will know
them with a knowledge of apprehension, in a judicial way; he will know them to
have been such as cared not to know him; he will know them to have been such as
never set their hearts upon this good knowledge, this excellent beneficial
knowledge, that they might be partakers of; he will know them to be such as
have neglected all those blessed means which have been afforded to them, that
they might come to advance in the Knowledge of Christ, -- I, and he will know
them so as not to know them, and profess unto them, Depart from me ye workers
of iniquity, I never knew you: you would not know me, you would not know the
Mysteries of my Kingdom: I do declare here before all the world, I never knew
you, nor I never will, I will never know you, not to the days of eternity; I
never did know you, I never will know you, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. Let these things be considered which I have thus spoken, with respect
unto such as do not mind the Knowledge of Christ.

But now 2ly. And it may be this may more concern the generality of the
Auditory.

But before I come to that, some may be apt to say; O, but I hope we are
without the reach of this lash, for we do know, we know Christ, and we can give
an account of Christ; many are apt to think thus, and to fancy thus with
themselves, that they are good Proficients in this Knowledge: But I say, take
heed that the light that is in us be not darkness, and the knowledge that is in
us be not found to be ignorance. -- What knowledge is it? -- It may be a
formal, notional knowledge (as I spoke before) many they can clatter over a
form of words concerning Christ, they can say their Belief from one end to the
other, and not miss a word; and this is all their Religion, they understand
nothing of what they say; they have gotten a form of words settled upon their
memories, but alas, they understand nothing of what they say. But I shall speak
more to that.

But the second way that this reproof goes, and this complaint, it looks upon
the faces of persons concerning whom there is better hope, that they may know,
and know to some good purpose, and yet not know to such a degree as they ought
to do, and so are culpable as not answering the duty of the Text, which
requires a growth in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. You
may be able to make a Judgment, by the things that have been so largely handled
in the Doctrinal part of this Text: Much has been spoken, according to what my
line would reach to, concerning the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And here now is this to consider of, whether we be not deserving blame upon
this account, that though we know something, and it may be something to good
purpose, in the saving knowledge of Christ; yet we have not set our hearts to
make the advance in this knowledge, and that progress, and to come to such a
measure and degree in knowledge as we ought and might have done, according to
time and means; and truly I think that there is none of us, but we may find
this cause to complain, Ah, sweet Savior, how little do I know of thee? I
remember how that holy Agur does bemoan himself, even upon such a like account,
Prove. 30. Surely I am more brutish than any man, I have not the understanding
of a man; I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy: Thus he
bemoans himself. O, surely, surely, we may most complain and say, O sweet
Savior, how little a matter do I know of thee? Some little smatterings there
are, but alas, it is nothing to what might be known and apprehended concerning
thee.

And what is the fruit of this, That Believers, holy Persons, such as have the
grace of God in truth, have not more advance in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Mysteries of his Kingdom: what are the consequences? and truly
the consequences are the evidences that there is not that advance, and that
growth in this holy Knowledge. How sad are the consequences that Christians
know no more of God, are not more insighted in the Mysteries concerning Christ.

1. Whence it comes to pass, That we advance no more in faith; for undoubtedly,
if we grow more in Knowledge, we should grow more in Faith: Did we but more
clearly apprehend and understand the Mysteries of the Gospel concerning our
Lord Jesus, what a curious cast there is in the business of salvation, by Jesus
Christ; did we but more clearly understand, and apprehend, and know the
continuance of that Mystery, it would most largely contribute to the promoting
of a Believers faith; and the unbelief would fall flat down on its face before
this Knowledge, if so be it were but duly improved.

2. Again, This is the consequence: We love the Lord Jesus, with a poor
inconsiderable degree of love. -- Why? Because we know but little, little of
his excellencies, little of that pretiousness that is inhim; and as our
knowledge is, so will our love be; much knowledge, much love; little knowledge,
little love: Surely, if we had but more through acquaintance with Christ, we
should come to have our hearts more fired with the love of Christ; our hearts
would burn within us, if so be that we had but more intimate acquaintance with
him, and had but a more clear understanding of the Mysteries of the Gospel.

3. And so for Desire. O, if so be there were but that advance in the Knowledge
of our Lord Jesus, our desires would sparkle and flame out most strongly after
this desirable Christ. When the Spouse had informed the Daughters of Jerusalem
what a choice one, what an incomparable one he was, then they cry out, O thou
fairest among Women, tell us whither thy Beloved is gone, that we may seek him
with thee.

4. Whence is it, that there is so much straightheartedness to the precious
privileges of the Gospel, that we do not prize them more, that we do not set
our hearts more upon them? -- That great privilege of Justification, -- of
Adoption, -- of access to God -- of acceptance with God, -- and that God should
not be ashamed to be called our God (to which I spoke the last day.) Whence is
it that we be not taken more with holy admirings of these great and glorious
privileges, but because we are not more insighted in the Mystery of the
Gospel concerning Christ. Whence is it that we do not make more account of
Justification, forgiveness of sins, which is a most precious mercy? We do not
know Christ as we should, and what it cost him to bring over to us the
forgiveness of our sins.

5. Whence is it that we are so apt to be tampering with that accursed thing,
with sin, that we are so apt to be upon compliance with it, and upon
gratifications of it, and of the lusts of it? We know not Christ; did we know
Christ, what he suffered, that he might satisfy the Justice of God for the
sins of his People, what soul-conflicts he had, and how he was pressed under
the burden of the wrath of God, that he might deliver his People from the
everlasting Curse and Condemnation, it would make us fear and tremble, and take
heed how ever we deal with that accursed thing, and throw away that bloody
knife that cut the very throat, and stabbed the very heart of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

6. Whence is it that we are so apt to be meddling with the World, and apt to
have our hearts set upon these beggarly vanities here below? Whence is it, but
because we know not our Lord Jesus Christ as we ought to know? Did we but know
what a precious Christ he was, we would set light by the World, and account
nothing of it in comparison of the Lord Jesus.

7. Whence is it that poor souls are so apt to be tossed with every wind of
Temptation, and to be unsettled upon every occasion, as touching their peace and
inward comfort, but because they are very short in the knowledge of the
Mystery concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, and the riches of Grace that
discovers it self in him? As, let the guile be what it can be that may be
represented to the Conscience, the Conscience may yet upon the true knowledge
and apprehension of the Grace of God in our Lord Jesus, bear up with boldness,
and make a challenge unto men and devils, and say, Who shall lay any thing unto
our charge, when we know that concerning Christ, concerning his Death,
concerning the merit of his Sacrifice, concerning his Acceptance with the
Father, concerning his pleading in the behalf of his People at his Father's
right hand? We have that knowledge of the Lord Jesus that we bear up with
glorious confidence, and with blessed boldness; and we are not afraid to look
men and devils in the face; we know who it is that is once for all entered into
the holy place that is not made with hands, and appears before God in heaven,
representing the merit of his Sacrifice; and for our parts we now can triumph
with a holy boldness, and say, Who shall lay any thing to our charge? We have
no conscience of sin; though we make conscience of sinning, yet we have no
conscience to charge against us: O this would be our fruit of the well advanced
and improved knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

These things, Brethren, would be considered of by us; and to close up this
part of the Discourse, I have only this to say, That if so be that any of us do
think in our consciences that we deserve to come under this lash of reproof,
and that this Complaint may be justly taken up against us, That we have not so
minded as we ought, the knowledge of Christ, and have not set our endeavors as
we should, that we may come to grow in this knowledge. Then to close up all
(for I would willingly give a dispatch to this part of the Text) I would only
speak a few words in a way of Exhortation; and I would thus persuade in the
Name of the Lord,

That as it is the duty of the Text, so it may be the matter of your practice
for to grow in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. -- And here
you must consider, that this knowledge, as also the Grace that God gives, so
the knowledge that you may have, and are to have of Christ, it comes not in all
at once. Shall I express my self thus if it may not be too low for the
Argument:) The Lord, in managing of his Trade with his People, he does not deal
by wholesale, but rather by retale; he does parcel out, and give by parcels,
dispences by parcels; now a little, and then a little; now a little Grace, then
a little more; now a little light, and then a little further improvement: The
Sun, it gives not out its full light at once; so Christ, and therefore it is
that there is a growth in Grace, and a growth in Knowledge, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus. So then, reckon upon it, we are but in the way,
and so we know but in part, and prophecy but in part; and we are not
comprehensaries, we come not to the full of that which is to be known; press
on, and after, and increase in the Knowledge of Christ. I need no other
Arguments than what have been already presented to you in the Doctrinal part.

It is the most excellent Knowledge.

It is the most beneficial Knowledge in all respects, according to what has
been accounted to you. Now, there are but these three things, which I shall
dispatch in fevv words.

First, I would have you to consider, what knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ it is that you are to grow in; not a notional knowledge, not so much
in that, so as you should rest in a bare notional knowledge, and a form of
knowledge; but you must know this, That the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus,
which you are to endeavor a growth in, it is a spiritual Knowledge, an
inward spiritual Knowledge, a heart Knowledge; it is not a knowledge of Christ
after the flesh, no, not in that sense which the Apostle may mean in the second
of the Corinthians, We have known Christ after the flesh; that is, they knew
him, and they knew him so as to see him with their bodily eyes; it is not this
Knowledge of Christ: though, if you have this spiritual Knowledge, you will in
due time have this knowledge and sight of him; but now we know Christ no more
so (as he says there.) Though we have known Christ after the flesh, as he was
known to the Disciples when he was here in the state of humiliation, and
conversant in the World; We have known Christ after the flesh, but henceforth
know we him so no more: Nor is it any carnal Knowledge, but to increase in the
Knowledge of Christ, according to the Mystery, which is Christ in you, the
hope of Glory. You should labor to increase in the Knowledge of him, which
answers his Constitution, who was made a Priest, Prophet and King; not after
the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless life; as in
Heb. 7.

You are to endeavor increase in the Knowledge of Christ, which is a confiding
knowledge, -- and a conforming Knowledge; -- such a knowledge of him as is a
fiducial knowledge, -- such a knowledge, as that by knovving him, to come to
be more and more enabled to rest and rely upon him; that you can say, I know
so much of the Lord Jesus, that I can sit down and look no further; I have
enough, I have the desire of my heart, here I can boldly trust, here I can fix
and stay, without any misgivings; I know this foundation is strong enough to
bear up the whole weight of my soul.

And then you are to endeavor to grow in that Knowledge, which is a conforming
knowledge, that knowledge by which you come to be molded into a conformity to
the Lord Jesus; so as what you know of his Wisdom, and Meekness, and Patience,
and Humility, and Heavenly mindedness, you know him in these things, so as that
you come to grow up into conformity to him: This is the Knowledge, or else your
light will be darkness, and your knowledge will be found to be ignorance.

And then I press upon you, that you would endeavor to grow in the Knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Now, what especially of the Knowledge of Christ
would you have us to grow in? -- I Will only mention two things briefly.

First, That you would labor to grow more and more in the Knowledge of the
infinite fullness, and sufficiency, and power of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
may know what a powerful Christ he is, what an able Christ he is, how able to
do exceeding abundantly above all you ask or think. I reremember it was the
blessing of Judah, that his hand should be sufficient for him, Deuteronomy. 33. Christ
is the head of Judah, he is the Lord of Judah's Tribe; and to be sure this
blessing rests upon his head, his hand shall be sufficient for him, to remove
Mountains, to break gates of brass, to cut in sunder bars of iron; he is able
to do all that concerns his Church, and every Saint that belongs to him, and
that the Father has given him; he is present to go through his work, and he
will not leave any part nor parcel of it undone. O this is precious knowledge,
which we should endeavor to advance in, that we may come to be more full in
the apprehensions of the fullness of sufficiency, of the power of our Lord
Jesus, that whatsoever work lies upon his hand to perform, he will be found
all-sufficient to accomplish and bring to pass; he is sufficient to present all
that the Father has given him, without spot and blame, before the presence of
his Glory, with exceeding joy; and though there be the power of Devils, and
World, and Corruption, that may labor for to wrest a soul out of the hands of
Christ, why says he, None shall be ever able to pluck them out of my hands.
And then,

2ly. That you would know the singular eminency of the love of Christ, which is
a love that passes knowledge. And the Apostle presses this upon us, in Ephesians. 3.
says he, I bow my knees, etc. that you may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, the heights, and depths, and breadths, and lengths. -- And what do
these dimensions refer to? -- Why, says he, That you may know the love of
Christ that passes knowledge; that you may know it in the height of it, in the
depths, in the breadths, in the lengths of it. O, says he, this is the
Knowledge that I would have you increase and grow in, that so you may come to
be filled with all the fullness of God. O this love is such a love as we can
never know enough of, That Christ has such love to his Father, as to comply
with his designs concerning a sinful World; -- and that he should bear such
love to a company of vile wretches, ugly, defiled, loathsome creatures, that he
would not stick at the laying down of his Life, and shedding his Blood to save
them from eternal vengeance. O, says the Apostle, study this, that you may
comprehend the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of the love of
Christ, which passes Knowledge, and then shall you come to be filled with all
the fullness of God.

I have only this one thing further: -- But what shall we do to grow in the
Knowledge of Christ?

First, When you have improved well; To him that has shall be given.

Labor to be more humble: If you be of meek and humble frames of heart, and do
not swell with notions, truly Christ will delight to communicate more of his
Knowledge to you.

And then love him more: If you would love him more, you should know him more;
as knowledge will help to increase love, so love to Christ upon what we do
know, will contribute to the promoting of our Knowledge.

And then, what you do know, make use of it, practice it, and labor to keep in
an obediential frame: If any man will do his will, he shall know, etc.

And then you must pray for this Knowledge, that the Lord would open the eyes
of your understanding: I am a stranger in the earth, O hide not thy
Commandments from me.

And then, the whole Scriptures, they testify of Christ; and if you would know
much of Christ, be much in the study of the Scriptures. There are two
Scriptures, which I would (not in the least to take you off from the searching
into others) have persons to be well studied in, to desire to advance in the
Knowledge of Christ: -- There is first, the Song of Solomon, -- and the Book of
the Revelations. The Song of Solomon: The studying of that Book, will much
promote your knowledge in the love of Christ, when you shall come to see what a
spirit breaths in that blessed Book, that Song of Songs, what a spirit of love
does breath there; you will come to know the love of Christ, how dear he is
over his Spouse, over his Children, over all that are given to him: O how he
delights in them, and to hold converse with them, and how he can overlook
their spots and blemishes, and look upon them as fair, and having no spot in
them. It is admirable to consider what endeavors there are on the part of
Christ over his beloved Spouse: that Book well studied, will promote your
Knowledge in the love of Christ. -- And then, the Book of the Revelations, it
is a Scripture that is given us for precious purposes; and being well studied,
it will contribute much to the advancing in the knowledge of Christ, of his
Glory, and Power, and Greatness. There we come to have discoveries made to us,
of what Enemies he has, -- and what Victories he shall get, -- and what
triumphs he shall maintain, -- and what glory shall be settled upon him, -- and
what enjoyments there shall be between him and the Bride in due time; and we
shall come to understand more fully what blessed days, Sunshine days, days of
light and liberty, of joy and comfort, when tears shall be wiped away from the
eyes of his poor mourners here on earth, and they shall come to Zion with
everlasting joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

And so I have done with this Knowledge. Now, the Lord make you wise to
consider, and give us hearts to set to it, that we may answer our duty
according to the charge in the Text.

SERMON. XIX.
2 PET. 3. 18. To him be Glory, both now and for ever. Amen.
HAving spent several years in the handling of this Chapter; and having in the
former Exercise, been driving at this, That there may be a growing in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; I am now to issue all that has
been spoken, according to what the Text now guides me to, in a Doxologie, that
is, in an honorable acknowledgment of the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Person unto
whom Glory is most righteously to be ascribed. Thus the words signify to us,
according to the sound of them, To him be glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

Words of precious import, words of common use. It were much to be wished, both
for Ministers and Christians, that are upon the frequent usage of them, that it
may be very carefully looked unto, that while we keep a form of words, and hold
up a form of words, and make use of them in ordinary course, we be not awanting
to that which is imported in them; and lose not the Spirit, while we hold forth
the Letter.

To him be Glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

And there is infinite cause, that when these words sound in our ears, we
should be most free to say our Amen unto them; a sweet close of a sacred and
saving piece of Scripture: And truly it is well becoming men and women
professing godliness, for to be most cordial unto the uttering and expressing
of this language, the language of the Text.

It Is a becoming close for every Sermon that is Preached, for every Prayer that
is made, for every Duty performed, for every Mercy that is received, and for all
that is testified of God and Christ, to issue all thus; Now unto him be glory,
both now and for ever, Amen. We have the Letter; the great matter is, to look
to it, that we lose not the Spirit, that we be not (as I said) in the usage of
a form, and in the mean time be strangers to the Power.

There is some difference as to words, and phrase, and form of expression,
between this Doxologie, and some others that we meet withal in holy Writ. The
Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, he forms the Doxologie thus, Chap.
16. 25. To him that is of power to establish you, according to my Gospel, and
the preaching of Jesus Christ. To God only wise, be glory, through Jesus Christ
for ever, Amen. -- In Ephesians. 3. we have the Doxologie formed thus: Now unto him
that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the Church by
Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen. In 1 Timothy 1. we
have the Doxologie formed thus: Now unto the king eternal, immortal, invisible,
the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen. In the Epistle
of Jude, we have the Doxologie formed thus: Now unto him that is able to keep
you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory
with exceeding joy: To the only wise God our Savior, be glory, and majesty,
dominion and power, now and ever. Amen. -- And in the Text thus: To him, that
is, to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, To him him be glory, both now and for
ever. Amen. These are the Scripture Doxologies (some of them) which I have now
referred you to: And you may observe, there is something of variation in words
and terms; and whereas in the other Doxologies, the glory is ascribed and voted
up unto God by Jesus Christ in the Churches, here the Doxologie is made to
refer unto our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and so the Apostle carries it in
reference unto Christ. To him be glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

You must not think that Peter was more devoted to the promoting of the honor
of Christ, than of the Father, and of the Spirit; nor that he does exclude the
Father, and the Spirit; the eternal Father, and the eternal Spirit, from out of
the bounds of this Doxologie: -- or that he has not an holy aim at the Glory
of the Father, and of the Spirit, as well as at the Glory of the Lord Jesus,
the second Person; no, nothing less than so. The truth is, no man can honor
the Son, but in honoring him he honors the Father and the Spirit too; no
person can give glory to Christ, but he must give glory to the Father and to
the Spirit too: but the wisdom of the Spirit appears in this, and his
direction, that sometimes the Doxologie should in terms be referred unto God,
Father, Son, and holy Spirit; sometimes it should be so formed, as to have a
reference unto the second Person, considered as Mediator; and so in the Text:
-- And there may be some reason why the Apostle Peter should refer this
Doxologie unto our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, not mentioning in terms, the
Father, or the Spirit, and putting it in the ordinary form; To God only wise,
To the great God, be glory for ever. But thus; To him, who is our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, be glory, now and for ever. There may be this
apprehension, that the Apostle Peter minding and remembering the great
disservice that he had done to Christ, when he was under his abasing, and what
dishonor was done to him by his threefold shameful denying of him; he would
now leave the best Testimony behind him that he could, of his devotedness to
the exalting of his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, he would leave the best
Testimony to all Posterity that he could: And so in this Epistle, and in this
closing Doxologie, he makes mention of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
voting and wishing up, making this application to him, praying this, and
wishing this, and voting this unto him, that Glory may be unto him, both now
and for ever, Amen. And so you have this more general account concerning these
words.

Where you have some matter, To him be glory: To him; to whom? To our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. To him be Glory; a Duty, or a Vote, an Apprecation, that
is, a praying unto him. A fit word to be used, the sense whereof, is as I say,
an Apprecation, a praying up to Christ, a praying over to Christ, a voting over
to Christ; To him be glory. This is the Apprecation.

And then there is the Time; To him be Glory, Now: Now let him have Glory, now
while there is time, while time continues, and as long as there is any time; as
long as there is a Now, as long as we can say Now, why so long let glory be to
him: To him be glory Now, now in this present time, and as long as time shall
continue, as long as there is but a nick of time; if there be but a Now of
time, one now, even now, and in this present time, be glory to him.

And then, For ever; not now only, but let it, be for ever; let it be a
standing business, let there be acknowledgment of honor and glory to Christ:
Now; I, and when there shall be no more time, even in Eternity, let there be an
acknowledgment of Glory to Christ Jesus. Now, and for ever; in the Original it
is (...), unto the day of Eternity. Now, and unto the day of Eternity, to him
be Glory; to him be Glory now, and to him be Glory, In diem eternitatis, ^en to
the day of Eternity: Such a day there (...) come, and it will be such a day as
will swallow up Time, that came out of the womb of Eternity, before Time was;
and Time shall be swallowed up of the Eternity that shall follow, when Time
shall be no more; and that shall be a standing and lasting day, a day that
shall know no night, and a day that shall know no limits and bounds, but it
shall be a lasting day, and a day of Eternity: Such a day there will be, which
shall be a dreadful day unto wicked ones, that live and die in unbelief and
impenitency; they shall have a day, or rather a night of eternity, a black
burning night that will never have a dawning morning, no, never have a dawning
morning.

But then there will be a bright and lightsom Sunshine day, that shall never
have a cloud upon it, a day of Eternity; and in this day of Eternity, this work
is to be performed; and this Glory in this long day of Eternity, is appointed
and voted up to the Lord Jesus; To him be Glory, both now, and to the day (...)
Eternity.

And then we have the confirmation of all, Amen. O let it be so, Amen; O so it
shall be, unto this Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, be Glory for ever, Amen; O
be it so, Amen; O it shall be so. I, thus the Apostle shuts up this precious
Doxologie, this blessed Epistle which I have treated of so long.

Now, what are we to gather from hence? This is the only thing that remains to
be done, which is, to give you an account of this one Point from the Text.

That they that are acted by a Gospel Spirit, and have any saving Knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are and will be most strongly devoted
to the Glory of Jesus Christ, to have Glory given to Jesus Christ. This is the
Doctrine, and consider of it well, Now and for ever, and will come in with
their vote, and say, Amen. This is the thing that I offer.

There was never since the Gospel sounded in the World; never any person that
heard and knew this joyful sound, but they would have a tongue to say, Now unto
him be glory, both now and for ever. Amen. Those references which I made before
to the Doxologie, in the Epistle to the Romans, Ephesians, Timothy, Jude, and
other places which might have been referred unto; they are all a sufficient
proof of this Doctrine that I have now delivered unto you, That such a spirit
does act in all those that know the Lord Jesus Christ to any purpose, that this
is the proper spirit and genous of the Gospel, and of a Gospel spirit, for to
have Honor, and Glory, and Dominion, and Majesty given up to Christ. Paul was
most lively to this discovery, as appears by those Scriptures; when he comes to
fall upon the mentioning of Christ, he would make a diversion of purpose,
leaving the prosecution of his cause, that he might give up honor to the Lord
Jesus Christ; as in 1 Timothy 1. says he, speaking before, I was such and such a
Persecutor, and a Blasphemer, and the chiefest of sinners; Howbeit (says he)
for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth
all long suffering, for a pattern to them which hereafter should believe on him
to eternal life. -- Now mark you the diversion; out of the pregnancy of his
Gospel spirit, he leaves the Argument he was driving, and breaks forth upon
this Doxologie; as if he should say, O I have mentioned Jesus Christ, Now to
the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory,
for ever and ever. Amen. He cannot mention him without a Doxologie; O unto this
only wise God, this Lord Jesus Christ, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Now, there is infinite cause and reason why there should be such an
apprecation (understand the word Appre^ation, a praying to Christ.) I have said
already, it is the spirit of the Gospel, and they that are acted by that
spirit, will be most pregnant this way, they cannot hold. The Disciples ^id, We
cannot but speak the things that concern the honor of God, and the Glory of
Christ, we are not able to hold our peace; and when the Disciples were rebuked,
and the Children, for crying Hosanna, etc. Why, says Christ, if they should
hold their peace, the very stones would speak; they must be crying out, Glory
to God, Honor to Christ. -- This was that which was prophesied in Psalm. 72.
where you have that that concerns Christ, v. 15. He shall (...) t^ sole of the
poor and needy from deceit and violence, and precious shall their blood be in
his sight; he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba.
Typically understand it according to the time of Solomon, who should be very
much enriched with offerings; but understand it in the Mystery of Christ; To
him shall be given of the gold of Sheba ^e gold of Praise, and honor and
Glory: Prayer also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be
praised. Understand this of Christ in the Mystery; Prayer also shall be made
for him continually. -- What Prayer? -- Does Christ in heaven need the prayers
of his People? -- Understand, -- They shall be continually praying up his
Glory, an apprecation of Glory to Jesus: O let him be glorified, O let him be
exalted, O let his Name be magnified; Prayer shall continually be made for him,
that his Name may be lifted up in the World, that his Kingdom may be enlarged,
that his Throne may be established, that upon his head the Crown may flourish.
It was the manner of old, to vote up, and to make apprecation, Let the King
live for ever; why, O King, O Jesus, live for ever; O Jesus, be thou glorified
for ever; O Jesus, let thy throne flourish; O Jesus, let thy Crown flourish
upon thy head: why this is the apprecation. And as I was saying, there is
infinite cause why it should be thus, and that this language should sound in
every mouth, where there is any touch upon the heart; To him be glory, now and
(...) (...). Amen.

First, This is that which does most fully comport with God the Father's design
concerning his Son: For mark you, Christ having (...) the Father by his most
voluntary and (...) subj^ ^o him in the service of the (...), and in (...) o^
the saving of souls. (...) (...) (...) (...) the Father in this great (...)
(...) saving (...) world, why the Father now sets hi^ (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) to glorify him, and that is the (...) (...) (...) God, to have the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ lifted up, that Christ may be glorified; and God the
Father, and God the Spirit, do not account themselves honored and glorified,
if the Lord Jesus ^ist be not glorified: So that I say, in that regard ^s most
righteous that it should be thus, that there should be an apprecation, and a
wishing, and voting up of Honor and Glory to Christ, because it is that
wherein we do most fully comport with the design of the great God, concerning
his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; he having humbled himself, and becoming
obedient unto the death of the Cross, God has exalted him, and given him a
Name which is above every name; and he will have Honor and Glory given to
Christ.

2ly. Consider this, Christ is most worthy of it, in respect of himself; he is
most worthy to have an apprecation made of Glory to him, and that every
breathing soul should breath out after this manner, and say, To him be glory,
now and for ever. Amen.

Worthy of it, O most worthy of it, that every thing that has breath should
give Glory to him. Do but consider that passage, in Rev. 5. 11, 12. I heard the
voice of many Angels round about the throne, and the beasts, and the elders;
and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands. Do but weigh this, think with your selves what a vote here was; The
voice of many Angels, and the beasts, and the elders, and the number of them
was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands. -- and what is
the^r vo^e? -- Saying with a loud voice, WORTHY IS THE LAMB THAT WAS SLAIN, to
receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing; and every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under
the earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, Blessing, honor, glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever. Mark what a spirit here is:
Here Is the vote of Angels and Saints in the fullest conjunction, Nemine contra
dicente, not one contradicting, voting up Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and
Power, to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever.

He is worthy; worthy is the Lamb.

Upon what account worthy? -- Worthy, because the Lamb; yea, I say, worthy is
the Lamb, because he is the Lamb; the Lamb of God, the Lamb that was slain; its
a name that he delights to be known by, the Lamb upon Mount Sion; worthy is the
Lamb that was slain.

And because a Lamb slain, because he was pleased to become an Offering and a
Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, and would undertake to redeem a People
unto God by his Blood; worthy therefore to have this acknowledgment made to
him, O worthy, worthy is the Lamb that was slain.

Here now I have a large field to walk in, but that I would contract my self,
and dispatch the Point: The Lord Jesus Christ, worthy.

Consider first of all, who he is for his Person; why he is the brightness of
his Father's glory, the express image of his person; worthy therefore to have
Glory given to him.

2. What is he for his Name? Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, everlasting
Father, Prince of Peace, the Lord our righteousness, King of Kings, Lord of
Lords, the blessed and only Potentate, the Prince of the Kings of the earth;
his Name is as an ointment poured forth: Well may it be said, To him be glory,
now and for ever.

3. Consider his Qualifications; The only begotten of the Father, full of
Grace: Then, if full of Grace, worthy to be full of Glory. Grace leads in
Glory, and Glory does most properly follow Grace: Who should have Glory, but
they that have Grace? Why none have so much Grace as Christ, he was as full of
Grace as ever he could hold: Now, where should Glory rest, but upon him that is
full of Grace? Therefore worthily is it said, To him be Glory.

4. Then again, Consider this Jesus, this Lord Jesus, Why he suffered, he
suffered for sin; The just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. He
suffered, and by suffering made satisfaction to infinite Justice; he has
expiated the sins of his People, provided for the purging of their Consciences;
he has made way by his own. Blood for an entrance into the Holiest. Now, is
there not reason to say, To him be glory, both now and for ever? Mark what our
Savior speaks after his Resurrection, says he, Thus it is written, and thus
it behoved Christ to suffer: And what then? And afterward to enter into his
glory. It behoved him first to suffer, and then to enter into Glory; and he
has entered into Glory, and it is our duty for to follow him with loudest
acclamations, and to say, yea, yea, To him be glory, now and for ever. Amen.

5. And then again, Christ is most worthy to have these acclamations, and such
Doxologies, a voting up, and applecation of Glory to him. Why? Because all the
Glory that ever any Saint on earth shall have, or Saint in heaven does possess,
all that Glory comes over to thereby the Lord Jesus Christ. Whatsoever Glory
any soul here shall be partaker of, or hereafter in the Kingdom of Glory, they
are to reckon themselves beholding to Christ for it, it comes over to them by
his means. Worthy then is this apprecation to be made to him; and that every
soul that has any hopes of Glory, should say, Now unto him be glory, both now
and for ever. Amen. So that these things being duly weighed, which indeed are
of proper cognizance for men and women professing godliness, and professing to
be acted by a Gospel spirit: What is there that should more properly sound in
an Assembly of People, that attend to the Gospel? What can more properly sound
than this, That unto the King of Sion, the Lamb that was slain, to him that is
the King of the Princes of the earth, -- to him that is set upon the Throne
with his Father, to him that has overcome Principalities and Powers, -- has
made a show of them openly, -- to him that has vanquished Devils and enemies,
and has brought Life and Immortality to light, to him that is now entered into
the Holiest once for all, and appears in the heavens before God, to plead the
Cause of his Peoples souls: What is there more proper in a Congregation of
Saints, to sound out, than this? To him be glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Now in a word, for Application. Are they acted by a Gospel spirit, that design
nothing less than the Glory of Christ; that instead of making apprecations, and
voting up Glory to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, do what in them lies to
cast all the shame, and dishonor, and contempt upon him they can? Is this the
spirit of the Gospel? It Is the spirit of the Devil. That man, be he who he
will; let them be never so high in the World, let them be Kings, and Princes,
and Potentates^ whatsoever names and titles they are known by, whatsoever
dignities and honors they are advanced unto, whatsoever breadth they carry in
the World, whatsoever they are for worldly respects, that are set to cast
contempt upon Christ, and to turn reproach and dishonor upon him; are so far
from being acted by the spirit of the Gospel, that they do walk in the very
spirit of the Devil, and it will appear so.

But are there any such? are there such as walk in such a spirit? -- There were
so of old. O, people be apt to think that they were worthy to be spit in the
face: -- Why? what did they that cried out, Not this man, but Barrabas? Let
this Jesus be crucified, let him be hanged, let him be hanged for a Malefactor,
do him all the shame they can. -- They did so; they buffetted him, they spit
upon him, they smote him with their fists, they knocked him upon the head, they
put him into a fools, coat, they would make him their laughing stock: Thus they
did. -- What was this spirit? Why is this spirit quite worn out of the World?
-- Nay, the Lord be merciful to us, there is a desperate spirit of opposition
to Christ; -- among whom? -- among the Antichristian party. O that it were not
to be found among persons that would be accounted godly, and stand for the
honor of Christ, and make apprecations to him: And they can patter it over in
forms of words, O Glory to Jesus; Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the holy Ghost; they can patter over such words in their mouths, and in the
mean time they carry swords in their hearts against Christ, and their
Conversations speak nothing but dishonor to Christ; shame him in his Name,
shame him in holding out that, shame him in making Profession of him. -- And
why? -- because they live thus unchristian-like, walk most unsutably to the
Gospel, walk most unworthy of their holy Profession; are these men and women
acted by a Gospel spirit, that pretend to the Name of Christ, that express
nothing but that which is quite contrary to Christ? they would be accounted
Christian People, and to have been baptized into Christ's Name, and in the mean
time they make it their business every day to cast dishonor upon Christ,
walking cross to him, and quite contrary to the glorious Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. -- For men and women to rise up in opposition to the Kingdom of
Christ, to the spiritual Worship of Christ, to a holy reformation, and to do
all that ever they can to hinder that God and Christ may not be worshipped in
the beauties of holiness: This is to cry up, To him be shame, instead of
saying, To him be glory, both now and for ever. No, but to him be shame, and to
all his People, and let them be the reproach and scorn of the World.

2ly. And so to close up: If so be that we will approve our selves to be acted
by a Gospel spirit, consider how it must appear; it must appear by holy
apprecations, and votings up of Glory to Christ, and to say, To him be glory;
the Father gives him Glory, the Father reckons Glory to him, the Spirit gives
Glory to him; The Spirit shall glorify me, he shall take of mine, and show it
unto you. -- The Angels give him Glory; Worthy is the Lamb that was slain. --
The twenty four Elders, and the four Beasts make apprecations of Glory; -- an
innumerable number, thousands of thousands, and ten thousand times ten
thousand; they say, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to have Glory. Now, if
you be men and women of a Gospel spirit, let it appear by having your hearts
set to this, to give Glory to Christ; -- wish him Glory, in having the
Government in your own hearts: O, to thee be Glory, sweet Savior, the Glory of
thy Kingdom in my own soul; -- wish him that Glory, the Glory of his Kingdom
enlarged in the World, of having that performed which is foretold, the Kingdoms
of the world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever; wish him that Glory, make an apprecation, vote
it up to him; show the spirit of the Gospel, by having your hearts most
strongly devoted to have Christ exalted in all his offices, Priestly,
Prophetical and Kingly office, that he may come to be the glory of the World,
that he may sway the Scepter, according to what is promised: This is the great
thing that Christians should be set upon. I speak not this as if I would cry
down Civil Magistrates, but that Government which is belonging to Christ, and
according to what he is anointed of the Father to, according to what is
purposed to him; it is that we are to wish to him, all that honor and Glory
that the Father has designed him; this is that we should wish to him, and say
as the Apostle here, To him be glory, now and for ever.

And this is that which we are to do, not in word and tongue, as the Apostle
says; O my little children, let us not love in word and tongue only, but in
deed and truth. So I say to you, my Friends, Let it not be in word and tongue
only, but in heart and reality: O let your lips speak it, let your lives speak
it, To him be glory; so live, so walk and carry your selves; as that you may
give a real proof and demonstration of it, that your hearts may be devoted to
have Christ honored and exalted in the World.

I Will conclude all with an itteration of this Doxologie; and if ever tantologie
(though it is no tautologie) but if ever there were any place for tautologie,
here were the properest place for it to be used; but it is none: I have a
pattern for what I shall now perform from the holy Spirit of God, in Psalm. 136.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for his mercy endures for ever.
Mark you how many verses you have in that Psalm, 26. verses; and so many times
you have this itteration, For his mercy endures for ever. Will you call this
tautologie? why then the Spirit is guilty of tautologie; twenty six times you
find it there, O give thanks unto the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever; he
did thus and thus, for his mercy endures for ever; he slew great Kings, for
his mercy endures for ever; he slew famous Kings, for his mercy endures for
ever; and he remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy endures for ever.
Here Is my pattern, and let me a little follow it, and I have done, and charge
me with tautologie if you can.

Thus I say then, take up the language of the Text, which I would do, not using
the words without the Spirit: And thus I say,

Jesus is the Son of God, Now to him be glory for ever. Amen.

Jesus the Savior of the world, To him be glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Our Lord Jesus came into the word to seek and to save that which was lost, To
him be glory, now and for ever. Amen.

Jesus who was full of grace and truth, Now to him be glory for ever. Amen.

Our Lord Jesus that went about while he was here in the world, doing good,
preaching the Gospel, healing all manner of sicknesses and diseases, and
delivering them that were oppressed of the Devil, To him be glory, now and for
ever. Amen.

Our Lord Jesus, who took upon him to satisfy, even by death and suffering,
the Justice of his Father, to fulfill the Law, and to expiate sin, and to purge
the Conscience, and to deliver from damnation those that were obnoxious to it;
Now unto him be glory, both now and for ever. Amen.

Jesus, he is risen again, and he is ascended up on high; he is set down at the
right hand of the Father, and there he appears to make intercession for his
People; Now to him be glory, now and for ever. Amen.

This Jesus he improves at the Fathers right hand, all the interest that he
has, for the good of his People; he communicates the Knowledge of the Mystery
of the Will of God, and he makes Revelations unto his Church and People, of
those things that do concern it, unto the end of the World; and thus he is
beneficial to his poor People here on earth, he takss care of his Churches, and
has a tender respect of all his interest; Now unto him be glory, both now and
for ever. Amen.

This Jesus is now in Heaven, in Glory, and he longs after the enjoyment of all
his redeemed ones, and he has undertaken to keep them while they are in the
World, and to lose not one of them; but he will bring them to the enjoyment of
himself, and he will have them to see and to share in that Glory which he is
now possessed of, now he is in Heaven. O what cause have we to say, To him be
(...). both now and for ever! Amen.

This Jesus, who died and rose again, and lives at God's right hand, and as I
said, improves all his interest for his People; O to this Lord Jesus Christ, Be
glory, both now and for ever. Amen. And so I have done.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 39 line 25, for hearing read being, p. 41 l. 8, for says r. sees, p. 49
l. 7, f. contiguity r. contiguity, p. 50 l. 31, f. Kod r. Rod, p. 52 l. 8, f.
can r. cannot, p. 56 l. 15, f. trust r. faith, p. 62 l. 25, f. firedness r.
fixedness, p. 65 l. 15, f. less r. let, p. 74 l. 30, f. said r. saved, p. 84 l.
3, f. that r. their, l. 18, f. proposition r. opposition, p. 90 l. 4, f. and r.
as, p. 109 l. 27, dele Christ at the beginning of the line, p. 112 l. 5, dele
the day of, p. 116 l. 18, f. se^ r. get, p. 127 l. 19, 20. dele that I might be
so discoursed of, as, p. 130 l. 8, f. faithful r. faithless, p. 132 l. 13, f.
eradicated r. eradiated, p. 152 l. 31, f. in r. l, p. 158 l. 16, f. which r.
with, p. 174 l. 17, f. that is r. there is, p. 195 l. 23, f. fidelial r.
fiducial, p 197 l. 3, f. in r. it, p. 209 l. 27, f. established r. chastised,
p. 228 l. 12, f. for r. from, p. 234 l. 123 r. things, p. 239 l. 28, f. perfect
r. present, p. 244 l. 27, f. such r. sure, p. 250 l. 32, r. no, p. 257 l. 30,
f. born r. brother, p. 28^ l. 16, f. denoted r. devoted, p. 292 l. 32, f.
affective r. afflictive.


