VINCENTIUS REDIVIVUS. A Funeral Sermon, Preached October. 27. 1678.

Upon Occasion of the much bewailed Death of that Reverend and Eminent Servant
of CHRIST, Mr. THOMAS VINCENT, Formerly Preacher at Ma^dlins Milk-street,
London.

By SAMUEL SLATER, an unworthy Servant of Christ in the Gospel.

Psalm. 112. 6. The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.

Quae caecitas animi, quaeve dementia est, amare pressuras, and poenas and
lachrymas mundi, and non festinare potius ad gaudium, quod nunquam possit
auferri. Arnob.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst and T. Cockerill, at the Bible and three
Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at the three Legs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks Market, 1679.

To my Honored Friends Mrs. Mary Vincent and that Flock of Christ over which
the Holy Ghost had made dear Mr. Thoma^ Vincent Overseer.
AT your request this Sermon was Preached and is now published. Such as it is,
you ar^ welcome to it, and much good may it do you (...) the Lord grant all
those may meet with (...) blessing in it, who shall read it out of a real
desire to ge^^ good for their souls; other Readers we care for none. (...) take
your invitation of me to this work, as an eviden^ token of that love and esteem
you have for me, howeve^ unworthy: Therefore I did not draw back, but humbl^^
bless God for the assistance he has afforded me in it (...) all you find here
according to his Will, came from hi^ Spirit. I would be very, very low in mine
own eyes yet I do neither dread the censures of men, nor am I (...) vain as to
court their applause by making Apologies* What I have here presented you with,
are the Truths o^ God, which deserve your acceptance; I desire you to tr^^
them, and having seen their Fathers name in their fore^ head, give them a ready
admission, a most friendl^ and honorable entertainment. I shall speak nothing
(...) you here by way of advice, having said so much in the Sermon; but only
signify to you, that you are much upon (...) heart, and in my prayers; I will
not be unmindful you at the Throne of Grace, but speak many a good ^^rd for
you; the Lord comfort your hearts, and san^^ifie to you his hand, that out of
the eater may come ^eat; out of this Providence which has removed your
^everend Pastor, special^ advantage may come to your ^^ls; the Lord send you
another, under whose shadow (...) may sit with delight, finding his fruit sweet
to your ^^ste; the Lord supply all your need according to his ^^ches in glory
by Jesus Christ. My dear Friends, wisely ^^d graciously improve this
dispensation, submit to the ^^od pleasure of a taking God; be much in the study
of ^ur hearts and ways; be you sincere and thriving Chri^^ians. And the Father
of mercies bind you up in the ^^ndle of life, and grant you a glorious
Inheritance a^^ong them that are sanctified by faith in Christ; so ^^ayes,

Your Friend and Servant in our* dear Lord Jesus. Samuel Slater.
^ctob. 29. ^1678.
Hebr. XIII. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken to
you the Word of God, whose says follow, considering the end of their
conversation.
THIS excellent Epistle is not without good reason reckoned to Paul as its
Author, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, who having obtained mercy, burned
with zeal for God, and had such yearning bowels over the blind, unbelieving,
obstinate Jews, his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh, that for their
sakes he could have found in his heart to wish himself accursed from Christ,
Rom* 9. 3. which was a rapture of love, a pang of affection highly becoming
him, who was a brand plucked out of the burning; and of a chief sinner made an
eminent Saint; of a cruel furious persecutor, a blessed and most successful
Apostle; unto these Jews he wrote this Epistle, and for weighty reasons,
without doubt, concealed his Name.

Herein he made it his business so to set forth the Lord Jesus, and commend him
to them, as that they might receive him with all acceptance, as the promised
Messiah, and High Priest over the house of God, and persevere in faith and
obedience to him; and likewise to lay down such rules for their lives and
carriages in the world, as that by an holy and exemplary conversation, they
might honor his Name, and adorn his Gospel: The Union between Faith and
Holiness is so strict, that they never were nor can be separated; and it is
pity they should, being most amiable in conjunction: Faith giving encouragement
unto holiness, and holiness reflecting a glory upon faith. Several precious
Commands or Exhortations you meet with in this Chapter, which, though primarily
ordered out to the Hebrews, do remain a burden upon all persons in all Ages who
profess themselves Christians; unto them it is our duty to attend, and
according to them to walk.

The Text is a fruitful Bough, consisting of three Branches: 1. Remember them
which have the rule over you, who have spoken to you the word of God. 2. Follow
their faith. 3. Consider the end of their conversation. Or if you please, you
have here a double duty enjoined, Remember them that have spoken to you the
word of God, and follow their faith; and you have a choice means prescribed for
the commending those duties to you, and encouraging you in their performance,
Consider the end of their conversation. Of all these I shall (God willing)
speak in the prosecution of this Doctrine.


Doct. There is much duty incumbent upon people, upon the account of their
deceased Pastors. When Ministers dye, their work is done, they have finished
their course, and dispatched the business given them to do: they did shine
among you in Purity of Doctrine, and Holiness of Conversation, as long as the
Lamp of life lasted; when the oil of that was spent, they were taken up to
Heaven, there to outshine the Sun in his greatest strength and glory. But your
work is not then at an end, being of equal extent and duration with your lives:
As you have time enough for your work, so have you work enough for your time;
none can say he sat idle one hour, because he had nothing to do; put forth all
your strength, use your utmost diligence, husband your days and minutes to the
best advantage; you will be happy men and women, you will have cause eternally
to bless the hand above that helped you, if you can do your work by that time
death shall come to take you off.

I am not now to speak concerning the whole duty of man, but those particular
duties mentioned in the Text, relating to those servants of Christ, who have
labored among you, one of which is remembrance.

Remember them who have the rule over your. In which word two things must be
considered, 1. The Act, Remember. 2. The Object about which that act is to be
exercised, Them which have the rule over you.

I shall begin with the Object, those which have the rule over you, [(...)]
your Guides, such as are appointed by God to point out the way you should go,
and do themselves go before you in it; such as do not only show the way, but
lead the way: this is the primary signification of the word. And it has been
metaphorically translated and applied to them whose business lies in ordering
and governing others, both in Church and State, to persons in Magistratical and
Ecclesiastical office. And without all peradventure, godly Magistrates, whether
Supreme or Inferior, who rule in the fear of God, and with Prudence and
Righteousness manage the affairs of State, are worthy to be remembered. Though a
Pharaoh did rise up, who knew not Joseph, let not the man be found in Israel
who remembers not Joseph; nor a Protestant in England, to whom the Memory of an
Edward and Elizabeth is not precious.

But it is evident from the words themselves, that the Apostle here did not
intend the Civil Magistrate, but Gospel Ministers, whose work is not only to
instruct, but also to rule in the Church of God: they have power to command the
rich in this world: they are to rebuke with all authority. Paul had his rod
too, which he knew how to use when need required: They are the Masters of the
Assemblies, Elders that rule, as well as labor in the Word and Doctrine:
Shepherds that are to feed the flock of God; yea, and to order it, and to
reduce those sheep that wander. Yet let them remember, they are under
authority; though chief men among the brethren, yet but men; though Masters of
the Assemblies, yet servants of Christ; such as rule, but such as must be ruled
by the Word; and in case of maladministration, are liable to censure: Their
authority is of no farther extent than their warrant; they are to lead, and be
followed, not blindfold, not as infallible persons, not as being above the
possibility of erring; but with caution and limitation; follow your guides,
Christians, but look to your way, 1 Cor. 11. 11. Be ye followers of me, even as
I am of Christ; just so, and no otherwise; so far be sure to follow me, but not
a foot farther. But we shall speak more particularly.

1. Those whom you are to remember, are the Ministers of the Gospel, the
Ambassadors of the glorious King of Saints, the Pastors and Angels of the
Churches, in whom, though poor earthen vessels, God has laid up heavenly
treasure for the enriching of many. Alexander, Caesar, William the Conqueror
may be remembered; but never let a Paul, a Calvin, an Usher, a Caryl, a Manton,
a Vincent be forgotten; there is no need of canonizing them; God made them
Saints while they lived, though the Pope dubs his Saints after they are dead;
as the Heathen made gods, whose Ape he is: It would be a sin to worship them,
to pray to them, or to put up your prayers to God by them as his Master of
Requests; there is but one M^diator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus;
yet let them live, they do so in Gods sight, let them do so in your remembrance
and esteem.

2. Those whom you are specially to remember, are your Pastors, Christ's
Ministers in your Congregations; so the Apostle directs, them that have the
rule over you. It is the fashion of some to applaud and admire other Preachers,
while they despise and slight their own, which is a shrewd argument of a wanton
spirit: It would be their wisdom, and is their duty to like the disposals which
God has made. Accordingly, think you of them, honor them who rule over you,
who have labored among you, who spent themselves for you; their relation to
you was very near, being your spiritual Fathers; if not those that begot you,
yet those that nursed y^^, and travailed for many among you, by preaching and
prayer, with tears and groans, with earnest longings to see Christ formed in
you; Oh how dear was their love, answerable to their relation; they watched
over you, and watched for you; they brake their rest, and wasted themselves in
providing and dealing out food to you, when, it may be, some among you thought
much of returning to them a sorry and pitiful acknowledgment or reward.
However, let^ such narrow souls remember them now; that will cost them nothing.

3. Those whom you are to remember, are your deceased Pastors [ loquitur de iis
qui jam obierunt. Jun.]; the Apostle here means those who had completed their
work, and were gone to rest. Let those Ministers of Christ, who are alive and
remain, who at this day live and labor among you, be in your thoughts, and
esteem, and prayers; count them worthy of double honor. Trample not them under
your feet, whose feet are beautiful, being messengers of peace, that bring and
rejoice to bring you glad tidings of great good, the very best that ever the
world had. Our Savior pronounces a woe against those dissembling Hypocrites,
that build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the
righteous, but despise the labors, and blow upon the reputations, and starve
the bodies, and persecute the persons of those that are alive, Matthew. 23. 29.
Give unto both their due; let it never be said, that dear Mr. Thomas Vincent is
out of mind, now he is out of sight. Though now his place know him no more,
though his Family and Pulpit know him no more, let it never be said his People
had forgot him too: No, no, as God has received and glorified his Soul, and
looks after his dust, of which he will not lose the smallest atom; do you
preserve his memory, and count his name a precious and fragrant ointment. Thus
you see, Pastors, your Pastors, your deceased Pastors are to be remembered.

Quest. But what, all of them? be they never so erroneous or flagicious?

Answ. I do not say so, the Holy Apostle does not mean so; if any be corrupt in
their Opinions, unsound in their Doctrines, or disorderly in their Lives; if in
their Sermons they bring you any other Gospel than that which Christ and his
Apostles did; or if Preaching the same Gospel, and holding to the form of
wholesome words, they contradict it by an unsuitable carriage, and by an unholy
life destroy what they build; it had been well for the World, and the Church,
and themselves too, if they had never been born; and the sooner they are
forgotten, the better: When their bodies are laid in a bed of dust, let their
^^ames be buried in the grave of forgetfulness. May their Memorial perish with
them. Those who are worthy to be remembered, have these qualifications, which
you find in the Text.

1. They are such as have spoken to you the Word of God; not the sentiments of
Philosophers* nor the notions and counsels of learned and civilized Heathen;
not Aristotle's Ethics, and Plutarchs Morals, or Plato's Divinity, though some
good use may be made of them: Doubtless natural light is beautiful and lovely.
But what need have we of the glistering of a gloeworm, or the blaze of a
candle, who do enjoy the help of Scripture, that has brought life and
immortality to light; who do through the riches of mercy enjoy the gracious
beams, the warming and quickening influences of the eternal Son of
Righteousness? Let us not disparage the God of Israel by repairing to the
forges of the Philistines, or borrowing their weapons for our spiritual
warfare; none like to the sword of the spirit, the Word of God, which is mighty
through God. We need not go to those puddles, since the Lord has been pleased
to open to us the Wells of salvation, out of which we may with joy draw living
waters for the refreshing of thirsty, and reviving of fainting souls. Those
Ministers are to be remembered, who bring not their own idle dreams, but Gods
Truths; not the Precepts of men, but the Doctrine of Jesus; who have determined
(as Paul did) to know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ and him crucified:
Those Pastors which (like the woman spoken of Revel. 12. 1.) were clothed with
the Sun, and had upon their heads a crown of twelve stars; The Truth of Christ,
and the Doctrine of the Apostles; in short, men sound in judgment.

2. They are such as did believe what they Preached; therefore you have mention
made of their faith, Whose faith follow. Oh that I could say, all Preachers are
Believers. But I cannot but tell you, though I desire to be very charitable, I
have not faith enough for that; all ages having sadly proved the contrary: The
woeful defections and apostac^es of many in the Pagan, Arrian, and Antichristian
Persecutions, are undeniable demonstrations of the contrary. God forbid I
should take upon me to judge any particulars, much less whole Parties; that very
word [ Party] is exceeding bitter and unsavory to me; I heartily wish there
were no such name, or thing; and oh for that day! when will that day come (the
God of love and peace hasten it), in which his people shall serve him with one
shoulder, and with one consent in the beauties of holiness! In the mean time I
am firmly persuaded, that there are those who fear God, and work righteousness,
and study to approve themselves by a sincere desire and care of walking up to
Scripture-rules, and the dictates of their consciences, among all those Parties
in England, which hold the Head, and have not drunk in damnable heresies, as
the Apostle calls them; yet, yet I fear, there are also those that have not
faith: Rest they do in floating notions, take things upon trust, are beholding
merely to education, or the profession of the Country where they live, for
their being Protestants or Christians. And I also tremble to think how many
would be found stark rotten, if they should be shaken by a temptation; found
dross, if they should be cast into the furnace: Those deserve to be remembered,
who are rooted and grounded in the faith; who can say, Lo, this we have
searched: this we have experienced, so it is; Those that see the truth in its
own evidence, that have found it mighty in operation upon their own souls;
those that have held the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, and would not
let it go upon any terms, or in any times, but choose rather to venture all, to
part with all, to throw all overboard, than to make shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience.

3. They are such as practiced what they Preached, and lived their own Sermons;
such as expressed the virtues of him who had called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light, and advanced them to be lights unto others. Such Masters of
the Assemblies as did drive home and fasten the nails of serious wholesome
counsels and exhortations with the forcible hammer of a spotless, gracious and
heavenly deportme^t in the world; such as preached Christ, and lived him too;
such as received him, and walked in him; such as did [(...)] foot it right, and
could boldly say to their flock, Walk so as ye have me for an example: Such as
did not mind earthly things, nor hunt after the world, as if it had been their
god; did not sinfully serve the times, nor turn into all shapes, and wound
their souls to save their skins; did not prodigally spend their precious hours,
nor unchristianly smite their fellow servants, nor eat and drink with the
drunken, but were the companions of them that fear the Lord, and placed their
highest delight, next to God, in the Saints, those excellent ones of the earth;
and did show out of a good conversation their works with meekness of wisdom,
making it their inward desire, great care, and utmost endeavor in all things
to adorn the Gospel. Holy men of God, who were good in the Pulpit, and in the
House too, and in all places, in all companies; against whom there could be no
exception, save in the matter of their God, abating them for those natural
humane infirmities, which are inseparable from the most holy persons, whilst
on this side of perfection, tabernacling in houses of Clay: The good Lord
increase the number of such Pastors in England, yea all the world over, in all
places where he has caused his holy Name to dwell; and unto them, mine honor
be thou united; unto them shall my soul adhere in sincere and most entire
affection, whatever smaller and circumstantial differences are, or may be
between us. May so much suffice to be spoken concerning the object, about which
the following Acts are to be exercised, unto which I now come.

Quest. Next then, What is to be done by that people whom God did bless with
such Pastors?

Answ. Two things, Remember them, follow their faith. Of which in order,

Remember them. Your memories are precious Cabinets, too good for dung and
trifles; lay up nothing in them but what is excellent; there is enough of that:
Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, yea and in the days of your
age, so shall you be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. Remember your dear
Savior, his love, his life, his death; attend upon Ordinances, and receive the
Sacrament in remembrance of him; remember his love more than wine: Remember the
mercies you have received, so as to be thankful; the promises you have made, so
as to be faithful; the sins you have committed, so as to be humble; the
experiences you have had, so as to be encouraged. Remember them that are in
bonds, as bound with them; them that are in straits and necessities, so as to
be compassionate and liberal to them. Remember your latter end, so as to be
diligent, and quicken your pace; and withal, remember your deceased Pastors,
who obtained mercy to be found faithful: They, they are some of Gods Jewels,
allow them therefore a choice room in these Cabinets.

Quest. You will ask me, how^they are to be remembered?

Answ. I Answer in these following particulars:

1. Remember them, so as to bless God for them. Have not you had great benefit,
soul-advantages by them? Oh! let God have praises from you. When you are under
smarting rods, sore afflictions, pore not so much upon them, as to become by
that means injurious to God: Some that did too little mind, and prize, and
improve mercies whilst they were in their hands, do view them, and curiously
study them, when taken away, until their spirits be imbittered, and discontent
raised up against the Providence. But, Christians, beware you of that; I advise
you to be sensible of your loss: Let the Widow be sensible what an husband she
has lost, the Children what a Father (if their tender age will admit it); the
Family, what a Governor; the Society, what a Shepherd; I, and others, what a
Friend and Brother. But let us all remember to bless God, that we had him once,
that we had him so long; let this Congregation bless God that ever it was
committed to the care and charge of such a Minister, that ever such a shining
and burning light was set up in this Candlestick; that ever such a labourer was
sent into this Vineyard. My dear friends, I do most earnestly beg this of you
for my dear Master, Whatever your loss is, how great soever, how painful and
afflictive soever, let not your and my God be a loser; look carefully to that,
as you love your selves; Gods loss is your loss. Therefore how sad soever your
case is, how dark soever your day, how low soever your spirits, do not now, do
not at any time withhold from God those praises which are his due. Truly he
has been good to you, and he is so now, and he will be so still, if you will
but do your duty; therefore be sure to love him, and bless him; let the holy
God ever inhabit the praises of Israel.

2. Remember them, so as to bewail the loss of them. You ought indeed to
moderate your sorrow, keeping it within the bounds of Reason and Religion, as
becomes those that have hope; nay, let there be a mixture of joy with your
sorrow, being sure it is well with them, perfectly, unspeakably, and
everlastingly well; their happiness does exceed their thoughts, and not only
afford satisfaction to them, but likewise raise admiration; Oh what am I that
God should ever bring me hitherto!

Yet mourn. It becomes you to be both affected and afflicted in your spirits.
What! shall the Father be smitten, and the Children not grieved? the Shepherd
taken away, and the Flock not troubled? that would be a grand Solecism both in
Nature and Religion. When Samuel dyed, all Israel were gathered together, and
lamented him, 1 Samuel 25. 1. The tears of an whole Nation may well be poured out
upon a Samuels death. When Stephen the Proto-Martyr was carried to his burial,
there was great lamentation made over him, Acts 8. 2. Those devout and holy men
broached their sorrow, they went on, weeping as they went. When Elisha was
arrested and confined to his bed by his last sickness, Ioash the King of Israel
wept over his face, and said, O my Father, my Father, the chariots of Israel,
and horsemen thereof, 2 King. 13. 14. And well may there be such great sorrow,
else it will hold no proportion with the occasion: Losses of such persons are
great, how little and vile soever in the worlds eyes while they lived; for they
were their peoples blessings, the Nations pillars, the stakes in our hedge, and
their death is not seldom ominous; it speaks a storm-brewing evil to come. When
they are housed in the silent and safe chambers of the grave, what may we look
for next, but that the great God should come out of his place, clothed with
righteousness, and armed with vengeance, to punish the inhabitants of the world
for their iniquity. This know for certain, the Lord is greatly offended, it
angers him at his very heart, when he sees men stupid and insensible under such
dispensations, specially when they become ordinary; when the righteous perish,
and are taken away, none considering or laying it to heart.

It is true, there is now joy in Heaven; but let there be sorrow on Earth, that
will not be jarring: Angels and perfect spirits above, welcome those departed
Saints with shouts and acclamations; let us part from them with tears, at least
with sighs. Possibly there are some who do rejoice at such a man's death; but
whether they will believe me or no, I will tell them, they have no cause; God
will make them change their note, even they shall mourn at the last.

3. With your remembrance of them, join heart-grief and trouble that you gained
no more by them; consult and listen to your own consciences, see what they will
say, deal impartially and ingenuously. Have not you been asleep in your seats,
when they have been at work in their Pulpits? Have not your minds been wandering
after vanity, and your eyes gazing about upon this body and that; this face,
and that fashion, while they have been fixed and intent, wholly taken up about
the good and salvation of your souls? Have not you been cold at heart, while
they were fervent in spirit, serving the Lord? They have mourned, but you wept
not; they have piped, but you danced not; when they poured out their souls in
confession of sins, you were not humbled, your hearts not broken within you;
many a sad and foul story has been told of you, yet you did not blush, neither
were you ashamed: They have mightily wrestled with God, and tug'd hard for
mercy, mercy for you, your pardon, and your lives, but you have sat and seen
all this with a most wretched indifferency, as if you were persons altogether
unconcerned, and did not care whether they prevailed or no. How have you slipped
the precious truths they delivered to you, and been disobedient to the counsels
they ordered out; and have been little the better, though they came to you in
the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ? They have come and blown
upon your garden, now with the Northwind of dreadful threatenings, then with the
South of gracious promises; yet your spices have not flown forth; nay, are not
too many of you unto this very day like the dry and barren Heath? And surely
you have cause to be troubled, and oh that you may be so, the good Lord trouble
you kindly; let your souls have these losses and afflictions still in
remembrance, and be humbled within you.

4. Remember them so as to be quickened by that remembrance. Think of their
death, and go to their graves, and fetch life and liveliness from thence: We
Ministers should do so. When our fellow laborers grow fewer, it stands us in
hand to work the harder. What! shall some drop on our right hand, and others
upon our left, yea many round about us; and shall any of us notwithstanding be
idle, and lazy, and half asleep at our work! Oh that the rattling of deaths
Chariot-wheels might awaken and rouse us up. When Elijah is taken up to Heaven,
let every Elisha look out for a double portion of the spirit, and go forth in
all their might to plead the cause of Truth and Holiness, and finish that great
work their Lord has set them.

You also that are the People of God, should double your diligence. You are not
ignorant how your faithful Pastors lived and labored, how they walked and
wrought, what indefatigable pains they took for God, and for you, and with
their own hearts: though you do not know half, yet let that which you do know
be a spur to you. Up, Christians, up, shake off a supine sluggish temper; Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling: give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure. Hasten, oh hasten to the Kingdom of God; lose no
time, slip no opportunity, neglect no part of your duty; fill up your days,
relations, and places; and so run, as that you may obtain; you are compassed
about with a great Cloud of witnesses; lay aside therefore every weight that
presses down, and the sin^ that does so easily beset you; gird up the loins of
your mind, call forth all your strength, buckle in good earnest to your
business, and on, on in that holy pleasant race that is set before you.

5. Remember them, so as to be encouraged by them, and take heart. You live in
a world that lies in wickedness, it is grievously polluted; almost all places
are so dirty, that we can scarce tread clean; surely these are the dregs of
time; you are environed with enemies and dangers. And speak seriously, Do you
not sometimes feel inward fears and faintings? Well, encourage your selves in
the Lord your God; And take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the
Name of the Lord, for an ensample of suffering afflictions, and of patience.
You have seen what great things God has done by them, and for them; you have
seen that God has carried them through all their difficulties, so that they
have overcome at the last. Satan that roaring Lion has pursued them, and come
with open mouth, yet could not devour them; he has got some of them, and
winnowed them as wheat, yet their faith did not fail. Lusts and corruptions
within their own bosoms have made frequent assaults, and furious batteries upon
them, yet they could not prevail. These holy souls through Christ strengthening
them, have trodden down sins strength; sometimes they have gone halting* but
always came off conquering. The World again has one while fawned like a
strumpet, and another while raged like a fury; yet could not gain them by fair
means, nor foul: Though the Archers have shot sore at them, their bow has
abode in strength, and the arms of their hands have been made strong by the
hands of the mighty God of Jacob. The waves have lifted up their voice, and
dashed against them, yet have they stood like Rocks unshaken; some of them have
had an hard passage, and met with many a violent storm; yet at last they have
got in a Calm unto their desired Heaven; and being landed in the other world,
^re now feasting in the new Jerusalem which is above, at the Court of the King
of Glory.

It is true, they died, and so must we, so must the strongest and the highest;
it is appointed for all men once to dye, yet these dye but once; they did not
dye before the time; they did not dye before their work was done; they did not
dye before they were fit to dye, no, nor before they were willing to dye; they
were ripe fruit, and so dropped into the bosom of Abraham. In a word, they dyed
to live, and now they live to dye no more: Be you therefore of good cheer, O ye
holy Ones, that God who did so much for them, can do as much for you; his arm
is not shortened, nor his ear heavy, nor his love less; be you strong in him,
and in the power of his might.

6. Lastly, So remember them, as to think of theirs who are left behind. It is
more than probable that some of their Wives and Children are in a low
condition, and want conveniences, if not necessaries: Be you liberal to them,
give them a supply out of your abundance; pare off some of your superfluities
for their relief; you shall not suffer, nor be losers by it; I dare engage to
you, there is one in Heaven will take care of that. There be others, who,
though not reduced to such straits as to need the help of your purses; yet
being now in a disconsolate condition, they do need your company and comforts.
Poor hearts! their houses are left unto them desolate, they are Turtles alone,
and mourn sore like Doves; give a knock at their door^ now and then; when you
can, turn into those Widows houses, and speak comfortably to them; the very
sight of their Husbands friends cannot but be cordial to them; though for a
time it will open the wound, and renew their sorrow; yet it will revive and
cheer them too. Thus much for the first part of your duty, Remember your
deceased Pastors. Yet before I pass on to the second, let me subjoyn to what
has been said, two things by way of Caution.

1. While you remember them, be not unmindful of God, and do not forget to
trust in God; though they are dead, yet God still lives, yea he lives for
evermore; whosoever dies, God cannot dye; he necessarily is, and is necessar^ly
what he is. As he is eternally, so eternally immutable, not having the least
shadow of turning. And this ever-living God has the residue of the spirit, and
can pour it out upon whom he will, and furnish whom he pleases with
Ministerial Gifts and Graces; and he never cease to look after his interest
and people. Look you to it, that you be true to him, and he will be true to
you: He will have a Ministry in England, as long as he has a Church in
England; and may that be as long as the Sun and Moon endure, Amen. This great
Lord of the Harvest will lose none of his Corn, not an ear, not a grain, for
want of Laborers to gather it in. This gracious and loving Father of the
Family sees good now and then to pinch some of his Children, but he will starve
none. When Israel was in a Wilderness, he was pleased to work Miracles, rather
than they should not be provided for; therefore let your Faith live as long as
God lives in Heaven, and you upon Earth. And let me add this for your comfort;
Let never so many good men, eminent men dye, your life, O Believers, is secured
and insured to you by the life of Christ. Hear his own words, John 14. 19.
Because I live, ye shall live also.

2. While you remember them, do not forget your selves. It is readily and
joyfully acknowledged, that God does not stand in need of Ministers: He that
could make Heaven and Earth by the Word of his Power, can accomplish all his
pleasure without helps and instruments; yet you do need them, and it is his
Will to employ them, and continue them to the end of the world. Magistracy and
Ministry are two standing Ordinances, and will be necessary so long as there
are men on Earth, and men to be sitted for Heaven. Therefore, my Brethren, sit
not down in this your Orphan-condition. What I have told you is unquestionably
your duty, but not the whole of it. Keep together. Though the Shepherd be
smitten, let not the Sheep be scattered. Look out for a good supply; that your
loss may be made up again, and your Pastors place filled. No loss is
irrepairable but the loss of God and your souls. Be wise before you fix;
consult together, and ask advice of them who are both faithful and able to give
it; act with due deliberation, yet defer not too long. Above all go to God, who
holds the Stars in his right hand; and then look out for a man Orthodox in
judgment, and holy in life, who may not go about to raze, but wisely to build
upon the foundation, which by my Reverend Brother has been already laid. And
my prayer is, That God would set a man over your Congregation, even a man after
his own heart. And so I come to the second Duty incumbent upon you, which you
have in these words, Whose faith follow.

Holy imitation does most highly become all that profess themselves Christians.
Be careful in your choosing a Pattern, and then curious in your imitation: You
must not follow lying vanities, then you forsake your own mercies; you must not
follow vain fashions, that is not suitable to the gravity and seriousness of
your Religion. You must not follow a multitude to do ^vil, unless you have a
mind to be damned with a multitude, and think Hell is a desirable place,
because most go thither: The most beaten road is not always the best; you must
not follow the world; instead of being conformed, you ought to be crucified to
it.

You have far better Copies set you, far more noble and excellent Patterns
before you. God; be ye followers of God as dear children. Christ, he has left
you an ensample, that ye should tread in his steps. The Saints, who while here
walked in their integrity; and now they are above, sit in Robes of Glory: Be ye
followers of them that through faith and patience have inherited the promises.
And among them, those that have held forth the word of life, and shined as
lights in the world. Be wise now in making these your choice, and follow them
as close as you can; live up to Scripture-rules, and holy Presidents. And
truly, my Brethren, since God and Christ, Godliness and Heaven are as good,
full out as good as ever they were; I can see no just reason why Professors
should decline and decay; why our gold should become dim; why the Saints of
this Generation should fall miserably short of those that went before them; why
the present Christians should be so unlike the former, both for Purity and
Zeal, as if they were not begotten of the same Father, and did not suck the
same breasts. But so it is; ah! so it is; our Nazarites were purer than snow,
whiter than milk; whereas now the visage of many of them is blacker than a
coal* they can scarce be known in the streets; and let this be for a
lamentation.

Oh that you would do your endeavor to revive the old Godliness, which is the
best Godliness; and to live over again the lives of the old Saints, and in
particular, those of your Renowned Pastors: Follow them in all that is good,
and within the compass of your sphere; you must never go out of your places to
follow your Pastors; the Lord Jesus himself is to be imitated by you only in
his imitable works. That being premised, I say with the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.
8. Whatsoever things you saw in them, true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of
good report, whatsoever there was of virtue, or of praise, think on those
things, and follow them in those things: In no other; for they were but men,
imperfect men, subject to like passions, infirmities, and failings; and these
you must not draw into an example, nor use them as an argument why you should
do so too, as too many argue from David's Adultery to their uncleanness; for
certain God never put such things upon record for an encouragement unto sin,
but for cautions to all; you must not wander with them that wander, nor fall,
because others have; no, follow them as they followed Christ, and only so, in
all that is good, in all that is well-pleasing to God, and will be Ornamental
to the Gospel. But I shall confine my discourse to the Command in the Text,
Follow them in their faith. And here I shall speak to these four particulars:

1. Follow them in the Doctrine of Faith: Be sound in your j^dgments, and
suffer not your heads to be fly-blown with Error. Hold fast that which is good,
for otherwise you will lose your Crown: The age in which we live is a learned
age, and it is a very inquisitive age, and an hot disputing, but with grief be
it spoken, it is an error-broaching and embracing age; there are too too many
among us that act industriously toward the shaking of our foundation, though
the Virgin-daughter of Zion looks upon their attempts, and laughs them to
scorn; for God himself, the mighty God has laid them, and they shall not be
destroyed. But though our foundations are firm and lasting, yet many of our
professors are feeble and wavering, yea some are removed to another Gospel:
They have rejected those great Points, those main Truths, which are the very
vitals of Christian Religion, and you may see them wallowing in the blood of
their Apostasy: Stick you to that faith which was delivered to you by your
deceased Pastors, who are now with God, that is, the faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, once for all: The Doctrine which they held out to you,
is the Doctrine of the Church of England, built upon the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. Hold to that, all that,
specially the Deity of Christ, his satisfaction, justification by him, and
faith in him, not by works which we have done; and the spiritual mystical Union
that is between him and true Believers. Keep these things as the Apple of your
eye, yea as you would your lives. And though we or an Angel from Heaven should
come and preach among you any Gospel contrary to, or besides that which they
have preached, and you have received, let him be accursed.

2. Follow them in the Grace of Faith. They were Believers, be you so too: look
narrowly to it, that it be the true Grace of God in which you stand. Take not
up, my brethren, with an empty name, a verbal profession, a company of bodily
exercises, and heartless duties. Mind, I beseech you, the Power of Godliness,
and do not stop one hairs breadth on this side of it: Painted Hypocrites are as
odious to that God who requires and searches the heart, as the openly profane:
his soul hates them that secretly mock him, as well as those that publicly
affront him. Make sure work therefore for your precious souls; see that you
have that faith which is unfeigned, the faith of Gods Elect, that you do
cordially embrace the Truths of the Gospel, and ^lose with an offered Jesus;
that you have that faith by which you may live, that faith by which you may
walk until you come to walk by sight. I would not have any of you deceived, and
cheated to your own destruction, as many poor creatures are, who run away with
a lie in their right hand, build hopes of Heaven and Happiness upon a sandy
bottom, please themselves in a lifeless Image of Religion, which the holy One
of Israel will despise when he awaketh unto judgment; their faith is no better
than a fancy; their Godliness is not a Godliness of Gods making nor approving;
they walk about in the sparks of that fire which themselves have kindled, and
at last lie down in sorrow. Be you wise for your souls, and deal prudently; get
that faith which upon trial will be found to praise and honor, much more
precious than gold that perishes; be ye provided with that Oil which will keep
your Lamps burning when the blessed Bridegroom comes.

3. Follow them in the actings of their faith. Grace is given you not only for
Ornament, but also for use; we are not only to be justified by faith, and saved
by ^aith, but to live by faith. Have you got it? then suffer it not to lie
dormant, but exercise it: Act your faith upon Christ, his Mediation, Merits,
and Intercession: He is a full Christ; it has pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell, a fullness that is far beyond your emptiness; live
upon him therefore, and draw from him, you can never draw him dry: Act your
faith upon the Covenant, it is an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things,
and sure. God is ever mindful of it; with it holy David comforted himself, in
it he placed all his happiness, and sum'd up all his desires. Act your faith
upon the Promises; these are exceeding great and precious, you cannot measure
them, nor over-rate them. In them there is an answerableness to every case, a
complete suitableness to every condition, in which you either are or can be.
And you cannot over-trust them, being Yea and Amen, of most sure and certain
accomplishment: The Womb of Divine Promise never miscarried, but shall bring
forth at the time of life all the mercies and blessings with which it travails.
Ever count Gods Promise abundant security; and believe that all Mountains which
lie in the way of its performance, shall be made a plain; the darkest
Providence are still subservient to the promise. Joseph's being sold for a
Slave, and clapped up in a Prison, were steps to his being made the second man in
the Kingdom. Act your faith upon the wisdom and power, the love and care of
your heavenly Father; know, he endears you, and will look after you: His Glory
shall not be lost, nor given to another; his Truth is great, and shall
overcome; his Church is built upon a Rock, and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. Jacob, though small, shall rise; and though a worm, he
shall thresh the mountains; the Beast and the false Prophet shall be cast into
a lake of fire, burning with brimstone, and the glorious victory shall be the
Lambs; for he is King of kings, and Lord of lords; and they that be with him,
are chosen, and faithful, and true.

Believe, and rejoice while you believe, that when Gods desperate Enemies are
at work, He himself is not idle, but observes them, is in the Conclave and the
Cabal, undermines them, counter-acts them, and will turn their counsels
backward or headlong, so that no weapon shall prosper which they form against
his cause and people; but he will accomplish the thoughts of his heart, which
shall stand in all generations; and effect his own designs, and be absolute
Master of all his ends, finishing all the work which he has to do in the
world, and that without losing either time or ground; as our days go off, so
Gods work goes on, it is never out of hand. Thus act your faith upon God in
all conditions, and under all dispensations; when you are high, and when low,
yea at the lowest, for still, still, still the everlasting arms, arms, are
underneath. In these actings of faith those holy men lived, and so must you,
otherwise you will never be established, much less in such gloomy, tottering,
turning, and tumbling times as these are.

4. Lastly, Follow them in the fruitfulness of their faith. Your gracious
Pastors were not, neither may you be Solifidians: As they did believe, so they
maintained good works, and by that means obtained a good report. While you know
that faith justifies you, you must also know, it is your duty to justify your
faith; that faith which is alone, is stark naught, it is dead and rotten, and
stinks above-ground; show me, and show the world your faith by your works. If
you ask me what fruits they are which grow upon the root of faith, and prove it
genuine? I Answer, all the fruits of the spirit, in which you must abound, if
you would have an abundant entrance into the glorious Kingdom of our God and
Savior. But I shall speak only to three, Holiness, Love, Joy.

1. Follow them in their Holiness. A wicked Believer is as mere an
impossibility as a gracious Devil; such a faith as will consist with the love,
and life, and reign of sin, is no better than what may be found in Hell among
lapsed Angels, and damned Spirits, who, as the Apostle James tells us, Believe
and tremble. Wheresoever true faith is, it purifies the heart, and reforms the
life, and orders the footsteps according to the word: As it clothes the soul
with the beautiful Robe of Christ's Righteousness, so it subjects the soul to
his governing Scepter and Law; it lets Christ in, and casts corruption out;
when Christ dwells in the heart by Faith, he shines in the life by Holiness:
The pearl of faith is never found in the dunghill of profaneness. Study then,
study holiness, and perfect it too in the fear of God; think with your selves
what manner of persons ye ought to be, how acurate and exact in your whole
course; remembering, That grace of God which brings salvation, and has
appeared unto you, teaches you, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, ye
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present evil world, 2 Tit.
11, 12. And that you ought to be like your Father, who is holy in all his ways,
and righteous in all his works. When therefore a temptation to any sin assaults
you, resist it with utmost indignation, and say as Nehemiah did in another
case, Shall such a man as I do this? or as Joseph, How shall I do this great
wickedness and sin against God? or as that good Woman [ Christiana sum] I am a
Christian. This, my dear Friends, this is the way to glorify your God, to
honor your Religion, to credit your Pastors. In this way you shall be their
comfort while they live, their Crown when they are dead, yea their joy and
rejoicing in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming: The
exemplariness of your carriages is the best commendation of the Ministers you
have, and of the Sermons you hear; whereas when you walk disorderly, and as
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, you are our shame and reproach, spots in our
Assemblies, goads in our sides, and burdens upon our spirits: Let no man nor
woman tell others they sit under my Ministry, unless they resolve by the grace
of God to depart from iniquity.

2. Follow them in their Love. True faith works love, and by it; it kindles a
pure flame of love, and then makes use thereof for the promoting and
furtherance of all duty. Have you not taken notice of your Pastors love? What
did they think too much to do for you? They have hazarded their liberty, and
spent their strength, and broken their rest, and wasted their lungs for you:
They mourned under the untractableness of some, and were humbled for the
unreformedness of others, who had sinned, and had not repented; they longed for
your Conversion to God, and progress in Religion, and growth in grace: They had
no greater joy than to see you walking in the truth; Oh! how did they prize
God, and Christ, and you? how did they rejoice in their work, though hard, yet
sweet? how welcome was a Sabbath, upon which they might draw their breasts for
your consolation, and open their treasures for your enriching? imitate you them
in their love; give the best, the flower, the quintessence of it unto God.
Erect in your hearts a Throne for Christ; love him as well as you can, and then
mourn because you love him so little, and always pray that you may love him
more: Love one another dearly, for you are brethren, and so fulfill the law of
Christ, and prove your selves his Disciples. Have an universal love for all the
Saints, all in whom you can see [ aliquid Christi] any thing of Christ; yea so
love all men, as to wish their good, and to do them all the good you can, even
your Enemies, your Persecutors, those that hate you; do you hate their sins and
wicked ways, but love their persons, and pray for their conversion and
salvation.

3. Follow them in their Joy. You read of the joy of faith, and of the Saints
rejoicing in believing, with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Certainly it is
a duty incumbent upon all the Saints to rejoice in the Lord, and that evermore;
and call to remembrance the times that are past. Have you not seen the faith of
your Pastors budding and blossoming with joy, when you have been sinking, and
days have been dark, and fears many? Have you not seen a smile upon their brow,
even then when there was a Cloud upon their tabernacle? You have indeed been
acquainted with their sorrows, and their tears, because men hated to be
reformed, would not keep Gods Law, but dishonored his Name, and opposed his
Gospel, and would break his bands asunder, and cast away his cords from them;
but you have also been privy to, and witnesses of their joys; follow them in
this: Let them that are of a fearful heart be strong; be you of a cheerful
spirit, and let your brethren and others see you are so. You have, O Saints,
matter of rejoicing in your worst conditions; nay, let me say this, You have
much more matter of rejoicing than you now have, or ever shall have of sorrow
and disquiet. For, if you be really what you profess your selves to be, God is
the cause and matter of your rejoicing; it is he that is your comfort and your
glory, Psalm. 43. 4. I will go, says that sweet singer of Israel, unto the
Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: or as the margin tells you it is in
the Hebrew, unto God the gladness of my joy. Now I beseech you, if you can,
tell me, What can possibly be; I ask you again, what can possibly be so great a
cause of sadness and sorrow, as your God is of joy and rejoicing? Thou, O poor
drooping soul, think thou have a great many sins in thy heart, and the
Church of Christ has a great many dangers at this day in poor England, City
and Country is full of them; and doubtless all this is very true, too too true,
the good Lord help us. Yet know, God is above them all, and greater than them
all: He is greater than all thy sins, and so can both pardon and subdue them:
He is greater than all his Churches enemies, and so can either reconcile and
change them if he pleases, or curb and conquer them. As he is greater than all
our dangers, and so can easily obviate and prevent them: He can with a word
command deliverance, and create peace, and place a defense upon and about all
our glory. You have, my Brethren, at all times, in the very worst times, more
cause of joy in God, than you can have of sorrow and discouragement in any
thing, nay in all things. This made the holy Prophet take up that brave
resolution, Hab. 3. 17, 18. To rejoice in the Lord, and to joy in the God of
his salvation; though there should be a famine in the world, and the staff of
creature comforts should be broken to pieces; though earth should sink under
him, yet he would by faith hang upon a God above him; and as long as he had a
God above to live upon, his joy should live and flourish: He knew not only how
to make a meal, but how to feast it upon God alone. Thus have I at large set
before you that duty which is incumbent upon you in reference to your deceased
Pastors, who have Preached to you the Word of God; it lies in these two
things, Remember them -- Follow their faith. Now I come to the last clause in
the Text, which you may look upon either as a third duty, or an excellent means
for the commending of the two former, and facilitating them unto you; and that
you have in these words, Considering the end of their conversation.

Here again you have the Act, Considering; and the Object, The end of their
conversation. I will begin with the former.

Considering. We ought to be a considering people; it would be our safety, our
honor, our comfort and advantage every way, as I could easily show you. We
should sin less, if we would consider more. Most, if not all our sins come in
at this door, want of consideration. Men do not consider, their ways lead
directly to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death; and therefore they go on
in them: They do not look into the state of their souls, nor consider how
affairs stand with them; and so when they should mourn and weep, they live
jovally, and frolic their days away, dancing and roaring upon the very brink
of the burning lake: They do not consider the pearl of price, how orient it is,
how excellent and inestimable; and therefore they do not sell all, and buy it:
They do not consider the worth of their souls, that they are immortal, and
their ransom precious, and therefore they barter them away for a filthy lust
and transient pleasure. Men do not consider how sordid and odious a thing it
is, how ill-becoming them, how hateful to God, and how exceedingly it inflames
their reckoning, and will one day add to their torments, (...) swill like a
Swine, to be filthy like a Goat, to curse like a Devil, and to swear like a
Cutter; to profane Sabbaths, and (...) to hate the power of Godliness, and
(...) those that are peaceable in a Land. Due and serious (...), my Brethren,
would correct all these things, (...) ^ould reform a thousand disorders, and we
should have another world. And until this be, the world will be the old world
still; we shall find it as bad as ever, a wicked, malicious, and troublesome
world; Cain will kill Abel still; And they that are born after the flesh, will
persecute them that are born after the spirit. I shall not at all wonder to see
men carry like Bedlams, to see them raging-mad in sin, so long as they live
like fools, without consideration.

Well, my Friends, if any will be vain and foolish still, let them be so: As
for you, reckon upon it as your wisdom and interest to do nothing rashly, not
to pass over things lightly, not to run on headily; look before you leap,
ponder your path, try all things. Consider those things which we deliver to you
in the course of our Ministry, and require of you in the Name of our God,
whether they be not most holy, and just, and good. Consider those things we
propound to you, the great and gracious offers we make, whether you can any
where else better your selves, and get a more gainful bargain; see if we do not
out-bid all the world, and offer you such a match for your souls, as is the
chiefest of ten thousands, altogether lovely, without compare. O ye fools, be
ye of an understanding heart.

We would not have you embrace our counsels, and follow our directions
blindfold. We can say this, We counsel you as we do our selves, and we lay no
other burden upon you than upon our selves, and your souls are precious to us
as our own, and it sorely troubles us to think of your eternal miscarrying, and
our hearts would greatly rejoice, even ours, if that danger were over, and that
we did but see you in that tender and mighty hand, out of which none can pluck
you: yet we would not have you take all upon trust from us; an implicit faith,
and a blind obedience do not please us: No, weigh things in right balances,
compare the service of Christ with the drudgery of a Devil, and the service of
sin; peace of conscience, with roaring in a Tavern; the kisses of a Saviors
lips, with the caresses of a Minion; the favor of Christ, with the smiles of a
Man; a being filled with the spirit, with a being drunk with wine, in which is
a brutifying excess. Compare contrivances for God, with plots for Rome, and
conspiracies against Princes; an heavenly mind, with earthly affections; an
interest in promises, and an inheritance in Heaven, with an ill-gotten estate
in the world that has a curse in it. Compare, I say, these things together,
and consider, and then choose. Let some men say what they will, their tongues
are their own, only let them remember, they must at last be accountable for
their words; as for us, we would have you rational in your Religion, rational
in your believing and living; use your reason in all things within its reach,
only to call that to determine in matters too high for it, in points of faith,
that could never have been known by us, but by Divine Revelation, has much
more absurdity in it, than to call a Countrey-clown from following the Plough,
to sit down at the Helm, and determine in the [ Arcana Imperii] mysteries and
riddles of State. Use all the reason you have, only be not unreasonable in you
reasonings; and believe it, we are not afraid of having things brought to a
trial; the cause of Godliness is too good to be cast, when it has its hearing
before a prudent, impartial, and righteous Judge.

Consider then, and that not only once, but often; so the Original word
signifies [(...)] considering again and again; frequently repeat this act;
think of it now, and think of it anon; to day and to morrow, every day. The
things of God, the matters of Religion, the product and issue of an holy life,
do deserve greatest seriousness, and most frequent thoughts; there is nothing
in the world so considerable in it self as these things are, and therefore
nothing in the world is so worthy of your consideration. Besides the merit of
the things, the dullness of the hearts calls for it. Ahlas I we are not easily
wrought upon; our minds are blockish, our wills stubborn, our hearts obdurate,
our judgments do not readily assent to truth, nor our wills close with
goodness. We are as the Disciples were, slow of heart to believe, and submit
and embrace the things of God. There must be precept upon precept, and line
upon line; and there had need be consideration upon consideration, and prayer
upon prayer, and all this is little enough; nay all this, and more than this
would be too little, were not God pleased to bare his Omnipotent Arm, and to
make it a day of power upon the obdurate and refractory sinner. Slight thoughts
and transient glances will make no impression, will kill no sin, nor kindle any
holy heat; it is the fixed eye that does affect the heart; as the Burning-glass
must be for some time held with a steady hand in the beams of the Sun, before
it will fire combustible matter. Be much then in the work; let not vain
thoughts lodge, but let holy thoughts abide and dwell within you.

So much for the Act. I now come to the Object, What is it that we are to
consider? What? truly you need never be at a loss for matter of consideration,
most choice and excellent matter, viz. God himself, and the operations of his
hands, in Creation-work, and acts of Providence; specially that admirable
Masterpiece, sinners Redemption and Salvation. Consider your selves, your
hearts and ways, and latter end; together with that infinite Ocean of Eternity
into which you must lanch; and those two places, Heaven and Hell, into which
all Intellectual and Rational beings shall be gathered. Consider the Sermons
you hear, and search the Scriptures daily; bring all that is said in the Pulpit
to the Law and to the testimony; and see whether those things be so or not. In
Prayer consider in what a presence you are, and with what a glorious Majesty
you have to do; what great Mercies and Blessings you have to seek, and do not
offer the sacrifice of fools. Consider the Worship you perform, whether the
word will warrant it, and God accept it; many things that are very pretty in
the account of men, are very ugly in the sight of God. Consider the opinions
you take up, the Doctrines you believe, whether they be truths of God, what
foundation they have in the Scripture, with what evidence they come upon your
minds, and what work they have made within. I might multiply particulars to
this purpose, but shall forbear. The Text directs you to a very proper Object,
Consider your Pastors, in the end of their conversation.

King Solomon was a very wise man, and very considerate; he went too far in his
trial and search for an happiness under the sun; and being out of his way, he
was often in the ditch; yet wheresoever he was, he took consideration with him:
You find him one while returning and considering oppression, Eccles. 4. 1.
another time you find him returning and beholding vanity under the sun, Eccles.
4. 7. and at another time he is busily taken up in the sluggards field, Prove.
24. 30, He went by the field of the slothful: he saw and considered it well,
and looked upon it. What did he observe there? Two things; The posture of the
field, and the issue of the Owner. The field lay overgrown with thorns,
covered with nettles, having its stone-wall broken down; and as for the end of
its Owner, that was beggary; he had not so many rags to his back, as he had
nettles in his ground. Poverty and want came upon him as an armed man. King
Solomon considered all this, and received instruction. He was the better for it
while he lived. If we would be wise, we might get good out of nettles; turn
every thing we see, into spiritual advantage. Honey is by the industrious Be
sucked out of nettles and weeds. But,

I am calling you to turn, not into the Field of the heavy and lazy drone, but
into the Field of the diligent and laborious Husbandman. And do you consider it
well, observe how it is watched, and manured, and kept; how curiously it lies,
and how fertile it is; what pains the industrious owner took in sowing, and what
comfort he has in reaping; observe his harvest joy, when he goes home at night
carrying his sheaves with him. We will consider here two things.

1. (...), their Conversation. 2. (...), the end of their Conversation.
1. Consider their Conversation, all the windings and turnings of their lives,
take special notice of the whole, and of each particular. Consider them in all
their Capacities, Private and Public, as Men, Christians, Ecclesiastic
Governors. In all their Relations, as Neighbors, Friends, Masters, Parents,
Husbands, Ministers. In all times, serene and cloudy, halcion and tempestuous.
In all conditi^ns, high and low, prosperous and adverse, in Honor and
disgrace. In all these consider the evenness of their spirits, the stedfastness
of their faith, the holiness of their walking, their industry and patience,
their self-denial and submission, their meekness and contentation, their purity
and zeal. Consider how in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God they have had their Conversation in the World,
2 Cor. 1. 12.

2. Consider the end of their Conversation. A twofold end, which I shall give
you up in these terms, since better do not occur at present.

1. The end of their desires. 2. The end of their days.
1. Consider the end of their desires, what they propound to themselves, and
aim at in all they do, and which indeed their hearts are very much upon. Would
you know what it is, I answer negatively; Not a name among men, to be carried
aloft by the ^ading breath of popular applause. Alas that is a vain thing that
will please and satisfy none but a light and empty Spirit. With them it was a
very light thing to be judged by man's judgment, 1 Cor. 3. 3. That wind
continues not long in one corner. Our dearest Lord Jesus spoke and lived as
never man did, he excelled and outshined all that ever the world could glory
in, the brightest stars were darkened by that beautiful Sun, yet he, even he met
with a crucify him, after an Hosannah in the highest. Again, their end was not
worldly riches and s^cular advantages, not vast and swollen estates, on which the
greater part of the Sons of men dote, yea too many professors, these did fly
an higher pitch. A liberal maintenance was their due, the communication of
their spirituals did richly deserve a return of your temporals, which to make
is not your charity but duty, yet this was not their end. I could tell you of
some, who for your sakes have greatly denied themselves; Others have labored
hard and cheerfully in the midst of hardship and want. They have hugged
opportunities of bringing to hungry souls bread from Heaven, clusters from the
Land of promise, when they themselves have, as to their outward condition, been
in a dry and barren wilderness: but affirmatively thus, the end at which they
aimed did consist of these three things, which were worthy, most worthy of such
truly noble souls.

1. The glory of the ever blessed God, which is his own supreme and ultimate
end in all he does; and indeed nothing below the glory of God is fit to be
advanced to the honor of such an end. Now this was the end of those holy men,
To me to live is Christ, said Paul, Phil. 1. 21. He was the Author, preserver
and comfort; he was the pattern and end of Paul's life: the advancing of his
name, the setting forth of his excellencie^, the enlarging of his territories,
and increasing the number of his subjects, was the scope, the white at which he
levelled all his actions: and this also was principally designed by your
gracious and faithful Pastors: Christ they loved, and Preached, and exalted;
for him they contended, for him they suffered, for him they were ready to have
died; for the proclaiming of his Righte^usness, yea his only, and for the
maintaining of his Authority, as Head of the Church, and Zion's King, against
the bold and God-daring invasions of the grand Roman-Impostor and Usurper with
his Adherents. Doub^less nothing was so sweet to them as serviceableness to
this purpose. Contributions hereunto did not only reconcile them to their own
^^^lipses, reproaches, losses and sufferings, but also put a pleasantness into
them. John the Baptist speaking of this blessed Bridegroom, could say in the
uprightness of his heart, Ioh. 3. 29. 30. This my joy is fulfilled; he must
increase, but I must decrease. And you find Act. 5. 40, 41. when the Apostles
had been bcat^^ for Preaching up Jesus, they departed from the presence of the
Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name.
Now, my Brethren, this is such a pitch as the most raised Heathen, and
sublimated carnal man never yet soared; their principles are too low and
sordid, their wings too weak and feeble to admit of so lofty a flight. Let
nature and the power of it be never so much commended by its admirers, the
natural man without a supernatural principle, and the sweet, yet mighty
assi^^ance of special grace, never did* never can make God his highest end: No,
no, self s^icks too close to him, and is predominant; it is both at the top and
bottom of all his actions, and does indeed run quite thorough them. Whereupon
Theophylact said, you cannot instance in one good Heathen, because they did all
for vain glory.

2. Your deceased Pastors desig^ed the salvation of their own souls; interest
in God, communion with him, and fruition of him, tastes of his sweetness, sights
of his beauty now, and satisfaction hereafter. They were of David's mind, and
rejoiced in the same hopes. David had been speaking of the men of the world,
how they had their bellies filled with hid treasures. Oh! that is good, say
some, we wish we had our belly full too; but stay, that which spoiled all is
this, that they had their portion in this li^e. The comforts of the w^^ld are
good en^oymen^s, but they are a bad portion; that holy man did think them so,
and therefore closed most sweetly thus, Psalm. 17. 15. As for me, I will behold
thy ^^ce in right^^us^ess, I shall be s^tisfied when I awake with thy likeness.
It is as if he had said; Every one as he likes* if these men see so much in the
world, let them take it, and much good may it do them; when they have their
bellies full, let them go to rest, and sing themselves asleep in the lap of
pleasures, at the breast of creatures; when God awakens them, they will find
emptiness and pain, having fed all along upon wind and ashes. As for me, I will
not be put off with these things, they are but for the body, but for the belly
which must be destroyed, for that part of man which shall never be glorified.
As for me, I study the good of my precious soul, and am set for a portion for
my soul; I would have my portion to take when their portion is spent: I am for
beholding the face of God, and satisfaction with the likeness of God; and when
I once have that, I am sure that I shall have enough both of his love and of
his glory.

Paul labored more abundantly than all; if you should ask him, what it was he
labored for, he tells you, I and my faithful Brethren labor that whether
present or absent, they might be accepted of God, 2 Cor. 5. 9. We would gladly
be accepted of the Saints, but our chief desire and ambition is to be accepted
of the God of Saints, and to be received to live with him as his Children for
ever. And surely their greatest Adversaries may well allow them this. We all
know, there is a scantiness in the creature, and a narrowness in the world,
from whence proceeds shouldering, and justling* and scrambling; but the Divine
Love is infinite, the fullness of a God inexhaustible, and in Heaven there are
many mansions, room enough* and happiness enough, and glory enough for all that
shall come thither: let us not quarrel by the way, nor at the Inn; at home, at
our Fathers house, there is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore.

3. Lastly, They desired and aimed at the spiritual good, and eternal welfare
of your souls: To bring you unto Christ, to build you upon Christ, to keep you
from departures from him, and from unstedfastness with him; in a word, to be
instrumental for the making you meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light. Your selves are witnesses of the pains they took among you.
God is witness of their studies for you, the tears they shed in private, the
prayers they made, in which they wrestled with great wrestlings, that you might
live in his sight, and neither fall short of the grace which is bestowed upon
his people, nor of the Rest, which remains for them. I dare with highest
confidence affirm, these were the ends at which they principally aimed, and do
not fear being put to the blush at last, as one that is found a liar.

2. But now let us consider the end of their days, their [(...)] last end,
their going off the stage of the world, and out of this vail of tears. What
Exist have they? how come they off at last? for that is the import of the word
in the Original; which (says a Learned Critic) is a metaphor taken from
those, who being incompast about with thieves, are in danger on every side; how
do they escape? Faithful Pastors are tha light of the world, but how many are
there every where puffing at them! They are the Salt of the earth, but how do
the wicked endeavor to cast all this Salt upon the dunghill! and what an
unsavory world should we have then? They are troubled on every side, and in
all revolutions of Kingdoms and Nations, none are so much exposed to hazard as
they. Well now, observe and consider the end, the last Act, and blessed be our
good God, you shall find that in the Evening it is light, [Finis coronat opus]
Their End is such as that it crowns their works; such as makes them free to
tell the world, that their labor has not been in vain in the Lord, because it
fully answers all their hopes and expectations; nay, does unspeakably exceed
them. It is such an End as is desirable for all men. Even a Balaam wished thus,
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. The
vile wretch did not like the righteous man's life, that was too refined and
strict for him who loved the wages of unrighteousness, but he would fain have
his end. And you will see no cause at all to wonder at it, if you will but
retire a little, and in good earnest consider these things.

1. The End of your faithful Pastors, yea and of faithful Christians too is a
welcome end. Others, like the fool in the Gospel, have their souls taken from
them; there is a force put, if they could resist, they would: in a sullen mood
and disconted fit they will call for death, but when it comes indeed, they wish
it ^arther off, Whereas these resign their souls, and give up the Ghost, and
commend their spirits into their Saviors hand, They did according to their
duty love their work, and Relations, and Friends, and Comforts, yea and glory
in the Cross of Christ, but they can freely bid farewell to all, when they know
they shall, and think they do go to God. Though their days be few, yet they
depart hence full of days, because they have had their fill of living, they do
not only submit to God, when he sends for them, but also are well pleased, the
World was crucified to them, and they to the World; and when things are once
brought to that pass, it is no hard matter to part, the World is weary of them,
because they convince and condemn it; and they are weary of the World, because
of its wickedness and frowardness. It is terrible to think, what a struggling
there is when a wicked man comes to die. Methinks it is something like, though
much beyond that of the Vine and Olive, when the rest of the Trees would have
made one of them King; Oh, says the Vine, how shall I leave my sweetness? and
I, says the Olive, my fatness? So say ungodly men upon a dying-bed, how shall
I leave my jovial and merry companions, my honors and preferments, my riches
and estate, my pleasures and delights? if these be once gone, all is gone with
me, there is nothing left, I have nothing to take to. Death ruins them at
once. Alas, these poor cr^atur^s are not branches of the Vine, they are not
ingrafted into the Olive, they are brambles, and it is not strange that they
should rather choose to rule on earth, than to burn in Hell.

But when these holy men come to die, whatever struglings there are in nature,
they cheerfully comply. Death is what they have looked and long^d for. P^ul
desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ Phil. 1. 23. They groan earnesily
to be (...) upon with a robe of glory, and that house which is from. Heaven, 2
Cor. 5. 2. They have been familiar with death, they have prepared for it, and
waited for it, and given many a long look; and what should hinder their bidding
of it welcome, since they know it comes upon a good errand, though it be a grim
Messenger.

2. It is a peaceable end. If a wicked man should say to Death, as Ioram did to
Jehu, is it peace, Death? He might expect such an answer as he had. What peace,
so long as thy rebellions, and whoredoms, and abominations are so many? peace?
no, no peace. I am come to arrest thee upon Actions of high Treason against the
King of Heaven. The Sovereignty, Holiness, Goodness, Son, Gospel, Mercies,
Judgments of God have brought in their charges against thee, and I am come to
drag thee as a cursed Malefactor to the tribunal of thy Judge, where thou shall
be convicted and sentenced.

But now if these gracious men should ask death, as the Elders did Samuel,
come thou peaceably? the answer would be, yes peaceably. I was thine Enemy,
but I am reconciled. A good Friend of thine has plucked out my sting, so that I
cannot hurt thee. I am come to fetch thee home. I am come to send thee to a
place where thou have laid up great hopes, and many prayers, and much treasure,
to a place where thy Father is, and thy Savior, and an innumerable company of
Angels, and Spirits of just men made perfect; many of them thou know, most
of them thou know not; yet all of them, one and other, are ready with joy to
bid you welcome. Sanctify thy self, set thine house in order, and come away.
As soon as ever I have taken off this clog of earth, Angels shall, according to
the charge their great Lord has given them, receive thee, and conduct thee to
Iehovahs palace, where thou shall quickly be; no tiring by the way, and no
want in the Country It is true, a malicious Devil is ready to fall upon the
Saints, when they are weakest, and if God permit him, he will bruise their heel
just when they are to go their journey. And sometimes there is a very sharp
bout, and soar conflict upon a deathbed between him and them, but when once
death is come, he parts the fray, and all is quiet* The Devil may rage, and
storm, and fret, but he can do nothing else.

3. It is a comfortable end; I deny not but a little before there may be
Clouds; and this shady Valley so dark, as that the Believer is at a great loss.
Though his Title be good, yet h^ cannot read his Evidence. God may be pleased
to put a Vail upon his own face, and the Sun of Righteousness suspend his
Beams. There may be a great silence in Heaven, and not one word of comfort
spoken, that the attentive and listening Soul can hear. God is indeed by, but
he is not seen. He does uphold, but not revive. And hereupon there follows sad
questionings and hot disputes, if it be so, why am I thus? will not God
vouch^afe me one smile now, and can I think he owns me for one of his Children?
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Has he forgotten to be gracious, or resolved
he will not be so to me? But when it is thus very dark, the dawning of the day
is near at hand. And oftentimes the Clouds scatter, and the case is rightly
stated, and things are brought to a good issue, before the last blow be given.
God comes in and takes off the sackcloth, and puts upon his beloved Child a
Garment of praise, so that now he lies in state upon his Bed of languishment.
But however, as soon as Death has done his work, the dispute is at an end, and
the controversy is determined on the Souls side. And this is done when things
have been at the worst. After the lowest ebb, there then is a springtide of
consolation. Then the enlarged Soul does magnify the Lord, and the Spirit
rejoices in God its Savior.

But how often is it otherwise, have you not known? have you not heard, that
some of these precious Sons of Sion, these heirs of joy and glory have
triumphed over Death, even while they were under its assaults. When Death has
been making its most furious batteries, then have they been singing their Song
of praise in the Apostles language and strain, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O Death,
where is thy sti^g? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The sting of Death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God which gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. What raptures have they been in; and
what ecstasies of joy? so that their pains and throws have been forgotten or
neglected. How have some of them told bystanders [ hic sat lucis] here is
light enough, meaning in their breasts. And others, that they were as full of
joy as they could hold. God had anointed them with the oil of gladness against
their burial, and made their cups run over, so that their Hearts have leaped
within them at the thoughts of their being upon the borders of Eternity, and so
near the company which they loved so well. Witness that more than Swan-like
Song of good old Simeon, Luke 2. 29. 30. Lord now let thou thy Servant
depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.
Having got his Heart, and Christ in his Eye, he would set up his Sail, and his
Frait, Grace inbe gone for the other World.

4. It is an Honorable end. Wicked men go out in a stink, not only the grossly
profane, but the hypocritical professors, if discovered, as often they are.
Their putrid carasses are not so unsavory as their Names. Specially the Names
of such professors, who by their villainies have made Religion stink in the
nostrils of foolish men; though it is pity it should. Let all men judge of our
Religion, not by the practices of some that pretend to it, but by its own Rules
and Laws, which are the most exact, excellent, and noble, of any in the World.
But let the name of the wicked rot, and indeed so it does and shall* There is a
curse upon it, and that rots it. There was wickedness in their Lives, and that
causes rottenness in their Names. No good man will speak well of them, and the
commendations of the wicked are not worth the having, for they are a real
disgrace.

But these followers of the Lamb have obtained a good report, and left it
behind them. That Death, which makes them naked and bare of all their temporal
enjoyments, cannot strip them of this. The righteousness of Christ, and the
graces of the Spirit go along with them; their works sollow them, and the
remembrance of their holiness and usefulness stays behind. How do their
Relations and Friends want them? How do their People and acquaintance bewail
their absence! nay, some of their Enemies will strew flowers upon their Hearse;
And though they will not be so liberal as their Conscience, nor speak all
that is put into their mouths, but suppress and detain such truths in
unrighteousness, yet they will bestow the Epithet of an honest man. That God
whom they served, has said, The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.
He takes care of their names, as well as of their dust. And he has also said,
the memory of the just is blessed. It is and shall be so, like a precious
ointment, which fills the whole place where they lived with a fragrant odor,
yea and places far remote.

We cannot expect all should speak well of them. Some paint the Angels black;
the Devil would have had Job taken for a mere mercenary, although he was the
Worlds nonesuch for his uprightness. Shimei cursed David, and Tertullus the
Orator threw dirt upon a Paul. Christ himself was called a Deceiver after his
death, yet He was in all things faithful to him that appointed him. When all
men speak well of one, it is a shrewd sign, all was not well. Either something
was amiss, they will be such as their company is; or else something was
wanting, viz. Faithfulness and plain dealing. It is honor enough to have a
good report among them who fear God, they are best able to judge, and most to
be credited; and this honor have all his Saints, all those, whose character I
have given you, and those also who tread in their steps, and hold out to the
end, so doing.

5. Lastly, It is a most blessed and glorious end. You, Slaves of Hell, who are
at the Devils beck, and drudge for him all your days, committing uncleanness
with greediness, and drawing sin as with Cart-ropes, what is the end you must
expect? The Apostle tells you, Romans 6. 21. The end of those things is death.

That is the best wages the Devil has to bestow upon his Servants, a
never-dying death, a death which is unspeakably worse than death, and their end
is shame. Now they are impudent, but then they shall be ashamed. Dread shall
fill them, and shame cover them. That is the promotion of fools, Prove. 3. 35.
Oh! change your Master, leave your work, break off your sins by repentance,
unless you think eternal death a good reward, and everlasting shame desirable
preferment.

But behold these servants of the Lord, who have served their generation
according to the will of God, and glorified him upon earth, who have fought a
good fight, and kept the faith to the finishing of their course; who have
desired and endeavored to turn many to righteousness; how is it with them,
when their end comes? I want words, The lines fall to them in pleasant places,
they have a goodly heritage. Who can sum up their happiness? were one of them
here, were an Angel here, he could not tell you half. They are approved, and
highly commended. The testimony given is, that they pleased God; that they have
done well, very well. [ E^ge bone serve] Well done good and faithful servant,
thou have been faithful in thy little. Now they shine as Stars in the
^irmament: now they have their Crown of Righteousness, in comparison of which
the richest Diadems are not worth taking up in the street. And their glory is
answerable to their Crown. An exceeding and eternal weight of glory, such as
has substance and solidity in it. And no wonder if, together with all this,
they have their joy. If any thing can, this will make them forget their sormer
sufferings, the worlds affronts and inoignities, the angers and bitter
unkindnesses of their Mothers children, who are dandled in her lap, and yet are
peevish with their weaned Brethren. All this will make them merry at heart, and
cheerful in look, and sing Allelujah. They have a joy of God's making* and
maintaining; not the crackling joy of the world, but the unconceiveable joy of
their Lord; a joy too big for them to contain, though their capacities are
greatly enlarged: it cannot enter into them, they shall enter into it: a joy
that shall fill them to the brim, and compass them round about: they shall be
in joy as a full vessel in the midst of the immense Ocean. The doctrinal part
being thus finished, I shall speak a little, and but a little in a way of
Application. And

Use 1. My Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry of whatsoever Judgment
you are in these divided times, give me leave in all humility, yet with all
earnestness to beg of you, that you would so preach and walk, so labor and
live, as that you may be ex^mples to the flock, and your memory may be blessed.
Oh! let us all look to it* that we know and speak the truth as it is in Jesus,
not departing from the purity and simplicity of the Gospel. Let us remember,
whose Ambassadors we are, and keep close to our Commission, delivering only
our Masters word. Let our lips preserve knowledge, and not cause people to
err. May our discourses turn chiefly and mostly upon those two Cardinal points
that Paul's did, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Do
what you can to turn your Auditors from all their immoralities to a sober,
civil, and unblamable life. Doubtless the Gospel requires this* Christ came to
redeem us not only from Hell and condemnation, but also from a vain and vicious
conversation. And our perfection in Heaven will consist in a complete
conformity to the Moral Law. If any decry Morality, it is because they do not
understand it. Yet my Brethren, let us also teach Faith in Jesus Christ; do not
rob him of any part of his glory, to bestow it upon another. Sure I am, that is
far from Morality; it is no good manners to deal so with a precious Savior, to
whom we are infinitely and everlastingly obliged. And such injustice will cost
them dear, that are guilty of it. Labor we to make men and women ^ound
Believers. Show them the insufficiency of all they do to justify them; that
they may never (with the besotted Jews) go about to establish their own
righteousness, but submit to the righteousness of God, and by Faith put on that
perfect spotless Robe, which our dear Jesus has wrought for humbled sinners.
It is that, and that alone, that can cover all our shame, and adorn our
persons, and make our beauty perfect, and us lovely in the sight of God. Teach
them to look after the inward glory which the King's Daughter had, Psalm. 45.
13. but withal to put on this clothing of wrought gold.

And let us also live up to the Laws of our Religion. Away with covetousness
and debauchery. Away with envy, malice and contention, Let not the noise of
Axes and, Hammers, and evil Tongues be heard among us. Verily these things will
not be for our honor. Bespattering one another is not a likely way to
beautify our selves; it is a di^ty trick, and some of that dirt which you
throw upon others will fly back upon your selves; or if not the same, yet some
as bad. This very work defi^es you. That person has no love in the family, who
is of a cross s^irit, and delights in abusing. Walk holily, and humbly, and in
love. Let not head-divisions cause heart-divisions. Hatred, variance,
^mularions, wrath, s^rise, envyings, are works of the flesh, as well as
seditions and (...). These gratify the Devil, and please Papists, but offend
God, and dishonor you. Let all of us that fear God, and love godliness, keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, for we are Brethren. We see the
common Adversary is at work to ruin and destroy us all; let not us strengthen
his hands for it by weakening our own, and devouring one another.

Use 2. I would exhort you that are the People, to remember your deceased
Pastors, and follow their Faith. And in particular, do you set upon these
duties, my dear friends, who are the Members of this Congregation, who sat
under, and rejoiced in the Light and Labors of my dearest Brother, your late
Reve^end Pastor, Mr. T^omas Vincent.

Concerning whom, much, very much may be said in his high and just
commendation. My acquaintance with him has been short, not full three years;
so that I cannot look back so far, nor enlarge so much upon this noble and
copious Subject, as some of my worthy Brethren could have done, had you pleased
to have invited one of them to this service. Blessed be God there is no need of
many words, for his works praise him in our Gates; they will ^peak, though I
should be silent. But I know you do expect something from me, which you may
please to take thus.

Reverend Mr. Thomas Vinc^nt was a man really set for God; having chosen him
for his portion, and for his Lord too. He was devo^ed to his fear and honor*
and delighted greatly in communion with him: him he served with his spirit in
the Gospel of his Son. Prayer was his daily work, and great delight: he was
much at it, mighty in it, and successful too. Many a gracious answer was given
him from Heaven. This wrestling Jacob was a prevailing Is^a^l, a Prince with
God.

He was a painful and indust^uous Labourer in God's Vineyard, laying out
himself to the utmost for his peoples good. Oh! how great was his zeal in the
Pulpit? what his hand found to do, there he did it with all his might. You his
Auditors could not but conclude his Heart was in his work. He put up his
requests to God, and delivered his messages to you with inlargedness of soul,
and in the sweat of his brows. I can assure the world, he was none of those
idle drones, those ^lothful servants, who did the work of their Lord
negligently.

He stayed with you here in the time of that noisome and greedy Pestilence,
which raged so furiously, and devoured so hastily, and numbered out many
thousands, and ten thousands, to the Grave, when others fled for their lives,
he kept his station all the while, knowing he could not go out of Gods reach;
the arm of omnipotency could so bend his bow, and draw his arrow to the head,
that it should fly as far as he could run. He knew his duty and his safety lay
together. He was however freely willing to venture his life for the salvation
of s^uls.

He was sound in his judgment, and turned not aside to any errors upon the
right hand or the left. H^s Doctrine speak his faith in Christ, and both that
and his life expressed his lov^ to M^r^li^y, and Piety. I will tell you one
passage which came from him about three or four days before his death. Asking
him how it was within, He answered me, very well, adding withal; Blessed be God
for an imputed Righteousness, and blessed be God for an inherent Righteousness;
Dear Brother, I must tell you, if I had not an inherent Righteousness, I could
take no comfort from an imputed Righteousness.

He was of an unblameable Conversation. I never heard of one dead fly in his
Box of Ointment. Did I say; he was of an unblameable Conversation? it was too
little a word, too short by much; He was of an exemplary Conversation; He
reduced precepts into practice, and was not only in his Doctrine, but in his
way too a shining light.

He was a sweet Companion. Ah! my dear Brother, how pleasant, how very pleasant
wast thou unto me! Grace was poured into his lips, and they dropped as an
honeycomb. I was beholding to him for frequent visits. And though sometimes my
own occasions were very pressing and urgent, yet was his company never
burdensome, for he still detained me from business with delights and
sweetnesses. And if at any time I was not a gainer by his company, it was mine
own fault. He was a warm Christian, and carried up and down with him a heavenly
fire, a Divine heat both in his heart and his discourses.

Some opposition he met with in his work, and discouragements, yet he was not
discouraged, but held on his way, and grew stronger and stronger [ Sub ponder^
crevit] storms made him root the faster, and flourish the more. He did not
count liberty nor life dear to him, so that he might finish his course with
joy, and the ministry, which he had received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God.

And his blessed Master crowned his labors with admirable success, he did not
draw up his net empty, nor had he cause to complain of laboring in vain, and
spending his strength for naught and in vain. He did see of the travail of his
soul in the conversion of many, and will be able to say at last, Lord, here am
I, and the Children which thou have given me.

But alas! alas! this bright and orient Star must fall, he must fall, not by
the rail of the Dragon, but by the hand of death, did I say, he fell? no, no,
he rose higher, and is now in the highest, with the highest. This Star is
removed into another Orb! His Mantle of flesh he dropped and left behind, but his
Spirit mounted, and returned to God that gave it. And [ Si verbis audacia
detur] give me leave to sa^, a great man is fallen in London. His work was
done, and his dear Master would not permit his stay after it; but took him
home, and gave him his Crown. Hear a little my Brethren, of those precious
sayings which f^owed from him abundantly, that Night before a full surrender
was made. What he spoke was taken by the Pen of a ready Writer. Out of that
large Garden I have picked some few flowers, which I thus make up and present
unto you.

He had his light of comfort in that day of trouble, though not a bright
Sunshine, yet under the thickest Cloud he could see grace in his Heart, and
read his Evidence. These words assure us of that; Dear Jesus, do not thou
know that I love thee, though not with that activity, which others do, yet with
truth of love. Oh! thou know that I love thee, and wilt not thou love me,
and manifest thy self to me? Lord thou know, the bent of my heart was toward
thy self; thou know, I laid up my treasure with thee, and made choice of
Heaven for mine Inheritance, thou will not forget it n^w.

He had his experiences ready to produce, as Cordials to himself, and Arguments
with his God, will you hear them? Oh dear Jesus, a glimpse of the light of thy
Countenance is worth an age of pains and prayers. I have had formerly, not only
tastes, but large draughts sometimes. Ah my dear Father, thou have given me
sweet encouragement in waiting upon thee, and of late thou have not wholly
turned thy back. Oh my dear Jesus, did thou not manifest thy self to me at
the Sacrament, when I was so very weak? did not thou give me some tastes that
thou art gracious, and that thou did love me in particular, and that thou
would never leave nor forsake me, nor suffer me to depart from thee, is this
so long a time ago?

He had high thoughts of God when he was at the lowest, he justified him, and
that in this very Lauguage; O my Lord, I will not complain of thee, though I
must complain to thee. I complain of my self, but not of thee. I have deserved
thou should let me die in a Cloud, and though I do, I doubt not but I shall
be happy.

He could with a composed Spirit take his leav^, and shake hands with all. His
expressions were these; Farewell the world, the pleasures, profits and honors
of the world: farewell sin, I shall ever be with the Lord. Farewell my dear
Wife, farewell my dear Children, farewell my Servants, and farewell you my
Spiritual Children; whom he was at leisure thus to advise, be careful in your
choice of a Pastor, choose one, who in his Doctrine, life and manners may adorn
the Gospel; I shall be glad to meet you all in Heaven. This spoke a calm
within, a sedate frame of Spirit.

He could welcome death, observe how his words were dipped in oil, when its hands
were to be imbrewed in his blood. Oh noble Death, welcome, welcome. Would you
know how this came to pass? these words tell you. Death has wounded my head,
death has wounded my breast (which was full of pimples) but he has not
wounded my conscience, blessed be God. He could with importunity call for
Death. Hasten, hasten, oh hasten Death, where is thy bow, where thine arrows,
come, come, come, I am yet in the body, I am yet on earth, but it is Heaven,
Heaven, Heaven, I would fain be at. I seek death, but (...) find it* How long O
Lord holy and true. He would scarce be reconciled to the means of rebuking his
disease, and prolonging his (...) was conscience of duty that put him upon use
of them. That learned and excellent Physician (who applied to him in his
sickness, and whose heart was set upon his recovery (though he much questioned
it) told me he said to him, why do you come to keep m^ out of Heaven? H^ could
play with Death thus? Praythee, take possession of my Body, see wha^ thou will
get by it, fatten thy Grave with thy Sacrifices:

He had high and admiring thoughts of Jesus Christ, read them thus, Oh dear
Jesus, what or who art, thou? Oh! that glorious Spirit, that laid ^he
foundations of the Earth, and stretched out the Heavens like a Curtain. Oh what
an excellent person a^t thou! oh what an excellent person art thou! thou art
all lovely, in every part, from the Crown of the head, to the Soal of the foot,
thou art all love, all excellent, thy bounty is divine, thy love is divine, thy
beauty is divine.

He was not satisfied with what he had of Christ. Observe how desires flamed.
Dear Jesus, dear sweet Jesus, come unto me, and manifest thy self unto me, that
others may see and know that thou love me. Now if ever; now, now, now, if
ever, now if ever; O dear Jesus. I am going out of the body to be with thee, to
deal only with Spirits. Oh that I might have the light of thy countenance, the
sense of thy love, oh bome unto me. I see but a little of thy beauty and
excellency; oh that I might see more, and taste more, and enjoy more, that I
may have more than ever I had, and ^ast more than ever I did.

And he longed to be with Jesus, was in a kind of holy impatience, sick of love
and desires to delight himself in clear vision and full fruition of him.
Witness these groans, Dear Jesus, come and take me away, I have no business
hear, my work is done, my glass is run, my strength is gone, and when my work
is done, why shall I stay behind, Oh come, come, be as a Roe upon the Mountains
of spices. How long shall I wait? and cry? how long shall I be absent from
thee? And again, O come and take me to thy self, and give me possession of that
happiness, which is above, the vision of thy self, perfect likeness to thy
self, full fruition of thy self, without any interruption or conclusion. And
yet again, O come de^r Lord Jesus, how long before thou ^end thy Chariots, O
come thou down to me, and take me up to thee. Having ^ain some time silent and
still, a Friend desired him to give him his hand, if the clouds were scattered,
whereupon he reached out his hand, and said (as those present understood him) I
am upheld in the Arms of a Mediator. Thus died this precious Saint, this
eminent Minister; thus he lived, and thus he died. Let him never be forgotten,
he shall not, he cannot be forgotten. And let us who survive be followers of
him, and others, who served and walked with Christ on earth, and now sit and
reign with Christ in glory.

FINIS.

