Sir Thomas Grosvenor's CASE, in Answer to the Petition of William Monson and
William Thompson Esqs and others, in order to avoid the said Sir Thomas his
Privilege as a Member of the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament.
THE said Sir Thomas does admit, that he did Demise the Mines in the said
Petition mentioned, unto Phineas Bowls and John Blunt, as in the Petition is
set forth; and Sir Thomas did immediately deliver all the Ground mentioned
therein; with which the Petitioners did rest satisfied for these Six years and
upwards, without laying any further Claim.

Sir Thomas does not detain any of their Rights, or disturb them in their
Possessions, for the Place in question was never in the poffession of the
Petitioners, or ever Let by the Lease to Bowls and Blunt, but the Place was
before Leased and granted to Mr. Roger Mostyn, and Mr. Williams, who have so
Sworn it, in their Answers to the Petitioners Bill in Chancery; and the Ground
was then, and has ever since continued in their possession, as Sir Thomas's
Tenants, and Workmen.

But Sir Thomas does deny, and so in his Answer in Chancery to the Petitioners
said Bill, has denied, that he was privy or consenting to the Assignment of
that Lease to the said Petitioners; and the said Sir Thomas, by his said
Answer, has set forth, That the said Lessees, and the Petitioners under them,
had forfeited the said Lease by Misfeazances, and not Working the said Mines as
they ought to have done, and yet notwithstanding have enjoyed the benefit
thereof, and that the said Sir Thomas offered to wave the said Forfeiture, and
to allow the said Lease upon moderate Terms, in the Answer set forth, which
they refused or neglected to do; And by his Answer denies expressly, as the
truth is, that he, or any claiming under him, had in any fort entered upon, or
disturbed the said Lessees of the benefit of the Mines so demised, to the best
of his knowledge: And that the Petitioners had combined with one Davies, and
others, to defeat his Title to the said Mines by foul and indirect Practices,
which Davies obtained a Lease thereof behind Sir Thomas his back, and without
notice to Sir Thomas, and entered thereupon by color thereof, which Mines are
Sir Thomas his Inheritance, the said Davies pretending that Sir Thomas held
them by Usurpation, and in wrong of the Crown, whereby Sir Thomas was greatly
vexed and disturbed, and at this day the said Davies pretends to find defects
in Sir Thomas his Grant of the Mines, and thereby to let in the said Lease.

And Sir Thomas does deny, that he Ordered the Petitioners Workmen to be beaten
off the Work by violence, or to be threatened to be, or that he knows that one
of them was buried alive in the Pit, as the Petitioners have falsely and
scandalously suggested in the Case by them Printed and Published, and actually
delivered to many Members of this Honorable House; Which Suggestions tend to
the great Defamation and Reproach of the said Sir Thomas, who, as he is a
Member of this Honorable House, humbly Prays, that this Honorable House will
be pleased to take the same into Consideration, and do him Right therein, the
rather, for that if the same Matter had been true, yet was it altogether
unnecessarily inserted in the said Case as to the Matter prayed by the
Petitioners said Petition, and therefore could be designed only to render the
said Sir Thomas Obnoxious, and even Odious.

And it does appear by the Petitioners own showing in their said Case, That Sir
Thomas has done no Violence or Injury in his own Person to the Petitioners,
their Workmen or Works, and that as to such other; Persons as the Petitioners
pretend have done them wrong, and they Indicted them, and had the Liberty of
the Law against them, and the said Sir Thomas wholly left them to the Law.

Sir Thomas Grosvenor denies to have ever waved his Privilege, or hindered the
Petitioners in delivering their Petition last Sessions, but after the
Prorogation, pursuant to the General Order of the House, did put in his Answer.
It Is true he came to Dr. Newton, the Master in Chancery, November last, and
told him his Solicitor was out of Town, and he had none of his Papers, and
produced to him the Vote of the House, and did insist on his Privilege during
the sitting of the House, but as soon as it was up, that he would appear with
his Council, and argue the Exceptions.

And as to the Exceptions put in to the said Sir Thomas his Answer in Chancery,
as in the Petition) he says, That his said Answer is direct and full to all
the necessary parts of the Petitioners Bill, as thereby may appear, and that
the said Exceptions are merely frivolous and impertinent, and designed only to
Trouble and Perplex him, and tend to the Discomposing and Retarding him in the
Discharge of his Duty and Service of this Honorable House: And therefore
humbly Prays, That he may have his Privilege allowed him according to the
Vote and Standing Order of this Honorable House of the 17th of April 1699.


