THE Catholic Cause; OR, THE HORRID PRACTICE OF Murdering Kings, Justified,
and commended by the POPE,

In a Speech to his Cardinals, upon the barbarous Assassination of Henry the
Third of France, who was stabbed by Jaques Clement, a Dominican Friar.

The true Copy of which Speech, both in Latin, and also faithfully rendered into
English, you have in the following Pages.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

Sixti Quinti Pont. Max. de Henrici Tertii morte, Sermo, Romae in Consistorio
Patrum habitus, 11. Septem. 1589.
ANIMO meo saepe acserio revolvens, mentisque aciem intendens in ea, quae nuper
Dei voluntate acciderunt, vidior mihi vere posse illud Prophetae Abacuch
usurpare: Qui opus factum est in diebus vestris, quod nemo credet, cum
narrabitur, (Abbak. 1. v. 5.) Mortuus est Rex Francorum per manus Monachi.

Nam ad istud potest recte applicari: licet de alia re, nempe de incarnatione
Domini, quae omnia mira, ac mirabilia superat, Propheta proprie locutus sit,
sicut and Apostolus Paulus eadem verba, ( Actorum 13. v. 4^.) ad Christi
resurrectionem verissime refert. Quando Propheta nominat Opus, non vult innuere
aliquid vulgar, vel ordinarium, sed rarum, insigne, ac memorabile facinus:
quomodo de creatione Mundi, Opera mamium tuarum sunt coeli. Item, Requievit die
septimo ab omni opere quod patrarat. Cum vero factum ait, eo verbo tale aliquid
in Scripturis exprimi, quod non temere, casu, fortuna aut per accidens evenire
dicitur; sed quod expressa Dei voluntate, providentia, dispositione, ac
ordinationo obvenit. Vt cum dicit Salvator, Opera quae ego facio vos facietis,
and majora horum facietis: and similiain sacris litteris plurima. Quod autem
loquatur in praeterito factum esse, id more aliorum Prophetarum facit, qui
propter certitudinem eventus solent saepe de futuris, ac si jam facta essent
praedicere. Dicunt enim Philosophi, res praeteritas esse de necessitate,
praesentes de inesse, futuras de possibili tantum: it a illi loquuntur.

Propter quam certitudinem Isaias Propheta long ante vaticinatus de morte
Christi, sic dixit, sicut in Act. Apostolorum cap. 8. etiam recitatur, Tanquam
ovis ad occisionem ductus est and sicut agnus coram tondente se non aperuit os
suum, etc.

Atque hoc, de quo minc verba facimus, and quod hic diebus nostris evenit, vere
insigne, memorabile, and pene incredibile opus est, nec sine Dei opt. Max.
particulari providentia, and dispositione perpetratum. Occidit Monachus Regem,
non pictum aut fictum in charta, aut pariete; Sed Regem Francorum in medio
exercitus sui, milite and custodia undique septum: quod re vera tale est, and
eo modo effectum, ut nemo nunc credat, cum narrabitur, and fortasse apud
posteritatem pro fabula reputabitur.

Quod Rex sit mortuus, vel etiam peremptus, facile creditur, sed eum sic
sublatum, vix est credibile: sicut Christum natum ex f^minia statim assentimur;
sed si addas porro ex f^mina Virgin ortum esse, tunc secundum hominem non
assentior: ita etiam quod mortuus sit Christus facile credimus, sed quod
mortuusjam resurrexerit ad vitam, quia ex privatione ad habitum non fit
regressio, redditur secundum intellectum humanum impossible, propterea in
credibile: quod homo ex somno, ex morbo, etiam ex syncope, vel extasi
resuscitatur, quia id saepe secundum naturam fit, humanitus credimus; sed
resurrexisse a mortuis, ita secundum carnem videbatur incredibile, Vt Paulo
apud Philosophos Athenienses de hac resurrectione disserenti, improper arent,
quod esset novorum daemoniorum annunciator: and allii, sicut D. Lucas narrat,
irridebant; alii dicebant, Audiemus te de hoc iterum. De talibus igitur, quae
secundum naturae leges, and ordinarium cursum fieri non solent, dicit Propheta,
quod nemo credet, cum narrabitur; sed hujusmodi tantum fidem adhibemus ex
consideratione omnipotentiae divinae, and per subjectionem intellectus nostri
in obedientiam fidei, and obsequium Christi. Nam hoc modo quod erat incredibile
naturaliter, fit credibile. Igitur qui secundum hominem non credo Christum de
virgin natum, tamen quando additur hoc factum esse supra naturae terminos per
operationem Spiritus sancti, tunc vere assentior, and credo.

Ita quando dicitur Christum ex mortuis resurrexisse, humanitus non credo; sed
cum id factum esse per divinam (quae in ipso erat) naturam affirmatur, tunc
omnino credo.

Eodem modo licet tantum Regem in medio exercitus, tot stipatum militibus, ab
uno simplici, and imbelli Religioso occisum esse, secundum prudentiam carnis,
and intellectum humanum sit incredibile, vel omnino improbabile; tamen
considerando ex altera part gravissima Regis peccata, and specialem Dei
omnipotentis in hac re providentiam, and quam inusitato, and mira ili modo
justissimam voluntatem suam erga ipsum impleverit, omnino, and firmiter credo.
Rem etenim istam tam grandem and inusitatam alio refer, quam ad particularem
Dei providentiam (sicut quosdam ad alias causas ordinarias, vel etiam ad
fortunam and casum, aut similes accidentarios eventus perperam refer
intelligimus,) prorsus non licet; sicut ij, qui totius facti seriem pressius
observant, facile videre possunt, ubi plurima intervenerunt, quae ab homine
nisi Dei speciali concurrente auxilio, expediri non quiverant. Et sane Regum ac
Regnorum rations, caeteraque tam rara tantique momenti negotia a Deo temere
administrari non est existimandum. Sunt in sacra Historia nonnulla hujus
generis, nec eorum quidquum potest alio, quam ad Deum Authorem referri: tamen
nihil est, ubi magis claret superna operatio, quam in isto, de quo nunc agimus.

Libr. Macchab. 1. chap. 6. Legimus, Eleazarum, ut Regem populi Dei
persecutorem, ac hostem tolleret, seipsum certae morti obtulisse. Nam in
conflictu conspiciens Elephantem caeteris eminentiorem, in quovidebatur Rex
esse, concito cursu in mediam hostium turmam se coniiciens; hinc inde viam vi
sternens, ad belluam venit, atque sub eam intravit, subjectoque gladio peremit,
quae cadens oppressit Eleazarum and extinxit. Hic quoad zelum, and animi robur,
reique tentatae exitum, aliquid hujus nostri simile cernimus, tamen in reliquis
nihil est comparabile. Eleazarus erat miles, armis and pugna exercitatus, in
ipso praelio constitutus, adoreque animi, and furore (ut fit) accensus: iste
Monachus praeliis ac pugnis non erat assuefactus, and a sanguine vitae suae
instituto ita abhorrens, ut nec ex venae incisione fusum cruorem forsan far
potuerit.

Ille noverat genus mortis, simulque locum sepulturae suae, nempe quod ruina
belliiae inclusus magis, quam oppressus, suo sepeliretur triumpho: iste mortem,
ac tormenta crudeliora, and incognita expectabat, sepu chroque se cariturum non
dubitabat. Sed and alia multa dissimilia sunt. Nota quoque est insignis illa
historia sanctae mulieris Judith, quae and ipsa, ut obsessam civitatem suam, ac
populum Dei liberaret, cepit consilium, Deo sine controversia suggestore, de
interimendo Holopherne hostilis exercitus principe; quod and perfecit. In quo
opere licet plurima, and apertissima supernae directionis indicia appareant,
tamen long majora divinae providentiae argumenta, in istius Regis occisione,
ac civitatis Parisiensis liberatione conspicere licebit, sicut certe quoad
hominem, hoc fuit illo magis difficile, vel impossible.

Nam illa sancta foemina intentionem suam aliquibus urbis presbyteris aperuit,
portamque civitatis, and custodiam pertransiit illis praesentibus, ac
approbantibus, ut proinde scrutationi, vel explorationi, quae obsidionis
tempore solet esse tam exacta, ut ne musca fere sine examine egredi queat, non,
potuerit esse subjecta.

Apud hosts vero, per quorum cassra, and varias excubias transeundum erat,
saepius explorata, and examinata cum foemina esset, net quid quam haberet vel
literarum, vel armorum, unde suspicio oriri potuit, de que adventu in castra,
and a suis, fugae probabiles reddens rations, facile dimittebatur.

Sicut tam propter easdem causas, quam propter sex, um and formae excellentiam
ad Principem impudicum introduci, and in temulentum, facile, quod designavit,
perficere valuit. Ita illa.

Hic vero Religiosus aggressus est, and confecit rem long majorem, pluribusque
impedimentis, ac tantis difficultatibus, periculisque obsitam, ut nulla
prudentia, aut astatia humana, nec abio modo, nisi aperta Dei ordinatione, ac
succursu confici potuerit. Debebant obtineri litterae commendatitiae ab iis,
qui erant contrariae factionis; transeundum erat per eam urbis portam qua itur
ad castra hostium; quae ita sine dubio in illis obsidionis angustiis
custodiebatur, ut cuncta haberentur suspect, nec cuiquam sine curiosissima
exploratione de litteris, nunciis, negotiis, armis, pateret exitus.

Sed isse (res mira) vigiles pretransiit sineexamine, etiam cum litteris
credentiae ad hostem, quae si fuissent interceptae a civibus, sine mora, ac
sine ulteriori judicio de vita fuisset actum, atque apertum hoc divinae
providentiae argumentum: sed majus miraculum est illud, quod idem mox sine omni
exploratine transierit quoque castra hostium, varias militum excubias, ipsamque
corporis Regis custodiam, ac totum denique exercitum, qui fere erat conflatus
ex haereticis, ipse Religiosus existens, and in habitu Ordinis sui, qui ita
erat exosus talibus hominibus, ut in illis locis, quae paulo ante prope
Parisios vi ceperant, Monachos quosque vel occiderint, vel pessime tractaverint.

Judith erat foemina, minimeque odiosa; tamen examinata saepe, illa nihil secum
tulit, unde sibi oriretur periculum: iste Monachus, and propterea odiosus, ac
suspectissimus, etiam cum cultello ad hoc propositum praeparato, non in vagina
condito (unde poterat esse probabilis excusatio) sed nudo, ac in manica
abscondito, quem si invenissent, mox fuisset in crucem actus.

Ista omnia clariora sunt particularis providentiae divino argumenta, quam ut
negare queat: nec aliter fieri potuit, quam ut a Deo occaecarentur* oculi
inimicorum ne agnofcerent illum.

Nam; ut antea diximus, licet quidam ista absurd tribuant fortunae, aut casui,
tamen nos hoc totum non alio referendum censemus, quam in divinam voluntatem.

Nec profecto aliter factum credercm, nisi captivarem intellectum in obse quium
Christi, qui hoc modo admirabili, and liberare civitatem Parisiensem (quam
variis viis intelleximus fuisse in summo discrimine, maximisque angustiis
constitutam) and istius Regis gravissima peccata punire, cumque tam infausta,
and infami morte e medio tollere statuit. Atque nos, dolentes sane, aliquoties
praediximus fore, ut quemadmodum erat familiae suae ultimus, ita aliquem
insuetum, and dedecorosum vitae exitum esset habiturus. Quod me dixisse non
solum Cardinales Ioiosa, Lenocortius, and Parisiensis, sed etiam, qui tunc apud
nos residebat Orator, testes esse possunt.

Neque enim hic mortuos, sed viventes in testimonium hujusmodi verborum
nostrorum adhibemus, quorum isti omnes probe meminisse possnnt. Quidquid tamen
in hunc infoelicem Regem hoc tempore dicere cogimur, nullo modo volumus, ut
pertineat ad nobilissimum illud Galliae Regnum, quod nos imposterum, sicut
hactenus semper omni paterno amore, ac honorc prosequemur. De persona ergo
Regis tantum ista cum dolor diximus, cujus infaustus finis eximit quoque ipsum
ab iis officiis, quae solet haec sancta seeds (quae est pia Matter omnium
fidelium, and maxim Christianorum principium) Imperatoribus and Regibus post
mortem exhibere: quae pro isto libenter quoque fecissemus, nisi id fieri in hoc
casu sacrae Scripturae vetarent.

Est, inquit S. Joannes, peccatum ad mortem, non pro illo dico ut roget quis:
quod vel intelligi potest de peccato ipso, ac si diceret, pro illo peccato. vel
pro remissione illius peccati nolo ut quisquam roget, quoniam non est
remissibile: vel, quod in eundem sensum redit, pro illo homine, qui peccat
peccatum ad mortem, non dico ut roget quis. De quo genere etiam Salvator apud
Mat. quod illi, qui peccat in Spiritum sanctum, non remittetur, neque in hoc
saeculo, neque in futuro. Ubi facit tria genera peccatorum, nimirum in Patrem,
in Filium, and in Spiritum sanctum; atque priora duo esse minus gravia, and
remissibilia, tertium vero irremissibile, quae tota differentia, sicut ex
Scripturis scholae tradunt, oritur ex distinctione attributorum, quae singula
singulis Personis sanctissimae Trinitatis appropriantur.

Licet enim, sicut eadem est essentia, sic eadem quoque est potentia,
sapientia, and bonitas omnium personarum (sicut ex Symbolo S. Athanasii
didicimus, cum ait, Omnipotens Pater, Omnipotens Filius, Omnipotens Spiritus
sanctus;) tamen per attributionem, Patri applicatur Potentia, Filio Sapientia,
Spiritui Sancto Amor; quorum singula eo modo, quo attributa dicuntur, ita sunt
propria cujusque personae, ut in aliam referri non queant; ex quorum
Attributorum contrariis, and distinctionem, and gravitatem peccatorum
dignoscimus.

Contrarium Potentiae, quae attribuitur Patri, est Infirmitas; ut proinde id
quod ex infirmitate, seu naturae nostrae imbecillitate committimus, dicatur
committi in Patrem.

Oppositum Sapientiae est Ignorantia, ex qua cum quis peccat, dicitur peccare
in filium; ita ut ea, quae vel ex humana infirmitate, vel ignoratione peccamus,
facilius nobis condonari soleant.

Tertium autem Attributum, quod est Spiritus Sancti, nempe Amor, habet pro
contrario Ingratitudinem, vitium maxim odibile: unde venit, ut homo non
agnoscat Dei erga ipsum dilectionem, aut beneficia; sed obliviscatur,
contemnat, ac odio etiam habeat. Ex quo tandem fit, ut-obstinatus reddatur,
atque impoenitens atque his modis multo gravius and periculosius peccatur in
Deum, quam ex ignorantia, aut imbecillitate; proinde hujusmodi vocantur peccata
in Spiritum Sanctum.

Et quia rarius, ac difficilius, and non nisi abundantiori gratia condonantur,
dicuntur, irremissibilia quodammodo; cum tamen sola impoenitentia sit omnino
and simpliciter irremissibilis: quicquid enim in vita committitur, licet contra
Spiritum sanctum, potest per paenitentiam deleri ante mortem. Sed qui
perseverat usque ad mortem, nullum locum relinquit gratiae ac misericordiae:
atque pro tali peccato, seu pro homine sic peccante, noluit Apostolus ut post
mortem oraremus.

Jam ergo quia magno nostro dolor intelligimus, praedictum Regem ex hac vita
sine poenitentia, seu impoenitentem excessisse, nimirum in consortio
haereticorum; ex talibus enim hominibus confecerat exercitum suum: and quod
commendaver at moriens regnum in successione Navarrae declarato haeretico, and
excommunicato; necnon in extremis, ac in ultimo fere vitae spiritu ab eodem,
and similibus circumstantibus petierit, ut vindictam sumerent de iis, quos ipse
judicabat fuisse causas mortis suae. Propter haec, and similia manifesta
impoenitentiae indicia, decrevimus pro ipso non esse celebrandas exe quias, non
quod praesumamus quidquam ex hoc de occultis erga ipsum Dei judiciis, aut
misericordiis, qui poterat secundum beneplacitum suum in ipso exitu animae suae
convertere cor ejus, and misericorditer cum illo agere; sed ista locuti sumus
secundum e^a, quae nobis exterius patent. Faxit benignissimus Salvator noster,
ut reliqui hoc horrendo justitiae supernae exemplo admoniti, in viam salutis
redeant, and quod misericorditer hoc modo coepit, benign prosequatur, ac
perficiat, sicut eum facturum speramus: ut de erepta Ecclesia de tantis malis,
and periculis, perennes illi gratias agamus.

In quam sententiam cum dixisset Pontifex, dimisit Consistorium cum
benedictione.

An Oration of Pope Sixtus the Fifth, upon the death of King Hen. the Third, in
Rome in the full Assembly of the Cardinals.
COnsidering oftentimes and seriously with my self, and applying the utmost of
my understanding unto these things which now of late, by the Will of God, are
come to pass; I think I may fitly use the words of the Prophet Abbakuk, saying,
I have wrought a Work in your days, which no Man will believe when it shall be
told him, Abbak. 1. v. 5. The French King is slain by the hands of a Friar.

For unto this it may truly be compared, though the Prophet spoke of another
thing, namely, of the Incarnation of our Lord, which exceeds all other
Wonders and Miracles: As also the Apostle S. Paul refers the same words unto
the Resurrection of Christ, ( Acts 13. v. 41.) When the Prophet says, a work,
he means not by it some common or ordinary thing, but a rare and notable
matter, and worthy to be remembered, as that of the Creation of the World; The
Heavens are the works of thy hands: and again, He rested the seventh day from
all the works which he had made. When he says, I have wrought, with these
words the Scripture is wont to express things not to come to pass casually, by
Fortune, or Accident; but things falling out by the determined Counsel, Will,
Providence and Ordinance of God: As our Savior says, The works that I do,
shall ye do also, and greater works than these, ( Joh. 14. v. 12.) and many
more in holy Writ to the like purpose. Now that he says, that it is done in
times past, herein he follows the use and manner of the other Prophets, who for
the certainty of the event are wont to predict things to come, as if they were
past already; for, as the Philosophers say, Things past, are of necessity,
things present of being, and things to come, only of possibility* So do they
speak. For which certainty the Prophet Esaias long before, prophesying of the
death of Christ, has thus spoken; He was led as a Sheep to the slaughter, and
like a Lamb dumb before his Shearer, so opened he not his mouth, etc. as it is
likewise repeated, Act. chap. 8.

And this, of which we are now speaking, and which has happened in these our
days, is a very famous, memorable, and well-nigh incredible thing; not done, or
accomplished, without the particular providence, and disposition of the
Almighty. A Friar has killed a King, not a painted one in Paper, nor pictured
out upon a Wall; But the French King, in the middle of his Armies, encompassed*
round about with his Guard, and Soldiers; which truly is such an Act, and done
in such a manner, that none will believe, when it shall be told them; and
perhaps our Posterity after us will account, and esteem it, but a Fable.

That the King is dead, or else slain, it is easily to be believed; but that he
is killed, and taken away in such sort; is hardly credible: even as we
presently assent, that Christ is born of a Woman; but if we further add, of a
Virgin-woman, then, according to human reason, we cannot assent unto it; and so
we can readily believe that Christ died, but that he rose from the dead to life
again, this, to Man's natural understanding, is imposible, and therefore
incredible, because there is no return from a privation to an habit: That one
is awakened again out of a sleep, ecstasy, or a swound, because it is not
against Nature, we naturally believe it; but to be risen again from the dead,
it seemed so incredible a thing to Nature, that St. Paul disputing with the
Athenian Philosophers about this very Point, was disgusted for it, and accused
to be a setter forth of new, or strange Gods: and some, as S. Luke reports,
mocked him, others said, We will hear thee again of this matteer. Of such
things therefore which befall not according to the Laws of Nature, and the
ordinary Course thereof, speaks the Prophet, viz. that none shall believe it,
when it shall be told them. But we give credit unto it, whilst we consider the
omnipotency of God, and by submitting our own understandings to the obedience
of Faith, and the Commands of our Savior Christ; and by these means, what was
incredible before by Nature, becomes credible by Faith: We therefore, that as
mere Men cannot believe Christ to be born of a Virgin, when this is further
added, that it was wrought supernaturally, by the operation of the Holy Ghost,
then we truly assent to it, and faithfully believe it. So likewise when it is
said that Christ is risen again from the dead, naturally we believe it not, but
when it is affirmed that this was done by the Power of the Divine Nature (which
was in him) then we readily, and without any kind of doubting, believe it.

In the same manner, though to natural Reason and human Capacity it may seem a
thing incredible, or altogether improbable, that such a mighty King should be
murdered in the midst of his Army, environed round with his Guards, and
Soldiers, by a poor, simple, weak Religionist, or Friar: Yet considering, on
the other side, the great and grievous sins of this King, and the special
Providence of the Almighty herein, and by what a strange and wonderful way he
has accomplished his most just Will and Judgment against him, then we fully
and most firmly believe it; and therefore this great and miraculous work, we
are to ascribe to a particular Providence of God only: not as those that
erroneously referr all things unto some ordinary Causes, or unto Fortune, or
suchlike accidentary Events; but as those who (more nearly observing, and
looking into the Course of the whole matter) do easily see that there were many
things intervening in it, which could not have been brought to pass, and
dispatched, without the special help of God. And truly the state of Kings and
Kingdoms, and all other such rare and weighty Affairs should not be thought to
be Governed of God rashly, and unadvisedly; there are some Instances in holy
Writ of this nature, and none of them can be referred unto any other cause, but
God only: but yet there is none wherein the celestial operation more
appears, than in this, whereof we are now aspeaking.

We read in the first Book of Macchabees, chapter 6. how Eleazar run himself upon a
certain Death, to kill the King that was an Enemy and a Persecutor of the
People and Children of God: For, in the Battle, espying an Elephant higher and
more stately than the rest, whereon It was like the King rode, with a swift
pace casting himself into the midst of his Enemies Troops, here and there
making his way by force, he came to the Beast at last, and went under her and
thrust his Sword into her Belly, and slew her, who falling, with the great
weight of her Body pressed him to death, and killed him out of hand. Here in
this Instance we may see something not unlike to ours, viz. as to zeal,
valiantness of mind, and the issue of the Enterprise; but in the rest there is
no Comparison to be made. Eleazar was a Soldier exercised in Weapons, and
trained up in Wars, set in Battle, emboldned with courage, and inflamed
withrage and anger: This a Friar, not inured to fighting, and so abhorring
blood by the Order of his Profession, that perhaps he could not abide the
cutting of a Vein.

He knew the kind of his Death, as also the place of his Burial; namely, that
he should be Entombed under the fall of the Beast, and so buried in the midst
of his triumph and victory. This Man looked for a certain death, and expected
nothing but unknown and most cruel torments, and did not doubt before but that
he should want a Grave to rest within. But there be many other things wherein
these two Instances can suffer no comparison. The famous History of the holy
Woman Judith, is sufficiently known, who determined with her self, (God no
doubt immediately moving her to it) that she might deliver the City and the
People of God, to murder Holophernes, the General and chief Commander of the
Enemies Forces, which she most effectually accomplished. Wherein although
appear many and most manifest signs of Heavenly direction, yet far greater
Arguments of Gods Providence are to be seen in killing of this King, and the
delivering of the City of Paris, far more difficult, and harder to be brought
to pass, than was the Enterprise of Judith. For this holy Woman discovered her
intention to some of the Governors of the City, and passed through in sight and
presence of the Elders and Princes of that place* and by that means was not
subject unto their examination and searching (which is always used so strictly
in time of Siege and War, that a Fly can hardly without examination escape
them) She being come to the Enemy, through whose Company and Watches she was to
go, and oftentimes searched and examined, being a Woman; and carrying no
Letters nor Weapons about her, from whence any suspicion might arise, and with
all yielding reasons of her coming thither, and abandoning her Relatives, was
easily discharged: and not only upon the forementioned causes, but also for her
Sex and exquisite beauty, being brought before this lewd and unchaste Prince,
she might perform that which she had determined before. This is Judith scase.

But this religious man undertook and performed a matter of greater weight;
encompassed with so many Impediments, Difficulties and Dangers, that no
subtilty of Man, no Humane Policy, nor any Worldly Wisdom, but only the clear
and visible Providence of God, and his special Aid could bring it to pass.
First Letters commendatory were to be procured of the contrary party, then was
he constrained to go through that Gate of the City that led to the Enemies Camp;
the which without doubt was so narrowly kept and watched in the extremity of
that Siege, that every triflle bred suspicion, and none were suffered to go
forth without narrow searching before, touching their Letters, Messages,
Business, and Affairs they had. But he (a wonderful thing) passed through the
Watch unexamined, yea with Letters credential unto the Enemy; which if they had
been intercepted by the Citizens, without any delay and further trial he should
have been executed presently. And therefore this is a manifest Argument of Gods
Providence. But this is a far greater Miracle, that he without searching went
also through the Enemies Camp, by diverse Watches and sentinels; and, which is
more, through the Kings Guard du Corpse; and finally, through the whole Army,
which was made up mostly of Heretics; he being a Religious Man, and clade in
the Habit of his order, which was so odious a Garb to those men, that they
either killed, or severely treated all those Friars, whom they found in those
places, which not long before they had taken about Paris. Judith was a Woman,
and nothing odious, yet examined often; she carried nothing that might have
turned to her Danger and Destruction. This man, a Friar, and therefore hated,
and most suspected, having also a Knife prepared for that purpose, not in a
Scabbard, (which might have made his excuse probable) but naked, and concealed
in his Sleeve; which if it had been found about him; he would (questionless)
have been put to death immediately. All these are such clear Arguments of the
particular Providence of God, that they cannot be denied; neither could it
otherwise be, but that God blinded the Eyes of the Enemy, that they could not
see nor know him. For (as we have said before) although some do absurdly
ascribe this unto Fortune, or Chance, yet none can refer the whole matter to no
other cause, but the will and holy purpose of God. And indeed I could not
believe this to have been done otherwise, unless I should captive or submit my
understanding to the obedience of Christ, who determined by these miraculous
means, to deliver and set at liberty the City of Paris, which as we have heard
was in great danger and extremity) and to punish the notorious sins of that
King, and to deprive him of this life by such an unhappy and infamous kind of
death; and we truly (not without great inward grief) have oft-times foretold,
that as he was the last of his name and family, so was he like to have, and
make some strange and shameful end of his life. And that I have several times
said this thing, not only the Cardinals Joiosa, Lenocortius and Parisiensis,
but also the Orator, at that time here resident, can sufficiently testify. For
we mean not to call the dead to attest our words, but the living; some whereof
at this very present do yet well remember them. But whatsoever we have been
forced to speak against this unfortunate King, we would by no means have it
thought to be intended against the noble Realm of France; which we shall
embrace and foster hereafter, as we have hitherto always done, with all
Fatherly love, honor and affection. This therefore which we with grief have
spoken, concerns the Kings person only, whose unhappy and unlucky end deprives
him also of those honorable Offices and Respects, which this holy Seat (the
tender Mother of all Faithful, but especially of Christian Princes) is wont to
pay to Emperors and Kings; which we most willingly would likewise have
bestowed on him, if the holy Scriptures in this case had not altogether
forbidden it.

There is, says St. John, a Sin unto Death; I say not that any should pray for
it; which may be understood either of the Sin it self, as if he should say, for
that Sin, or for the remission of that Sin, I will that none should pray,
because it is not pardonable: Or else which comes to the same sense, for that
Man who commits such a Sin unto Death, I say not that any should pray for:
of which Sin our Savior himself has spoken in St. Matthew, saying, That he
that sins against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven, neither in this
World, nor in the World to come: where he sets down three sorts or kinds of
Sins, to wit, against the Father, against the Son, and against the Holy Ghost;
and that the two first are less heinous and pardonable, but that the third is
altogether unpardonable. All which difference proceeds from the distinction
of the attributes, (as the Schools teach us out of the holy Scriptures;) which
severally are appropriated to every several person of the holy Trinity. For
although as the Essence of all the three Persons is but one, so also is their
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, (as we have learned out of S. Athanasius his
Creed, when he says, The Father Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy Ghost
Almighty;) yet by attribution, Power is ascribed unto the Father, Wisdom unto
the Son, and Love unto the Holy Ghost; whereof every several, as they are
termed Attributes, are so proper unto every several person, that they cannot be
attributed and referred unto any other. By the Contraries of which Attributes,
we come to discern the distinction and greatness of sin. The Contrary to Power,
which is attributed to the Father is weakness or infirmity; and therefore that
which we do amiss through infirmity, or weakness of Nature, is said to be
committed against the Father: the opposite unto Wisdom is Ignorance, through
which when any Man sins, he is said to sin against the Son; and therefore
what we commit through natural infirmity, or ignorance, is more easily forgiven
us.

The third Attribute which is the Holy Ghost's, is Love, and has for its
contrary ingratitude, a Vice most detestable and odious; which causes Men not
to acknowledge the Love of God, and his benefits bestowed upon them; but to
forget, despise, yea and to hate them; and from hence at last it comes to pass,
that they prove obstinate and impenitent. And thus to sin against God is far
more dangerous and dreadful, than if it were done either through Ignorance, or
Natural Infirmity; and therefore it is termed a sin against the Holy Ghost; and
because such Sins are seldom and hardly, and not without great abundance of
grace pardoned, in some sort they are said to be unpardonable. Whereas final
impenitence only is really and simply unpardonable. For whatsoever is done
amiss in this life, although it be against the Holy Ghost, yet by repentance it
may be wipt out, or done away before we dye; but they that persevere therein
till death, are excluded from all grace and mercy hereafter. And therefore for
such Sins or Sinners, the Apostle has forbidden to pray after their decease.
Now therefore because we understand, not without great grief, that the
aforesaid King departed this life without repentance, or impenitent, to wit, in
the communion and fellowship of Heretics, (for all his Army was made up almost
of none other but of such men;) and that by his last Will he commended and made
over his Crown and Kingdom to the Succession of Navar, long since declared an
Heretic, and Excommunicated; as also in his extremity, and now ready to yield
up the Ghost, desired of him, and such as he was, then standing by, that they
would revenge his death upon those whom he judged to be the cause thereof. For
these and suchlike manifest Tokens of his impenitency, we have decreed not to
solemnize his death with Funerals; not that we presume any thing by these,
concerning Gods secret Judgment against him, or his Mercies toward him, who
could according to his good pleasure convert and turn his Heart, even when his
Soul was leaving the Body, and deal mercifully with him: but this we have
spoken, being thereunto moved by these external signs and tokens.

God grant that all, being admonished and warned by this fearful example of
Heavenly Justice may repent and amend, and that it may further please him to
continue and accomplish that which he has thus mercifully begun for us (as we
firmly hope he will) to the end we may give everlasting thanks to him that has
delivered his Church from such great and imminent dangers.

When his Holiness had thus ended his Speech, he brake up the Consistory, and
dismissed them with his Benediction.

THIS Speech is taken from that Printed at Paris in the Year 1589. the Year of
the Kings Death, by Nicholas Niuelle, and Rollin Tierry; and set forth with
approbation of three Doctors of the faculty of Paris, as follows.

Nous soubsignez Docteurs en Theologi^^de la faculte de Paris certifions avoir
confere ceste Harangue pronouncee par sa sainctete avec l' exemplaire Latin
envoye de Rome, and avoir trouve conform l' un a l' autre.

BOVCHER. DECREIL. ANCELIN.


FINIS.

