ILLUSTR: PRINCEPS SULTAN MAHOMET HAN MAG: TURCARUM IMPERATOR andC.
Sultan Mahomet Han ye present Emperor of the Turks Aged 34 years etc



THE HISTORY Of the TURKS.

DESCRIBING The Rise and Ruin, of their first Empire in Persia; the Original of
their Second.

CONTAINING The Lives and Reigns of their several Kings and Emperors, from
Ottoman its first Founder to this present Year, 1683.

BEING A Succinct Series of History, of all their Wars (Foreign and Domestic)
Policies, Customs, Religion and Manners; with what else is worthy of Note, in
that great Empire.

LONDON, Printed by Ralph Holt, for Toomas Passenger upon London Bridge,
William Thackery in Dack-Lane, and Toomas Sawbridge in Little-Brittain, 1683.

TO THE READER.
SInce the late Alarms the Port has given to Christendom, I have thought it
both Profitable and Convenient, to describe the Original of that Great Empire,
which now spreads over near half the World, and to demonstrate by what means it
aspired to its Immensity, and by what Policies maintained; as in the Series of
this History, it is fully and at large discoursed; not so only, but the Turks
various Successes in their Wars at Land and Sea; Including their Religious
Customs, Manners, and extent of that Empire, as it remains at this day; being
deduced from the Original of the first and second Empire, for the space of six
hundred years, attended with Circumstances too tedious here to be recited. So
that all may plainly comprehend how easily those Infidels might at first have
been hindered from Incroaching, and how often (had not the Divisions of the
Christians, upon which they founded their Empire) they might have been brought
low; but as God, in whose Eternal Wisdom all Affairs are centered, has not of
late permited, and should they extend their Arms (as at this time they
threaten) yet a hearty Unanimity in the Empire, and the Kings and Princes of
Christendom, may through God's blessing impede the growing Greatness of this
great Monarch, and hinder the Effusion of Christian Blood. Here you have an
impartial Account of their Rise and Ruin in the first Empire, and the
Continuation of the second, to this present time; Faithfully Collected, which I
hope will prove to the Satisfaction of the Ingenious Reader, which is all
desired by,

Your Friend, I. S.

The Heads of each Chapter or Division contained in the History, directing to
the Revolutions of the Turkish Empire, and Reigns of their several Kings and
Emperors.
CHAP. I.
THE Original of the Turks according to the opinion of Sundry Learned Authors,
with the means by which they acquired their first Monarchy in Persia, together
with the Reign and Death of Tangrolipix their First King. Page 1. Part 1.

CHAP. II.
The Reign and memorable Achievements of Axan the Second Turkish King, or
Sultan of Persia. The Division of the Turkish Monarchy, and the Expedition of
the Christians to the Holy Land, in order to regain it from the Turks. page 8.
part 1.

CHAP. III.
The Reign of Solomon, Son to Cutlu-Muses, his Wars with the Christians; Their
taking Jerusalem from the Infidels, their various success in the Holy Land
against the Turks, Sarazens, etc. p. 11. part 1.

CHAP. IV.
The second Expedition of the Western Princes for the recovery of the Holy
Land. p. 28. part 1.

CHAP. V.
The ruin of the Turks first Kingdom in Asia by the Tartars. p. 33. part 1.

CHAP. VI.
The rise of the powerful Empire of the Turks under Othoman it is first Founder,
with his Life and Actions. p. 57. part 1.

CHAP. VII.
The Life and Actions of Orchanes, otherwise Urchan, Second King of the Turks
in Asia. p. 68. part 1.

CHAP. VIII.
The Life and Actions of Amurath, the First of that Name, and Third King of the
Turks. p. 74. part 1.

CHAP. IX.
The Life of Bajazet the First of that Name, and Fourth King of the Turks, his
Wars and Captivity. p. 80. part 1.

CHAP. X.
The Life of Mahomet, the First of that Name, Fifth King of the Turks, and the
Restorer of their Kingdom ruined by the Tartars. p. 87. part 1.

CHAP. XI.
The Life of Amurath, the Second of that Name, and Sixth King of the Turks, his
Wars, Victories, and Defeats. p. 93. part 1.

CHAP. XII.
The Life of Mahomet, the Second of that Name, Seventh Monarch, and the First
that took upon him the style of Emperor of the Turks, who for his many
Victories was Surnamed Great. p. 108. part 1.

CHAP. XIII.
The Life of Bajazet the Second of that Name, and Second Emper or of the Turks,
his memorable Exploits, Victories, and Death. p. 132. part 1.

CHAP. XIV.
The Life of Selymus the First of that Name, Third Emperor of the Turks, his
bloody Reign, and woeful Death. p. 153. part 1.

CHAP. XV.
The Life of Solomon the First of that Name, and Fourth Emperor of the Turks,
who for his many great Exploits, or rather lofty Carriage, was Surnamed the
Magnificent. p. 181. part 1.

CHAP. XVI.
Selymus the Second of that Name, and Fifth Emperor of the Turks, his Life and
Actions. p. 45. part 2.

CHAP. XVII.
The Life, Reign, and Memorable Transactions of Amurath, the Third of that
Name, and Sixth Emperor of the Turks. p. 73. part 2.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Life of Mahomet, the Third of that Name, Seventh Emperor of the Turks. p.
123. part 2.

CHAP. XIX.
The Life of Achmat the Eighth Emperor of the Turks, and first of that Name. p.
162. part 2.

CHAP. XX.
Mustapha, the First of that Name, Ninth Emperor of the Turks, his Life and
Actions. p. 196. part 2.

CHAP. XXI.
The Life and Actions of Osman, the First of that Name, Tenth Emperor of the
Turks. p. 198. part 2.

CHAP. XXII.
Mustapha reinthronized with an Account of his proceedings till his second
deposing. p. 214. part 2.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Life and Reign of Morat, or Amurath the Fourth of that Name, and Eleventh
Emperor of the Turks. p. 222. part 2.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Life of Sultan Ibrahim, the Twelfth Emperor of the Turks. p. 256. part 2.

CHAP. XXV.
The Reign of Mehomet, or Mahomet the Fourth of that Name, and Thirteenth
Emperor of the Turks, who now Reigns. p. 272. part 2.

CHAP. XXVI.
A Description of the Power, Policies, Forces, Revenues, Religion, and
Greatness of the Ottoman Empire, and by what means it subsists, and maintains
its Grandeur, etc. p. 378. part 2.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF THE TURKS.

DESCRIBING The Rise and Ruin of their first Empire in Persia; the Original of
their Second.

CONTAINING The Lives and Reigns of their several Kings and Emperors, from
Ottoman its first Founder to this present Year, 1683.

BEING A Succinct Series of History, of all their Wars (Foreign and Domestic)
Policies, Customs, Religion and Manners; with what else is worthy of Note in
that Great Empire.

WITH A Continuation of the History to this present time; Containing the
Remarkable Siege of Vienna for Sixty days, the raising of it by the Imperial
Forces, and the King of Poland: The Ruin of their Army before it, and a Second
Fight in German; with their Successful Entrance into the Bowels of Hungaria.
Together with a Table to the whole Book.

LONDON, Printed by Ralph Holt and John Richardson, for Thomas Passinger upon
London Bridge, William, Thackery in Duck-Lane, and Thomas Sawbridge in
Little-Britain, 1684.

THE Turkish History EPITOMIZED:
CHAP. I. The Original of the Turks according to the Opinion of sundry Learned
Authors, with the Means by which they acquired their first Monarchy in Persia;
Together with the Reign and Death of Tangrolipix their first King.
IT has, and at this day does cause sundry Disputes amongst the Learned, from
what Nation or People the Turks, now so formidable by extending their Empire
over a third part of the known World, are sprung or derived; some being of
opinion that they are descended of the Remnant of the Trojans that escaped the
Sword at the Destructiou of the City of Troy, and strengthen their Argument
with this Reason, viz. That the Word Turcii signifying a Trojan, is corruptly
called Turci or Turk, and that on all hands it is affirmed that they originally
inhabited the lesser Asia, where the City so much Renowned in Story for its
holding out a ten years Siege against the Power of the then Grecian Empire
stood; others affirm they sprung from the ten Tribes carried away captive by
Salmanaser the Assyrian King, and that from them likewise sprung the Tartars
inhabiting the Northern Climes, and their Reasons are, for as much as the great
Lords of Tartary derive their Pedigree from Tribes, calling themselves Danists,
Zebulonians and Napthalists, and that the Word Turk in the Hebrew signifies a
banished man, or one in disgrace; and further, that they still retain many
Ceremonies of the Jewish Nation, as Circumcision, and the like, as also
frequently to repeat to themselves Lamentations, though corruptly for the fall
of Jerusalem, and Damascus the chief Cities of Judea and Syria, affirming they
know not the meaning of such their Lamentations, but that they have been taught
of their Ancestors so to do. Others are of Opinion that they were Scythians,
who left their Country by reason of the Scarcity thereof, and Coldness of the
Clime, and falling on Armenia, grasped it with so hard a hand, that all the
Power of the Roman Empire then flourishing could not rescue it, but as a Token
of their first Success in their issuing out of the Caspian Straits, they named
it Turcomania, which name remains to this day. And that there were such a
People long before their aspiring to Empire in Asia, Pomponius Mella, Pliny,
and Ptolomy do aver; but about the time of their Eruption, Blondus Platina, and
Segonius disagree, the two former declaring it to be in the year of our Lord
755, and the latter in 844. yet conclude upon the reason of their coming forth
as aforesaid.

Their Rise and aspiring to Greatness, was after this manner; Mahomet the
persian Sultan wresting the Government from the Caliph or Successor of Mahomet
the Impostor, or as they falsely called him, their Great Prophet, whose
Erroneous Doctrine had infected all Asia, Afric, and part of Europe, to
provide against the worst strengthened himself, and the better to do it, sent to
the Turkish Chief in Armenia to furnish him with a competent number of Men of
War, who in compliance to the Sultans Command caused 3000 to March under the
Leading of one of his chief Captains named Tangrolipix, by the help of which he
overthrew the Caliph of Babylon, with an incredible Slaughter of his Army; and
being further minded to make an Expedition against the Indians that bordered
his Country, and knowing by Experience the great courage of the Turks, and
their singular dexterity in Archery, he resolved to retain them for his further
Service; so that when they desired to be conducted over the River Araxis, he
not only refused to permit it, but also threatened them, if they offered to make
any further mention of their departure, which Indignity caused them to take the
opportunity of withdrawing themselves into the Desert of Caranonitis, and there
like Outlaws to live upon Spoil; the News of which no sooner reached the
Sultan's ear, but he commanded ten of his Captains to March against Tangrolipix
with an Army of 20000 choice Soldiers composed of diverse Nations, which
Incamping by the border of a Forest, wherein the Turkish Captain resided with
his Forces, they were in the dead of the night set upon and put to flight with
great Slaughter; so that the Turks furnishing themselves with the Spoils of the
slain appeared more boldly in the Field, and were in a short time increased to
50000 fighting men by such Outlaws and other Villains, as upon the bruit of
their Success resorted to 'um, which caused Mahomet, now jealous of his other
Subjects revolt to raise a great Army and to advance against Ta^grolipix First,
having put out the Eyes of those Captains overthrown in the fight, and
threatened to disgrace the Soldiers that escaped the slaughter by attiring them
in Woman's Apparel, which afterward redounded to his loss by causing them to
avoid future punishment to fly to his Enemy. In fine, both Armies met on the
great Plain before the City Ispahan in Persia, and began a dreadful Battle,
which with great Slaughter lasted till Sultan Mahomet fell from his Horse, and
broak his neck, at what time both Armies ceased from fight, and by unanimous
consent chose Tangrolipix Sultan of Persia, and the Dominions appertaining to
that large Kingdom, who was no sooner seated in his Throne, but he caused the
Garrisons that kept the Passage over Araxis to be removed, and called in the
Turks his Countrymen then dwelling on the other side, and by degrees advanced
them to all the chief Places of Trust, deposing the Persians and Sarazens, the
Ancient Inhabitants of those Dominions; but long he had not wielded his Scepter
ever he made War upon Pisasiris the Caliph of Babylon, and after sundry Battles
having slain him annexed his Kingdom to Persia.

This Success firing him with a desire to extend his Dominions wider, he sent
Cutlu-Muses his Nephew to war on the Arabians, but those People as dexterous in
Archery as the Turks soon overthrew him with the slaughter of a great part of
his Army, and therefore in his Return requested of Stephen the Greek Emperors
Lieutenant in Media, that he might pass through those Territories into his own
Country; but he not only denied him passage, but opposed him with a powerful
Army, which was by the Turks defeated, and the Lieutenant taken Prisoner: After
which the Sultan in Person made an Expedition against the Arabians, thinking to
revenge the late disgrace, but procured a greater for himself, was likewise
overthrown, which caused him to bend his Forces to the Conquest of Media, to
effect which he sent his Brother Asan, but in the mean while his Nephew fearing
his displeasure for disobeying his Command fled, and gathering to him a strong
Power, seized on Pasar a strong City of Chorasmians, yet the Expedition was not
thereby obstructed; but his Army had scarce entered the Confines of Media before
the Emperor's new Lieutenant gave Battle, and put the Turks to flight following
the Execution for many miles.

This defeat enraged the Sultan, and caused him to send an Army double the
number of the former under the Conduct of Humbramy-Alim his other Brother, who
after six days Siege took Arzen a Town rich in Merchandise, but the Lieutenant
having joined his Forces with those of Liperates Governor of Iberia, who came
to his Assistance, the Battle was joined, which continued bloody and doubtful
for the space of four hours, at the end of which the Victory fell to the
Christians, who followed the Execution till Night put an end to it, yet
Liperates fighting valiantly was taken and carried into Persia, for whose
Ransom the Emperor sent great Presents; but the Sultan out of a generous
bravery sent him home Ransom-free, only admonishing never to bear Arms against
him more, and with him sent Seriph a Mahumetan Priest as his Ambassador, to
demand of the Emperor that he would become Tributary to the Sultan, and that
thereby an Eternal Peace might issue, which the Emperor rejected with just
disdain. Whereupon the Sultan invaded the Roman Provinces with great Forces,
but understanding upon his approaching Caesarea that the Emperor's Army was
upon the March, resolving to give him Battle, and that if he should be
overthrown there was little hopes of retreating by reason he had left so many
Enemies at his back, he returned into Media and laid Siege to the strong City
of Mantizichiert, furiously assaulting it for thirty days without intermission;
but after the loss of Alean his chief Captain, and 20000 Turks and Persians he
in great perplexity raised the Siege, and upon his return being displeased with
his Brother Habraim-Alim, he fled by Night and joined such Forces as he could
raise with Cutlu Muses, against whom the Sultan marched, and overthrowing them
in plain Battle took Habraim Prisoner, and immediately commanded his head to be
struck off, when in the mean while Cutlu Muses, and his Cousin Melech fled into
Armenia with the remainder of the broken Army, and from thence sent Ambassadors
to the Greek Emperor to take them into protection, but the Sultan following
them close with his Army, they removed from thence and fled into Arabia, upon
which the Sultan leaving the pursuit, turned his Army upon Iberia and wasted
the Country with fire and sword in many places; but upon the approach of
Acoluthus the Emperor's Lieutenant he retired to Tauris, leaving behind him one
Sannich with 3000 Turks to infest the Imperial Territories. At which time the
Emperor Constantius died, leaving his Empress and three Children, the former
being obliged in an Oath not to marry, though afterward that Oath was
dispensed with by the Patriarch, and she married to one Diogines whom she
pardoned as the Sentence of death was about to pass upon him for conspiracy to
dismember the Empire: So that he being proclaimed Emperor, advanced with an
Army against the Turks pasting over into Asia, where they were wasting the
Provinces with fire and sword, upon whose approach the Sultan doubting the
Event, sent one part of his Army into the South, and the other into the North,
the latter surprising upon its arrival new Caesarea, and so laded with rich
Booties departed, upon notice of which the Emperor pursued them, and after a
sharp Encounter put them to flight, recovering the Booty and Prisoners, at
which time the City of Hierapolis was surrendered to him, and many other Cities
which the Turks had taken; and then dividing his Army, past on with one part of
it to Syria, and left the other part to defend the new Conquest, which in his
absence was overthrown by the Turks, upon News of which the Governor of Aleppo
revolted from him. But whilst the Turks supposed they had him in a Toil, he
without any noise fell in with their Army and put them to flight, making great
slaughter of such as fled, and then receiving the Homage of the several
Countries he passed through, he came to Alexandria in Caelicia, and there
quartered his Army, and so returned to Constantinople.

The Emperor having recruited himself all Winter, early in the Spring hasted to
his Army to oppose the Turks that were abroad ravaging the Country about new
Caesaria, and after having repressed them passed on to the River Euphrates,
where leaving part of his Army with his Lieutenant for securing the Frontires,
he retired into Capadocia; but in his absence his Lieutenant was routed by the
Turkish Army which the Emperor understanding at Sabestia, he sent the Governor
of Antioch with part of his Army to oppose them at Mopsiphestia, but they
before were broken by the Armenians, who had took from them the rich Booties
they had acquired by the Sacks of many Cities.

And thus this Emperor continued to defend the Roman Provinces with great
Success against the powerful Forces of a furious Adversary all the Reign of
Tangrolipix the first Turkish Sultan of Persia.

CHAP. II. The Reign and Memorable Achievements of Axan the second Turkish
King or Sultan of Persia. The Division of the Turkish Monarcby, and the
Expedition of the Christians unto the Holy Land, in order to regain it from the
Turks.
TAngrolipix being dead, his Son Axan was chosen by the general Consent of the
Soldiery, Sultan in his stead, who sent his Ambassadors immediately upon his
Election to the Emperor Diogenes to conclude a Peace, but some of his
Counselors persuaded him that thereby the Turk only sought to gain time till
he could increase his Army, insomuch that the Treaty broke off abruptly, though
in an ill time, for the Emperor had sent away part of his Army, yet was he
spurred on to engage the Turks by such of his Predecessors Relations as envied
his Greatness, and after Battle joined, the Turks retiring, the Emperor
supposed they did it to fetch a Compass, in order to surprise his Camp, and
thereupon himself caused a Retreat to be sounded, which John Ducas his
Predecessor's Brother and his Caesar, under whose command a great part of the
Army was, perceiving, laid hold of that opportunity to ruin the Emperor by,
turned Tail and commanded a Retreat to be sounded, which created so general a
fear in the Army, that they fled in all Parts, the Emperor not being able to
stay their flight, which unexpected advantage the Sultan perceiving, charged
with fury upon the Christians; so that the Emperor fighting with a brave
resolution amongst the thickest Squadrons, was at last taken Prisoner, together
with several of his great Commanders after several wounds received, yet
comforted by the Sultan, and within a while honorably dismissed, when during
the time of his Captivity John Ducas his Caesar, Psellus one of the Senators,
and other of the Faction had thrust the Empress into a Monastery, and
proclaimed Michael Ducas her Eldest Son Emperor, and when they heard that the
Emperor Diogenes was at liberty, they sent out Letters to the Lievtenants of
the Provinces to apprehend him which made him gather a great Power, but being
discomfitted by Andronicus the Eldest Son of John Ducas, he was forced to
resign his Claim to the Empire; nor were his Enemies content with that, but
afterward put out his eyes in such sort that he died miserably. To revenge
which by reason of a perpetual League made at his dismission, the Sultan with
great Forces invaded the Roman Provinces, whereupon several Battles were fought
with various Success; in which the Caesar and Roselius the Emperor's Lieutenant
were taken, but both ransomed, the former by the Emperor, the latter by his
Wife.

The Affairs between the Empire and Sultan of Persia being at this pass gave
Cuthu Muses opportunity to strengthen himself, insomuch that resolving to cast
a Hazard for the Persian Dominion, he drew his Army into the Field, near the
City of Eres, to encounter which the Sultan likewise drew forth his; but (fatal
to Christendom) just as they were about to give Battle, the Caliph of Babylon,
who as Priest of Mahomet, was held in great Esteem amongst the Infidels, came
running between either Army, and conjured them not to weaken the Religion of
their great Prophet by shedding each others blood, but rather stand to his
award; the which they having consented to do, he instantly decreed that the
Sultan should quietly enjoy what ever he possessed, and that his Cousen aided
by him should possess in himself and Posterity whatsoever should thenceforward
be gained from the Christians, upon which the Christians were on all sides
invaded by the Turks and Sarazens, their own Divisions in many Parts rendering
them easy to be subdued: So that the Turkish Empire spreading wide, the
Christians were grievously oppressed, especially in the Holy Land, which caused
them to send a Letter filled with Lamentations, by one Peter a Hermit to Pope
Urban the Second, who taking their sufferings into consideration, called a
Council at Charemont in France, at which were present upwards of three hundred
Bishops, besides several Princes; when to stir them up, he caused the Patriarch
of Jerusalem's Letter, and other Letters to be publicly read; as likewise
ordered the Hermit to relate the deplorable state of the Christians, suffering
under the cruelty of the Infidels, which with such Eloquence and feeling
commiseration he delivered, that it moved the hearts of all present; nor was
the Pope himself wanting to exhort them to stir up the Christian Princes to
undertake a War for the deliverance of the Eastern Christians, which was so
effectually ordered, that within a short time an Army of 300000 men were
raised, wearing on their breasts red Crosses, under the Lead of Godfry of
Bulloin, Duke of Lorrain, and his two Brothers Eustace and Baldwin, Hugh the
French King's Brother, Raymond and Robert Earls of Flanders, Robert Duke of
Normandy, Son to the Conqueror, Stephen Devalois, Earl of Chartiers, Ademar the
Pope's Legate, Bishop of Podie, with many other honorable Princes and expert
Warriors, who passing through part of the Greek Empire, with a Promise from
Alexus the Emperor, that they should be from time to time provided with
necessaries, they passed over the Hellespont with their Armies, covering the
Shores of Asia to the great Terror of the Turks and Sarazens, who
notwithstanding to oppose the Tempest of War, which from Europe threatened their
overthrow; they gathered huge Forces, and falling upon part of Peter the
Hermit's Army, which was too far advanced before the rest of the Princes, and
consisted of forty thousand men raised in the Territories of the Church, they
cut them off, and caused him with the remainder to betake himself to Civite, a
Town before abandoned by the Turks, where he stayed till the Arrival of Duke
Godfry.

This Loss inspired the Christians with rage and desire of revenge, so far that
they made a terrible destruction in all places, when in their Progress they had
notice that Cutlu Muses the most politic Prince of the Turks was dead, and had
left large Dominions to his Son Solomon, of the Proceedings during whose Reign
I shall treat in the following Chapter.

CHAP. III. The Reign of Solomon Son to Cutlu Muses, his Wars with the
Christians, their taking of Jerusalem from the Infidels, their various Success
in the Holy Land against the Turks, Sarazens, etc.
CVtlu Muses Nephew to Tangrolipix having as aforesaid accorded with the Sultan
by the means of the Babylonish Caliph, he by his Aid won many Provinces from
the Christians, which were now left in the possession of his Son Solomon. The
Christian Army resolved to recover them again if possible, and he as
obstinately to defend what he had in possession: So that gathering huge Forces
with which he approached Nicea where the Christian Army lay in Leaguer, Anno
1097. and after on the Fifth of July took it, having spent fifty days in the
Siege, but were well recompensed by the rich Booties they found in it, and
amongst the rest Solyman's Wife and two Children, which they sent Prisoners to
Constantinople; yet the bad Success put not a stop to the advancement of
Solomon with the whole power of the lesser Asia, consisting of 60000 Horse and
Foot; So that within a short space the Battle began with great fury on both
sides, the Christians eager to revenge their Fellows so lately slain, and the
Turks to secure their Country, made horrible slaughter, but after a long and
obstinate fight, where nothing but blood and slaughter appeared, nor nothing
but cries and dying groans to be heard, the Turks were put to flight; the
Christians following the Execution, so that 40000 of them fell in the Battle
and pursuit. Though Solomon flying with the remainder of his broken Army, gave
out that himself had Victory on his side, the less to dismay his Subjects; yet
so far the Terror of the Christians wrought, that the Infidels fled into fenced
Cities, leaving the Villages desolate; whereupon they besieged Antioch, which
with little difficulty they subdued, being joyfully received by the Christians
there dwelling; next Iconium and Heraclea, two Cities of note surrendered upon
Summons. Solomon still flying before the Victors, and duly sending Letters to
his Cousen Axan the Persian Sultan for Aid; but he not being able to supply him
against such powerful Opponents, the Christians recovered all that had been
torn from the Greek Empire, the which according to their Contract made with the
Emperor they restored.

The Princes thus Victorious in Asia, called a Council, in which it was decreed
that an Oath should be administered as well to the Princes Commanders as to the
common Soldiers, that none should return till they had won Jerusalem, which was
joyfully embraced.

And now the Turks perceiving they were no ways able to oppose the Christians
in open fight, endeavored to surprise and cut off as many as they might by
Ambushment, and therefore sent several straggling Troops to face Antioch, upon
which the Flemins sallied and followed hard till within the danger of the
Ambush, where they had been inevitably lost, had not the Citizens, who were
Christians, timely come in to their assistance, and put the Turks to flight,
and then the Armies drawing forth, marched as far as the River Orontes before
they met with any resistance, but there the Turks had fortified the Bridge and
Banks on the other side, but being overwhelmed with showers of English Arrows
sent from the Squadron commanded by Robert Duke of Normandy, they soon gave
ground, and left the Passage open, and so the Princes passing the River, came
to the other Antioch in Syria, of which one Cassianu was Governor, to the
Relief of which the Turks came with an Army of 100000 Horse and Foot, but were
repulsed by the Christians, and returned with 20000 less than they brought; so
that the City on the third day of June, 1098. was secretly and contrary to the
knowledge of the Governor delivered by one Phirrus to Prince Bohemund of
Tarentum, who furiously entering a dismal slaughter ensued, insomuch that the
Streets run with blood. The Governor upon notice of what had happened fled, but
falling into the hand of the Armenians that were expelled Jerusalem, he was
slain.

The loss of Antioch being made known to Corbanus the Persian Sultan's
Lieutenant, as he lay before Edessa, he raised the Sige, and with all his
Forces marched toward Antioch, resolving to put all upon the Hazard of a
Battle, against whom the Princes drew out their Strengths, leaving the Earl of
Tholous with a competent number to secure the City from a revolt, by reason the
Turks still held the Castle, and after a long and doubtful fight overthrowing
with such incredible slaughter of his men, that all the Valleys were filled
with blood and bodies of the slain, 100000 Turks being adjudged to fall in that
Battle, and not above 4000 Christians, and the next day they took 5000 Cammels
with their lading, as also a new Castle built but the year before by the
aforesaid Lieutenant. And thus conquering they passed on taking several Cities
of note till they came within the view of Jerusalem, upon sight of which they
shouted so loud, that all the Country resounded with the joyful Acclamations,
and with their hands and eyes extended toward Heaven, they called upon the
name of Jesus, and many in humility to the place where our Blessed Lord had so
often preached his Gospel, fell to the Ground and kissed it with great
Affection, making fresh Vows never to leave the City till they had delivered it
from the Infidels; but their strength was much impaired by reason of a
Pestilence that had the Autumn before happened in the Army; yet in a Council of
the Princes and chief Commanders, it was resolved that the Siege should
immediately be begun, and carried on with all the vigor imaginable.

The Governor having notice of the Christians approach, and what was intended,
delayed not to prepare all things that might conduce to the making a strenuous
defense, having a little before received a strong recruit of able Soldiers, and
a supply of all things necessary; yet the Christians after having got what
knowledge they could of the state of Affairs within the City, sat down before
it on the North, for toward the East and the West the broken Rocks and
shattered Hills render it very incommodious. Next the Wall encamped Godfry Duke
of Lorrain with his Germans and Lorainers, near unto him on the right pitched
their Tents Robert Duke of Normandy, and the Earl of Flanders, before the West
Gate lay encamped Tancreed, and the Earl of Tholous. Bohemund and Baldwin being
absent, the one remaining King at Antioch, and the other Governor of Edassa.

The Christians having refreshed themselves, it was concluded amongst the
Princes, that the fifth day the Assault should be given, which accordingly was
done with such bravery, that the Turks were beaten from their Defenses and
miserably slaughtered by the shot of the Archers; but they wanting scaling
Ladders, and the weather being exceeding hot, the retreat was sounded, but
being desirous of nothing more than winning the City, five days after they gave
it another fierce Assault, which made the Walls to tremble, nothing that Policy
or Valor could afford being wanting on the part of the Christians, but
scarcity of Water afflicting them with drought, and the excessive heat of the
Weather frustrated this second Attempt; for the Enemy had either stopped up or
poisoned all the Wells about the City, unless that of Siloe, whose Water had
worked out the Poison, and was become wholesome, but that yielded not half
enough to suffice the Army.

During the time that the Christians besieged Jerusalem, a Fleet of Genoeses
arrived at Joppa, where having notice that a far greater Fleet of the Egyptian
Sultans lay at Ascalon with an intent to relieve the besieged, they after
having taken out all things necessary, sunk their Galleys, and marched over
land to the Camp, where they became very serviceable in making Engines for
Assault, and moving Towers covered with raw Hides to prevent their being fired,
one of which they set to the Walls, and from it greatly annoyed the besieged,
which they perceiving prepared to set it on fire, but the wind favoring the
Christians, drove i^ full in the besiegers face, insomuch that the Duke of
Lorrain with his German Foot getting upon the Engine beat the Turks and
Sarazens from the Wall with great slaughter, and leaping thereon fixed his
Standard, keeping his Ground, though the Enemies shot flew as thick as Hail,
which venturous Attempt so encouraged the rest of the Princes, that they
pressed on with great fury, insomuch that a terrible slaughter ensued, the
Soldiers in their rage sparing neither Man, Woman, nor Child, which made the
most courageous of the Turks, Sarazens, and Jews retire to Solomon's Temple; in
the Entrance whereof they maintained a bloody and obstinate fight, spreading
all the Pavement with the bodies of the slain, and bedewing it with streams of
blood, and so eager were the Christians to charge the Infidels, that they for
haste thrust one another upon the Enemies Weapons; yet after great slaughter
they gave back and betook them to the Vaults on the top of the Temple, from
whence they defended themselves till the fury of the Christians was over, and a
Trumpet sounded to give Quarter, upon which they yielded, and had their Lives
spared.

Thus was the Famous City of Jerusalem retaken by the Christians in 30 days,
Anno 1099. after it had remained in the hands of the barbarous Infidels for the
space of 409 years, and so great was the joy conceived by the Christians, who
inhabited it, and had suffered miserable Persecution under the Turks, that they
embraced the Soldiers, weeping for gladness, and every where singing praises
for their deliverance.

Things being at this pass, the Princes consulted amongst themselves whom to
constitute King of the Holy City, and after some deliberation thought none
fitter than the valiant Duke of Normandy, but he hearing of his Brothers death
declined it, as desirous to return and take possession of his Kingdom of
England, but at his return found it possessed by his younger Brother Henry, who
not only deprived him of his Kingdom, but soon after of his Duchy of Normandy:
And finally of his life, by putting out his eyes, which many held as a Judgment
for his refusing the Scepter of Jerusalem.

Upon the Duke's declining, the Princes unanimously chose Godfry of Bolloin,
Duke of Lorain, who accepted the honorable and glorious Trust, but at the time
of his Inauguration refused to be crowned with a Crown of Gold, saying, that it
became not a Christian to wear a Crown of Gold, where Christ the Son of God had
for the Salvation of mankind sometime worn a Crown of Thorns; but long he had
not enjoyed his new acquired Dignity ever News was brought that 100000 Turks,
Sarazens, and Jews were upon their march to recover the City, against whom the
Christian Army advanced and gave them battle with so fearful an overthrow that
all the Field and Plains for the space of ten miles were covered with the
bodies of the slain, and then passing on won many famous Cities, every where
putting the Infidels to the rout, but not long after a great Mortality
happening, the Heroic Godfry King of Jerusalem died, and was interred in the
Church of the Sepulcher of our Savior on Mount Calvery: And Baldwin Count of
Edassa his Brother succeeded him, who with many Victories and Cities taken,
much enlarged the Territories of Jerusalem; but besieging the City of
Ptolemais, he was in a Skirmish with those Turks wounded, yet took the City,
and lived many years after, but the wound being as was supposed given with an
impoysoned weapon, and not pertectly cured, he died thereof in the eighteenth
year of his Reign, and was most favorably buried by his Brother, his Sepulcher
remaining yet visible.

After him succeeded his Cousen Baldwin Brugenses, against whom the Caliph of
Egypt aided by the King of Damasco, and the Turks came with a great Army, but
they returned without effecting any thing; yet not long after Gazi the greatest
Prince of the Turks in the lesser Asia, aided by the King of Damasco, and
Debeis King of Arabia came against Antioch with a great power, and encamped at
Aleppo, against whom Roger Prince of Antioch advanced without staying for King
Baldwin, who was on his march with a great Army, and unadvisedly joining
battle, his Army was overthrown, and himself slain; but King Baldwin coming
upon the Turks grown secure by reason of their new acquired Victory, put them
to the rout far and near, filling all the Plains with the bodies of the slain;
but within a while after, encountering with Balac General of the Persian
Sultan's Army, he was taken prisoner, and his Army overthrown; but after
eighteen Months imprisonment, for the Ransom of 100000 Ducats set at liberty,
and afterward obtained many signal Victories over the Infidels; and in his
Reign was settled the order of the Knights Templers, Hugh Paganus being the
first great Master of that Order; but King Baldwin the Second being tired and
disordered with the many battles, and having received many wounds, after he had
married Margaret his Eldest Daughter to Foulk Duke of Turin, Anjoy and Mayn,
fell sick in the thirteenth year of his Reign, Anno 1131. and constituting his
Son in Law to succeed him, gave up the Ghost, and was buried in the Temple upon
Mount Calvery near his Predecessors.

After the death of Baldwin Foulk was crowned King of Jerusalem, viz. on the
Sixth of September, Anno 1131. by William the Patriark; but the Devil envying
the spreading of the Christian Religion, endeavored to stir up Division
amongst the Christians, in the beginning of this King's Reign; for Pontius
Count of Tripolis by force of Arms endeavored to rend the City and Territories
of Antioch from the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and Hugh Count of Joppa being highly
concerned in the Treason for fear of punishment joined with the Sarazens that
held the strong City of Ascalon, but God prevented the mischief that thereby
might have ensued, by taking the former away by the Sword of the Turks, and the
latter being driven out of Ascalon, died in Exile, the very Heathens abhorring
a Traitor.

These stirs were no sooner over, but the Turks invaded Antioch with a powerful
Army; but the King coming suddenly upon them, put them to flight with much
slaughter, and got in the plundring of their Camp great Riches.

After which John the Creek Emperor raised a great power to seize upon Antioch,
pretending it a part of his Empire; but the Kings of Europe interposing, he was
content it should be holden by the present Prince the Earl of Poictou, he
paying him Homage for his Principality; but being a man of a restless Spirit,
he soon after came again with a powerful Army, thinking to have admittance into
the City, and so to surprise it, but found his expectations frustrate, for the
Citizens would not admit him to enter, unless with some few of his Followers,
in reveage of which he caused the Suburbs to be sacked, and so returned into
Cilicia, where hunting a Boar, whilst the furious Beast pressed on the Spear
the Emperor held against him, the Emperor's hand pressed upon the point of a
poysono^s A^^o^^ he had in his Quiver, which entering the flesh, the force of
the poison was such, that in great pain he shortly died, upon which Emanuel
Elexus his Son was chosen in his stead.

Jerusalem by this means being ^t pea^e, the King, Queen, and many great
Commanders went without the Walls to take the Air, when there ^^^nced a Hare to
be started, after which the King and those that accompanied him rid, and he
forcing his Horse he fell: so that the King's head fell under him, of which
mortal bruise he in three days dyed in great torment, viz. on the thirteenth of
November, Anno 1142. and was bu^ied by his Predecessors, greatly lamented of
all good Christians, and after him succeeded Baldwin his Son, the third of that
name, he being about thirteen years of Age, and in his Reign came Conrade the
Third, Emperor of Germany with a powerful Army to the Assistance of the
Christians in Syria, who by the way being opposed by the Turks at the River
Meander gave them battle and overthrew them with the slaughter of 30000 of the
Enemy, so that the River for many miles ran (...), and then marching forward,
without the least Impeachment, came to Iconium, the Chief Seat of the T^^k^sh
Kings in the lesser Asia, which he besieged; but it being strongly fortified
and Want increasing, in the Camp a Mortality hap^ned which destroyed so many of
the Soldiers, that the Emperor was forced to raise his Siege and to return
home. The occasion of this (...) was said to be occasioned by eating of Meal,
which the (...) Emperor upon their passing through his Dominions, had caused to
be mingled with Lime, (...) no less envying the success of the Christians in
Syria (...) the Turks, and by such like Treacheries he frustrated (...)
Expedition of Lewis the Eighth King of France, who after a long Siege laid to
Damasco, without pre^^^^ (...) it, was forced to return with half his Ar^^,
(...) half being through want and diseases lost.

But (...) to Baldwin King of Jerusalem, after he had given the Turks and
Sarazens several Overthrows, (...) Pe^^^d, fortified Gaza, and taken all the
(...) held in the Terrirories of Jerusalem (...) accorded a Marriage with the
Greek Emperor's ^iece, which Emperor in requital thereof, desired in Marriage
one of the King's near Kinswomen; whereupon he offered him Mathildas, an
honorable Lad^^ ^^ter to the Count of Tripolis, but he refusing her, and taking
Mary the Daughter of Raymund Earl of A^t^^ch, the Count was greatly displeased,
and with certain Ships of War greatly infested the Emperors Territories, and
upon the King's coming to Antioch to solemnize the Marriage, he was supposed to
be poisoned by one Barac a Jew, the Counts Physician, for he taking ^^ysick to
prevent Winter sickness, immediately fell into a bloody Flux, and afterward a
Consumption, of which he died at Beritus, Anno 1163. when he had reigned
prosperously 21 years, being generally lamented of his Friends and Enemies,
Noridan the Turkish General and King of Damasco declaring that the world
afforded not his Peer.

During these stirs in Syria, Sultan Solomon, and Mahomet his Successor being
dead, Mansal having upon the overthrow of the Greek Emperor's Army grasped the
Scepter of Persia, divided his Dominions at his death between his three Sons,
viz. to Clizasthilon his Eldest he gave Persia with the Towns and Provinces
thereunto appertaining; to Jagupasan his Second Son he gave Amasa and (...),
with the fruitful Country of Cappadocia, and to Da^i^n and his Third Son gave
he the Cities of (...) and S^bastia, which Division caused a greater amongst
the Brethren; so that mortal hate ins^ed, which (...) heels brought an
Intestine War; the Elder who bore the name of Sultan seeking to destroy and
dispossess the two younger, which intestine broyls the Greek Emanuel sought to
augment, covertly assisting them both, that they by rending the Persian
Monarchy might give him an easy means to recover what had been dismembered from
his Empire; but finding the Sultan powerful, he supposed it best to side with
him openly, which he doing by that means, Jagupasan was overthrown in a bloody
and doubtful battle, and he flying into Arabia, had all his Dominions seized,
upon which an enterview was had between the Sultan and the Emperor, wherein a
Peace was concluded between those Potentates, the former promising at his
return to take Caesaria and Sebastia from Dadune, and deliver them to the
Emperor; the former part of this promise he performs, viz. the taking the
Cities, but the latter part of restoring them, as he never intended, so he
never performed, but forgetting all former courtesies, invaded the Imperial
Provinces with Fire and Sword, doing great mischief, taking by storm Laodicea
in Phrygia, upon which the Emperor passed the Hellespont with a great Army, and
fortified Dorileum and Subleum, with other strong Holds, to hinder the Inroads
of the Turks; nevertheless they ceased not to infest his Frontiers, whereupon
the Emperor grievously complained of the Sultan's Ingratitude and breach of
Promise, and he on the other side of his breach of League, in fortifying the
Frontier Towns; whereupon the Emperor raised the whole power of his Empire,
resolving to raze Iconium marching with his whole Army, Phrygia, Laodicea,
Chonas, and other Countries, the Turks keeping aloof, as not daring to give him
^atr^^; but the Sultan sent his Ambassadors with offers of Peace, but the
Emperor driven headlong on as it were by the Destinies, trusting his power,
slighted all his Proposals, willing the Ambassadors to tell their Master, he
would give him answer under the Walls of Iconium; whereupon order was given to
the Turks to impoyson the Well, and destroy all Corn and Forage by the way the
Emperor should pass, which was accordingly put in Execution; so that by such
means many of the Soldiers and some prime Commanders died; and further they
fortified the Straights of Zibri^^, through which the Christians were to pass
upon their departure from Myria-Cephalon, which are seven narrow Valleys of
five miles long each, over which hang Rocks, craggy Clifts and Mountains, that
almost touch at the top, yet through these the Emperor would needs pass, though
he had notice that the Turks ^^d strongly possessed themselves of the said
Valleys, having first divided his Army into three Battalia's; but he was no
sooner entered, but the Turks appeared upon the Rocks and Mountains on every
side, sending showers of poisonous Arrows upon the Imperialists, themselves
remaining as it were secure under the shelter of the Rock, insomuch that ever he
had got through, three parts of his Army were destroyed, filling the Valleys
with blood, and the Carcasses of the slain; but in the middle of his distress,
it pleased God, to move the Sultan to pity him, and conclude a Peace on
condition that the fortified Towns should be rased, and so dismissed him with
the remainder of his broken Army; but after repenting that he had suffered his
Enemy to escape his hand, permitted such as would to fall upon his Rear, by
which means many were slain, yet at last he arrived at Chovas in his own
Territories, and caused Subleum to be rased, but not the other Towns, whereupon
the Sultan complained of the nonperformance of the Articles, but receiving no
satisfaction to his mind, he sent Atapatch one of his great Captains with an
Army of 2400 Horse and Foot to destroy the Emperor's Territories, even to the
Seaside, and in token thereof to bring an Oar, some of the Sea water, and Sea
Sand, which the said Captain undertook, spoiling Phrygia, and all the Cities
upon the Banks of the River Meander, taking a great Spoil, but in his return he
was met withal by John Bataza, the Emperor's Nephew, and Ducase Constantine,
who setting upon him about to pass the Meander, destroyed him and all his Army,
recovering the rich Booty.

And thus the Emperor Emanuel passed over in continual Wars, yet by so doing he
gave the Christians in Syria rest, who after he had sat Emperor for the space
of thirty eight years died, leaving Alexius Comnenus his Son, a Child of twelve
years of Age to Reign in his stead under the protection of the Empress, both of
which were barbarously murdered by Andronicus the deceased Emperor's Cousen,
who proved so inhuman and unmerciful, that one Isaac Angelius, whom he designed
to murder, caused the Citizens to mutiny against him, and put him to a
shameful death himself, being afterward chosen Emperor in his stead; but he
reigned not long, for proving almost as Tyrannical as the former, he was
deposed, and his Brother Alexius chosen to succeed him, who getting him into
his power to make all safe, put out his eyes, and thrust him into a Monastery;
so that in these sudden alterations the Turks made great spoil of the Imperial
Provinces, greatly dismembring the Empire, sore shaken with inrestine broyls:
But Clisalth^n dying gave some Rest, by reason his Sons fell at variance among
themselves, as he and his Brothers had done; for he leaving four all grown to
Men's estate, viz. Maful, Coppatine, Ren^^^^ine, and C^ichofroes, he divided his
Dominions amongst them; but they thinking each other wronged, unless every one
had all, would not content themselves with what their Father had allotted them,
though Dominions large enough to suffice twenty Kings, raised impious Broils:
But after long contention, Masut the Elder seized by force all the Dominions in
Persia, making himself thereby absolute Sultan, where I shall leave him settling
his Dominions, and return to Jerusalem.

After the death of Baldwin in, Almericus his younger Brother was crowned King,
on the seventeenth day of February, A^^^ ^163. who was no sooner settled in his
Throne, but he warred upon Dargan the Egyptian Sultan for refusing to pay him
the accustomed Tribute, and in a dreadful battle overthrew him, who to stay the
pursuit cut the Banks of Nilus, and laid the Country under water: But whilst
he was busy in Egypt, Noridin the King of Damasco making Inrodes upon the
Christians near Tripolis was fought with by Gilbert Lacy an english man, then
great Master of the Templars, and by him overthrown with the loss of three
parts of his Army; but the next year laying Siege to Arethusa, the Christian
Princes gathered their Forces to oppose him, who upon their approach raised his
Siege and departed, and whilst they eagerly pursued, he trained them into
certain miry Fens, where turning upon them he overthrew their Army with
incredible slaughter, and the Captivity of all the Princes commanding, after
which Victory he again laying Siege to the City had it yielded to him; but
Almericus was more successful in Egypt, for he so prevailed against the Turks
and Sarazens, that they were obliged to purchase their Peace with the delivery
of the City of Alexandria, and most of the Prisoners taken by Noradin in the
late overthrow; and within a short while after the Turks infringing the
Articles, he aided by the Knights Templars, and other Christians laid Siege to
Pelusium, which he after three days setting down before it, won and gave it to
the great Master, and the Knights of the Order. In this City they took the
Sultan of Egypt's Son, and Nephew, for whose ransom the King received 100000
Du^ats, and so he returned to Jerusalem, when shortly after S^ra^con the
Turkish General in those Parts, under pretense of Friendship, slew the Sultan
of Egypt in his Tent, and was in his stead proclaimed Sultan, being first Turk
(...) ever governed Egypt; yet he enjoyed not his ill got Dominion above the
space or a year before death surprised him, when in his stead Saladine his
Nephew was crowned Sultan, who desirous to be rid of the Caliph, who as
Successor to the Impostor Mahomet ruled in effect the Kingdom, he upon some
disgust with his horseman's Mace, beat his brains out at a blow, and then
taking the chief Places of Trust from the Egyptians, and giving them to his
Turks, so well secured himself and his Posterity, that for the revolution of
many years that fertile Kingdom remained in subjection to the Turks.

Being by the means aforesaid settled in his Kingdom, he raised a great power
and entered Palestine, and after a short Siege took the City of Daron e're
Almericus could come to relieve it, and now the Turks increasing in great
numbers, the King of Jerusalem was obliged to send to the Christian Princes of
the West for aid, and in the mean while stoutly defended his Territory, which
the former Kings had extended to the uttermost borders of Arabia Felix, larger
than what ever the Israelites possessed; and Anno 1173. Noridon King of Damasco
died, the sorest Enemy the Christians had; but as Joy seldom comes without some
taste of sorrow to allay it; so now, for Almericus the Sixth famous King of
Jerusalem, returning from the Siege of Peane. (...) year fell into a Fever,
which after a short sick (...) him of life.

Up (...) the (...) Americus, his Nephew Baldwi^ (...) nightily opposed the
Turks, g^^ing them many (...) ^^erthrows, but was in the flower of his youth
cut (...) death the sixteenth of A^^y, 1185. when as he ha^ ^ei^^ed twelve
Years and some Months.

In this King's stead his Son Baldwin the Fifth of that name, and Eighth King
of Jerusalem was crowned; but long he had not reigned ever his perfidious Mother
to advance her second Husband Guy to the Throne, poisoned him; But Heaven le^t
not such wickedness unrevenged not long after Guy the Ninth and Last King of
Jerusalem took upon him the Scepter, the Christians fell at variance amongst
themselves, ready to turn their Swords upon each other, of which Saladine the
Egyptian Sultan taking the advantage, won many Cities, and finally in a bloody
battle the Christian Army was overthrown, the King and most of his Nobles,
together with the great Master of the Templers, were taken Prisoners, which
altogether broke the strength of the Christians in Syria; for hightned with
this success, the Sultan with an Army of 200000 Horse and Foot besieged
Jerusalem, which being naked of men, and wanting a Head, was after fourteen
days Siege, and many fierce Assaults delivered up to the Enemy, Anno 1187.
after it had been in the hands of the European Christians for the space of 100
years, upon condition that such Christians as would might still remain there,
with free exercise of their Religion, and those that were minded to depart
might be permitted so to do, with as much of their Goods as they could carry
upon their backs.

And thus the Holy City again fell into the hands of the Pagans, who poluted it
with their profane Idolatries and superstitious Worship, through the
Christians lukewarmness and disrespect of God's Divine Worship, who living in
abundance of plenty, forgot the hand that protected them, trusting in their own
arms, as the Israelites to their cost had done before them.

After Jerusalem the Metropolis of the Kingdom was taken, An^^e^^ was betrayed
by the Patriarck (such little regard had Christians of their Fidelity) into the
hands of the Turks, for a certain sum of Gold, (...) afterward most of the
other Cities either revolted, or were taken by force.

Chap. IV. The Second Expedition of the Western Princes for the Recovery of the
Holy Land, etc.
JErusalem and most of the Cities of Palestine being lost, as aforesaid, the
European Potentates were not a little grieved, and to recover the same raised a
mighty power; and first that advanced was Frederick the German Emperor, who
setting forth from Vienna passed with a puissant Army through Hungary,
Bulgaria, and Thracia, and so to Constantinople, where he passed over into
Asia, and entering Lyconia gave the Turks a great overthrow, after which he
besieged and took Iconium giving the Spoils thereof to his Soldiers; and from
thence passing into Celicia in the Straights, where the Greek Emperor some
years before received his fatal overthrow, he had a second conflict with the
Turk, whom he put to flight with great slaughter, and took the City of
Philomela, and put the Inhabitants to the sword, for executing his Messangers
he sent to treat with them about delivering it peaceably; and then entering
^^^^enia the less, he took the City of Melitene, and subdued all the
Territories round about, and there gave the Turks an other fearful overthrow,
which Army was no sooner vanquished, but another not inferior to ^^ appeared
under the heading of Saphadine Saladin the Sultan's Son, which with an
undaunted bravery he charged, and put to rout, with incredible slaughter (but
the joy of Victory was soon turned into Mourning) for the good Emperor zealous
for the Christian Cause, following h^^d upon the flyers, his Horse floundered
in the River (...), and threw him out of the Saddle, with his right foot
hanging in the Stirrup, after which manner, ever he could be relieved, he was
dragged through the River, and hitting by the way on certain Stumps, so bruised,
that when he was taken up, he was heard to say no more then, Lord receive my
Soul, ever he gave up the Ghost, in the seventieth year of his Age, and of his
Reign 38. Anno 1190. Whereupon his Body was carried to the City of Tire, and
there in the Cathedral with all Solemnity interred.

This Heroic Emperor being dead, his Son Frederick Duke of Suevia, then in the
Army was saluted Emperor and General by the consent of the great Commanders;
but now (the Country being purposely destroyed before them) pale Famine began
to stare them in the face, yet on they marched, and charging Dodequin Saladius,
General, sent to oppose their Passage, gave him a great overthrow, and had all
the Cities rendered as they passed, till they came to Ptolomais, where the power
of the Christians in Syria were encamped, headed by Guy late King of Jerusalem,
who for a great Sum had obtained his Liberty.

Upon the Arrival of Frederick, the Christians gave a fierce Assault to the
City on all Parts, and had taken it by Storm, had not Saladine the Egyptian
Sultan, who lay hovering aloof with his Army, fallen upon their Camp, and
thereby in the hottest of the Assault obliged them to draw off to defend the
same, and having forced him to retire with the loss of a few men, they returned
again to the Siege, expecting the Arrival of Richard the First, King of
England, and Philip the Second, King of France, who were upon their way with
great Forces; but they wintering in the Isle of Sicilia, the French King out of
Envy to the Glory of the English, and an old grudge having been formerly about
King Richard's refusing the French King's Sister, and marrying the Daughter of
the King or Navar, the French King not long after returned home, and withdrew
his Army to the frustrating the whole design of recovering Jerusalem; yet at
present he dissembled the matter, and loosing first from the Port of Mesina,
arrived at Ptolomais, where the Christians lay still incomped, after whom King
Richard shortly followed; but sailing by Cyprus, his Fleet was dispersed by a
Storm, and two of his Ships falling on ground on that Coast, the Islanders
spoiled them, and when the rest of the Fleet put in there, they rudely
withstood their landing, which so enraged King Richard, that he landing by
force, seized the Island, and took the King thereof Prisoner, and sent him
bound in Chains of Silver to Syria.

The King having secured the Island to his use, disanchored and sailed to
Ptolomais, where he was joyfully received of the Christian Princes, upon whose
Arrival the City after a hot Assault, and a great breach in the Wall, was
surrendered upon condition the Garrison might depart with safety, for which they
were likewise to pay a great Ransom to deliver they Holy Cross they had in
possession, and a certain number of them to remain as Hostages, that the
Saladine should deliver such Christian Prisoners as he had in his power,
whereupon the Germans of Austria entered first the (...) and advanced the
Standard of their Duke upon the W^ll, as if by their only valor the City had
(...), which so offended King Richard, that he (...) the Standard to be thrown
down, and trampled on, which indignity the Duke resented so heinously, that
(...) great hindrance of the Wars in Syria, he retu^^^ (...) his Forces into
Austria; as likewise did the (...) France with the greatest part of his Army,
under (...) he did it for want of health in so hot a Clime, (...) out of secret
Envy to King Richard.

Sal^^^ (...) of the lessning of the Christian Army, and that there still
remained amongst them discontent, refused to pay the money for the Ransom of
the Hostages, or deliver up the Christian Prisoners; but threatened that if any
Extremity was used by the King toward them, he would behead all the Christian
Prisoners, the which notwithstanding the Hostages were not hurt, he most
barbarously performed; in return whereof the King commanded 2500 of the
Hostages to be executed in the sight of the Infidels Camp, and resolved to give
him battle, which he perceiving raised his Camp, and departed along the Sea
Coast, ruining the strong Towns, to prevent their falling into the hands of the
Christians, who leaving Ptolomais strongly fortified, followed close at his
heels, resolving to besiege Jerusalem, which he perceiving, and taking such
advantage as the time and place would afford, faced about: So that both Armies
meeting about Noon, a dreadful conflict began, which continued with great
slaughter, especially on the part of the Turks, till Evening: at what time the
Victory fell to the Christians, who had the Execution of the Infidels for seven
miles; but Winter coming on, they disposed of the Army till Spring, in the
Towns that Saladine had ruinated, repairing and fortifying them stronger than
before; but when Spring came, upon must'ring the Army, they were found greatly
decreased by diseases and absenting, and at the same time the King found the
Duke of Burgundia, under whose command the French King had left part of his
Army, still to cross his purpose, as desirous to return home, having received
such Orders privately from the King his Master, who was contrary to his Oath
taken at his departure warring upon the Normans, then King Richard's Subjects,
and that others were of the like mind, found himself altogether too weak to
besiege Jerusalem, and hearing how the French King had incited his younger
Brother John to take upon him the Government of the Kingdom of England, fearing
lest while he was warring abroad, he might loose his Kingdom at home, he
resolved to make such conditions with the Sultantain, as might be best for the
advantage of the Christians in Syria, and so imbarque for England, which the
crafty Infidel understanding, and finding his power daily to decay, would
hearken to no other Proposals, than that the Christians should surrender all
the Towns they had taken, Ptolomais excepted, and in consideration thereof be
suffered to live in Peace, which being concluded on, the King leaving Count
Henry of Champaigne his Lieutenant of Syria, embarked with his fair Queen, who
had accompanied him in his tedious Expedition; but by the way being separated
from the rest of his Fleet, suffered wrack upon the Coast of Histria, and
attempting with a small retinue to walk over land in the Habit of a Templar, he
was discovered, and by the command of the Duke of Austria (in whose
Territories, and whom he had disgraced at the Siege of Ptolomais, by throwing
down his Standard) taken Prisoner, and by him sold to the Emperor Henry for
40000 pounds, who kept him prisoner a year and three months, and then received
for his Ransom 150000 pounds. But the Ship that the Queen and her Ladies were
in, arrived safe in England.

Soon after the King's delivery, news came that Saladine the great Sultan was
dead, which caused the Princes of Germany, animated by Pope Celestines, to
undertake a third Voyage for the Recovery of Jerusalem. The Dukes of Saxony and
Austria commanding in Chief, and with them went many Bishops, who upon their
Arrival joined with the Christians they found there, and repaired Joppa, the
which whilst they were doing, the ^^^^^ish Army approached, whereupon they show
out, and in pitched battle overthrew them, but to the Loss of their two
Generals, the former dying within four days after the Victory of a Fever, and
the latter of the Wounds he had received. And in fine, news coming that Henry
the Emperor was dead, most of the chief Captains returned home, in hopes to be
elected Emperor. After which the Turks took Joppa and put all they found in it
to the Sword, but at the instance of Pope Innocent the third, Philip the French
King sent 5000 Soldiers, under the leading of Simon Count of Mont-ferat to
join the Christians, by whose good conduct things were so ordered that they
procured to live at peace in Tire and Ptolomais, where I shall leave them and
return to the Lesser Asia, and relate by what means the Turks first Empire in
Persia was brought to naught.

CHAP. V. The ruin of the Turks first Kingdom in Asia, by the Tartars.
THe Turks having flourished in Persia and the Lesser Asia by the Space of
about 200 years under the Succession of diverse Sultans and Kings: The Tartars a
rough Savage People, dwelling in the cold barren parts of Asia Northward, under
the leading of Ziugis their pretended Prophet, having wasted all before them,
passed the high Mountain Caucasus, and part of the Mountain Taurus, came on
upon the more fertile part of Asia, like a deluge, whose huge numbers were such
that in a short time under the leading of Hoccata, old Ziugis's Son, himself
being dead, before they had far proceeded they in a trice overrun India,
Persia, and almost all the other Countries of Asia none being able to stand
before, nay so fearful were they to the Nations that at their Approach without
giving battle Kings with their People sled not into fenced Cities but their
Contries and amongst the rest Cursumes or as the Greek will have it Cor^^^tes:
The Turkish Sultan of Persia leaving all the Cities naked to be possessed
without resistance by the Barbarous Enemy, who in his slight dyed being the
last King Linaly defended of the S^lz^^cian Family Reigning in Persia,
whereupon his Son Vgn^^chan taking upon him the leading the People that
followed his Father seized upon Ba^^^^, now called Bagadet, supposing it the
safest place of refuge, and the better to secure it put to the Sword all the
inhabitants, but kept it not long, or the Turks (...) after him, t^^^ the City
by Storm, and in (...), expelled all his People, and so (...) on Conquered
(...), and many other (...) both in the Great and Le^^er Asia, formerly
possessed by the Turks, they by this means (...) driven out of (...) about the
year of our Lord, (...). yet there was found one of the Sel^^^ (...) Royal
Stem, named (...) the scattered Turks (...) to him in (...) taking the
advantage of the Greeks (...) themselves. (...) and the Countries (...) and
there first at (...) and (...) erected their (...) Kingdom, (...) is by the
Turks (...) the Kingdom of the Al^dine Kings. And by this (...) the (...)
Monarchy in (...) was received; the (...) S^iling himself great King and Lord
(...) the Eastern Countries

During this (...), the Constan^^^ (...) broils, which (...) who had deprived
his Elder Brother (...) Empire for the Settlement thereof and securing himself
in his throne to seek after the Life of the young Prince his Brothers Son, who
was active in recovering to his Father the Empire that of right appertained
unto him, which enforced the Prince to crave aid of Philip the Emperor of
Germany, and the rest of the Princes of that Empire, and so prevailed by means
of his Sister, who was Married to the said Emperor that being recommended by
him and the French King to the Army, then making an other expedition into the
Holy Land and by them taken into protection with a Solemn promise of restoring
him to his rightful Inheritance: In consideration of which, he obliged himself
to pay the French a great sum of Mo^ey, and to make Restitution to the
Venations the lo^^es they sustained in the time of the Emperor (...) by reason
of an (...) laid upon their gailies and se^^^re of the goods of their March
and Recompense the (...) by reducing the Greek Churches to the obedience of the Sea of Rome, for of those three Nations was mostly this Army composed which
consisted of near two hundred thousand Horse and Foot.

Upon these considerations was the Voyage, in order to the Recovery of what was
lost in Syria put off and all the forces ^ent against (...) where the Usurper
resided, who held his Brother the rightful Emperor in Prison, having deprived
him of his sight, and coming before the port with their huge fleet that almost
covered the Ocean, they ^^on broke the chain and entered with their Galley,
upon sight of which those that kept the Greek Galleys in the per^^^^ed and left
them as a prey to the Latins, for so they called the Western Christians, who
not content therewith but resolutely thrusting on shore a (...) those that
guarded it to retire, (...) re-enter the City, which the Usurper perceiving and
well weighing he was no ways able to oppose such an Army, taking with him all
his Treasure, and several of his trustly Friends, (...) ^ight, upon which the
Citizens to avoid being (...) ^ook the Old Emperor out of Prison; and the
Second time proclaimed him Emperor, and immediately opened their gates, and
admitted the Army calling them their dei^^erers; but this their Alacrity lasted
not, for the Prince having made known his promises, and the Old Emperor
confirmed the same, the People upon Settlement of the Taxes whereby such Sums
should be raised as might satisfy the Conquerors, they grew dissatisfied, and
raised tumults in several parts of the City; the better to Allay which, and to
bring them to a Compliance, the good Emperor desired the Lattins to retire to
their Camp; which was performed, but ^re he ^ould prevail with the Citizens to
pay the Tax (...), he through loss of Sight and other Infirmities (...) had the
Prince his Son Saluted Emperor in his (...), who desirous to perform his
Promise with the Lattins, proceeded where his Father lest off, but ^o no
purpose; for when he pressed the raising of the (...) before (...), they rose
in Arms, and (...) like a Torr^^ to the Palace, threatened to (...) of his Life
and Empire if he did not (...) him that he sent to the (...) part of his Army
privately into the City, at a (...) which he would deliver (...) intention of
the Emperors (...) privy, Surnamed for his (...) by the Emperors Father had
been (...) a low condition to the (...) and thinking to opportunity more (...)
to (...) to Empire, after which he had a long (...) then the present ^^^^^ion,
he gathered (...) and im^^^^ed them what was in^ended, and then under a Simile
of Friendship came to the young Emperor, and seizing upon his Person, caused
him to be Imprisoned, and by insinuating himself into the good liking of the
Mobile, procured himself to be proclaimed, which was no sooner done but he
strangled the Emperor, and attempted to sire the Venetian Galleys, which so
enraged the Christians, that they resolved to lay close Siege to the City, the
which after the overthrow of the Usurpers Army under its Walls they did, and
firing it in diverse Places entered, upon which the Tyrant fled.

The City of Constantinople thus taken the 12 of April 1204, or as some will
have it 1200, the Citizens Lives at the request of the Religious were spared,
but their Wealth became a prey to the Soldiers, so now those that refused to
part with a little at the request of their Natural Lord for the support of his
Honor and their Safety, were now obliged to part with all. After the Sack of
this City most of the Cities of the Empire yielded, whereupon the Princes
assembling chose Baldwin Earl of Flanders and Hanault, Emperor, and amongst the
other Princes was the Empire divided into Provinces, each holding his
Principality in fee of the Emperor as their Supreme Lord.

Things being at this pass news came that Theodorius Lascaris had fortified
Adr^ano^le, and raising forces for the recovery of the Greek Empire which
^^nsed the Latins under the leading of their Emperor to March against him, who
upon news of their Approach retired into the City, which he strongly fortified
expecting no less then a Siege, which accordingly was laid at what time John
King of Bulgaria, otherwise called Mysia a large Kingdom lying between the
great Mountain Emaus and Danu^ius, aided by the Scythians a Barbarous People,
came with a great power to raise the Seige, against whom the Emperor drew out
his strengths, but following too eagerly, the Scythian Horsemen sent out to
Skirmish on purpose to ^^ain him into an Ambush, he ^ell in with the Kings
power amongst the Woods and Mountains, where being over wearyed with the
tedious (...), he was overthrown himself taken Prisoner, and his Army for the
most part Slain, nor sus^i^ed it the Barbarous King to have him in his Power,
but after an Inhumane manner cutting off his hands and feet, cast him yet
living into a deep Valley, where he miserably perished, and thus died the first
most Valiant Emperor of the Lattins in (...) e're he had Reigned a full year.

The Emperor B^^hrin being dead, Henry his Brother was chosen in his stead, who
to revenge his Brothers Death aided by the Lattin Princes, Marched against the
(...) (who hightened with their Success were ^^r advanced, wasting with Fire
and Sword all they (...) in their way) and after many notable (...) ^iven,
drove them out of all the places (...) had (...). During th^se proceedings
Alexus (...) (...) falling into the hands of the (...) Eyes put out, and in
that manner being (...), was Condemned to be thrown (...) angling the young
Emperor, which (...) a reward of his Treason was put in Exception. And the
other Alexus commonly (...), who deprived the Emperor Isaac of his Sight (...)
him, hearing that his Son (...) desire ^s of his Kingdom, went to the Court of
(...) Sultan, (...) (...) holding (...) had showed great (...) his (...) by his
Brother (...) there so prevail (...) Sultan raised (...) with it laid (...)
part of (...) Kings (...), of which he had no (...) notice, but with what
Forces he could raise on the sudden, he posted thither, and (...) ^^riously
upon the Sultans Army slew him in the (...) thereof, which so discouraged the
Turks, that ^^^^^thstanding Victory inclined to their side, they (...) the City
free; In this battle was taken Alexus the Author of the War, whom his
Son-in-law notwithstanding used with great respect, though contrary to his
desert.

In the mean time the ten years Truke between the Christians in Syria, and the
Turks drew to a Conclusion: And Almeri^^s King of (...) and Titular King of
Jerusalem, refusing to assist them with Provisions and the like, the great
M^sters of the Knights Templers, and Hospitalers sent to complain thereof to
the Pope, and to inform him, that there was yet living one Mary the Daughter of
the Marquess of Mont-Ferr^^, a Lady of incomparable Beauty, who they as her
Tutor had brought up in hope of the Kingdom, and were now ready to bestow her
upon ^^^^h a Person, as he should think worthy of her, together with her Right
and Title to the Kingdom of (...); upon which the Pope (...) Almericus of the
Title of King of Jerusa^^^n, and gave it to John Co^n^ D' Brenne, of the (...)
in Trance. A man of great Fame and Courage, and then in Arms amongst the Lattin
Princes, who upon notice thereof committing his Earldome to the care of his
Brother, failed with a competent number of his followers to Tire, where he
espoused the Lady, and not long after the Pope, viz. Pope ^^^ocent the third,
calling in a general Council, so dealt with the Princes and Prelates, th^^
great Forces were again raised for the relief of the (...) in the Holy Land,
who setting fall (...) Towns and Castles on the ^^^-Coast, (...) with a great
Fleet, and an Army by Land (...), formerly called Pelusium, situate upon the
Bank of N^^^; resolving to begin first with Egypt, that Palestine might follow,
where building Towers of Wood upon Gallys, they fought with those that kept the
Walls at even hand, and after great slaughter on both sides took the Suburbs,
wherein they found not only store of Provision, but infinite Riches; being the
Merchandise of Persia, Arabia, India, and Egypt, that being the chief Scale of
Trade in those parts. During this Transaction the Sultan lay hovering aloof
with his Army, not daring to engage the Christians, and so long he continued
that Want began to rage in his Camp; insomuch that he was obliged to send away
one part of his Army.

The Infidels thus foiled, though the City still held out, Corradi^e, Sultan of
Damasco and Jerusalem sent his Ambassador to the Christian Princes, to sue for
Peace, for himself and his Brother the Sultan of Egypt: In lieu whereof he
promised to restore the Holy-Cross, and all the Towns his Father Saladine had
taken from the Christians, which large offer was thought reasonable by most of
the Princes, none opposing it but Pelagius the Popes (...), John the late made
King of Jerusalem, the (...) of the Knights Templers and Hospitallers, and the
Duke of A^siria, they alleging that the War was undertaken generally against
the Infidels, and that they ought not to desist, till they had brought them
under. Whereupon the S^^^^n supposing they would speedily come to Jerusalem,
caused it to be rased all, exce^^ (...) Tower of David, and the holy Sepulcher;
(...) instance of the Christians there dwelling, (...) with all his people
departed to Da^^^ (...) but (...) Christians, though too late, repented their
(...) advantageous an offer; for (...) of the raw (...) and Vapors that
ascended from Ni^^s, a mortal Contagion raged in the ^^mp, and much weakened
it; so that the Sultan taking the advantage, endeavored to put succors into
the Town, with such speed that many entered, ere the Christians could take the
Alarm; but they falling in the Rear cut off a great number that were shut out,
lest the Christians should have entered Pell-mel with them into the City, and
heightened with this success, they marched to the Sultans Camp and dared him to
battle, but he not willing to hazard his Kingdom upon a cast, refusing, they
assaulted him in his Lodging. In which daring Attempt, the French General was
lost with many more of note; so that without success they again returned to the
Siege: Famine beginning to rage extremely in the City, and soon after its
attendant the Plague, of which such a number died, that there were none left to
defend it. So that the Christians entering, found all the Streets paved with
the dead, 70000 of the Infidels having perished therein through obstinacy, who
upon surrender might have had their Lives and Liberties.

Thus this great City after a years Siege was taken, the Third of November,
1221. After which the Popes Legate laying Claim to it in the behalf of his
Master; though at the beginning of the War the Princes had concluded that all
the Cities and Tow^^ (...), should be put into the Possession of the King of
Jerusalem, a Contest arose between them, insomuch that the King retired to
(...) and was hardly entreated to return; upon whose return, and the Arrival of
the Duke of Bavaria, with fresh Forces at the Legates entreaty, a great part of
the Army was drawn forth in order, to the (...) the City of C^^, which they
effected not without hopes of w^^^ing it, but being unacquainted with the
Country, they i^ camping in low Ground, the (...), and overflowed their (...)
Waters, of a prodigious depth^^^ that many perished therein, and at last were
obliged to re-deliver Damiata for their Ransom, and so the Sultan relieving
them with such necessaries as they wanted, caused them to be Conducted out of
Egypt: Whereupon most of them returned into their own Country, having first
concluded a Peace for eight years with Coradine, the Sultan of Damasco, which
Peace was by the Infidel inviolably observed. King John upon his return, at the
instance of H^^or^us, gave his Daughter Yoland in Marriage, to Er^drick King of
Sicilia, and with her the Title of Jerusalem, from whence the succeedings
derived their Titles, instiling themselves Kings of Jerusalem.

And now Henry the second Emperor of Constantinople being dead, having Reigned
eleven years and some odd days, Peter Count of Ausseres was made Emperor in his
stead; who in revenge to Injuries done to the Ve^etians by Theodorus, Angelius
Prince of Epirus besieged him in D^^rachium; but upon his feigned Submission a
Peace was concluded, when the Emperor too much crediting the perjured Wretch,
going into the City slenderly attended to an Entertainment, to which the Epir^^
had invited him, was by his Commandment slain.

Upon the News of this sad disaster, the Constantinop^li^^ns elected his Son
Robert to succeed him, but he lived nor long, for having married a beautiful
Lady before Contracted to a noble man of Burgundia, he in revenge, in the
Emperors absence, with a resolute Company broke into the Palace, and there
seizing upon the (...) cut off her Nose, and Ears; and afterward (...) her
Mother, who had been the cause of the (...) of the (...) Contract, threw her
into (...) into the (...) Mountains, living (...) of his Companions, which
(...) the Emperor, that going to Rome in his return the died. After him
succeeded his Son by the name of Baldwin the Second, being the fifth and last
Emperor of the Lattins in Constantinople. For Las^ares of whom I have before
spoken after the overthrow he gave the Sultan mightily increasing his Power,
rigged a great many Ships and Siezed upon all the Islands in the Iconium, and
Egean Seas, Lesbos, Chios, Sa^os, Rhodes, etc. And by that means rendered
himself so formidable that most Cities before in the possession of the Lattins
revolted to him, insomuch that without any great resistance he brought his Army
to the Gates of Constantinople, and then dying lefe his Son John Ducas Batazes
to succeed him, who prosecuting the War against the Latrius became more
terrible then his Father, strengthening himself by a Marriage between H^lena
daughter to Assan King of Bulgaria and his Son Theodore: And after that renewed
the League with the Sultain of Iconium, who was then (...) in Warring against
the Tartars.

During these p^ss^^es, (...), the German Emperor, with great forces passed
(...) Syria, but by Reason he did not humble himself to Greogry the ninth; the
proud Pre^^^^ (...) thereto by his Strumpet, Fulminated against (...) with
Excommunications, sending his Le^ters to the Christians, not to aid nor receive
him upon his (...) but they did not regard the (...) Pope, (...) his Landing
with his forces (...) joyfully and honorably received (...) to Sultan (...),
(...) to (...), but (...) to (...) to his (...) desire, (...) himself (...)
that after (...), that the (...) the (...) was at hardly gladly (...) to (...)
up the City of Jerusalem, with all the Land of Palestine, together with the
Respective Cities taken by the Sultan Saladine, and all the Christian
Prisoners, in lieu of a ten years Peace which was accorded, and the Emperor
with his Army coming to the desolate City of Jerusalem, and there with great
Solemnity on Easter Day Anno 1229 was Crowned King, and so having fortifyed the
City by repairing the Wall, and Garrisoned Nazereth, Joppa, and other strong
Cities, and appointed Reynold Duke of Bavaria his Lieutenant in Syria, he
returned home, where the Pope had put his Subjects in an uproar, and Seized
upon his Kingdom of Naples, working him greater troubles then are convenient to
be here related, as not pertinent to this History: only note that this was that
Frederick, that married the King of Jerusalem's Daughter, and with her had the
Title of King of Jerusalem; which occasioned his setting forward to take
possession of that Kingdom.

The Emperor was no sooner returned, but to spite him, and break the ten Years
League, he sent Lewis King of Navar with a great Power into Syria to invade the
Sultans Dominions; but his Expedition was no ways prosperous, joining Battle
with the Sultans Power, he and the rest of the Christians were overthrown,
which occasioned the loss of Jerusalem, soon after (...) by the T^^ks, all the
Souls that were (...) being put to the Sword, and with (...) hands demolished
the (...) of our (...) Savior which all other (...) had with a (...) reverence
sorborn to (...).

The News of the great overthrow and the loss of (...) to the (...) of the
Christian Princes of the (...), greatly tro^^^ed them, but most of all the
Emperor and Lewis the Ninth King of France: Insomuch that the latter gathering
a great Power Anno 1248. set Sail and came to the Isle of Cyprus and there
wintered, by reason of the far advancement of the Season, during which time he
received an Ambassador from the Master of the Templars, to inform him that
there was no need of his coming by reason the Sultan oftered honorable terms,
but the King understanding that it was a contrivance between them that the
Templars might have the greater power, sent back to command him under pain of
forseiting his head that he should receive no more Ambassadors from the Sultan,
and Early in the Spring weighing Anchor within five or six days sail he fell in
with the Coast of Egypt, and with all his sleet sailing up the River Nile came
before Damiata, to oppose whose landing the Governor with what forces he could
draw out stood upon the banks, but in vain they resisted, for the Frenchmen
manning out their boats thrust on shore and put them to flight, leaving the
Governor and 500 of their Companions dead upon the Strand, and perceiving the
Christians were preparing to besiege the City the former Miseries it had
endured coming afresh into their mind, they in the dead of night set every man
his house on fire and sled, which the Christians perceiving they entered the
City, and exstinguished the slames, saving so much as was possible, and there
found abundance of Riches.

The Sultan upon notice of the loss of this strong City was greatly dismayed:
(...) he sent to the French King to osser him several places in Palestine,
never yet in the possession of the Christians, but his offer was rejected and
(...) by the Earl of (...) the Kings brother.

During these s^irs (...) Brother Melesh-S^ll^^ or (...) whom joined the Sultan
of (...), to oppose the Christians, and with his whole Power drew near to
Damiata, where the Christian Army lay encamped; who Sallying out of their
Trenches beat him back, but Sallying the next day, and following the Enemy too
far many of them were slain, and the rest were forced to retire.

Long they were not encamped, before a private Messenger came to the King from
the Governor of Cairo, to inform him that if he would draw near to the Walls
of that great City, he would put it into his hands; the said Governor
appearing to be much inclinable to the Christian Religion: Or, as some will
have it, o^^ of Revenge for the Death of his Brother slain by the Sultans
Command. Upon which the King assembled all his Power, and marched till he came
to an Arm of N^^us, with part of his Army, under the Command of his Brother
Robert Earl of Arth^^s passing at a Board, discomfited the Turks, that desended
the further Bank; but contrary to the advice of the renowned E^^l, and the
Master of the Templers following the Chase ever the other part of the Army
arrived, he was encompassed by the Sultans power, that ^ay in Ambush; that not
above two Templers, one Hospitaler, and a common Soldier escaped to tell the
heavy News.

This News was seconded, with that of the Imprisonment of the Governor of
C^^^^o; which altogether disappointed the King of his purpose. Whereupon he
pasted the River at the same Board his Brother had done, and behold the sad
(...) of the min^^ed Careasses of the slain, each having his Head and Hards ^n^
off, the Sultan the better to encourage his Men, haing promised rewards to
(...) could bring them either, but long he had (...) them, before the (...)
come upon him (...), being near ten (...); and after a (...) overthrew him,
cutting the greatest part of his Army in pieces, and amongst the rest the
Flower of the French Nobility: The King and some few of the Nobility were taken
Prisoners, and for their Ransom delivered up the City of Damiata, and paid
8000 pound in Gold, with a promise of a ten years Peace, but whilst the Sultan
was accompanying him to Damiata, two desperate Russians assassinated him in the
presence of his Nobility, instigated thereto by one Turquiminus a Mamaluke or
Slave, got himself proclaimed Sultan, renouncing the League that Melech-Sala
had made, and made another in his own Name, not much different from the former;
but performed not above the half part, but in fine, after the surrender of
Damiata, which the new Sultan caused to be rased, the King with all his Retinue
were Conducted to Ptolomais, and at the end of six years, from his setting out
sailing from thence arrived in his own Kingdom, having lost 60000 of his
Subjects in that expedition.

The Sultan being as aforesaid Traitorously murdered, the Mamalukes or Slaves,
bought by the Sultans of diverse Merchants, to serve them in their Wars: Put an
end to the Turkish Kingdom in Egypt, by deposing all such as bare Offices, or
had places of trust, advancing those of their own order, continually choosing
their Sultans from amongst themselves, flourishing in great Renown for the
space of 267 years, at the end of which they were totally subdued by (...) the
victorious Emperor of the (...) 151^ and the Kingdom of Egypt with all (...)
and the (...), as they are at this day annexed to the (...), as shall be in
process of this History (...) these Actions passed John Dacc^^, (...) ^^ed,
having Reigned successfully for the space of (...) three years, after whom
succeeded (...) his So^, who renewed the League his Father had made with the
Jathanites, the Turkish Sultan in the lesser Asia, after which with a puissant
Army, he passed the Straights of Hellispont to appease the troubles raised in
Macedonia, and Thessalia by the King of Bulgaria his Father in Law, and the
Despot of Thessalia, during which one Michael Paleologus a great Courtier fled
to the Turkish Sultan, under pretense that he doubted his Life, by reason of
those Enemies he had at Court, that inveighed against him; and at his coming to
Iconium, sound the Sultan leavying an Army to oppose them that spoiled his
Country, of whom he was kindly received, and the Greeks in his Service reduced
under his Command; and so marching against the Enemy a dreadful Fight began,
the Turks charging with great Courage, putting the Right-wing to flight, and
disordering their main Battalion: So that Victory began to declare her self in
favor of them, when one of the Sultans chief Commanders out of some former
grudge, fell with the Squadron of Persian Horse under his Command to the Enemy,
and by that means turned the Scale of War, so that the Turks, who even now were
Conquerors fled for their Lives; nor durst the Sultan stay in his own Country,
but fled to Constantinople, where of the Emperor he was kindly received, and
aided with what Force he could spare, under the leading of an experienced
Captain, for which kindness he gave the Emperor the City of Laodicea.

Not long after this, was Palelogus received into Favor, and restored to his
Dignity, upon his solemnly swearing to be true and Loyal to him and his Sons,
which had not long been done, ^'r the Emperor fell sick and dyed, Reigning only
three years, and in his stend was Crowned his Son John, a Child of six years
old, who was by the Emperors last Will bequeathed to the Tutorage of Arsenius
the Patriarch, and George Muz^la, the letter of which being of mean Birth,
having raised for his Virtues, and good parts by the departed Emperor, which
caused him to be greatly envyed by the Courtiers; whereupon he assembling
together, desired to be rid of his Charge, but every one seeming unwilling to
undertake it, he still continued with much Integrity; but several having
conspired against him, of which Paleologus was Chief, they during the Obsequies
of the defunct Emperor slew him, and several that they supposed Favored him,
even at the Altar; and in a short time Paleologus usurped the Empire, not in
the least regarding his former Oath.

About this time Mango, the great Cham of Tartary stirred thereto by Amonius
the Armenian King, of whom he had received the Christian Religion: Sent his
Brother Haalon with a powerful Army against the Turks, and Sarazens in Syria,
and the Land of Palestine, who in the space of six Months overrun all Persia,
with the Countries adjoining, and came at length into Syria, and took the great
City Babylon at that time, commanded by the Caliph, putting all the Inhabitants
to the Sword, enriching his Soldiers with the spoil, and passing from thence
through Mesopotamia, took the City of Rhoais, and there being supplied with
fifty two Horse and Foot entering Syria, he rased Aleppo and other strong
Towns, and soon after won Damasco; when as the Sultan with his Wife and
Children came and fell before him, desiring him to spare his Country, but in
vain, for he wasted all before him; but being about to pass on to Jerusalem,
News was brought him of his Brothers death, upon which he returned home; yet at
his departure for the good Will he bore the Christians, he left his Son Abiga
with 20000 Horse to aid them in Wars, but Abiga hearing of his Fathers Troubles
about his Establishment in the Empire, departed with 10000 of the 20000 leaving
the rest under the Command of Guirboca a valiant Captain, who by some affronts
put upon him by the Christians became their mortal Enemy, yet let not give
battle to the Sultans Army of ten times to the number, and not being aided by
the Christians, was overthrown, wherein himself fighting courageously with
greater part of his small Army were slain; and thereupon Antioch, and most of
the Towns holden by the Christians, were taken by the Sultan Bandocador.

By this time the Tartars warring in the lesser Asia, had driven Jathanites out
of all his Dominions, whereupon he fled to the Greek Emperor for aid, or
Refuge; but ungrateful as he was, not regarding the Kindness he had received at
his Hands, when he fled from Theodorus the Emperor, he committed him Prisoner
at large to the City of Aenus in Thrace, appointing several to watch him so
narrowly that he should not escape.

When Paleologus had Reigned at Nice two years, he sent Alexus Stregopulus
against the Despot of Epirus; who raised Tumults in the West, this man in his
passage with a small Army, by the Treachery of the Greeks dwelling in
Constantinople, found means to surprise that City, and again annex it to the
Greek Empire: After it had been in the hands of the Latins fifty eight years,
for which service Alexus triumphed in Purple Robes, wearing a Crown of Gold,
commanded that for one year following, his Name next to his should be mentioned
in all public Prayer, Psalms and Hymns.

But now the Son of Theodorius, whose Right this Emperor had usurped, coming to
years of Discretion, it bred much jealousy in him, that lest any discontented
Person espousing his Quarrel, should pluck the Crown from off his Head, and
place it where it ought to rest: Whereupon to render him unfit for Government,
he like a barbarous Wretch deprived him of his sight, which his Aunt Queen of
Bulgaria, no sooner understood, but with many Arguments stirred up her Husband,
to make War upon the Usurper; and at the same time being solicited by the
Sultan Jathanites to deliver him from his Confinement; he with a great Power of
Scythians, his own Subjects, entered the Empire, wasting all before him with
Fire and Sword, hoping to surprise the Emperor in his return from his
Expedition against the Despot of Servia; but failing of him, he turned to
Aenus, and took thence the Sultan the Citizens gladly delivering him to save
their Lives, and contenting himself with the spoil of Thracia, he passed over
Ister, and returned into his own Country.

Jathanites, the Sultan, being set at Liberty by the King of Bulgaria, for
Grief of his great loss dyed, not leaving any Dominions to his Children: Yet
not long after Gazan the great Cham of Tartary, as his Vassals, two of his
Kinsmen of the Zelzuccian Family, viz. Mesot and Rei-Cubades, they in
acknowledgment thereof, paying him a yearly Tribute, placed them in part of his
Dominions; and thus fell the Turkish Empire in the lesser Asia, being Rent in
pieces by the Tartars, who afterward seized upon a great part of the Greek
Empire; they and the Fugitive Turks together, possessing themselves of the
Countries from Pontus and Galatia, unto the Lyeian and Carian Seas, and the
River Eurymedon.

Anno 1270. King Lewis of France, aided by Henry the Third of England and
diverse others resolved, upon a second Expedition into the Holy Land; the years
Truce being exspired, he set out from the Haven of Marseilles, with a great
Fleet of Ships, and coming before Carthage, he found in the Port a great number
of the Enemies Ships which he seized, and after some light Skirmishes, with
those that kept the shore, Landed his Men, and laid close Siege to the City,
which after many desperate, though unsuccessful Sallies of the besieged
sarrendered upon Condition to depart.

Carthage being won, the King laid Siege to Tums, to relieve which the King of
Fez with a great Army of the Moors came down, but was quickly forced to retire
with 10000 less then he brought; but this Siege continuing long, a mortal
Pestilence happened in the Army, the Kings youngest Son dyed, and in the end
himself with many of his prime Nobility, which greatly encouraged the Moors;
but their joy lasted not long, for soon after came thither Prince Edward, Hemy
the Third King of Englands eldest Son, with sixteen Ships fraught with Valiant
English Soldiers, as also the King of Ci^ilia, Navar, and Arragon with great
Forces, upon which the Morish King making many large o^^ers for Peace, it was
granted in the Name of all the Princes, on Condition that he should pay a
yearly Trib^^e of 40000 Crowns to the King of Scicily, and to suffer the
Christian Religion, freely to be Exercised throughout his Dominions, in all its
particulars; which Articles being concluded on and ratified, though contrary to
the mind of Prince Edward, they weighed Anchor, and stood for the Isle of
Scicily, intending there to Winter, and the next Spring to pass into Syria: But
coming into the Bay, the Princes were no sooner got on shore, but a terrible
Storm arose, that most of the Fleet were broken to pieces, only of Prince
Edward's Fleet not one Ship perished in this wrack, a great part of the
Mariners and Soldiers were drowned, and the Plague still raging amongst them in
such sort, that the French Queen, the King of Navar, and diverse others of great
Rank dyed; which so discouraged Philip the French King, that he returned into
France, without Attempting any thing further, and with him all the rest (Prince
Edward his English excepted) returned into their Respective Countries; but the
Prince kept on his way till he arrived at Ptolomais, and was received by the
Christians with great joy, where having rested himself for a while, and
inquired into the nature of the Country, he with 6 or 7000 of his English, took
Nazareth, and upon his return overthrew a great Army of Sarazens, that supposed
to have intrapped him, and at another time overthrew them with great Slaughter,
near Cakhow, a Village about 40 Miles from P^olomais: And so succesfull was he
in all his undertakings, that the Infidels extremely dreaded him; Insomuch that
the Admiral of Joppa, feigned himself to be converted to the Christian
Religion, sent one of his Servants to commune with the Prince, about diverse
Matters, who being admitted in Private, and seeming as if he would draw a
letter out of his Bosom, with an Impoisoned knife, supposed to have Stabbed the
Prince into the Belly, but he being aware received the Wound on his Arm, and
with his foot Struck the Villain down, and then wresting from him the knife
Stabbed him, during which buffle the Guards entered, and cut him in Pieces as
he lay on the Ground. This Villain the Sultan sent to excuse, Swearing by
Mahomet it was not done with his privity, nor consent, but however such was the
nature of the poison, that it was not cured without great difficulty.

The Prince having a long time in vain, expected the coming of the other
Christian Princes, thought good to return, which accordingly he did having
first concluded a Peace with the Sultan, and shortly after his return, his
Father Henry dying, he was Crowned King of England, etc.

Anno 1273, (...) having been advanced by the Pope to the (...), upon promise
to pass into the (...) himself for so tedious a Voyage, sent his Son Henry
Prince of M^^^l^burg, who a^^^^ing at (...), with a great Power, wasted the
Territories of Damasco with fire and Sword, taking many Towns, but at length
being intercepted by the Mamalu^^s, he was taken Prisoner, and a great part of
his Army slain, in which state he with one Servant remained 26 years, no Ransom
being accepted for his deliverance, at which time a Runagado German, coming to
the Sultan, set him at Liberty, and sent him, who upon his return, was not
known to his nearest Relations, who supposed him long before silent in his
Grave, and indeed he lived not long after his return.

The Princes of the West growing weary of these tedious expeditions, the
Infidels thereby encouraged, under the leading of Alphix or Elpis their Sultan,
rased Tripolis, Sidon and Berythus, putting most of the Inhabitants to the
Sword, the Christians having now nothing left but the strong City Ptolomais;
and yet they were at variance amongst themselves, some for the Government of
the City, and some for the title of King of Jerusalem: During the contest
Sultan Araphius sent his Son to besiege Ptolomais, who in vain assaulting it,
many times made large offers, if he might have it delivered; but they as little
prevailed, whereupon his Father being dead and himself chosen Sultan, he drew
down before it 15000 Horse and Foot, assaulting it on every side, filling up
the ditches with his Multitude, but the Christians from the Wall, and by
sallying, killed so many of the Infidels, that they were forced to retire to
their trenches, yet in the Skirmish, Peter Grand Master of the Templars, being
Shot with a Poison Arrow, died within three days, and with him all the courage
of the besieged, for from that time, such as could make their escape by Sea
departed, so that the City being in the end left destitute of Defendants, was
by the Sultan taken and rased, all such as were found therein, being put to the
Sword, so that the Christians were utterly rooted out of Syria, this being the
last City which had remained in the hands of the Christians for upwards of 100
years, and was lost Anno 1291, just 192 years after the winning of Jerusalem by
Duke Godfry.

And now the Christian Princes despairing to recover what they had lost,
Cassanes the Tartarian Prince moved thereto by his Wife and her Father the King
of Armenia, undertook the Enterprise, and with a powerful Army entered Syria,
wasting all before him, when not far from the Mountain Amanus, he met with
Melsenoser, the Sultan of Egypt's Lieutenant, and put him to flight with the
loss of 40000 of his Soldiers, and drove him quite out of Syria, sending
Molais one of his Captains to pursue him over the desert Sands, to the Confines
of Egypt; then taking in all the Cities as he passed, and in the City of Hama
lighting upon the Sultans treasure, he divided it amongst his Soldiers, and
having fortified Jerusalem and Damasco, he purposed in the Spring to have
passed into Egypt, and to have destroyed the Country; but in the mean time,
receiving news that great tumults were risen in Persia, his new acquired
Empire, he with part of his Army departed to allay them, leaving Capcapus
Governor of Damasco, and his great Captain Molais of Jerusalem, with order to
send Ambassadors to the Princes of the West; but they being Imbroyled amongst
themselves, nothing could be obtained, so that no aids coming from the Tartar,
nor King of Armenia, the Towns were as easily recovered by the Egyptian Sultan,
as they had been taken from him by the Tartarian Cham. And thus taking my leave
of Syria for the present, I shall return into the lesser Asia, where I find
Mesoot and Rei-Cubades, the two Tributary Turkish Princes dead, without doing a
any thing worthy of note, of which the latter left a Son named Aladan, who
likewise paying Tribute, held jointly the Kingdom, that were before possessed
by his Father and Uncle. This Aladine the last of the Selzuccian Family dying
without issue, one Sahib his chief Counselor and then a man of great
Authority, aspired unto the Kingdom, but being risen from a mean estate, he was
highly envyed by the Nobility, they casting off all respect from him, by force
divided the Kingdom amongst themselves, every one seizing the Province he could
best light on; so that Sahib who was first in possession, lost all, no part
remaining as his Lot, so that they turned it into a perfect Anarchy, of which
the greatest share fell to Caraman Alusirus, who strongest took Iconium, with
part of Cilicia, Lycaonia, Pamphilia, Caria, and Phrygia; and of him descended
the Caramanian Kings, who in the rise of the Othoman Empire, put the Turks so
often to the Foil: The next to him was Saruchan, who possessed himself of the
greatest part of Lydia, and some other Countries adjoining; Troas, Phrygia, and
part of Mysia, fell to Calumus and his Son Carasius; the remaining part of
Mysia, and part of Lydia, was seized by Aidin; part of Pontus, the Cities of
Heraclea, Pontica Castomonia, Synope, and others near to the Euxine Sea, and
Country of Paphlagonia, fell into the hands of the Sons of Omer, or as the
Greeks call them Amar, of whom the Country took not their names, as did the
former of these that possessed them, but is commonly called Bolli, so named of
the Metropolis, as also was Mendesia, or as some will have it Mentetia, a
Country in the Lesser Asia.

These and diverse others, were the divisions of the Turkish Empire in Persia,
and the Lesser Asia, which Anarchy caused their Subjection, and utter
subversion, as in the Succeeding part of this History, will at large appear.

During this confusion amongst the rest of the great Captains, there happened
one Othoman, of the Oguzian Family, who had been raised from a low estate, by
Sultan Aladine, yet by reason he was not of the Selzuccian Family, they made
little account of him, not permiting him to share with them in their division,
though by what justice is uncertain; all of them feared his rising fortune, and
strove what in them lay, to hinder, but in vain, for the Destinies so ordering
it, he in a short time became the Founder of the Othoman Empire, as in the
Perusal of his Life and Actions will appear.

CHAP. VI. The Rise of the Powerful Empire of the Turks, under Othoman its
first Founder, with his Life and Actions.
THat Empires and Kingdoms have their Limitation from the Sovereign Creator and
Disposer of all things, it is undeniably evident, by the Sundry Mutations that
have been in all Ages of the World, for nothing can be assured of long
continuance, though never so great and powerful. How are the great Monarchies
of the Persians, Medians, Babylonians, Chaldeans, Romans, and the like,
dwindled away into nothing, no more then a bare Relation, of their Names and
Greatness remaining to testify the mighty actions they performed, when at
their becks were half three parts of Mankind. And indeed no less famous was the
Turkish Empire in Persia, and the Lesser Asia, till broken and dismembered, by
the violent intrusion of the Tartars, a Savage People bursting from the
Frozen-North, to the Terror and Subversion of the greatest part of Asia, and
Africa; but now under the Turkish Scepter, as shall by the subsequent Discourse
appear.

During the time that the Tartars overwhelmed the Turkish Dominions in Asia,
Solomon, of the Oguzian Family, Reigning in the lesser Asia; and seeing his
Countryman the Sultan of Persia, driven from all his Possessions, thought it
not safe for him, of far Inferior force, to abide the Sorm; but flying with
such People as would follow him, after long wandering, the Tempest being near
over, and he desiring to return home, as he was about to pass the Danube, was
carried away by the Stream, and drowned, leaving behind him four Sons, viz.
Sencur, Teken, Jundogdis, and Ertogrul, of some called Orthobules, who was the
Father of Othoman. This Ertogrul after the Death of his Father, having notice
that Aladine the Sultan had again settled himself in the lesser Asia: Sent
Messengers to him, to desire him, that he and the rest of his poor followers,
who were Herdsmen driving Flocks still before them as they traveled, might
inhabit in some Corner of his Country. The Sultan not unmindful of the state of
poor Exiles, it having so lately been his own Case, appointed them a Village
called Suguta, lying between the Castle Belezuga, and Mount Tmolus in the
greater Phrygia; during whose residence there with his small Train, the Sultan
had many Conflicts with the Tartars, whose Power by this time was in its Wain;
and being hard put to it in one Battle near the said Village, Ertogrul with
four hundred of his Herdsmen unexpectedly came to his Assistance, and behaved
himself so valiantly, that the Tartars were put to flight, for which the Sultan
honored him with a rich Cloak, and began highly to prize his Valor; insomuch
that he enlarged his Territories, making him a petty Lord, which Lordship with
great Repute, he held during the Reign of the Sultan, doing many notable
Services, as taking the Castle of Cara-Chisar from the Christians, who by their
many Injuries had exasperated the Sultan; but after the Sultans Death, those
that succeeded, being Tributaries to the Tartars, till such time as the Kingdom
was Anachised, he lived quietly at home; during which time many conceived great
hopes of his younger Son Othoman, called by some Osman Gazi, or Osman the
Warlike, by reason of the great delight he had in Arms when he was a Child, and
when grown up, to discourse and Argue with the Commanders and Governors, of
whom he had the general Esteem of an active Youth, designed for great
Achievements, as it afterward fell out.

One day Othoman going to visit the Governor of Eski-Chisar, lately taken from
the Christians by his Father: He fell in Love by the way with a beautiful
Damosel, named Malhatun, and sent to request her in Marriage, but she seeming
something averse, excusing her self that she was of too mean a Parentage, and
not a fitting Match for him, that was so nobly descended; he as she conceived,
designing rather to Debauch her, then make her his Wife; but this modest
repulse making him more and more desire her, he in other Discourses declared
his Affections to the aforesaid Governor, who seeming little to take notice
thereof, begun to be inflamed with the Love of the Damosel unseen, by the
lively Description Othoman had given of her rare Perfection, which Othoman well
perceiving, and fearful that he should enforce her to his Lust, having great
Power in that Country; he sent her Parents notice thereof, who tender of their
Daughters Honor, sent her away secretly, the which upon Knowledge it was done
by Othomans means, so enraged the Governor, that he vowed Revenge, and sent
after him a strong Party to seize him at the Castle of In-Vngi, whither he knew
he was gone, where being demanded of the Captain of that Castle, after some
Debate those that kept it resolved to defend him; but he not greatly trusting
them (as knowing the Governors Power in those parts) with several of his
trusty Friends, he broke through the Leagures, killing some, and dispersing the
rest; yet other Forces coming to their Assistance, they followed him into his
Fathers Territories, where his Danger was no sooner known, but all the Youths
Armed, and setting upon the Governors Soldiers, they slew many, took some
Prisoners, and put the rest to flight: So that Othoman began to be feared of
such as hated him.

Ertogrul being spent with Age and Infirmity, created by lying in the Field,
and watching in Camps, dyed in the ninety third year of his Age, Anno 1289.
Having since the Death of Solomon his Father, governed the Og^zian Family fifty
two years, who now being dead, the Heads of the Family assembled to choose
another Lord, and thereupon they pitched upon Dunder, Entogrul's Brother, but
he by reason of his great Age refusing the Honor; they with one Consent
elected Othoman, saluting him by the Name of Beg or Lord, he being by this
means become Lord of the same Family. The Herdsmen that sed their Flocks upon
the Mountains complained to him, of outrages done them in passing and repassing
by the Garrison or Soldiers of the Castle of Einegiol, they being thereto
incited by their Captain, with which he being not a little grieved, sent to the
Captain of Bil^zuga his Friend, another Castle not far distant from the former,
to permit his People to shelter and refresh themselves therein, during their
passing and repassing to the Mountains, to which in Relation to the Turkish
Women he Consented, but not to permit the Men for Fear of a surprise: So that
they went another way, avoiding the former Castle, but Othoman still studying
Revenge for the Injuries done to his People; whereupon gathering what Force he
could, he passed to the Mountains, in hopes to surprise it; but the Captain
having notice thereof came out to meet him, laying an Ambush in hopes to entrap
him, of which he being aware came not into it, but gave the Captain battle upon
plain Ground; and after some slaughter on both side put him to slight, and
passing on took the Castle of Chalce not far from Einegiol by surprise, putting
all he found therein to the Sword, of which outrage great Complaint was made to
the Governor of Cara-Chisar, and great Forces raised to apprehend him, and
destroy the Oguzian Family, who as they said coming not long before, poor
Herdsmen and sheltered out of Pity, began to Usurp over the rightful
Inhabitants.

Against these Preparations Othoman provided the best he could, and near to
Mount Tmolus, gave Battle to Calanus, Brother to the Governor of Cara-Chisar,
who overthrown in the Battle lost his Brother Saragatine, and many other
Friends; when shortly after Sultan Aladine the last Sultan of Iconium
understanding what had happened, and that Othoman might stand him in stead
against the Christians, gave him the City of Paleopolis, with all the
Territories thereunto belonging: So by this means he became of a poor Herdsman,
a formidable Governor, when not unmindful upon what Account such a Favor was
bestowed upon him, he entered into Consultation with his Brother Jundus, how he
might best get away, but he finding himself too weak, and by that means
Considering he should lay himself open to the Fury of the Tartar, he resolved
to make Peace with such as would accord thereto, and wait his better Fortune;
for there wanted not some of the Selzuccian Family, that greatly envied his
Aspiring, yet encouraged by the Sultan, he took the strong Castle of
Cara-Chisar the residence of his Enemy, and so settled his Affairs, winning
upon his People with kind Speeches and bounty, that great numbers of the Turks
daily resorted to him.

Now during the prosperous Proceedings of Othoman, there happened a Quarrel
between the two Christian Captains of Belezuga, and Cupri-Chisar, upon which
the former doubting his strength, and yet desirous of Revenge solicited Othoman
for aid, who in lieu of some kindnesses received, came to his Assistance with
100 Turks; by whose Valor he overthrew his Adversary, took his Castle, and put
him to the Sword, which so swelled the Captain with Pride that he gave Othoman
many rich Gifts, as likewise to his Soldiers; but what vexed them more then the
Gifts pleased them, he gave them his Hand to kiss; and above all, Othoman who
adviced with his Cozen Dunder his Uncles Son, what Revenge was best to be
taken, to humble the Captains insolence; but seeming to dissuade him from any
such Attempt, and to be the Captains Friend, lest he should relate his
Intentions, and that redound to his prejudice, resolving to make all; he at an
advantage shot his Cozen through with an Arrow, and hid him in the Sand.

Long it was not after this Transaction, ever he was invited by one Michael
Cossi Captain of Hirmen Caia, to the Marriage of his Daughter, where according
to the Custom of the Country, making large Presents; the rest of Captains began
to mistrust his greatness, so that the Captain of Belezuga resolved to prevent
it with his Death, and therefore the better to have him within his Power, he
invited him to his Wedding at a certain day, making Cossi privy to his Design:
And a little before the appointed time, sent Cossi to fetch him, who was as
ready to accompany him, which Cossi perceiving, to prevent his Ruin discovered
the Conspiracy against his Life: Whereupon he Contracted a strict Amity with
him, obliging him to secrecy, and then began to cast about how he might be
revenged of the said Captain; and so ordered it, that sending about forty men
in a Carriage instead of packs of Presents, they, whilst the Captain and all
his People, unless a few left to secure the Castle, by the help of some
Soldiers, who in the habit of Turkish Women were sent thither by the Captains
order, as Othomans Friends, surprised it, putting the Warders to the Sword: Now
Othoman came according the Captains wish, and stayed drinking with him in his
pleasant Bowers, till he supposed his men had effected his Commands; and
together with Cossi and some other of his Companions retired, which the Captain
perceiving, and loath to let him escape his Hands, as supposing he had him
sure; he and all his Soldiers followed him, but being overcharged with Wine,
they were by him and his Company lightly slain.

Things thus prospering he followed his Advantage, and the next Morning
surprised the Castle of Jarchisar, took the Captain Prisoner; as likewise
Lubufer the fair Damosel with all her Attendants, that should have the next day
been Married to the Captain of Bilezuga, and gave her in Marriage to his Son
Orchanes, who had Issue by her Amurath, the third King of the Turks, and
Solomon Bassa; and immediately thereupon besieged the Castle of Einegiol, which
he took, and put the Garrison to the Sword; and now no longer resolving to play
small Games, he besieged the City of Nice in Bythinia, not many years before
the Seat of the Greek Emperor, to relieve which the Emperor sent such Forces as
could upon so short a warning be drawn together; which Othoman encountering with
overthrew, and afterward by Famine constrained the Citizens upon promise of
Life, to surrender the City with spoils, of which he greatly enriched himself,
sending part thereof to the Sultan, who in requital ordered prayers to be put
up for his prosperous Success, promising that he should succeed him in his
Kingdom, of which being disappointed, at the death of the said Sultan by those
that divided it into an Anarchy, he nevertheless took upon him the Dignity of a
Sultan, Coining Money, and Causing public prayers to be put up in his own
name, and sezing upon Neapolis, made it his Regal seat calling it Despotopolis
or the City of the Prince; and thus Anno 1300 begun the great Empire of the
Turks. This upstart Turk having so soon advanced his fortune, settled his
Government with wholesome Laws, the lasting Cords of Empire, and then drawing
all his forces together laid Siege to Prusia, during which the Christian
Princes that bordered upon him, drew all their forces together, resolving to
give him battle, but therein his good fortune prevailing they were overthrown,
whereupon several Towns and Castles fell into his hands, some surrendering
voluntarily, and others by force compelled so to do; but the strong City of
Prusia, in which was the broken Army of the Christians stood impregnable,
whereupon he built two Castles to block it up, and returned to Neapolis,
sending his Captains out daily with strong parties, to fetch booties out of the
Christian Territories, and to take in such Castles as by surprise, or otherwise
might fall into their hands: His Power being now greatly increased, that he was
able to draw into the Field 20 or 30000 Horse and Foot, at what time Cossi the
Christian Captain revolting, turned Turk, and stood Othoman in great stead
during his Wars; nor did the other Turks in the Lesser Asia less indammage the
Christians, so that the Greek Empire began to Dwindle into a small
Circumference, occasioned by the divisions amongst themselves about Religion;
for young Baldwin the Latin Emperor, being expelled Constantinople, as is
aforesaid in flying into Germany, lay daily at Charles the Emperor to restore
him, which Paleologus the Greek Emperor understanding, offered unto Pope
Gregory the tenth, that if he would divert the Emperors forces by intangling
him in Domestic troubles, he would so order the matter that the Greek Empire,
in matters of Religion should acknowledge the Sea of Rome as Supreme, and from
thence take all directions as to Ecclesiastical affairs, which Innovation
caused diverse tumults, and many to leave the Empire, rather chosing to dwell
with the Turks, which troubles lasted to the Death of Paleologus, nor could he
fulfill his promise to the Pope.

After the Greek Emperors Death, Andronicus succeeded in the Empire, who was no
less troubled with the Incursions of the Turks, yet he fought with them several
Battles with various with Success, but then a difference arising between him
and his Brother Constantine, all his hopes of prevailing vanished though
without cause, as most believe suspected his Brothers aspiring to Empire, who
was one of the chiefest Bulwarks aagainst the Turks, beyond the River Meander,
giving to them many a fatal overthrow, yet was he cast in Prison, with many of
his followers, and one Alexus Philanthropenus made General of the Army, in his
stead, to whom was joined Libadarius, an experienced Captain, and grave
Councellor, the former of which after having obtained many Victories over the
Turks and Tartars, persuaded by the Cretensians, Rebelled against the Emperor,
taking upon himself the title of Emperor, which lasted not long, for being
overthrown by the latter in a mortal Battle, was delivered bound by his
Soldiers to the Conqueror, who depriving him of his Sight, sent him to the
Emperor, then residing at Constantinople.

The Rebellion created such Jealousy in the Emperor, that he chose rather to
trust strangers, then his own Subjects, so that he having notice of the
Massagetes, a People dwelling beyond Ister, being oppressed by the Tartars, he
upon their Supplication, appointed them part of his Dominions, whereupon they
came over to him with about 10000 families, which caused him to fall into the
displeasure of his Subjects; these new-come guests, being completely Armed, he
sent them with many others, against the Turks, under one leading of his Son,
and Partner in the Empire Michael Paleologus, who at the first sight of the
Turks, without so much as striking a stroke fled, which gave the Enemy the
advantage of conquering the Country as ^ar as Lestos.

After this as if destiny had so willed it, the Emperor called to his aid
Ronzerius a Pirate, who came with 2000 Catalonians, and afterward increase^
his number by sending for more, who at first did considerable service, but
within a while fell to spoiling and plundering the Emperors Dominions in Asia,
worse then the Turks, as likewise by setting out certain Galleys, bobbed all
the Merchants that passed those Seas, till at last their Galleys being
destroyed by a Fleet of the Genoways, and their Captain slain, by the command
of the young Emperor, they called in the Turks, having first seized upon the
City of Calipolis; against these who with joint forces harased the Country, the
young Emperor went in person, but was overthrown and most of his Greeks slain,
upon the revolt of the Massagets and other treacherous Mercenaries, who were
shortly recompensed according to their deserts; for being about to return home
with the spoil they had gotten, the Catalonians set upon them, and put 'um all
to the Sword, taking from them a rich booty, and then passing through many
Countries, they left the Emperor free, till at last coming to the Territories
of the Duke of Thebes, and he refusing to give them passage, they in a set
battle overthrew his power and seized on his Country, in which they settled
themselves, where their Posterity to this day remains.

But this freed not the Emperor of the danger, for the Turks coming down in
great number, and having overthrown the young Emperor spoiled all Thracia, to
stay whose fury Philes Paleologus a devout man and Kinsman to the Emperor,
undertook the defense of his bleeding Country, and meeting them as they were
ranging to and fro burning and destroying all before 'um, he in a set battle
overthrew 'um, and forced 'um into the City of Chersonesus, where he so
straightly besieged them by Sea and Land, that endeavoring to break through
the Leaguer, they were most of them slain, and the rest taken Prisoners.

Things being at this pass, and by this means peace Recovered to the Empire,
intestine broils began anew to be fomented by the factious Greeks; for the
young Emperor being dead, they stirred up young Adronicus his Son, to depose
his Grandfather the old Emperor, which after several Stratagems and devices he
effected, taking the City of Constantinople by treason, and casting him in
Prison where of grief he soon after died.

These Civil dissensions of the Greeks amongst themselves, gave Othoman the
opportunity to sound his Empire in Phrygia and Bythima, where being successful
in all his Attempts he mightily increased his Dominions, having by this time
subdued 20 Cities with all their Territories, and amongst the rest Prusia,
which after along Siege worn out with Famine Anno 1327 yielded upon several
Articles, few of which were afterward observed, by the Turk, which being the
greatest City in those parts of Asia, became for many years after the seat of
the Turkish Kings. But as all men must yield to death, so in the 28 year of his
Reign, and the 69 year of his Age Othoman the Founder of the Turkish Empire,
still called from him the Othoman Empire, died, and was buried in Prusia, where
to this day his Tomb is to be seen, and in his new acquired Kingdom, Orchanes
his Second Son succeeded him, his eldest dying during his Regency.

CHAP. VII. The Life and Actions of Orchanes, otherwise Urchan, Second King of
the Turks in Asia.
THE Funeral rights of this great Conqueror being performed by his Sons, viz.
Orchanes, alias Vrchan, his Second Son, and Aladin his third and youngest Son,
and he having left great store of wealth, Orchanes his Successor took upon him
the rule of the Kingdom, allotting to his Brother Aladin, at his request the
Lordship of Fodore in the Teckences Country, where he lived a private Life,
without doing any thing worthy of memory, but Orchanes now settled in his
Kingdom, following his fathers footsteps, whose Armies of late he had
altogether commanded as his General, he forgot not to proceed where he had left
off, and therefore prepare to War upon the Christians, but at first with no
great Success, for the Christians upon the death of Othoman, drawing their
forces together out of all parts, recovered the City of Nice, with diverse
Castles and Towns, and amongst the rest the Castle Tzuprichiser, which greatly
hindered the Turks excursions, who dwelt in Bithynia; whereupon Orchanes upon
notice that it was slenderly Guarded, went with several of his followers, in
the attire of Merchants, and by that means deceiving the warders got
admittance, but were no sooner entered e're they proved fatal ones; for drawing
their Swords they put all such as they found therein to death, and seized the
Castle, and having Garrisoned it, passed on to the City of Nice, to which they
laid siege, when to rescue it the young Emperor Andronicus came with such
power as he could raise, but being for the most part unexperienced Soldiers,
the Turks from the Mountains, as they were passing through the hot Country,
setting upon them a cruel battle begun, but night coming on they parted by
consent, yet in this fight the Emperor lost near half his People, and was
himself wounded with an Arrow, so that despairing of effecting what he came
for, leaving his Tents and great store of Furniture therein, every man shifted
for himself in the dead of Night, so that next Morning what they left became a
prey to the Infidels, who hightened by this Success, took in several Sea Towns,
and within a while recovered the City of Nice, by Stratagem; As thus the
Emperor in his flight thither from his Camp, had promised to send them 1000
Horsemen of which Orchanes having notice disguised 800 of his men in Grecian
habit, and sent them with full instructions, who being come within sight of the
City, he sent out 300 other in Turkish habit as foragers, whom the other
espying, as if they had been ignorant of the Matter, turned upon them, and
after a feigned skirmish put them to flight, then taking their way to the City,
the Citizens who from their walls had beheld what had passed joyfully opened
their Gates, supposing them to be the Emperors promised Aid; but they no sooner
entered but the other 300 Horse, and several Companies of Foot who lay in
Ambush, were at their Heels; by which means that great City was a second time
taken by the Turks, whose Riches became a prey to the Soldiers, and whose
Inhabitants became of free Persons miserable Captives.

The Fate of this great City followed many others in the same Tract, the Turks
wasting all before them as they went, miserably burning up what they could not
carry away; so that the Countries before them were dispeopled, all the
Inhabitants flying from them, as a ten-fold Contagion: So that no considerable
Forces being sent from the Emperor, the Cities fell into his Hands in great
abundance, and above all being desirous to possess the two fair Castles of
Abydos and Sestus, he sent Accecozza, one of his great Captains to win them if
possible, who by the way having Intelligence that the Captains Son of the
Castle of Seamandra being dead, his Funeral was such a day to be Solemnized
without the Walls; whereupon laying an Ambushment, they upon the Mourners
approach, suddenly issued from their Coverts, and slew several of them, taking
the remainder Prisoners, and amongst them the Captain, whom they carried to the
Castle; telling those that kept the Walls, that if they did not deliver it, he
should be put to a Cruel Death before their Eyes; at which nothing dismayed
they returned Answer, that they might Kill him, Boil him, and Eat him if they
pleased, but as for the Castle they would not deliver it; whereupon he finding
it a work of great Difficulty to take by force, departed to Sestus which he
with little Difficulty took, and had his Prisoners Ransomed for a great Mass of
Money, and amongst the rest, the Captain of Scamandra; and now Abydos standing
in Europe on the other side the Hell^^^^, was the only place Aimed at, when, as
Fate would have the Night before the Turks came before it the Captain of the
Castles Daughter dreamt that she falling (...) miry made her Clean; the which
as soon as (...) the viewed Abdurachman one of the Turkish Captains, the
fancied him to be the same Person she had (...) Vision, and so strongly her
fancy wrong (...) he lead up his Forces against the Wall, (...) Power from
whence she beheld what was (...) a Letter tied to a stone at his Fee^^ (...)
presed her Passion, Protesting that (...) of her Love, she would on such a
(...) Castle into his Hands. This Letter (...) Ac^ecozza, he much doubted the
(...) searing it was a design to draw them (...) upon Abdurachman's Request,
that he might (...) the Enterprise, he Consented; it being agreed, that to give
the besieged the less Suspicion, the Army should give a general assault, and
then draw off, the which being done, the Garrison buried in Sleep and Wine for
joy of the Turks departure, neglecting their Watches; the Captain being
Conducted by his Mistress a private way, entered with about fifty Followers,
and putting the Warders to the Sword, opened the Gates and let in the Army, who
the next Morning took the Garrison. The Turks departed with their Prisoners and
such Booty as they found: The Tratyress being given to Abdurachman as a reward
of his Adventurous undertaking, not long after Accecozza dying, Orchanes made
his Sons, Amurath and Solomon Lords of the Provinces he had taken from the
Christians, who laid Siege to the City of Ni^^media, which despairing of
succor, surrendered upon Condition, that so many as would depart might, and
those that would stay there might, without any hurt: Either Body, or Goods, of
which City Solomon was made Governor, and thereupon he removed his Court from
Prusa to Nice, that he might be near his new Conquests at all times, to give
such necessary Orders as were Convenient; and so prospered that he soon after
got Possession of Taraxa, Govinucia, and Mndurne; and raising a puissant Army,
he invaded the Country of Carasiana (the Brothers of the deceased King being at
odds about the Succession) and soon overrun it, forcing one of the Brothers to
fly into Pergamum, and the other as his Vassal to hold the Kingdom in Fee of
him, at the same time made his younger Son Amurath Lord of Prusa.

The Turkish Kingdom being thus settled in Asia, Archanes consulted with his
Son Solomon about getting footing in Europe, which he promised to effect; and
upon his return to his Government, sent over Ezes-Bey his chief Captain, and
some others to discover the Country; who taking a Greek Prisoner returned and
presented him to Solomon, who having given him Money and Raiment, inquired of
the Nature of the Country, who informed them at large: Whereupon repassing with
a small Force, they seized upon the Castle of Zembenick, without doing any harm
to the Garrison, which was indeed but small; most of them being gone out to
fetch in their Harvest.

The News of the Turks landing in Europe, soon flew to Constantinople, but such
was their Cowardice and Sloth together with intestine Divisions, that no Care
was taken to expulse them: So that they daily increasing their Power, by such
as were sent over in Boats, seized also upon the Castle of Maditas, and
afterward spoiled the Country of Chersonesus, as far as Callipolis; which City
they took after having overthrown the Governor in a pitched Battle; yet so
infatuated were the greater part of the Greeks, that they made a jest of the
proceedings of the Turks, who were by this time advanced 200 from the Castle of
Zembenick, where they first Landed. Whereupon Solomon sent to his Father, to
acquaint him with what had passed, as likewise to desire him, to send him fresh
supplies of Men, not only to secure what he had won, but to prosecute his
successful beginning; upon the receipe of which news Orchanes greatly rejoiced,
and immediately Commanded 1000 Sarazens and Turks, to pass the Hellespont in
Boats prepared for that purpose, upon whose Arrival Solomon intercepted the
Goveronour of Conger Castle, who had greatly annoyed the Turks, and striking
off his Head before the Castle-Gate so terrified those that were within, that
they soon surrendered the Place, from whence the Turks frequently sallying
fetched in great Booties, venturing even to the Walls of Didymotichum.

And thus in the space of one year, the Turks got strong footing in Europe,
possessing themselves of diverse Castles and Towns, with the Countries about
them; which Solomon as a reward of their Service, gave to his Captains and
Soldiers, as appears by the Monuments of Ezes-Beg, and Fazel-Beg the first,
Two Turkish Captains that set Footing in Europe, but for a while a stop was put
to the Turks Progress, occasioned by the Death of Solomon; who hawking in the
Fields of Bolyre, and following too furious in taking a Ditch, his Horse threw
him where he received such a mortal bruise, that he within a few days after
died, which News coming to his Father Orchanes, he for grief fell sick, and
within two Months gave up the Ghost, Anno 1359. and of his Age 80 years, having
Reigned 31 years.

This Orchanes was both warlike and Politic; Courteous he was to his Friends,
and stern to his Enemies, much devoted to the Mohammedan superstition; and a
great Enemy to the Christians.

CHAP. VIII. The Life and Actions of Amurath the first of that Name, and third
King of the Turks.
OChanes and Solomon his eldest Son being dead, Amurath succeeded in the
Kingdom, as the younger Son to the deceased King; who at his first Entrance
upon his Government, had great Contests with the Turkish Princes of the lesser
Asia, who Envying his aspiring, as supposing in the Current of his Victories,
he might as well overthrow them, as the Christians; but having Vanquished their
Forces, and brought them Terms of Agreement, he turned his Arms upon Europe
with a great host; passing the Hellespont he seized upon the Castle of Benutum,
when passing on the Greeks now roused out of their security, opposed him with
such Forces as they could draw together, but were soon overthrown: After which
he won the Town of Trurulus, taking likewise all the Castles and small Towns
adjoining, as Mesine, Burgos, Hebrus, and soon after Didimotichum; and staying
there sent one of his Captains named Lala-Schakin, to besiege Hadrianople, now
called Adrianople with whom the Christians fought a great and mortal Battle,
but such was their ill steered Fate that Victory declared for the Infidels. So
that that great City being out of all hopes of Relief, opened her Gates to the
Enemy, Anno 1362. The City of Hadrianople being taken, or, as their own
Histories relate, taken by Treachery in time of Peace; Amuratis made it the
chief Seat of the Turkish Kings in Europe, as a place from whence he might best
annoy Christendom, and then sending for his Captains, he Commanded to invade
the Countries of Philipopolis, Zogora, and Ipsala; the which in a snort time
they brought under Subjection.

The Turkish Kingdom in a small time being spread wide, Cura Rustemes the
Doctor of the Mohammedan Law, and Zinderlu Chelil the Chief Justice devised the
Order or Constitution of the Janissaries (which have ever since been available
to Turks in all their Wars) after this manner, that seeing there were great
multitudes of Christian Captives frequently taken, the Youths above fifteen
years of Age should every fifth be the Kings, and if there wanted of five, then
he who had them shoud pay twenty five Aspers a Head, and that those which
appertained to the Kind should for three of four years be put to hard Labor,
the better to inure 'um to Hardship; and then being brought to Court to serve
in the Wars, as the Kings Lifeguard being always near his Person. Which advice
was so well approved of, that it has continued acceptable to the Othoman Kings
and Emperors ever since.

Amurath having settled his Conquests in Europe, leaving a sufficient Power
with his great Captains: The Winter coming on, the passed over into Asia; but
early in the Spring, upon view tha the Christians were in Arms he returned, and
by the way took the Town of Boge, putting the chief Inhabitants to the Sword,
and carrying away the rest Captives, but held it not long ever it was recovered
and rased by the Christians, who served the Turks in like manner.

In the mean time the Christian Army in Servia and Bulgaria consisting of 50000
Horse and Foot, advanced in Order to their besieging Adrianople, which obliged
him for his better security, to haste over the Hellespont, giving Order for a
great number of Asians to follow him, but by reason of the Christians discord
amongst themselves, and refusing to join their Forces, they were set upon at
advantage, and overthrown with the loss of half the Army, ever the Forces
arrived from Asia. The News of which fatal overthrow spreading wide, Anairath's
Fame spread wider; Insomuch that German-Ogly Reigning in the lesser Asia, and
being chief of the Zelzuccian Family, sent his Ambassadors to entreat a
Marriage between his Daughter Hatun, and young Bajazet, in lieu of which he
promised a great part of his Territory, and that his Son-in-Law at his Death
should succeed him in his Kingdom, by that means joining both Families into
one, the which in short time was accorded; at the Celebration of which
Nuptials, the Ambassadors of almost all the Princes of the East were present,
who in the Names of their Lords presented the Bridegroom and Bride with
exceeding rich Gifts; but Amurath to outdo them all, caused Euronoses to bring
out of Europe 100 beautiful Boys, with as many Virgins; all Christian Captives
clad in rich Garments, imbroidered with Gold and Pearl, each of them holding a
Cup of Gold in the one hand, and a Cup of Silver in the other, filled with
Jewels, Pearls, Amber, and the like; which he caused in requital of their
Kindness given to the Ambassador to be.

At this Marriage Chusun-Beg Prince of Amisum in Galatia, sold by his
Ambassador his Territories of Amisum to Amurath, as doubting to keep them; the
Turks Power being now so near him.

The Nuptials Celebrated, Amurath making his Son Bajazer Governor of his
Countries in Anatolia, gathered what Forces he could for the Invasion of
Servia, taking by the way the strong City of Pherae; and entering Servia the
Despot no ways able to oppose him, he took Nissa the Metropolis of that
Province; and soon after Apolonia with many other places of strength, so in
fourteen days overrun nigh all the Provinces, but receiving News out of Asia,
that Aladine King of Caramania, who a little before had Married his Daughter,
wasted his Countries in Asia with Fire and Sword, which so enraged Amurath,
that making Peace with the Despot of Servia, he passed over with an Army of
70000 Horse and Foot, to whom in number Aladine was not inferior, as having
Confederated hmself with all the Petty Princes of Asia, when after several
overtures of Peace proposed and none accepted; both Armies joined on the great
Plains of Carramania, where after a dreadful Battle Aladin's Army was
overthrown, he was forced to fly into Iconium his chief City, and was there
straightly besieged, but at the humble Supplication of his Queen, who would
have no denial at her Fathers hands; he upon his Submission was restored again
to his Dignity and Kingdom, as likewise were all the Princes, his Confederates
upon Condition of acknowledging him their supreme Lord.

Whilst these things passed, the Despot of Servia grieving that he had made
such a dishonorable League with the Turks, and being told by his General, sent
with Forces to assist Amurath against the Caramanian King, how despightfully he
had used him and his Soldiers, therewithal stirring him up to break the League,
and cast off the servile Yoke, he sent secretly to the King of Bozan, to
request him to join with him against the Turkish Tyrant, who willingly
accorded; and at an interview between the said King, and the Despot all things
were agreed, upon Notice of which Amurath was not a little perplexed, but yet
resolving to take revenge, he gathered great Forces to invade both Princes; the
which whilst he was doing, the Captain of Alexandria took a Castle in the
Confines of Bosan, came privately to his Tent and offered to deliver to him
most part of the Country, if he would follow his directions, strengthening his
Promise with many specious Arguments; insomuch that the Greedy Turk giving
Credit to what he had said, sent twenty thousand Men under the leading of his
great Captain and Tutor Lala-Schalin, who plundering part of the Country, and
at last by the said Captains device, who had by Amurath been highly honored,
especially with a rich Cloak, which signifies the Person so invested to be
highly in the Favor of the Turkish King; but having drawn them within the
Danger of the Ambush, he sent to the King of Bosan, who coming upon them with
30000 Greeks, as they were straggling cut of 50000 of them, the other 5000 with
Schakin hardly escaping to tell the News.

With this overthrow of his Men, Amurath was greatly enraged, and gathering all
his Power marched into Servia (which before he had Relinquished upon the
Despots becoming his Tributary) where he found the Christians with a formidable
Army ready to receive him; when after some Towns and Castles taken, on either
side, both Armies met upon the great Plains of Cossovia, where when the
Captains on either side had put their Men in Order; exhorting them to do their
best for obtaining the Victory, they joined with such Fury that the Earth
trembled under their Feet, and such was the horrid noise of Clashing Arms,
shouts of the Conquerors Cries, of the Vanquished and Weeing of Horses, that
wild Beasts in the Mountains trembled; and those that beheld the Fight supposed
that showers of Arrows descended from the Clouds. At first the Turks gave back,
being assailed by the Christians in great number, and the Right Wing routed,
but Bajazet coming in with a fresh Power renewed the Battle, which having
continued eight hours with great slaughter: Insomuch that all the Plains were
covered with the Bodies of the slain, most of the Christian Captains killed
Valiantly fighting, and amongst the rest, Lazerus the Despot, the Victory fell
to the Turks; those that fell in the Battle, not being accounted less then
50000.

After the Battle was over, Amurath greatly Rejoicing in his huge Conquest, in
a Vainglorious Humor would needs take a view of the heaps of the dead
Carcasses, which made the Plain Mountainous, when as a half dead Soldier, named
Cobelits faint with loss of Blood and Wounds, rising as it were from the Grave,
came toward him staggering and falling three or four times in twenty paces,
when those that were about him, would have hindered his approach; but Amurath
(Destiny so ordering) Commanded he should have access, supposing he would have
Petitioned for his Life; when on the contrary without a Word speaking, Cobelits
drawing forth a Dagger, stabbed him into the Belly, for which he was presently
hewn in pieces; nor did Amurath long survive him, but within three days after
dyed of his Wound, and was buried in Prusia, Anno 1390. of his Age 68 years,
and of his Reign 31 years. To whom succeeded Bajazet his eldest Son, who was no
sooner Crowned, but he caused his Brother Jacup to be strangled in his Presence
with a Bow-string, which wicked Precedent has ever since been put in Practice
by the Othoman Kings and Emperors.

CHAP. X. The Life of Bajazet, the first of that Name and Fourth King of the
Turks his Wars and Captivity.
BAjazet a man of a Proud and haughty temper, having taken upon him the Regency
of his Father's Kingdoms, fell heavily upon Servia, not so much as vouchsafing
to hear the Ambassadors sent on their behalf, which made the Princes of the
West begin to consider their own estate, and especially Vincelaus the German
Emperor, and Sigismond King of Hungary, and not contented with the spiols of
Servia, he made several inroads into Bosan, spoiling the Country and carrying
away great booties, when in the mean while the King of Caramania hearing of his
Fathers death, began anew to waste his Countries in Asia, which caused Bajazet
to send a great power, who overthrew him and recovered all that was lost taking
from him likewise his own Country which obliged him in humble wise to beg their
restoration, which Bajazet upon condition that he should from that time
forward become his vassal restored.

About this time Philadelphia, the only City the Christians had in Asia, was
besieged by Bajazets Power, and after a straight Siege and no hopes of any
succors, delivered by the Citizens as a ransom for their Lives and Persons.

Having subdued Servia, and the greatest part of Bosan, he invaded Thessalia
wasting it as he passed with fire and Sword, even to the Walls of Thessalonica,
taking Neopolis in Greece; and Joannia in Aetolia, and afterward returning into
Asia he there spent the Winter, but Spring being come, with all his Power he
repassed the Hellespont, and laid close Siege to Constantinople, the seat of
the Greek Emperor, Emanuel Paleologus then Reigning, who after he had been
brought to great extremity, went to the German Emperors Court to crave aid, who
together with many other Christian Princes, sent an Army of 250000 under the
leading of young Sigismond King of Hungary, to oppose whom Bajazet raised his
Siege and found them besieging Neocopolis; from whence they drew into the great
Plain and joined Battle, but by reason of the confusion that was in the
Christian Army, their Van being overcharged, the Rear fled without striking a
stroke, so that the Turks getting the Victory with a far less number pursued so
hard upon the Christians that the greater part of the Army was slain, taken
prisoners and drowned in passing the River Danubius.

After this great and unexpected Victory over the Christians occasioned by the
emulation that arose amongst their great Commanders, Bajazet returned to the
Siege of Constantinople, now out of all hope to be relieved, where whilst he
lay casting his eyes upon Despina, the slain Despot of Servia's fair Daughter,
offered by her Mother; his former Wife being dead he Married her, and for her
sake restored to her Brother Stephen all his fathers Principalities.

Aladin the Carramanian King being dead, and his Son of the same name Reigning
in his stead, desirous to revenge the wrong Bajazet had done his Fathers
Subjects, coming to Aucyra surprised Temurtasses Bajazet's great Lieutenant,
but upon the approach of Bajazet with his Army he richly arraying begged his
pardon, and set him at liberty, sending Ambassadors to excuse them; but Bajazet
would not suffer them to come into his sight, whereupon the young King
gathering all the Power of his Country, fought with him a great Battle, but
being far too weak for such an Enemy was overthrown and he taken Prisoner, and
by the Command of Bajazet delivered to Temurtases his Capital Enemy, who for
the disgrace he had put upon him caused him to be strangled, which rash deed
much grieved Bajazet, the young Prince being his Sisters Son, yet he seized
upon the greatest part of his Kingdom, though he had several Sons living, and
so enraged was he that he expulsed all the Mohammedan Princes in Lesser Asia,
and seized upon their Territories, whereupon they fled to Tamerlane the Great,
who having Married the daughter of the Cham or Emperor of Tartary, and now
returned from the Conquest of China, he took them into his protection, and
being at the same time Solicited for aid by Emanuel the Greek Emperor, he sent
to Bajazet his Ambassadors, with many rich presents, requesting him to cease
from molesting his Allies, but he in a proud manner not only rejected his
presents, but with many opprobrious words, cast foul reproaches on him, telling
his Ambassadors that he desired nothing more then to meet him in the field, and
with many taunting expressions dismissed them. The report of which so thoroughly
netled the Tartar, that he resolved with a puissant Army to go against him,
being hightened thereto by Axalla his great favorite, a Genoway by birth, and
friend to the Greek Emperor, whose cause he daily solicited. And Tamerlane who
was a wellwisher to the Christians, in his opinion differing little from them
so well approved of all he said, and having taken his leave of his
Father-in-Law, and his Wife, with a powerful Army he passed the Mountains,
Marching through many Countries, none daring oppose his passage, till at length
coming to Bachichich, he mustered his Army, and found it to consist of 800000
Horse and Foot of diverse Nations, to whom he gave general pay, not having
suffered the least wrong to be done in any Country, through which he had passed.

Bajazet lying at the Siege of Constantinople, and hearing the Tartar
approached with a Power that covered the Countries as he passed, he raised his
Siege, and contrary to Tamerlains Expectation, but even as he wished, came over
with such forces as he could raise, into Asia; where he joined with his
Livetenant, whilst the Tartars still came on, having by this time passed
Euphrates, and taken all the Cities in their way, that appertained to Bajazet,
and amongst the rest the great City of Sabastia, once the chief Seat of the
Turkish Sultan, utterly rasing it, putting all the Citizens to the Sword, or as
some, Buried them alive in deep Pits he caused to be dug for that purpose,
unless the Governor whom he set at Liberty to carry the News to Bajazet, who
was advancing 500000 Strong, who upon the Governors coming into his presence,
demanded which was the greater Army he having seen both, to which after having
craved pardon, he replied that the Tartars Army must needs be the greatest: by
Reason he was Lord of far greater Countries; whereupon Bajazet Laughing, said
out of doubt the sight of the Tartars has made this Coward so afraid, that he
thinks every Enemy two.

The Armies being come near to each other upon the great Plains of Sennas, he
thought not good to join Battle presently by Reason the Evening approached; yet
many light Skirmishes happened between the Parthian Horsemen, and the
Forerunners of the Turkish Army; but the next Morning either Host being set in
Array, after some Pause the charge was Sounded, whereupon the Prince of Ciarcan
Tamarlin's Kins-man, with 40000 Horse charged the Turks in the Front, and
Piercing their Battle, put the Jannizaries into disorder; but venturing too far
was there Slain, whereupon Axalla Leading the Vaunt-Guard composed of Sciths
and Parthians, bore upon the left Wing of the Turks Army, cutting in pieces and
Bearing down all that opposed him, at what time his Footmen coming to join with
him he Faced the Batalion of the Jnnaizaries; who behaved themselves Valiantly
for the safety of their Prince, who in the middle of them Fought on Foot, which
Fight continued Bloody, and doubtful for the space of an Hour, all the place
being heaped with the Bodies of the Slain; till at last the Tartars being
overcharged gave Ground, which Tamerlain from his Stand perceiving sent 10000
Horse to Reinforce them, and other 10000 to Fight in the Rearward, and at the
same time sent his Footmen, who fell in with the Turks main Battle that
remained yet unshaken with such fury, that making them give way, he opened them
to the Rear of the Jannizaries; wherein was yet the Person of Bajazet, who
sustained the greatest Brunt of the Fight, but at last overpowered with number,
they were forced to give Gronnd, at what time Tamerlain coming on with 50000
fresh Horse, Bore down all before him till he came to the Jannizaries (who
always Fight in the Heart of the Army) and they weary, and not able to make
sufficient resistance, were trodden down on all sides, so that the Battle
Swerving, the Turks betook themselves to Flight, and amongst the rest Bajazet
wounded as he was, who afterward fell into the Hands of Axalla, together with
his Son Musa. The Despot of Servia and many others of note.

This great Victory fell to the Tartars chiefly, by the revolt of a great
number of Bajazet's men; who were raised in the Countries of the Mohammedan
Princes expulsed, who in the Heat of the Battle, seeing their natural Lords
under Tamerline's Standard went over to 'um.

This Fight lasted Bloody and doubtful from Seven in the Morning till four in
the Evening, wherein as many report 200000 on either side were Slain, and
amongst the rest Mustapha Bajazets Son with most of his great Commanders.

After this Bajazet being brought before Tamerlain, and demanded why he
oppressed the Christians, and made War upon so Noble a Prince as was the
Emperor of Greece; to which he replied, Even the same thing that has moved
thee to invade me, even the desire of Glory and Sovereignty; and why, said
Tamerlain, do you use such Tyranny over those you Conquer without Respect of
Sex or Age? That I did, said he, to give the greater Terror to my Enemies: Ah
what would thou have done with me, said Tamerlain, if it had been thy Fortune
to have had me in thy Power? I would, said the haughty Turk (not Conquered tho
overcome) have put thee in a Cage of Iron, and have carried thee in Triumph
about my Kingdom. Even so said Tamerlain, shall thou be served, and thereupon
commanded him out of his presence, and as he had determined, shortly after
Cooped him up in a Cage of Iron, and carried him into the Countries he
Conquered, whose Calamity may well serve as a memento to all aspiring Mortals,
by putting them in mind that the Worldly Glory is not perminent.

After this the Greek Emperor sent his Ambassedor to Tamerlain in his Name, to
deliver up his City and Empire; but he refused, saying he had Dominions
sufficient of his own, and after having seen the City and wondered at its fair
Structures and Riches, he taking leave of the Emperor; he passed with his Army
into Egypt, to be revenged on the Sultan for assistng Bajazet against him with
30000 Mamalukes, having first subdued all, or the greatest part of all the
Turks Dominions in Asia; and entirely restored Europe to its rightful
possessors: and meeting with the Sultan he overthrew his Army, consisting of
174000 Horse and Foot, and so wining Damasco, Jerusalem, Damiata, Cairo, and
most of the Cities in Egypt, Syria, Lybia, and other Eastern Countries, making
all the Kings as he passed become his Tributaries, he left Calibes a great
Captain with the greatest part of his Army, to pursue the Egyptian Sultan, and
secure what he had won; having news that his Father in Law was sick, and that
his Wife was desirous of his Company, he returned into his Country, but 'ere
his departure Bajazet as desperate and impatient of his Misfortune, had beaten
his Brains out against the Bars of his Cage, as the mos Authentic Authors
affirm; tho the Turks say he was set at Liberty by Tamerlain, who beforehand
had caused to take Poison, of which within three Days he dyed, tho their saying
is very unlikely to be true; but however he was Buried in Prusa, by his beloved
Wife Despina, Anno 1399. having Reigned seven years, and kept under restraint
two years.

CHAP. X. The Life of Mahomet the first King of the Turks, and the restorer of
their Kingdom ruined by the Tartars.
THough Historians somewhat vary about the Successor of Bajazet, yet the most
Credible do affirm that his Son Mahomet, several of his other Brothers being
slain and carried away Captive, succeeded him, and that the rest might be
mistaken in the Name.

This Mahomet, when his Father was taken Prisoner, was but fifteen years of
Age, having been by him appointed his Successor for the great Hope he saw in
him, for the recovery of the broken and much shattered Kingdom.

When Mahomet entered upon Kingly Authority, the Tartars possessed a great part
of the before Turkish Dominion, but the Remains of the scattered Army and other
Aids resorting to his Standard after the departure of Tamerlain, he recovered
many Cities, some by Force, and others by Revolt from the Tartars, and not long
after in a great and bloody Battle overthrowing Inal Ogly Tamerlain's
Lieutenant, he advanced more boldly and charged Costor Ogly, and Kinpeck Ogly,
two more of Tamerlain's great Captains, whom he likewise overthrew; and
following his good Fortune passed into the lesser Asia, of which Tamerlain
having Notice sent for him with a Promise, to give him one of his Daughters in
Marriage, to whom he intended to go; but by the way being often forced to fight
through the Ambushment of the Tartars, he fearing it was a Design to take him
Prisoner returned to his Government, excusing himself to Tamerlain's
Ambassador, and sending one of his own Ambassadors to give the reason of his
not coming; upon Notice of which, and that the Turks still prevailed;
Tamerlaine prepared for a second Expedition, having recruited his huge Army for
that purpose: But what Man wills God disposes, whilst he was intent upon the
matter falling sick of a Fever, or Ague, after three sits he dyed; Death
Conquering him, who in a short space Conquered fifty entire Kingdoms.

This mighty Tartar being Dead, his great Kingdom divided amongst his Sons, by
their jarring and discontent of the Nobility was soon after rent into pieces,
most of it falling into the hands of the Turks who at this day possess it: And
now Mahomet winning all the Dominions his Father held in the greater Asia, from
the Tartars resolved to recover the rest, which his three Brothers, Isa,
Solomon and Mnsa had seized on in Europe, and the lesser Asia; whereupon
assembling all his Forces, he marched to L^pacllum, near to which Isa being
encamped, he sent to offer him Caramania and several other Kingdoms in the
lesser Asia; though indeed they were not his to give, being possessed by their
rightful Princes, whom Tamerlain had re-possessed them off, which offer refused
from a younger Brother, whereupon a bloody Battle insued; in which Isa was
overthrown, and for the preservation of his Life forced to fly to Emanuel the
Greek Emperor: In this Battle were blain the two famous Basas, Eine and
Tenurtases, of which overthrow Mahomet sent to certify his Brother Sol^^^^n
then in Constantinople; after which he marched with his Army to Prrsa, and
received under his Protection all the Countries adjoining; and now growing
strong he ^eselved to brook no Rival in his Fathers Kingdoms, when on the other
hand Solomon his Elder Brother hearing what he had done, and knowing him to be
of an aspiring Temper, thought it not Convenient to suffer him longer so
Triumphantly to proceed; whereupon by the advice of his Grave Counselors, he
sent for his Brother Isa then at Constantinople, and making him general of his
Army, gave him Orders to pass over into Asia, and curb the Pride of his
aspiring Brother. Isa glad of this opportunity to revenge his own Injuries
sustained, in loosing his Dominions, obeying his Brother Solyman's Commands,
entered Mahomet's Dominions, and there with Fire and Sword began his Progress,
which Mahomet understanding came against him, and having overthrown his Forces
put him to a second flight into Carramania; where, in obscurity, of the Wounds
he received in Battle, and grief for his foul defeat he dyed.

Solomon hearing of the defeat prepared a great Army to invade Asia, which made
Mahomet retire into the Country of Amasa, as doubting the affections of his
People, by reason the Kingdoms of Bajazet of Right appertained to Solomon as
Flder: This retireing gave Solomon opportunity to advance to the Walls of
Prus^s, which City he besieged, and had it presently yielded, except the
Castle, which upon the Interceptions of Mahomet's Letters, was likewise
surrendered, but upon the approach of Mahomet with a great Power, doubtful to
keep what he had got, he with all his People retired to the Straights of
Neapolis, where he defended himself right valiantly against the assaults of his
Brother, who by reason of the Intemperance of the Weather, and a Letter framed
by Alis-Bassa, that there was a Conspiracy amongst his Captains to deliver him
up to Solomon, he retired.

Whilst these things were acting, Musa being set at Liberty by the Tartars,
came to Mahomet's Camp and was of him joyfully received, when after some
Discourse it was greed, that Musa with an Army should pass over the Euxin Sea,
into Europe; and whilst Solomon was busy in Asia, seize upon his Country,
which Expedition he undertaking, and making Isfender Prince of Castomonia his
Friend, and afterward the Prince of Valachia, by marrying his Daughter, he soon
prevailed with the Governors of the chief Cities, to Revolt from Solomon; when
entering Hadrianople he caused himself to be invested with Royal Robes, and as
King of the Country sent forth his Decrees, which Solomon hearing of as he lay
at Ancira in Asia, passed the Straights of Bosphorus with all the Forces he
could raise, upon whose Departure Mahomet recovered what ever he had won in
Asia.

Solomon being come into Europe, Musa prepared to oppose him, and both Armies
coming in sight of each other, Musa so dealt with Solyman's Captains, that they
revolted, which he perceiving fled, accompanied only with Caratze-Beg, Cara
Muchil and one Country Turk, whom they took with them as their Guide: whose
persidiousness brought them to Destruction, for pretending to lead them through
the by-ways all Night, he misnaming places brought them in the Morning near to
Musa's Camp; when giving Notice to the Rusticks they set upon them, and having
killed the two Captains, took Solomon and delivered him to Musa, who
immediately caused him to be strangled, whose Body by his Command was carried
to Prusa, and there buried by his Ancestors.

Solomon being Dead, Musa took upon him the Goernment of the Turkish Kingdom in
Europe; as had been agreed between him and his Brother Mahomet, but ever he was
settled he began to Tyrannize beyond measure over his Subjects, which caused
many of his great Captains to leave him, and amongst the rest Eurenosie
feigning himself Blind found means to depart to Constantinople, from whence he
wrote to Mahomet then in Asia; giving him an Account of his Brothers
proceedings, and soliciting him to pass over with his Army, whose Council
Mahomet taking, making first a League with Emanuel the Greek Emperor, he
entered Europe with his Army: But by the over eager pursuit of his Army, after
the Vaunt Couriers of Musa's Army, his Orders being broken, he was put to
flight, and forced to repass the Seas into Asia, leaving behind him a great
part of his Army, who were spoiled by the Enemy.

Mahomet thus foiled, and desirous of Revenge resolved once more to try his
Fortune, and thereupon drawing to his Assistance Dulgader Ogly, who sent his
Son with great Forces to serve him in his War, he repassed the Euxin, and by
the Council of Eurenosis, having procured the revolt of Jegides-Bassa,
Barack-Beg, and Sinon-Beg, 3 of Musa's great Captains who came over to him with
3000 valiant Turks he resolved to give his Brother battle, the which being
joined, Musa by the revolt of other Commanders during the heat of fight was
overthrown, taken, and by the Command of Mahomet strangled, receiving therein
the same measure he had dealt to his Brother Solomon.

After this overthrow of Musa, Mahomet proceeded to take possession of his
Kingdom, the which whilst he was doing, news came that the Carramanian King
spoiled his Countries in Asia, and had burnt his great City of prusa, which
being a frontier City was still exposed to the miseries of War; whereupon
Mahomet settling his Affairs in Europe as necessity would permit, passed into
Asia, and falling like a tempest upon the Country of Carramama took Aspropolis,
Despo^opolis, and Hierapolis, laying hard Siege to Iconium, which caused the
Carramanian to send his Emb^^^dors to treat a Peace, the which by reason of the
great ^oods of Rain that fell, and the Sickness in the Army, occasioned by the
intemperance of the Weather, was by Mahomet accorded, but it continued not long
e're the Carramanian King in the absence of Mahomet a second time invaded his
Countries, with whom Mahomet fighting, routed his Army, taking him and his Son
Prisoners, for whose Ransoms he had delivered into his possession the principal
Cities of Carramania, and then returning into Europe seized upon Valachia
obliging the Prince thereof to become his Vassal.

About this time two Persons viz. Buriluzes and Bedredin, pretending themselves
to be great Prophets drew great multitudes after them who spoiled the Country,
upon notice of which Mahomet sent forces to apprehend them, who dispersing
their followers, hewed the former in pieces, and hanged the latter upon a
Signpost, and now Mahomet falling sick without any hopes of recovery, assembled
all his great Captains and charged them to obey his eldest son Amurath, whom
after his decease he appointed to succeed him in his Kingdom, and lest in his
absence he being then at his Government of Amass, any disturbance should
happen, that they that were about him, if he should chance to die should
conceal his Death: All which, he at that time dying, being accordingly
observed, for when the Janiziries and Pensioners mistrusting him to be dead,
and demanded to see him, the Bassas attiring him in his Royal Robes, like as
when he was alive brought him forth into a large Gallery, placing a Boy under
his Gown, who as he was Commanded, lifted the Kings Arm and moved his head,
with which those that were below were well contented, and by this Stratagem
kept his Death Secret 41 days, even till Amurath came and took the Scepter, the
which had they not done the (...) and Pensioners would have spoiled the rich
City, wherein they were quartered, as ever since has been observed during an
Interregnum.

CHAP. XI. The Life of Amurath the Second of that name and Sixth King of the
Turks, his Wars, Victories and Defeats.
A Murath had no sooner taken possession of his Kingdom, and the Death of
Mahomet published, but diverse Princes revolted from him, and invaded his
Territories, as the Prince of Smyrna, Mentesia, and others, and amongst the
rest an obscure fellow of Thessalonica, feigning himself to be Mustapha the
Eldest Son of Bajazet who was slain in the battle against Tamerlane, all the
Turkish Cities in Europe fell to him, whereupon Amurath sent Bajazet Bassa
against him with a great Army, which was no sooner landed but it revolted to
Mustapha, leaving the Bassa alone to shift for himself, whereupon the Bassa
together with his Brother Hamze submitted themselves to this counterfeit Son of
Bajazet, but being envyed by the rest of the Captains, they raised such
Jealousies of his being treacherous in Mustapha, that he soon after put him to
death, and afterward prepared for the Invasion of Amurath's Territories in
Asia, of which he having notice, gathered all his forces to oppose him, and
after asking Council of a Mohammedan Priest, who assured him, he had after two
repulses at the hands of the Great Prophet, obtained the favor of making him
prosperous in his Wars, and so coming to the North-side of the River Vlibad, he
found the Bridge broken down, and Mustapha's great Army encamped on the other
side, where he so dealt with the great Captains of Mustapha's Army, that many
of them revolted, and at length Mustapha being frighted by forged Letters,
importing that his Army intended to deliver him up, fled by night, after which
his men submitted to Amurath, and he in his flight being taken in Europe was
hanged.

The Rebellion being pacified, and Amurath informed that all this had happened,
by the contrivance of the Greek Emperor, besieged Constantinople, which in vain
he often attempted to take by storm, but whilst he lay at this siege, news was
brought that the King of Caramania had set up another Mustapha, viz. his
younger Brother Son to Mahomet, to whom many Countries in the lesser Asia
revolted, which made Amurath raise his Siege, and with all have March to oppose
him, and with large gifts to have the sooner done he so corrupted Ilias Beg the
young Princes Tutor, that he delivered him up together with the City of Nice,
where he was by Amurath's command Strangled.

Amurath having appeased these Rebellious Tumults, Lessened his Council from 5
to 2 Bassas, viz. Ibrahim, and Eivazes, the latter of which being much envyed
by those that were outed, they supposing it was done by his persuasion,
possessed Amurath that he had a design upon his Life, and after that to seize
his Kingdom, and for that purpose went privately armed; to prove the truth of
which Amurath one day clasping him in his Arms, as in token of Friendship,
found it so indeed, and therefore growing more suspicious, notwithstanding his
many excuses for his so doing, caused his Eyes to be put out, and soon after
had news of the death of the King of Carramania his Mortal Enemy, who having
laid Siege to the City of Attalia in Pamphilia, as he was viewing it to see
where he might most conveniently make an Assault, was shot into the Breast, with
an Arrow from a Lope-hole, at which Amurath greatly rejoiced, but his joy was
soon allayed, by other news of a fierce Invasion of his Territories made by
Tzunites Prince of Smyrna, but it soon blew over, for the Prince being
Vanquished by the Viceroy of Anatolia, was together with his Son taken
Prisoner; and contrary to Faith plighted Slain; after this Amurath Married the
Daughter of Prince Isflendiar, and then on a sudden in revenge of the
pretended wrongs done him by the Greeks, besieged and took Thessalonica and
dispoiled it of all its Riches, leading away the Inhabitants into miserable
Captivity.

At this time amongst other distressed Princes, John Castriot Prince of Epirus,
perceiving the Turks ready to invade him, and being no ways Capable to
withstand so powerful an Army, resolved to avoid the Miseries of War by a
timely accord with the Turkish Tyrant, promising to become his Tributary, and
for confirmation thereof, as Hostages delivered his 4 Sons, viz. George,
Stanisius, Reposuis, and Constantine; Amurath promising well and honorably to
entreat them, but as soon as they were within his power, he caused them to be
Circumcised, and brought up in the Superstition of the Mahumetan Religion, and
after the Death of their Father, seized upon his Kingdom, and Poisoned all but
George, whom he Named Scanderbeg; who afterward became the Mawl and terror of
the Turks, as will in the Sequel appear.

Amurath being busy in Europe, the Carramanian King and the other Mahumetan
Princes invaded his Dominions in Asia, which caused him to pass over to repress
that dangerous Enemy, which done he returned into Europe, and with Fire and
Sword fell upon Hungary, and turning thence upon the Prince of Servia's
refusing to come to his Court seized Servia, tho he had Sworn to the contrary.

The Hungarians being at Variance amongst themselves, and likewise at Wars with
the King of Poland; upon the breaking off of the Match, between their Queen and
the King of Poland, Amurath resolved upon the Conquest of that Kingdom, invaded
Hungary, laying close Siege to Belgrade, often in vain assaulting it; and now
the Queen of Hungary being Dead, leaving Ladislans a Child in the Cradle to
succeed her, who not able to take any Measures about opposing the Turk, and the
Kingdom in likely hood to be overrun; the Nobility concluded to Elect Vldislaus
King of Poland, a man of great Fame and no less courage their King, which done
Ambassadors were sent to Amurath, still lying at the Siege of Belgrade, but
they were nothing more able to prevail as to his raising the Siege nor
procuring a peace, till such time as in diverse assaults half his Army were
lost, overwhelmed with Wildfire, and strangled in the mines, nor then tho he
raised the Siege, would his haughty mind condescend to a Peace; in his return,
hegreatly troubled the Countries of Servia and Bosan, causing the Princes in
lien of saving them from the Spoil, to pay a yearly tribute of 25000 Ducats.
Vldislaus being settled in his new Kingdom, and having frequently intelligence
of the incursions of the Turks into Transylvania; the better to resist them on
that side Created John Hunides Vayvod or his Vicegerent in that Country, who
putting all things in order, gathered such an Army as he might, and upon news
that Isa the great Bassa, and one of Amuraths most Renowned Captains, was
returned with a great power and spoiled the Country; he went against him
encouraging his Soldiers to Fight Courageously for their Lives, Country, Wives
and Children; and then setting upon the proud Bassa after a hard foughten
Battle, put him to Flight with the loss of 20000 of his men.

This Victory nothing daunted Amurath, but pushed him forward more eagerly to
revenge the disgrace; whereupon early in the Spring he sent Melites Bassa his
Viceroy in Asia, with a great Army, who spoiling the Country, took a great
Booty and many Prisoners, but in his return being pursued by Huniades, he
overthrew him, and Slew the Bassa and his Son. By that means recovering all the
Prisoners and Riches, together with the Turkish Camp, and many Turkish
Prisoners of note, which caused the Hungarians and Transilvanians greatly to
rejoice; part of the Spoils with the Head of the Bassa and his Son, he sent to
King Vldislaus, the other part he converted to religious uses, and what
remained freely bestowed it amongst his Soldiers, not reserving any part to
himself.

Upon Bruit of this Victory, and the Fame of the Valiant Huniades, Moldavia and
Valachia, before Tributary to the Turks, revolted, which so enraged Amurath
that he sent yet another great Army to reduce them to their former obedience,
which with great pride (under the leading of Schech Abedin, Bassa, consisting
of 80000 Fighting men, amongst which were a great number of Janissaries) came on
wasting the Country with Fire and Sword as they passed, to oppose which the
great Huniades marched with 15000 Hungarians and Transilvanians, and finding
them still Plundering near Vascape bid them Battle, where after both Armies
were put in order, and both Generals by moving-Oration had incited their
Soldiers to Fight to the utmost Extremity, a dreadful Fight began, where after
six Hours dealing Death on every side, the Turkish Army broken and disordered
by the Christians were put to Flight, with the loss of 30000 Horse and Foot:
And their rich Camp which became an acceptable Prey to the Soldiers. The many
Victories gained by Humiades over the Turks, made Amurath more inclinable to
peace then before; yet in his pride he demanded in consideration thereof, the
delivery of Bellgrade and many other places in Servia; upon which King
Vldislaus called an Assembly of the Estates of his Kingdom, where after many
had given their opinions, it was resolved that the Pious War should be carried
on with all Vigor Imgainable, and that the Christians following their good
Fortune should invade the Turkish Countries, whereupon a great Army was raised,
and passing the Danubius lead by the King and Humiades, they wasted all the
Kingdom of Bulgaria, and having intelligence that the Turks were with a great
Army coming down against them; Humiades drawing out 10000 of the most expert
Horsemen, having notice where they lay encamped in the Night: Broke in amongst
them, and put 'um almost all the Sword; returning the next Day with great
Spoil, where the King lay encamped, where he was received with great Joy.

This easy Victory wherein there fell 30000 Turks, and not past 300 of the
Christians, so lightened the Soldiers, that they desired nothing more then to
be lead forward, but coming to the great Mountain Hemus, and finding all the
passages stopped, and being greatly afflicted with Hungar and Cold; their
Courages began to abate, and they to conceive a desire of returning home: the
which whilst they were about to do, the Turks under the leading of Caramby
Bassa, Amuraths Brother in Law came down from the Mountains, and fell furiously
upon the Rear of the Army commanded by Humiades, and the Despot of Servia, the
King with the Van being a Days march before; but after a sharp Encounter were
overthrown, and the Great Bassaw taken by a common Soldier, who being demanded
of Humiades what he would have for his Prisoner, he asked only 10 Ducats; yet
Humiades ordered him 400, and the same Night sold him again to the Despot for
40000 Ducats.

In this Battle, but, as some say, in that Fought near Moravia, the famous
Scanderbeg found means to fly the Turkish Servitude, and leading Amurath's
Secretary with him, commanded him in the Name of Amurath to Write to the
Governor of Croia, to deliver him the City, that being the Metropolis of
Epirus, the which when he had done, he slew him and as many Turks as were with
him to prevent its coming to the knowledge of Amurath, before he had
accomplished his design. And thereupon with several of his trusty Friends
Posting away, had the City as he wished for put into his possession, whither he
sent for Prince Amaza his Kinsman, and many other of his acquaintance informing
them what he intended, viz. that he resolved to recover his Rightful
inheritance, and deliver his Subjects from the Tyranny of the Turks, which made
them not a little rejoice, and greatly encourage him to proceed in so
honorable an undertaking.

Things being at this pass, and the design known; great was the resort of the
Epirots to their Lawful Prince, who for the delivery of his Country from
Servitude had set up his Standard: Such Cities as conveniently could daily
revolting to him, as Petrella, Petra, Alba and Stelusa; other he reduced by
force, and having possession of the greatest part of Epirus, he raised what
forces he could, and the more to provoke the Turk, passed into Macedonia,
spoiling the Country before him, and putting the Turks to the Sword.

Amurath hearing this unexpected news, sent 40000 select Soldiers under the
leading of Alis Bassa, of whose coming Scanderbeg having notice retired into
Epirus, and putting all things in order, raised what forces he could to oppose
the Turks, comforting his People in the best wise; who upon the Bassa's
approach were filled with fear, and then marching against him, set upon him as
he was wasting his Country of Upper Dibra, and overthrew him with the Slaughter
of 22000 of his men, with the loss of Scarce 300 of his own, the news of which
raised such despair in Amurath, that he was glad to accord a peace with the
Hungarian King, by renouncing his claim to Moldavia, Transylvania and Bulgaria;
and then turning his Arms against the Carramanian King, his Brother-in Law
seized upon the greatest part of his Country, but upon his Submission and
giving in Hostage his Eldest Son, for the performance of paying double tribute
he restored him again to his former dignity, and then as a man weary of the
World, sent for his Youngest Son Mahomet, his Eldest Son Aladine being killed
at the Siege of Iconium, by a fall from his Horse, and appointing Caly Bassa
his Tutor, and Chosore a learned Doctor of the Law his Counselors, he resigned
to him the Kingdom being as yet but 15 Years of Age, and retiring into Asia
entered into a Cloister of Turkish Monks, there intending to spend the
remainder of his Days. But he had no sooner resigned his Government, 'ere
Vldislaus King of Hungary persuaded thereto by Julian the Popes Legate who
absolved him of his Oath broke the 10 Years League made with the Turks. But God
let not so heinous an Offense against his divine Majesty pass long unrevenged.
For Amurath roused with this unexpected news, leaving his Cloister, passed over
into Europe with an Army of 100000 Turks, and advancing with all speed against
the Christians, who had ^u^dued most of his Countries in Europe near the City
of Varna, both Armies meeting a cruel Fight began with an infinite Slaughter of
the Turks, whom Huniades and the King charged with such fury, that all the
Fields lay covered with the Slain, which Amurath perceiving and finding his
Battle to Swerve, and his men at the point to Fly; pulled the Writing
containing the League he had made with Vldislaus out of his Bosom, and holding
it up, with his Eyes lifted toward Heaven with a loud Voice said, Behold thou
Crucified Christ, this is the League they Christians in thy name made with me,
which they have without any cause Violated, now if thou be a God as they say
thou art, and we deem, revenge the wrong now done unto they name, and show thy
power upon thy perjured People, who in their deeds deny thee their God.

Upon this Speech of Amurath's, the Christians who before were well nigh
Conquerers began to give Ground, which the Hungarian King perceiving charging
into the Thickest of the Turkish Army, in hopes to restore the Battle was there
Slain, which so discouraged the Hungarians, that Huniades not being able to
stay their Flight giving place to necessity, and reserving himself for better
fortune fled with them, and left the Turks the Victory, but so dearly bought,
that only thinking the Christians had retired to their Camp, they durst not
venture upon it for two Days space, till by the profound silence they perceived
it was abandoned. In this Fight, most of the Hungarian Nobility were slain, and
amongst the rest Julian the Popes Legate, the Author of the perjurous
Expedition, who being wounded and slying out of the Battle fainted for loss of
Blood, and dyed in a Ditch. And thus we may see how just the Almighty is in
punishing those that dishonor him, and little Availes the Popes dispensation.

This great and mortal Battle in which perished on both sides 60000 men, was
Fought Anno 1444, after which Amurath glad of the Victory, tho much dismayed
with his great loss returned to Adrianople, and again resigned his Kingdom to
his Son; but soon after being weary of the Melancholy Life, he again assumed
his kingly Dignity.

At this great Battle of Varna, Scanderbeg should have been present; being on
his way with 30000 Horse and Foot in order to have joined King Vladislaus. But
God prevented his engaging in so bad a Quarrel, by permitting both Armies to
engage 'ere he could arrive, of which intention of Scanderbeg's Amurath having
notice sent sharply to reprove him of Ingratitude, to which the Valiant Prince
as sharply replied, upbraiding the Turk with the Poisoning his; Brothers,
seizing upon his Kingdom, and often determining to take his Life whilst he
remained in his Court, which so thoroughly netled the old Turk, that he raised
great forces to invade Epirus, sending of Ferises and Mustapha his chief
Bassas, with promise of great reward if they could take Scanderbeg, and subdue
the Country: but on the contrary they were both overthrown by the Invincible
Prince, and forced to return with great dishonor, yet the Prince of
Peloponnesus had not the like good Fortune, but for the preservation of his
Country was obliged to become tributary to the Turk.

Vladislaus being Slain, as aforesaid, Humiades was made Governor by the
general cousent of the Hungarian Nobility; during the Minority of the Young
King, Son to the deceased Queen, who having settled the necessary Affairs of the
Kingdom with great discretion, and finding the Turks since the late dreaful
overthrow at Varna, greatly to have incroached upon the Hungarian Territories,
he raised a great power and marched against them, when in the Territories of
his Country near the River Schichniza, meeting Amurath with a vast Army, he
courageously charged upon his foremost Battle, so that within a while, new
Succors being sent the whole Armies were engaged, which Battle without any
other pausing then what Night obliged them to, Fought for the space of 3 Days,
at the end of which the Christians being rather overpowred by number then true
valor, having done all that men were capable of doing, Fled disorderly, and
were Slain in great abundance: Humiades himself Flying after, having
Incountered and overcome two sturdy Thieves who set upon him to Rob him, was
taken Prisoner by the ungrateful Despot of Servia, whose Country he had a
little before rescued out of the Hands of the Turks: And forced to deliver up
several strong Towns, which the Despot pretended belonged to his Territories
for his Ransom. In this Battle were Slain of the Turks 40000, and of the
Christians 17000.

The Year following Amurath invaded the Despot's, for not delivering into his
power Humiades his Capital Enemy; whereupon he was constrained to send his
humble Supplication to Humiades, whom he not long before had so evil entreated,
for aid; who notwithstanding leavyed a great Army, and passing through Servia,
where tho false Despot to curry Favor with Amurath, taking an account of his
Army, secretly sent the Turk notice what number the Christians were, and what
they intended; yet this great Captain marched on to the Plains of Cassova,
famous for the many Battles there Fought between the Turks and the Christians,
where finding Amurath encamped with a huge Army he bid him Battle, which as the
former with great Slaughter continued for the space of 3 Days, but with better
Success, for in the end Victory declared for the Christians, all the Plains
being covered with the Body of the Slain, most of the Turkish Commanders,
either Perished in the Fight, or fell into the Hands of Huniades, who having
recovered many Towns, delivered the Prisoners to the Despot, and returned with
Triumph to Buda.

And now a quarrel arising between Scanderbeg, and the Duke of Venice, about
one Lech Zachery, a Nobleman of Epirus; who being shamefully Murdered by Lech
Duchagne his Kinsman, and having great Territories on the Frontiers of the
Kingdom; the Duke claimed it as belonging to his Signory, seizing upon the City
of Dayna part thereof, of which trouble Mustapha the Great Bassa, who lay in
Macedonia with a great Army, being advertised by the command of Amurath entered
Epirus, of which Scanderbeg having notice gathered all his forces, and finding
him Burning the Country in the upper Dibria, where both Armies confronting each
other, a Turk named Caragusa stepping forth, Challenged any in the Christian
Camp to Fight him Hand to Hand; which bold Challenge being accepted by Manessi
one of Scanderbeg's Captains, he at the first Encounter slew the Challenger,
which did not a little dismay the Turks, who highly relied upon the Strength of
their Champion; for the Battle immediately joining, the Turks were overthrown
with great Slaughter, and the Bassa taken Prisoner, who was afterward Ransomed
by Amurath for 25000 Ducats.

This overthrow so enraged the Tyrant, that raising a mighty Power, he came in
Person to invade Epirus; promising great rewards to those that could bring
Scanderbeg's Head; of which more then ordinary preparations Scanderbeg having
timely notice, furnished his Cities with all things necessary, providing them
with strong Garrisons, himself resolving to keep the Field with his Army, and
by Ambushes and frequent Assaults, to weaken and cut off the Enemy, which upon
the arrival of the Turkish Army he so effectually performed, that seldom a Day
or Night past that he intrapped not some or other of the Vauntcuriers, or broke
into their Camp; insomuch that they were obliged to be continually in Arms;
whereupon Amurath designing to win some strong City, there to leave a Garrison,
and so to depart, besieged Sfetigrade with all his power, continually
thundering against it with his great Ordnance. But one Prelat a Valiant Captain
being Governor, right Manfully defended it, insomuch that in the frequent
Assaults made he lost 20000 of his best men, yet being ashamed to raise his
Siege 'ere he had won the City, sent to offer terms of Peace with great
Privileges and immunities, if they surrendered the place, as likewise by
secret means endeavored to corrupt the Captains with great promises; but they
detesting his offer regarded more their Loyalty to their Prince then his Gold,
yet at the same time there wanted not one base minded Vallain, who for a Sum in
Hand and other large offers, when he had performed his promise, undertook to
deliver the City into the Hands of Amurath; which by this means he effected.

This great City standing upon a Rock, had in it but one Well, which served
both the Soldiers and Citizens plentifully with Water, into this Well did the
Villain by occupation a Smith cast the Carkas of a stinking Dog, which the next
Morning found by some of the Soldiers, and drawn thence the rumor thereof was
quickly spread throughout, whereupon the Soldiers notwithstanding all the
entreaties of the Governor and chief Citizens, the Soldiers would not be
persuaded to Drink thereof, resolving rather to endure the worst Extremity; and
by this means the City not being tenable, the Governor to prevent a mutiny
amongst his Soldiers, and the danger the City was in to be sacked, sent to
Amurath to acquaint him, that upon condition the Garrison might pass with Bag
and Baggage to Scanderbeg, and the Citizens live peaceably, he would deliver
him the City; who being glad of this offer freely granted their demand, only
with this condition, that the Citizens should build their Houses without the
City.

These Articles agreed on, the City was delivered to Amurath, and the Traitor
by whose means it was surrendered, was rewarded with three rich Suits of
Apparel, 50000 Aspers, and the promise of a yearly Pension of 2000 Ducats; but
long he had not enjoyed his riches 'ere he received a juster reward of his
Treason; being, as it is said, secretly made away by the command of Amurath, who
tho he loved the Treason, abhorred the Traitor.

The City being thus gained, Amurath having furnished it with a Garrison of his
best men, departed with the rest of his Army to Hadrianople, upon the Rear of
which Scanderbeg setting with 8000 Horse and 3000 Foot, cut off a great part of
his Army. And having followed quite out of his Territories, returned to Croia,
and fortified it, upon notice that Amurath intended to return with his Army in
the Spring, in which he was not deceived; for the old Turk desirous to subdue
the Country of Epirus, to obliterate the disgrace he had received by the many
overthrows he had there received, he sent Sebahyas one of his Bassas before
with part of his Army; himself following slowly with the rest, and upon his
arrival sat down before the great City of Croia, where having cast 10 Pieces of
Cannon, he began to batter it, the which with great fury he continued to do for
the space of 4 Days in two places, beating down part of the Wall, upon which he
commanded the Assault to be given, thrusting his men desperately into the
Breach, giving order that such as Shrunk should be killed by their Fellows, and
on the other side promising them great reward, if they entered the City, and
Mahomet his Son being then in the Camp, and commanding as General promised
100000 Aspers to him that should first advance his Ensign upon the Wall; but
neither prevailed, for Vranacontes the Governor, a Valiant man encouraging his
Soldiers, gave the Turks such a Welcome, that they left 8000 of their dead
Bodies in the Breach, Ditches and Plains adjacent; which Amurath perceiving and
understanding the invincible courage of the Epirots, caused the retreat to be
sounded, and after many repulses and no hopes of prevailing, he fell to his old
practice, endeavoring to corrupt the Governor, and chief Captains with large
Gifts, and to that end sent a Crafty Bassa, with two Servants Loaded with
Treasure; which the Governor with disdain rejected, Vowing that if the like
were attempted again, that he would cause the Hands, Noses and Ears of the
Messengers to be cut off, and they so returned to their Master.

During this Siege, Scanderbeg was not Idle but still hovered about the Turks
Camp, frequently Alaruming 'um, and breaking into one Quarter, or other,
killing those that Guarded it, and taking great Booties, insomuch that after
several Months Siege, and the loss of 30000 men, Amurath through Grief and
despair Dyed in his Tent Anno 1450, in the 85 Year of his Age, and of his Reign
the 28, or as some say, the thirtieth, leaving Mahomet his Son to succeed him
in his troublesome Kingdom, charging him to revenge his Death upon Scanderbeg,
and so having his Corpse conveyed to Prusa, he was there interred by his
Ancestors.

CHAP. XII. The Life of Mahomet the second of that Name, seventh King, and the
first that took upon him the Style of Emperor of the Turks, who for his many
Victories, was surnamed Great.
A Murath being dead Mahomet the second began his Reign over the Turkish
Kingdom, Anno 1450. Being of a firey Cruel Nature, given to many Debauches, not
acknowledging any Deity, but ascribing all things to Fortune and Chance; who,
ever he was well settled, caused his two Brethren, the one an Infant, and the
other not above twelve years of Age, to be put to Death; after which he fell to
altering the Constitution of the Government, by abrogating the Old Laws, and
Establishing new ones more suitable to his Humor: So that he began to be
exceedingly hated by his Subjects, when to prevent any disorder that might
happen by the Soldiers lying Idle, he hearing that Ibrahim King of Carramania
was entered his Territories in the lesser Asia, passed thither, upon whose
Arrival the King unable to oppose him, fled into the Mountains, and from thence
sent his Ambassadors to treat with him, who offered such Submission in the
behalf of their Masters, as Mahomet was well Content to accept, and so returned
to his City of Prusa, sending Isaac Bassa, against Elias Prince of Mentesia, or
Caria, who altogether deprived the said Prince of his Country, annexing it to
the Turkish Empire, for so henceforth I must call it.

Mahomet being proud of his Petty Conquests, without any Color or Reason, only
being driven Headlong by Ambition; he resolved to make War upon the Greek
Emperor, and to have the sooner done, marched to the Walls of Constantinople
with a great Power, laying Siege to that Imperial City, which had once been
Mistress of the World, which he reduced to such Extremity, that the Citizens
for mere Hunger left no filthy thing uneaten, and at last Eat one another; and
perceiving none intended to relieve them, they enforced by invincible necessity
yielded the fairest City of the World, to the Will of the Tyrant, having made
all the defense that from true Valor could be expected.

The proud Conqueror entering the City, amidst his Cups caused all the Grecian
Nobility, the chief Citizens and Nobles of other Nations to be slain in his
Presence. Constantinus Paleologus the Emperor being before slain and Trampled
underfoot in the Press, as he was endeavoring to escape the Imperial City;
this taken after a years Siege, Pera a City of the Greeks opposite to it
surrendered, yet were the Citizens used with all manner of Despite: And now
removing the Imperial Seat from Hadrianople to Constantinople, where it has
ever since remained, he repaired the Walls, and such Buildings, as had been
demolished by the Fury of the Cannon.

Amongst the Captives taken in the City, one of his Commanders presented unto
him one of the most beautiful Ladies that Nature ever formed, named Irene,
being nobly descended; and for Education not to be paralelled, upon this
incomparable Beauty, Mahomet so doted, that he spent whole Days and Nights with
her, never thinking his time well spent but in her Company: So that his warlike
Affairs were altogether neglected, which caused his Captains to murmur against
him, though they durst not freely speak their Minds, which Mustapha Bassa, one
that had been bred up with him, observing, presuming upon the Interest he had
in him, took upon him boldly to declare his Mind, laying before him the
glorious Atchievments of his Ancestors, and the disgrace and obloquie he
incurred by devoting himself to amorous Delights, whilst the Affairs of his
Empire were neglected.

At this free Speech of the Bassas, Mahomet was wonderfully offended, telling
him he was worthy of Death for his unseasonable Presumption; but
notwithstanding he would pardon him for the good Opinion he had of his
Fidelity, Commanding him the next Morning to assemble all his Captains, and
chief Counselors the next Morning to attend his Pleasure in his Palace; which
being accordingly done, he came out of his Chamber, leading the fair Greek in
most splendid Attire, which adding Luster to her rare Perfections, made her
appear more like an Angel then a Mortal; and sternly demanding of them, Whether
if any of them had such an inestimable Treasure, they would not be thrice
advised ever they parted with it: To which they all answered, that he had with
greater reason passed his time with her, then any man had to find sault
therewith. To which the barbarous Tyrant replied, well, but now I Will make you
to understand how far you have been deceived in me, and that there is no
earthly thing that can so much blind my Senses, or bereave me of my Reason, as
not to see or understand what beseems my high Calling; yea, I would you
should all know that the Honor and Conquest of the Othoman Kings, my noble
Progenitors, is so fixed in my breast, with such a Desire in my self to exceed
the same, as nothing but Death is able to put out of my Remembrance; and having
so said, he presently with one of his Hands catching the fair Greek by the
Hair, and with the other drawing his Scimiter smote off her Head, she vainly
Crying out for Mercy, and then taking the bloody Head in his Hand turning to
his Captains; said, now by this Judge ye, whether your Emperor is able to
Bridle his Affections, or not; and immediately to put this cruel Act out of his
Mind, gave order for his Army to march to the Invasion of Peloponnesus, which
he soon brought into Subjection, taking most of the principal Cities, and
putting the Inhabitants to the Sword; but upon the Submission of Demetrius the
Prince thereof, he restored him upon Condition of his becoming Tributary to the
Turkish Empire; and afterward being inamoured of his fair Daughter took her to
Wife, and soon after hearing of the Death of George Despot of Servia, he seized
upon his Country; and so passing on with his Army besieged Belgrade, both by
Land and Water, as having a great Fleet upon the River Danubius, on whose Bank
that City is seated; which Fleet being incountered by several Ships of War,
sent by Humaides for that purpose were soon destroyed; which so enraged the
Turk, that immediately giving order for the assaulting the City, his men were
beaten off with the loss of 4000 men, and amongst the rest Curaizis Bassa his
Lieutenant in Europe, who making his approach was slain with a great Shot; and
so well did the Valiant Humiades defend that City, that after many unsuccessful
assaults, Mahomet was forced to raise his Siege, and departed with 40000 less
then he brought.

The great Humiades having thus long stood a Bulwark to Christendom, now worn
out with the toyls of War fell sick; and although his Disease was grievous, yet
desirous to receive the blessed Sacrament, he would be carried to the Church,
saying it was not fit, that the Lord should come to the House of his Servant:
But that rather the Servant should go to the House of his Lord, and after his
being brought home, his Sickness Increasing, he gave up the Ghost to the Grief
of all the Christian Princes, and was buried in the Church of St. Stephen in
Alba Julia.

Mahomet hearing of the Death of this great Captain, who opposed the Torrent of
his Victories greatly rejoiced, and now resolving to extend his Dominions, as
well by Sea as Land, Equipped a great many in the Port of Constantinople, with
which he invaded the Islands in the Egean Sea, reducing several of them to his
obedience, and Landing his Army, straightly besieged the famous City of Rhodes;
but Calixtus the third then Bishop of Rome, being greatly displeased for the
loss of Pera, a City belonging to his See, aided by the Genoways, sent out a
great Fleet under the Conduct of Lodonicius, Patriarch of Aquilla, fought with
the Turks Gally, sunk and burnt most of them. And by that means recovered the
Islands they had taken, which so enraged Mahomet, that he prepared an other
Fleet against the Spring; the which whilst he was doing, Ambassadors came from
Vsun Cassanus King of Persia with many rich Presents, desiring that he would
enter into League with the mighty Prince his Master, and remit the Tribute
paid him by the King of Trepezond; that Kingdom as he said, after the Death of
the then Reigning King, revolving to his Master, in right of his Wife, Daughter
to the said King; which Peremptory demand so enraged Mahomet, that he not only
refused his Presents, but dismissed his Ambassador with this Answer: That he
would himself ever long be in Asia, to teach Vsun Cassanes what to request of
one greater then himself, and thereupon Commanded the Fleet he had prepared for
the Invasion of the Isles in the Egeum, incontinently to sail to Sinope, the
chief City of Paphlagonia, and to expect his coming thither with his Army by
Land; which City and Country being under the Persian King, he resolved to
besiege it on no other Account, then to raise a ground of Quarrel; which City
being but slenderly fortified, and not able to endure the Force of the
Ordnance, it was delivered by Ismaele the Prince of Paphlagonia into his Hands,
who putting a Garrison therein proceeded to the Siege of Trepezond, which he
had in like manner yielded to him, who sent the Emperor, together with his
Empress Sons and Daughters Prisoners to Constantinople, dispeopling the City,
and thrusting thereinto a Garrison of his Janissaries, by that means bringing
the whole Country into Subjection, and for ever ruining that Christian Empire:
And now hearing that Waldus Dracula Prince of Valachia, his Tributary, went
about to join with the Hungarians his mortal Enemies, he sought by all means to
get him into his Power, to effect which he sent Chamuzes Bassa, and his
Secretary accompanied with several others, to invite him to Court, but the
Prince understanding the Design upon his Life, hanged the Bassa and Secretary,
and impailed the rest alive, and then invaded his Country with Fire and Sword,
which so enraged Mahomet, that he in Person with a great Army invaded Valachia,
ruining all with Fire and Sword, till at length driving the Prince out of his
Country, he gave it to his younger Brother, who in lieu thereof became his
Tributary, and upon his return invaded the Islands in the Egeum, as he had
before purposed, and Landing on the Isle of Mittylene took the strong City,
from whence the Island take its name, after twenty seven years Battery with the
great Ordnance, and then for non-payment of Tribute, invaded the Kingdom of
Bassan; which subdued he by that means encompassed Epirus, he having all this
while according to his Directions of the Father, by one or other of his Bassas,
maintained War against Scanderbeg, but with such bad success, that he thought
more then Convenient to make Peace with him; but such were his Proposals, that
Scanderbeg with scorn rejected 'um, whereupon Mahomet sent Amasa Bassa with
12000 Horsemen, to wast Epirus; but Scanderbeg incountering with 6000 put his
Army to flight, and took him Prisoner, and worse faired Debreus Bassa, who soon
after was sent with 14000 Horsemen, for ingageing with Scanderbeg's Forces, his
Army was overthrown, and himself slain.

Mahomet grieved his Affairs prospered no better, and finding that by force he
could not prevail against Scanderbeg, he dealt underhand by giving great
Rewards to his Captains, thinking if he could cause them to revolt, Scanderbeg
would easily be subdued, and so effectually he wroght with Moses his chief
Captain, and a great Soldier, that in hopes of the Kingdom of Epirus promised
by Mahomet; when Scanderbeg should be subdued, and a great mass of Money, he
found means to escape to Constantinople, and after him Amasa another of
Scanderbeg's Captains, who were sent by Mahomet with great Power to invade
Epirus; but being overthrown by the invinsible Prince, they received such cold
Comfort at their return, that fearing their Lives, which indeed the Turk had a
design to bereive them off, Moses fled and humbling himself at the Feet of his
Compassionate Prince, he notwithstanding his Treachery received him again into
his Service, who afterward served him faithfully in his Wars, but Amaze being
overthrown in his expedition with Isaac Bassa, with the loss of 20000 Turks
upon his return, was by the Command of Mahomet as most Conjectured poisoned,
after which Scanderbeg concluded a Peace with the Turks for a year, and was
afterwad continued for a longer time, during which great War happened between
the Turks, about the seizing the Islands in the Egeum, and thereby hindering
the Traffic in the Mediteranian, to the great impoverishing their Signiory.
Wherefore entering into a Confideracy with the Princes, they Arm both by Sea
and Land; into which League they with many persuasions drew Scanderbeg,
notwithstanding his League made with Mahomet was not expired.

The Princes thus Confedrated raising great Forces, when in the mean time
Mahomet sent Scremet Bassa against Scanderbeg, to keep him from joining with
the Venetians, whose Duke Christopher Maurus was coming to him, with ten
Galleys appointed; with which Bassa Scanderbeg fought, and put him to flight
with the loss of ten Thousand of his Men, taking the Treasurer of the Army, and
six others of Account Prisoners, who were speedily Ransomed at 40000 Duccats;
and greater things had been done, had not the Duke of Venice dyed of a Fever,
upon whose Death his Army returned home Victor Capella; the next year with the
Venetian Fleet, seized Athens, Aulis, Chalchis, Larsum, and the Isle of Himber:
But attempting to recover Patras was overthrown.

Hungary being destitute of such a King as might defend them against the Power
of the Turks, elected Matthias Corroinus, the youngest Son of John Huniades
their great Captain deceased, who not much inferior to his Father in valor
and success in Arms, gave the Infidels many a fatal overthrow, with the Loss of
many of their Armies, and gave great hopes to the Christians that he would as
indeed he did prove a Bulwark to Christendom.

Whilst things thus passed, Mahomet desirous to revenge himself of Scanderbeg,
fent Ballabanus with a great Army to invaide his Territories, whom Scanderbeg
charging furiously overthrew him, but Moses and others of his Captains contrary
to the command of their General, in the heat of fight following their Enemies
into the straights of the Mountains, where fallen into an Ambush for that
purpose laid, they were taken Prisoners, and carried to Constantinople, by
those they had before Vanquished, wherewith Sanderbeg sent to desire that he
might Ransom them, but the crafty Tyrant knowing how much he was weakened by
such a loss, caused them Cruelly to be flain alive, and soon after sent Jacup
Bassa with a great Army, with whom the renowned Prince engaging, slew him hand
to hand, and put to the Sword a great part of his Army, upon news of which
Mahomet mad with Anger, raised an Army of 200000 men, thinking to overrun the
Country, but in vain, for having a long time layn Siege to Croia, and there by
the furious Sallies of the Garrison, and onsets of Scanderbeg, lost near half
his men, together with Ballabanus his General, he with great shame and
confusion returned to Constantinople.

But as all things must yield to Fate, so our invincible Champion, whom no
mortal hand could subdue, wearyed with the Toils of a tedious War, coming to
Lyssa a City of the Venetians, fell Sick, and calling the Venetian Ambassador
to him, he discovered to him what a troublesome Life he had lived, and by what
means the War was to be maintained, recommending to him the care of his Wife
and Children, appointing the Venetians the Guardians of his Son, till such time
he came of Age, and in the mean while to secure for him the Kingdom of Epirus,
admonishing him to be faithful and as much as in him lay to maintain peace and
unity. Then calling his Wife and Son, told them that he must leave the World
and exchange this Life for one more durable, and willed her that after his
death she should pass over into Apulia, and there to live upon the inheritance
given him by King Ferdinand, and then after some devout Prayers, gave up the
Ghost, Anno. 1466. in the 63 year of his Age and 24 of his Reign, to the great
grief of the Christian Princes, and joy of the Turks, whose Armies his very name
had frequently put to flight. After his death he was with great Solemnity
buried in the Cathedral Church at Lyssa, where he rested till about 9 years
after, at what time the Turks taking the City dug up his Bones, and happy was
he that could get the smallest piece, which they wore about them ever after as
inestimable Jewels, superstitiously imagining that whilst they had them about
u'm Scanderbeg's fortune would attend u'm, and that they should be invincible.

Not long after the Death of this renowned Soldier, the Hungarians under the
leading of their young King, seized upon the Kingdom of Bosna, and soon rent it
from the Turkish Empire, demolishing the Castles and driving away the Garrisons
placed there by Mahomet, at what time the Venetians being abroad with a great
fleet of Galleys, took diverse Cities from the Turks, burnt many Villages, and
carried away 2000 Captives into the Country of Euboea, now called Nigroponte,
which so enraged Mahomet, that he prepared a great Army to invade that Country,
and recover the spoil; in order to effect which, he sent Mahomet Bassa with a
fleet of 300 Galleys, whilst himself with a great Army Marched overland, with
which the Venetian Admiral not daring to engage it, arrived safe, where the
Turks landing took Stora Basasilicon, and Marching to Chalcis joined with the
Emperors Army, who with small Vessels and other Materials, made a Bridge over
the straight or narrow Sea, which divides Euboea from Achaia, straightly
besieging it both by Sea and Land, and with his Cannon for 4 days battered the
City incessantly, being given to understand by the chief Cannoneer of the
(...), whom he had bribed, which was the weakest part, insomuch that in the end
several large (...) made, yet was the City so manfully (...) the Turks could
not enter, and every day (...) Turks forced to make a new Battery, for such
part of the Wall as was in the Day time beaten down, which the Citizens in the
Night repaired, and at length coming to understand the Tretchery of their
Gunner, hanged him up as a reward of his Tretchery; Mahomet perceiving the
valor of the defendants, resolved after his having rent the Wall with his
Cannon in diverse places, and thirty Days besieged the City, to give a general
assault with all his power, at what time the Venetian Admiral came in sight of
the City with his Fleet, but would not tho his Captains urged, either Fight
with Turkish Galleys, or endeavor to break the Bridge, the which had he done,
he had shut up Mahomet, and all his forces in the Island, where through Famine
and other necessities he might have greatly distressed him. This Cowardice of
the Admiral, for which he and all his Family was afterward Banished by the
Signory of Venice, being perceived by the Turks, they gave a furious assault on
all parts, and were so stoutly repulsed, that they with their dead filled up
the Trenches and Breaches, but their number still increasing, and continuing
the assault a whole day and a night without intermission, the Citizens at last
being 3 parts of them Slain, and wounded, the remaining part retired to the
Market, and there upon the Turks entering Fought it out to the last man;
selling their Lives at a dear rate, amongst whom many Women disguised in men's
apparel Fighting courageously were Slain.

The City being thus gained at the price of 40000 Turks Lives the Barbarous
Tyrant commanded all that were found therein to be put to the Sword; which
Paulus Ericus the Governor understanding, with his Wise, Daughter, and trusty
Friends, betook himself to the Castle, who capitulated that upon the surrender
of the Castle, himself, and his Friends should have their Lives and Liberties
Granted them, which the Tyrant solemnly Swore to, but having gotten them in his
power, made at the great loss, he had sustained in winning the City, he caused
the Governor and all but his Daughter to be presently Slain, reserving the
young Lady, as the only Mirror of Beauty, to satiate his lust; but she
disdaining the Tyrants promises, and reviling him for his wicked purposes,
rather desiring Death then to lose her Chastity by becoming his prostitute, he
caused her even in his presence to be cruelly put to Death, and then proceeded
to subdue the other Cities of the Island; who terrified with the fate of
Chalcis, surrendered without being Assaulted: So that all the Fruitful Island
of Euboea fell into the Hands of the Turks, who infinitely enriched themselves
in taking the Spoil.

The Turks thus Triumphing over the Ocean Islands, the Christians thought it no
ways convenient to be lookers on, but in time to oppose them, whereupon the
Venetians aided by Ferdinand King of Naples, Sextus the fourth Bishop of Rome,
and the Great Master of Rhodes, set out a powerful Navy; under the command of
Petrus Mocenicus, a Valiant Venetian Gentleman, and the better to Amate him
both by Sea and Land, drew Alymbeus Vsan Cassanes, the great King of Persia
into a League with them, and so at once by Sea and Land, invading the Ottoman
Empire, took many strong places, and Loaded the Fleet with the Spoil, which
Fleet consisting of 85 so terrified Mahomet, that he durst not engage them, nor
once oppose their proceedings, but in revenge thereof turned his whole force
upon Epirus and Dalmatia; which Countries having lost their Champion, the
renowned Scanderbeg, growing Weak, he mightily wasted with Fire and Sword, till
he had made an absolute conquest over them, and the easier by Reason of the
discords, that arose amongst the great Commanders, during the Minority of the
King; but ere Mahomet had well settled himself in those so much desired
Countries, he had news that the Persians with a great Army invaded his
Countries in Asia, which made him begin to consider how to defend his own,
rather then further to proceed in Conquering what appertained to others, so
that increasing his Army with no less then 320000 men, he passed over the
Helespont, and after several Days marching, came within a League of the Persian
Army, lead by Vsan Cassanes their King, who after some debate, gave the Turks
Battle near the Mountains of Armenia, in which one of the great Bassas together
with 40000 Turks were Slain, and the rest put to Flight, which so discouraged
Mahomet, that had not his great Captains used many Arguments to persuade him to
the contrary, would have returned without attempting any thing further, but
being roused by their reproofs, lest he should be suspected of Cowardice, he
resolved to try the Fortune of another Field; in order to which he drew up his
forces in Battalia near to the Straights of the Mountains, and so fortified his
Camp with Wagons, and other cumbersome Carriages, that it seemed a Walled
City, when in the midst of his Army, he placed his great Artillery; the which
upon the first joining of Battle, his men opening to the Right and the Left,
played so furiously upon the Persian Horsemen, that they soon began to
Disrank, by Reason their Horses upon hearing the unwonted Thundering of the
Cannon, would know no Ruler but with Headstrong fury Floundered first one way
then another, and by that means put all things into confusion, of which Mahomet
taking the advantage, commanded his men furiously to charge upon the Enemy as
flyers. To resist whose fury and to stay the Flight of his men Zeinal Vsan
Cassanes Eldest Son Laboring, was Slain with a small Shot, which more and more
discouraged the Persians, so that from retreating, they betook themselves to
plain Flight, yet so great was the loss of Mahomet that he contented himself
only with the Spoil of the Enemies Camp, not thinking it convenient to pursue
them, for it was generally Rumoured, that in that Battle he lost 40000 men, and
the Persians 1000 only, after which Mahomet returning home, and Vsan Cassanes
leaving his second Son with his Army, for the defense of Armenia. Ambassadors
were sent by the former to Treat of a Peace, the which to the great dislike of
the Christians his Confederates, the Persian concluded with the Turks.

After the Expedition into the Persian Territories, Dyed the Courageous Prince
Mustapha, as some say of a Surfeit, but others say that he was strangled by the
Commandment of his Father, for Ravishing Bassa Achmets Wife, a Lady of
Incomparable Beauty, and Daughter to Isaac Bassa one of Mahomets chief
Favorites.

Mahomet desirous to revenge the wrong done by the Venetians, sent Solomon
Bassa with 80000 Soldiers to besiege Scodra a strong City; then in the
possession of the Venetians, and an Inlet into Epirus, Dalmatia and Albania,
who Anno 1475 set down before it, and having raised his Batteries, gave it a
furious assault, but was repulsed by Antonius Lauretamus the Valiant Governor
with great loss, when a while after the Venetian Galleys coming up the River
Boliana, on whose Banks the City stands, and as the Turks were busy in
laying a Chain across, slew many of them, and forced the rest to retire to
their Camp, out of which soon after Matthias King of Hungary drove them with
the Terror of his approach, the Bassa being glad after the loss of 14000 of his
men to raise his Siege.

Anno 1476. Mahomet growing impatient to be thus hindered in his progreess of
Victory, by the Christians confederates, set out a great Fleet under the
conduct of Geduces Achmetes; who did great harm to the Islands in the
Mediterranean, and hoped by Treason to have surprised the Island of Creet, but
was prevented by the Venetians, who discovering the Plot Executed the Traitors
before his arrival, yet sailing into the Euxine, he Landed his men in Taurica
Chersonesus, a Friutful Country belonging to the Genoways; in hopes to have
surprised the rich City of Caffa, Situate near to the Shore, but was repulsed
with a great Slaughter of his men, but being reinforced by fresh Troops, he
laid Siege to it, which by Reason of the Turkish Garrisons all along the
shoars of Bosphorus, and the Hellespont could have no relief by Sea, after a
stout resistance surrendered, and soon after all the Country to it
appertaining, most of the Merchants contrary to the promise of the Faithless
Bassa, being plundered of their Riches.

Mahomet thus conquering on, grew dreadful to the Tartar princes; Namely the
Precopenses and Destenses, who for fear of being invaded Voluntarily submitted
themselves, and became Tributaries, having ever since been greatly serviceable
to the Turks in their Wars, who now impatient that the Venetians held several
strong Towns in the Heart of the Ottoman: Solomon Bassa with a great Fleet
entering the Gulf of Corinth laid Siege to Naupactum now called Lepanto a
strong City near Locris over against Pelopennesus, but upon the arrival of
Antonius Lauretanus with the Venetian Galleys, after. he had layn 4 Months
before it, and gave many unsuccesful assaults, in a great fury raised his Siege
in order to his returning to Constantinople, and by the way Landing his men on
the Isle of Lemnos, in hopes to have surprised the City of Coccinum, but were
Valiantly repulsed by such Citizens, and Merchants Strangers as were then near
the Gate, and amongst the rest one Merulla a Maiden of the City seeing her
Father Slain, took up his Weapon, and with it made great Slaughter of the Turks
that were entering the Gate, upon which bad Success the Bassa departed for
Constantinople, and soon after was sent to besiege Croia in Epirus, to the
relief of which the Venetians hast'ned with an Army, under the leading of
Contarenus a man of great courage; who at the first onset overthrew the Turks
with great Slaughter, obliging them to leave their Camp, but not pursuing them
by Reason of the near approach of Night, whilst they were taking the Spoil, the
Enemy rallying fell into their disordered Ranks, and soon turned the Scale of
Victory, by subduing those who a little before were Conquerers, in which last
Fight the General, and several of his great Captains were Slain. Heightened with
this Success, the Year following Asa-Beg with a considerable Army passed the
River Sontium, where being incountered by the Garrison Soldiers of three
several Forts, under the leading of Hieronimus Nowel, the Count of Verona; he
trained the Venetians into an Ambush, by which they being few in number, and
beset on every side were mostly Slain, after which the proud Conquerers
proceeded to spoil the Country, wasting it with Fire and Sword taking great
Spoils, and driving before them a number of the miserable People into Captivity.

The Year following Anno 1478. about Harvest-time they come again, and with a
great power passing the aforesaid River, marched further into the Country,
wasting all before them, and unopposed passed over a part of the Alps toward
Germany: a way both difficult and dangerous, and so plundering the Mountaniers
who little dreamt of such troublesome Visitants, they returned home laden with
great Spoil. And now Mahomet remembering the disgrace he received at the Siege
of Scodra, of which he allowed one a yearly Pension, to put him daily in mind,
he sent for his Soldiers from all parts of his Dominions, and under the Leading
of several of his Bassa^, himself being there in person, likewise he set down
before the City with an Army of 350000 men, and there casting several pieces of
Ordnance of Metal he had for that purpose brought thither in Mass, one of them
carrying a Bullet of 1300 pound Weight; he after he had in vain Essayed to have
the City delivered by fair means from the Mounts incessantly battered the
Walls, and withal threw into the City huge Balls of Wildfire, and Stones of a
prodigious Weight, which beat down and fired many Houses, yet so far were the
besieged from being discouraged, that they daily animated each other
courageously to defend the City to the last man, every Night Countermuring the
Breaches the Cannon made, with Earth Timber and Planks, which Mahomet
perceiving commanded his men to give a furious assault, and either by Firing
the Planks, or scaling the Walls to enter the City; the which in hopes of great
rewards, promised them if they happened to be Succesful in the attempt, thrust
themselves into the mouth of Slaughter, being cut off in such numbers by the
storm of Shot sent from the Walls, that all the plains were covered with their
Bodies, which Mahomet perceiving and understanding, they could not accomplish
his desire caused the retreat to be sounded, and gave order for the renewing
the Battery, so that in one day the Engineers sent 194 great Shot into the
Breach, and immediately caused a second Assault to be made, tho with as bad
Success, as had been the former.

About this time the Turks under the leading of Solomon Bassa, had taken Croia
more through Famine then their Valor, which City the Inhabitants nigh perished
with Hunger, and not being able to expect any Relief, all the Country about the
City being in the hands of the Turks, had delivered upon promise of Life and
Liberty; but the Faithless Bassa not having Regard to his Promise, having got
Possession put the remaining Skeletons to the Sword, which the Scadrians
understanding by some Christians in the Turks Camp, were the more encouraged,
resolving manfully to dye rather then trust the perfidious Infidels.

Mahomet enraged at the besieged obstinacy, and the loss of his men in the two
assaults, after he had with his Artillery beaten down a great part of the Wall,
Commanded the most Courageous of his Soldiers to give a third Assault, which
they did with great Fury, shouting in the mean while Showers of Arrows and
Bullets into the City, and at length as men desperate entering into the Breach
came to Hand-strokes with the Christians, and began a cruel and dreadful Fight,
in which many were slain on either side: The Turks still renewing their assault
with fresh Forces, till at length they so far prevailed, that those who
defended the Breach were at the point to retire; at what times a fresh Troop
brought by the Governor came happily to their Relief, and beat off the
Assailants with great slaughter: Whereupon Mahomet again renewed his Battery,
and lodged 173 more of his great Shot in the Breach, and then sending for his
chief Commanders into his Tent-Royal, pitched upon a Mount advantagiously to
behold what passed, and there by Threats and Promises encouraged them to
undertake a fourth Assault. In which he lost 12000 of his best Men, and was
forced at last to sound a retreat, yet by the several Fights the Christians
were sorely weakened in all the Streets, lying covered with Turkish Arrows, and
the Breaches with the mingled Bodies of the Christians rent most miserably by
the great Shot, they were forced to Labor both Day and Night to repair the
Breaches, every one encouraging his Fellow in such sort, that Mahomet began to
despair of Victory, and blaspheming God, for (as he impiously pretended)
hindering his Proceedings, he retired in his Melancholy Mood into his Tent;
where Tormenting himself for the space of two days, he would not be spoken with
by any, but the third Day calling a Council, it was concluded another Assault
should be given, which was according done with great Fury, and much Effusion of
Blood on either side, but the besieged and resolving to fell their Lives dear,
so manfully withstood them, that with Shame and greater Slaughter then ever
they were forced to retire; and now all Provision being cust off from the
besieged, the Tyrant resolved to gain that by Famine, he could not do by Force;
and therefore ceasing any further Assault, caused the City to be so closely
Blocked up, that the Christians were forced to Eat all manner of unclean and
loathsome Things, as Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, and the like: Which
miserable state of theirs made known to the Senate of Venice, under whose
Protection that City was, and they being grown weary of their twenty years
tedious War with the Turkish Tyrant, sent Benedictus Trivisanus their
Ambassador to Constantinople, whither weary of the Siege, Mahomet was returned
leaving one of his Bassas with the Army, to Block up the City as aforesaid; who
upon his Arrival being admitted to the Presence of the Tyrant, he so ordered
the Matter, that a Peace was concluded upon these Articles: First, that the
Venetians should deliver him the City of Scodra, the Isle of Lemnos, the strong
Castle of Tenarus in Peloponnesus, and pay him yearly 8000 Duccats; that they
might have leave to Traffic in the Euxine-Sea, by the Straights of Bosphorus
Hellespontus, and Thracius, and that the Citizens of Scodra, and the Garrison
contained therein, should upon the Delivery of the said City, be at their
Choice free to Live in the City under the Turkish Government; or depart whither
they pleased with their Goods, etc. These Articles concluded on Notice thereof
was sent to the Governor, who assembling the Citizens related it to u'm, as he
had received it from the Ambassador, who then together with the Venetian
Admiral, Rode at Anchor in the Mouth of Boliana, when after some Debate it was
agreed, that they would leave the City, and not expose themselves to the Mercy
of the Tyrant at all times; whereupon at a certain time prefixed the City was
put into the Hands of the Bassa, and the Citizens marching out Bag and Baggage,
went on Board the Venetian Galleys, who carefully Transported them into their
other Territories of Italy, and thus was this City surrendered, Anno 1478.
after a years Siege, before which 100000 Turks had lost their Lives.

Mahomet having gotten what he sorely longed for, sent Achmetes Bassa with his
Gally, to take in the Islands of Neritus, Zacynthus, and Cephalenia; upon which
he seized without any Resistance, Lenord Prince of the same, upon the Arrival
of the Turks, hasting with his Wife and Children into Italy, where he was
kindly received of King Ferdinand his near Kinsman, after that he sent three of
his Bassas with a great Army to invade Transylvania: Whereupon Stephanas,
Batore the Vayvod, fled to Matthias King of Hungary to crave Aid, who at the
same time lay sick of the Gout, yet he ordered his two Captains, viz. Stephanus
Cherepetnus, and Palus Rivisus, to march with his Army; who incountering the
Turks near Alba Julia, in a great and bloody Fight overthrew the Army, with the
Slaughter of 30000 of their best Men, together with Isa Bassa their chief
Commander, and of the Christians there fell 8000 only.

Mahomet possessing most of the Islands in the Mediterranian Sea, began to be
very desirous of the Famous Rhodes, and to further his Design at the same time,
a Fugitive Knight of the Order, named Antonius Meligalus residing in his Court,
gave him a Platform of the City; informing him in what place the City was
easiest to be Assaulted, and how the Island might be best subdued: Whereupon a
great Fleet was fitted out, and this Traitor to his Country put on Board, with
a Command that his Directions should be followed, but he by the way falling
sick of a loathsome Disease, so infected the Ship with his noisome Smell, that
the Mariners in a great rage threw him Overboard, whilst he vainly Cried to
them for Mercy, and thus he received the reward due to his Traitorous Intention.

The great Master of Rhodes, having notice that Mahomet intended to invade his
Territories, was like an experienced Captain wanting nothing that might conduce
to a resolute Defense, and having certain Notice that Misistes Bassa had Landed
his Power, and was marching toward the City, he assembled his Captains, and
with many Christian and Soldier-like persuasions admonished them to fight the
Battle of the Lord Jesus against his Enemies, which so wrought upon them that
they all resolved to Live and Dye in his defense.

By this time the Bassa had set down his Camp, and began to raise his
Batteries, according to the Directions of one Demetrius another Fugitive
Knight, who in the first Skirmish according to the Merits of his Treason,
having his Horse slain under him, was miserably trampled to Death; most of the
Ordnance now bent against the Wall, the Bassa sent out a part of his Army to
seize upon an Orchard, possessed and entrenched by the Christians, which those
that possessed it, not being able to defend, against so powerful an Enemy
slighted it; and retired to the City, leaving the Ordnance behind them: Out of
this Orchard by the advice of one George Trapain a Christian Runagado, the
Turks battered the Tower, standing about 300 paces from the City with great
Fury, and having made a Breach endeavored to have entered, but were beaten off
with great loss; after which they framed a Bridge upon Boats, over a frith of
the Sea, fastening by Ropes, so endeavoring to besiege the Tower both by Sea
and Land; the which was no sooner fastened, but the Ropes were all cut in
sunder, by one Garvais Rogers a most expert English Sea-Captain, and after that
attempting to make another Bridge, and plant pieces of Cannon in Lighters and
foists, the Bridge was broken, and the Lighters sunk by Anthony Damboise the
great Masters Brother, who with his Artillery planted for that purpose on the
Bastions, beat them to pieces; but it had not been long ever Caly Bassa the
younger Arriving in the Camp, it was noised that Mahomet was coming with an
additional Army of 100000 Turks, which so terrified the Spaniards (for the
Garrison was Composed of all Christian Nations) that they desired to be Shipped
out of the Island, and to return home; but for such their Cowardice, being
sharply reproved by Peter Damboise the great Master, a most expert and Valiant
French man, they, as ashamed of what they before proposed begged Pardon, and
afterward notably defended the City during the Siege.

Mesues perplexed that he could not carry the City by Force, though with his
Artillery he had levelled the Walls in many places, which were as soon
repaired, he resolved by Treachery to perform what otherwise he could not
Effect, and therefore made large Offers to several discontented Rhodians to
poison the great Master, which some of them undertook to bring to pass, but ever
any thing was done in Relation thereto the wickedness was discovered, and the
undertakers worthily Executed; upon notice of which the Bassa more perplexed
then before, and yet not knowing without loss of Honor how to raise the Siege,
sent several Messengers to the great Master in his Name, to promise him
extraordinary Matters if he would surrender to him the City, and to denounce
all the Miseries of War upon his Refusal: To which the Heroic Old man returned
Answer, that he would not willingly in his surest Estate use the Council of his
Enemy, neither in his greatest distress refuse Cheerfully to yield his Life
unto Almighty God, to whom he did owe it, and that with far better Will, then
to surrender the City upon any Conditions, bear they never so fair a show of
Honor or Profit. The Messengers perceiving this constant Resolution of the
great Master, by other Arguments endeavored him at least to become Tributary
to the Emperor, paying a small matter yearly for his Peace; but he knowing that
to be the ready way to be brought under the Turkish Slavery, utterly refused;
upon which the Messengers returned greatly discontented to him that sent 'um,
who thereat greatly perplexed gave another general Assault, battering the City
for four days without Intermission, but not prevailing after three Months
siege, having lost 9000 of his Men, and 15000 dangerously sick of their Wounds,
and mortal Distempers, he with great shame raised his Siege; and after having
destroyed all the Trees in that part of the Island, embarked his Men for
Constantinople, where at his return he received but a Cold Welcome from his
imperious Master.

Whilst Mesites besieged Rhodes, Achmetes Bassa passed over into Italy, and
besieged Otranto a Famous City in Puglia; the which after the loss of many of
his Turks took it, spoiling all the Country round about it, which brought such
a Fear upon Italy, that Sextus Quartus Bishop of Rome, being only dreadful to
the Christian Princes, was about to fly and leave this once Mistress of the
World, as a prey to the Infidels; and doubtless at that time the greatest part
of Italy had been subdued, had not the Ottoman Forces been Converted another
way; for the Carramanian King, aided by the Persians and Sultan of Egypt;
having entered the Turkish Dominions on that side, had in a mortal Battle
overthrown Bajazet, Mahomet's eldest Son (then Living) with the Slaughter of
well nigh all his Army, to revenge which Mahomet called home his great Bassa
Achmetes, with all the European Soldiers, and in Person passed over into Asia;
but upon the way within two days journey from Nicomeda a City of Bythinia he
fell sick, and there for the space of three days grievously Tormented with a
pain in his Belly (which some supposed to be the Colic, though others to
proceed from the effects of Poison) he Dyed, Anno 1481. of his Age 52 years,
and his Reign 31 years. His Body being afterward Magnificently buried in a
Chapel, near unto the great Mohammedan Temple, which himself had built at
Constantinople; Leaving his Empire to Bajazet against whom Bandied (till such
time he was Poisoned by the Bishop of Rome, who at the Commandment of Bajazet
durst do no other) Zemes, or Zizimus his younger Brother, as in the Life of
Bajazet will appear.

CHAP. XIII. The Life of Bajazet the second of that Name, and second Emperor of
the Turks, his memorial Exploits, Victories, and Death.
MAhomet being dead, and Bajazet and Zemes his two Sons absent (for the Turkish
Tyrants will not permit their Sons to remain at Court when they are Men grown,
lest they should aspire to Empire before their time) the great Bassas, and Aga
of the Janissaries Conspired together, ever either of them could arrive, to make
Corcutus younger Son to Bajazet Emperor, which accordingly they did; of which
Bajazet upon his approaching the City of Constantinople, hearing, horribly
Exclaimed against the perfidious dealings of the Bassas, and so labored that
at the Instance of Cherseogles Viceroy of Greece, and the Aga, or Captain of
the Janissaries; the young Emperor being of a mild and Courteous Nature,
overcome by their Entreaty, and the Reverence of his Father, resigned unto him
his Imperial Government, which he took upon him, with the general liking of the
men of War, the finest token of any Turkish Emperors Establishment; for if they
oppose it it is in vain for them to hope for Empire, and in lieu of this
Resignation, Bajazet made him Governor of Lycia, Caria, Ionia, and all the
pleasant Countries adjoining; where being altogether given to study, he Lived
quietly all the Reign of Bajazet, but after his Death was strangled by the
Command of Selymas his Brothers Son, as will in his Reign more at large appear.

During these Troubles, Ferdinand King of Naples, sent his eldest Son Alphonsus
Duke of Calabria, with a great Power to besiege Otranto, which after several
sharp Conflicts he had delivered up to him, with all the Country lying about
it, which had been by Achmetes Bassa taken from the Christians, during the
Reign of Mahomet; to recover which an Army was a second time prepared, under
the leading of the same Bassa; but ever he arrived in Italy, he was
Countermanded upon notice that Zemes was coming out of Amasia with an powerful
Army, to Wrestle with Bajazet for the Empire: In which Expedition Achmetes was
made General, who meeting Zemes by plain Force, drove him out of the Field with
great slaughter of his Army; insomuch, that not thinking himself safe in his
Brothers Dominions, he fled into Syria, and from thence into Egypt, to
Caytbeius Sultan of Egypt and Syria, who received him with many great
Expressions of joy, and at his Request sent an Ambassador to Bajazet, to
entreat in his behalf, that some part of that so great an Empire might be
allotted him; but the Proud Turk having gotten Possession, would not yield to
have so dangerous a Partner: Whereupon the Ambassador effecting nothing, he
joined with the Caramanian King, who by such a Conjunction hoped to recover his
Territory taken from him, by Mahomet, Prince Zemes Father, against whose joint
Forces, but few in number, Bajazet advanced with 200000 Horse and Foot, of
which the Princes having notice, and finding themselves too weak by far to
oppose so great a Power, not finding as they had been put in hopes, any to
revolt from Bajazet to them; they thought it good to retire before the ways
were beset, through the Straights of the Mountain Amanus, which done, they
dispersed their little Army, and soon after Zemes went to Rhodes, where of the
great Master he was kindly received, with Promise of Protection from the Fury
of his Brother, hoping by this means, if Bajazet should die a natural Death, or
otherwise misearry, this Prince might be set up Emperor, and by means ever
remain a firm Friend to the Christians.

During these Transactions, there wanted not some in the Court of Bajazet, who
Envying the Prosperity, Achmetes Counseled the Emperor to put him to Death,
falsely insinuating that he held private Correspondence with Zemes: Whereupon at
his return from the Wars, Bajazet as in kindness to his Bassas made a Royal
Supper, where after they had Drunk plentifully of Wine which by their Laws is
forbid, yet frequently amongst the Great ones used at their Feasts; he in token
of Honoring them, caused a Rich Garment to be cast over each of them, but when
they came to Achmetes, they cast over him a black Velvet Garment, by the Turks
called the Mantle of Death; for whosoever that Garment is cast upon, none of
the Bassas dare be so hardy as to entreat for his Life, which the other Bassas
perceiving, most of them being before privy to the Matter by leave of the
Emperor, after having kissed the Ground whereon he stood departed; amongst whom
Achmetes would likewise have gone out, but was Commanded to stay for the
Emperor, and no sooner were the Bassas gone out, but the Ministers of Death
(which are certain strong Men bereaved of Speech, whom the Turkish Tyrants keep
as Instruments of their Cruelty) Entered, and were about to strangle the Bassa;
when one of the Eunuchs in great Favor with the great Emperor, stood up and
advised (...) not to be too hasty in Executing so great a Man, so beloved by
his Soldiers, and best men of War, but rather to defer the Execution, till he
saw how the matter would be digested, and in the mean time by Torture to make
him confess what might render his Execution more reasonable, of which Counsel
Bajazet approving, commanded him immediately to be stripped, and delivered into
the Hands of the Tormentors. The which whilst they were doing, his Son having
gotten notice in what Extreme danger his Father was in, raised the Jannizaries,
who upon notice that their beloved Captain stood on the Brink of the Grave
flowed from all parts, like a Torrent to the Palace, Thundering at the Gates
as if they would have beaten the Palace about his Ears, whereupon causing the
outward Gate to be set open, he showed himself to 'um through an Iron Window;
demanding the cause of that Tumult and Uproar, to which they answered, that
they would by and by, teach him as a Drunkard or Beast, and a Rascal to use his
great place, and calling with more Sobriety and Descretion, Loading him with
many more such like opprobrious Expressions, Commandin forthwith to deliver
Achmetes, or else they would beat the Palace about his Ears, which demand of
the insolent Janissaries he durst not deny, but Commanded that he should be
forthwith delivered to them, who for have was brought out half Naked, with the
marks of his severe usage on his Body; who had no sooner got him, but they
stripped the Emperors Minions, and with their Spoils Clothing him, carried him
out of the Court on their Shoulders in great Triumph, tho the Bassa did what he
could to appease the Tumultuary Joy they conceived for his deliverance.

Bajazet knowing by experience how deeply the Bassa was rooted in the
affections of the men of War, durst not presently show his Anger, tho Burning
with the desire of revenge, therefore the better to bring to pass what he had
purposed, he took Achmetes into favor again, promoting him more then ever;
which the Loyal old man trusting too far, was as he was sitting at Supper, by
the command of Bajazet thrust through with a Sword, and Slain after he had
Conquered 7 Kingdoms, and Annexed them to the Ottoman Empire, being the most
expert Commander, that ever the Turks could Boast off. But Bajazet's Spleen not
so satisfied, he purposed to destroy the whole order of the Janissaries, in
revenge of the insolency they had offered him, but his design upon their lives
coming to their knowledge, and they standing upon their Guard, he found it a
matter not to be compassed without great difficulty, tho to execute his
pleasure, he had sent for the Acanzii, accounted the best Soldiers next the
Jamzaries, throughout all his Dominions; therefore he was forced to forego his
Bloody and Tyrannical purpose, and the better to Color the matter pretended he
had sent for those Soldiers to War against Moldavia: But the Janissaries not
greatly trusting him, Inbattled by themselves, refusing to receive him into the
middle of their Ranks, as was their usual manner, but shaking their Weapons,
bid him send his Executioners, for they were ready to receive them; but by the
mediation of the Bassas, at length matters were accorded, and they received
Bajazet amongst them, for the Turkish Emperors never marched but in the middle
of the Janissaries.

The Tumult pacified, Bajazet with his Army passed over Danubius, and entering
Moldavia besieged Kele or Achilleia, which after many furious assaults was
delivered to him, as afterward was Ac-Gimen or Asprocastron, the Turks usually
changing the Names of such Cities and Towns, as fall into their hands.

Zemes being at Rhodes, Bajazet was not a little troubled, lest he should prove
a Thorn in his side, and therefore used many Endeavors, to get him into his
possession, but the great Master abhorring Breach of trust, notwithstanding the
many Threats and Promises of the Tyrant, would not deliver him, nor was he
sought only by his Brother, but by Charles the French King, Matthias King of
Hungary, and Pope Innocentius the Eight of that Name Bishop of Rome, all of
them thinking to advantage their Affairs, by having a Prince of the Ottoman
Blood in their Custody; the King and the Emperor in their Wars, and the Pope of
a mind more Ignoble, by getting a yearly Pension from his Brother Bajazet, for
the safe keeping him to the last; of which after Reiterated entreaties, the
great Master delivered him, in lieu of which be was Created Cardinal, nor was
the Popes Expectation vain, for he yearly received of Bajazet 40000 Ducats,
yearly for the safe keeping him, but of this more hereafter.

Bajazet being frequently troubled by the sudden Invasions of the Caramanian
King, resolved to subdue the remaining part of his Country, the which with a
great Army out of Europe he invaded, spoiling all before him, but the wary
Prince knowing himself far too Weak, to meet so powerful an Enemy in the Field,
kept himself with his few forces in the Fastnesses of the Mountain, whereupon
Bajazet besieged Tarsus in Cilicia, and had it delivered to him, upon condition
that the Citizens might depart thence with their Goods, and not be further
prejudiced, either in their Lives or Liberties; but by this time Abraham,
Alias, Pyramet King of Caramania having obtained considerable forces of
Caytbeius Sultan of Egypt, he was resolved to try his fortune in the Field, and
put all to the Hazard of a Battle, which being begun the 10th. of May Anno
1486, was Fought with great obstinancy on either side, for the space of a whole
day, when the Turks by Reason of their Multitude prevailed, in which Battle the
King and the greatest part of his Army were Slain, and afterward his Country
totally subdued by Bajazet, who likewise at that time took into his possession
all Asia the less, becoming Lord of the Sea Coast from the Straights of
Bosphorus to the Confines of Syria.

By this means the Ambitious Emperor Stretching the borders of his Empire, to
the bounders of the Egyptian Sultans Territories, resolved to have no peace
with him, by Reason he had not only assisted his Brother Zames against him, but
likewise the Carramanian King in the last Battle, so that raising a great
Power, he sent them under the Leading of Ishender-Bassa, Michael-Beg, and
Jaxis-Beg his two Sons to wast the Sultans Dominions in Syria; but passing the
Great Mountain Taurus, they were intraped by Aladules the Mountain King, who
had laid an Ambush of his Savage people for that purpose, where most of the
Turks were together with Michael-Beg were Slain, the Bassa his other Son, and
the remaining part taken Prisoners; the news of which defeat being known to
Carragoses Bassa, who was following with more forces, it so discouraged him
that he would advance no further, yet the next Year passing into the confines
of Egypt, he was Fought with, and overthrown by the Sultans power: But these
ill haps so little discouraged Bajazet, that he more enraged then ever,
resolved to invade Egypt by Sea and Land, which the Sultan understanding
resolved to Transport the Seat of War into the Turks Dominions, and so with a
great Army, he Commanded Vsbeg to pass into Cilicia, where not far from Tarsus,
he found the Turks encamped under the command of Chersogles Viceroy of Greece,
a most Valiant Captain, whereupon a mortal Battle begun, and many thousands
Slain, for the Sultans Army consisting mostly of Mamalukes, such an obstinate
Fight was fiercly maintained between them, and the Turkish Jannizaries, that
Victory stood doubtful for the space of 2 days, at the end of which the Turkish
General having lost 60000 of his men, in the Night left his Camp and fled, nor
was the loss in the Sultans Army much inferior, but the Turks loss still
proved greater; for Flying through Aladules Country, that King had so beset the
way, that most of the remaining part were Slain, and the General taken
prisoner, nor fared Bajazet's Fleet at Sea better, for Anchoring in the mouth
of Orentes within sight of Antioch, it was by a Tempest beaten to pieces, all
which losses coming one upon the Neck of another, caused Bajazet to send his
Ambassadors to the Sultan to require peace, which was accorded to, and all the
Prisoners set at liberty, when shortly after the Sultan, who of a Circassian
Slave, by the favor of the Mamaluke's his Fellows become a mighty Monarch dyed.

Peace being concluded in Asia, the Christian Princes stirred up thereto by
Pope Alexander the Sixth, that Firebrand of discord, all Christendom was in a
Flame, at what time Charles the French King seized upon the Kingdom of Naples,
taken from his Father by Ferdinand the first, whereupon the Pope and Alphonsus
the exiled King of Naples, solicited Bajazet to send them 6000 Horse, and as
many Foot for the recovery of the same, laying before him (like special
Christians) what danger the Mohammedan Religion would be in, if the French
prevailed; the Pope promising him also to Poison Zemes his Brother, if he would
pay him well for so doing; these Admonitions and large overtures so prevailed
with the Infidel, that he had great store of treasure, but as it was designed
for evil purposes, it prospered accordingly; for the Vessel in the Adriatic
Sea, being boarded by John Roverius, a Venetian, he seized the cash before it
came to the Popes fingering, yet his Holiness loath to break his Word,
nevertheless, contrary to his Oath made to the Ambassadors, from the great
Master of Rhodes, Poisoned Zemes, by putting Poison amongst the Sugar which he
was wont to mix with his Water, to the great Scandal of the Christian Religion,
and reproach of St. Peter's pretended Successors: nor was God slow in revenging
the dishonor done to his name, for Alexander having a Bastard Son, named Caesar
Borgia, a Profligate Wretch, who after many Outrages and Murders committed,
being about to Poison several of the Cardinals, at a Supper in the Vattican, by
a lucky mistake of the waiter, in taking up the wrong flaggon poisoned his
Father, who notwithstanding his infallibility, was not Poison proof, nor did
this ungracious Son long escape, for fighting under the standard of the King of
Navar, he was slain with a hargubus shot.

Notwithstanding the death of Pope Alexander, yet he left Christendom in such a
blaze, that the flame of discord, was not in a long while after quenched, for
whilst the Emperor of Germany, and Princes of Italy, were Bandising against the
French King and shedding Christian Blood, the Turks invaded Podolia and Rassia,
spoiling the Country and sacking several walled Towns, but by reason of the
Excessiveness of the Winter, through Hunger and Cold, most of the Army
Perished, yet not dismayed by the Loss sustained, he the next year sent Cadumes
Bassa into Illyria, who spoiling the Country was incountred by 9000 Croats and
Hungarians near the River Morava, under the leading of Count Bernard
Francopain, where after a cruel and Bloody fight, the Christians were put to
the worst, and 7000 of them slain, and drowned in passing the River, the noses
of which being cut off, and hung upon strings, were sent to Bajazet as a
Barbarous present.

Charles the French King being dead, Lewis the 12 Succeeded him in the Kingdom
of France, who laying claim to the Dukedom of Millain made a league with the
Venetians, whereupon Sfortia the Duke in possession sent to crave aid of
Bajazet, laying before him the danger his Empire was in daily to be invaded, if
the French grew strong in Italy, preferring Ambition and revenge, before the
advancement of the Christian Religion; Bajazet by this means stirred up,
resolved to render the Venetians unserviceable to the French, by keeping them
busy nearer home, whereupon he commanded Scander Bassa his Lieutenant in
Illyria, to break in upon the Fruitful Country of Friuli, part of the Venetians
Territories on the borders of Italy, the which he did with 12000 Horse,
destroying all before him as far as Liquentia, driving before him a great
number of Captives, the which when he came to the Banks of Tiliaventum, and
understanding that the French and Venetians had driven the Duke of Millan out
of his Territories, he barbarously caused to be put to the Sword.

After the Seizure of Millan, the Venetians set out a great Fleet under the
charge of Anthony Grimani, who set upon the Turks Fleet (far Superior in
number) as it was coming out of the Bay or Haven of Sapientia, in the Island of
Sphraga, but through the Cowardice of the Admiral, in not permitting half his
Fleet to come up, those that were engaged retired after a sharp dispute, and
the Turks kept their course to Naupactum, now called Lepanto, where they found
Bajazet already arrived with his Land Army, so that after a few days Siege, the
Citizens dispairing of Succor Surrendered the City, wherefore the Venetian
Admiral upon his return was Banished by a decree of the Senate, to one of the
Absytidies Islands, upon the Coast of Liburnia.

Bajazet by this means having got firm footing in the Venetian Territories, the
year following viz. 1500 entered the straights of Corinth with an Army of
150000, and passing through Peloponnesus, laid Siege to the strong City of
Menthon, now called Modon, and took it by surprise, putting all the Inhabitants
to the Sword, upon which several other Cities belonging to the Venetians,
yielded by composition, but after the taking of many Cities on either side,
with great Bloodshed both by Sea and Land. A peace between Bajazet and the
Senate of Venice was treated, and finally accorded upon consideration, first
that the Venetians should deliver up the Islands of Neritos and Lucadia (the
which during these Wars they had taken from the Turks) reserving to themselves
only the Island of Cephalenia: And that in consideration thereof, Bajazet
should restore all such goods as had been taken from the Venetian Merchants in
the late Wars, and that it should be lawful for them (as they were wonted,
safely to trade and traffic into the Euxine Sea, and to Constantinople, and
there to have their Conful or Governor, as they had in former time, and lastly
that the Venetian Territories should be certainly known and separated from the
Turks, by certain Bounds or Limits. These conditions were Solemnly concluded
on, and confirmed, both by Bajazet and the Senate of Venice, and so affirmed:
Peace concluded in Anno 1503, after the Wars had continued between them for the
space of 5 years.

Peace concluded with the Venetians, Bajazet raised a great Army intending to
invade Hungary, but having been often foiled by that warlike Nation, he changed
his mind, and Marched to suppress the insurrection in Albania a part of his
Territory, which done as he was returning, a Derviller which is a Fantastical
kind of a beggarly Turkish Monk, using no other apparel but two Sheep Skins,
the one hanging before, and the other behind, who coming up to him as if he
would have asked an Alms, with a short Cimiter, strock at him, and beat him
from his Horse, and being about to redouble his blow, had certainly dispatched
him, had not Ishender Bassa come in, and with his Horsemans Mace, struck the
Varlet dead, who afterward by the Soldiers was hewn in pieces; this
treacherous and desperate act so moved Bajazet, that he proscribed all them of
that Superstitious order, and banished them out of his Empire.

Bajazet after the incessant toiles of War, resolving to repose himself,
committed the Management of his great Affairs to his 3 Bassa's, viz. Alis,
Achmetes, Kinsman to him that was slain, and Jachia, who having got the Reins
of Empire in their hands for the space of 5 years, suffered things to run into
such disorder, by regarding their private profit, more then the public good,
that a great part of the Lesser Asia was in an uproar by the means of Chasan
Chelife, and Schach Culi, or Techellis, two Persian Imposters, who set the
Multitude a madding, by spreading a new fangled Doctrine, more wicked then that
of Mahomet their pretended Prophet. To quench this Flame that began dreadfully
to blaze into a Rebellion, Bajazet was forced to rouse from his Lair, yet the
Doctrine could not, nor is it, to this day extirprated, for being persecuted by
Bajazet, they fled into Persia, and there pretending themselves to be the true
Successor of Mahomet the Imposter, and that none but they knew his Will, and
that those that believed not in their Doctrine, should never Enjoy any
happiness after this Life, with a deal of such ridiculous Cant they so besotted
Asymbeiu^ Vsun Cassanes the Persian King, that he had to the first Author of
this Doctrine, viz. one Haider, who was Master of these Disciples, given his
Daughter Martha in Marriage; but he dying, and his Son Jacup succeeding him in
the Kingdom, began to have his Brother-in-Law in suspicion, by reason of the
multitude that followed him, upon the account of his pretended Sanctity:
Insomuch that he caused him secretly to be murdered, and raised a great
Persecution against those that embraced his Doctrine; yet this Haider left a
Son which he had by Martha his Wife named Hysmael, who afterward became a Sophy
of Persia, as will appear in his Wars with Selymus Bajazet's Son, and
Successor, but upon the Persecution raised by Jacup Son to Vsun Cassanes, the
two aforesaid Disciples of Haider fled to Armenia, and there dwelling in Rocks
began to tell Fortunes, and other strange things which made the Rusticks
suppose them men more then ordinarily inspired; Insomuch that they gathered
about them in great numbers, insomuch that they came out of their Iurking Holes
into walled Towns, and taught boldly.

During the spreading of this Doctrine, Hysmael the Son of Haider being grown
to man's Estate, and his Uncle Jacup dead, he by the Aid of such as favored his
Fathers Doctrine, won the Kingdom of Armenia, and after that overthrowing Eluan
the Persian King, Son to his Uncle Jacup in a pitched Battle, wherein the said
King was slain, he took Possession of all his Grandfathers Dominions, and from
that time was called the great Sophy of Persia, being afterward exceedingly
beloved of his Subjects.

This Hysmale was no sooner Established in his Kingdom, but he Established to
his Power his Fathers Doctrine, which Chusan, Chelife, and Techellis,
perceiving, and understanding the unlooked for success of their Masters Son,
they resolved not to be Idle, but to try their Fortune likewise: Whereupon
gathering a great number of their Proselytes in Arms, they wasted again the
Countries in the lesser Asia, and being encouraged thereto by Hysmale with
Promise of great Succors, they set down before the City of Iconium; sending
out their Proclamations strictly to enjoin all the People thereabout to embrace
their Doctrine, threatening them otherwise with Death, and Confiscation of
Goods; which wrought such Terror in the Peasants, that they had many of them
joined with them; so that within a while their number was increased, from 10 to
50000. Whereupon Orchanes and Mahomites, two of Bajazets Nephews gathering what
Forces they could Sallyed out of the City against them, but were put to flight
with the loss of most of their Men: Corcutus also one of Bajazets Sons, and
then Governor of Thyatria, Sypilus, Magnesia, and Phocia, having leavyed a
great Army, durst not nevertheless to give them Battle, but waited the coming
of Caragoses Bassa, who was raising great Forces in Cappadocia and Pontus;
having sent his Command to Achmetes one of Bajazets Sons to do the like, but
ever he had gathered a sufficient Power, the pretended Prophets came upon him,
put such Forces as he had to the Rout, and forced Caragoses then Viceroy of
Asia, for his safety to fly into the City of Cutaie, near unto the Mountain
Horminius, situate in the middle of the lesser Asia; which City they besieged,
took by force, and in it the Viceroy his Wife and Children, putting most of
the Citizens to the Sword, and from thence marched to besiege the great City of
Prusa; but in their way hearing that Alis Bassa was come out of Europe with
great Power, and followed hard upon them, they retreated and passed another way
to avoid joining with the Turks in the plain Ground, of which the Bassa having
Notice, and dispairing to overtake them with his Footmen, chose out 8000 of his
swiftest Horse, leaving Achmetes with the rest of the Army, after a tedious
March he fell in with their Rear: Whereupon Techellis, who was chosen General
of the Rebels, put his men in Battle Array; when taking the most advantageous
Ground, he stayed the coming of the Turkish Horse, who charged him in the Front
with great Fury, but wanting Foot to second them in so Hilly a Country were
driven back, which the Bassa perceiving drew forth 1000 Harquebusiers, who
served as Foot to oppose the Front, whilst the Horse Charged on the right and
left Wings of the Enemies Army, which was performed with such Bravery, that
Techellis's Men gave Ground, and in the Rear broke and disordered their own
Ranks; when Chelife one of the Impostors fighting desperately was slain. But
Techellis coming with fresh supplies, restored the Battle, to break which Alis
Bassa Charging furiously with fresh Troops of Horse, and entering too far
amongst the Squadrons of his Enemies was slain, which so discouraged his men
(then at the point to have prevailed) that they first fainted, and afterward
betook themselves to plain flight; so that in passing the Mountains many of
them were slain, and more taken Prisoners.

Bajazet hearing of the Success of the Rebels, sent Jonuses Bassa against them
with 40000 Horse and Foot, upon whose approach they retired into the Mountains,
but being driven thence they fled into Armenia: Whereupon the Bassa fretting
that he had not beset the ways, caused all that he found to embrace the new
Religion, or to have born Arms against Bajazet on the behalf of Techellis,
either to be put to Death, Burnt in the Forehead with a hot Iron, or
Transported into Europe, to prevent any future Insurrection; and upon his
return to Constantinople had Notice, that Techellis and his scattered Forces in
their flight, lighting upon a Caravan of Silks and other Rich Merchandise took
the spoil thereof, for which outrage coming to Tauris, the Captains were all by
the Command of Hysmael hanged upon Gibbits, and Techellis for a Terror to
others burnt alive.

The Astan Rebellion suppressed by the means aforesaid, the year following,
viz. Anno 1509. a dreadful Earthquake happened in Constantinople, and the
Countries adjacent, which lasted with very little Intermission for the space of
eighteen days, or as the Turks affirm a Month; in which time ^^ t^ew to the
ground many stately Buildings in Constantinople, Hadrianople and other Cities
of Greece, and in their Ruins overwhelmed 13000 People; after which a great
Mortality happened, which dispeopled many Cities in the Turks Dominions; but
both being past, Bajazet set 80000 to repair the mischief Constantinople had
sustained by the Earthquake, which they performed in four Months, Beautifying
the City more then ever.

Bajazet had by his many Wives eight Sons, and six Daughters, who lived to be
Men and Women grown, and the Sons all Governors in diverse Provinces of his
large Empire, whom the Turkish History after this manner reckons up, viz.
Abdullah Zelebi, Alem Scach, Tzihan Scach, Achmet, Machmut, Corcut Selim, and
Mahomet; yet as Antonius Vtrius, Genois, who long time lived in Bajazet's
Court, accounts, they were only six, whose Names he recites thus; Scieniscia,
Alemscia, Achometes, Mahometes, Selymus, and Corcutus, and that the two former
dyed long before their Father, and were by him greatly lamented; now as for
Tizhan, and Abdula Zelebi, the Turks report they were put to Death by their
Fathers Command, upon: Suspicion that they aspired too high in Conceit of
Empire.

Of all these Sons Mahometes was of greatest hope who was by his Father made
Governor of Magnesia, but being by reason of his Youth, somewhat Frolicksome,
he often went disguised, to take a view of his Brothers Courts, how therein
they behaved themselves etc. And at last came with two others in the habit o^
Seafaring men to the Court of Bajazet, where not at first finding Admittance
to the Emperors Presence they went and bought a fair Christian Captive, and
then pretending they had a Present to deliver, were by the Warders permitted to
enter, and having delivered the Present found means to depart; being first
rewarded with three rich Garments, but ever they were gotten on Shipboard, they
were met by a Courtier that knew Mahometes, who allighting would have done him
Reverence, but he forbad it, as not being willing to be discovered, yet it was
not kept so close but it came to Bajazet's Ear, who jealous (as always Tyrants
are) that under such like Intreagues might be hid some secret Conspiracy
against his Life, or Empire, he wrote to one Asmehemides a Courtier highly in
Favor with Mahometes to poison him, sending withal a poisonous Powder to
effect it; which this perfidious Courtier, in hopes to succeed him in his
Government performed, but long it was not ever the Tyrant repenting him of his
inhumane and unnatural Command, cast the said Courtier in Prison where he
miserably perished.

Bajazet having caused Mahometes to be poisoned, whom he need not to have
feared: Selymus the Governor of Trepezond, one whom he entirely Loved,
immediately Conspired against him, and having Corrupted most of the great
Bassas of the Court, the better to strengthen himself, married the Daughter of
Mahometes the Tartarian King, who Aiding him with 15000 Tartarian Horse, he
left his Government and passed over the Euxine into Europe, under pretense of
invading Hungary, where haivng notice that his Father intended to declare
Achometes his Successor; leaving the Coast of Hungary, he marched directly
toward Hadrianople, where Bajazet lay with his Army, and incamping within
sight of the City, sent a feigned Message to excuse his coming in a Hostile
manner; the which was as he said, only that he might gain Access to his
Presence, to show him such Reasons as he doubted not but he would approve of,
why Achometes should not succeed him; but Bajazet not trusting to his fawning,
sent him word that if he did not immediately return to his Government in Asia
and disband his Army, he would not fail to chastise him with the Scourge of
War. But this Speech did not at all dismay the Headstrong Youth, nor could all
the Presents, and fair Words Bajazet could devise avert him; but raising his
Camp marched directly toward Constantinople, which Bajazet perceiving drew his
Army out of Hadrianople, and marched to prevent his surprising the Imperial
City, at whose Departure out of Hadrianople Selymus entered it, and having
there refreshed his Army, followed hard upon his Father, cutting off the
straglers of his Army, and part of his Rear, which caused the Old man to Face
about and bid him Battle, though all the Bassas except Cherseogles dissuaded
him from it, as secretly favoring Selymus, which Selymus as willing to accept,
after both Armies were put into Order, and Bajazet with a moving Oration had
encouraged his Men, a cruel Fight began, which continued from Noon, till the
setting of the Sun; at what time the Tartarian Horse sore Gauled with the shot
of the Harquebusses, and terrified with the Thundering noise, disranked and
fled in spite of their Rider, after which the Foot being Charged by the
Janissaries were most of them slain, Selymus himself upon a swift Horse hardly
scaping.

In this Battle fought, Anno 1511. near Chiurlus, 30000 of Selymus his Men were
slain and taken Prisoners, with the loss only of 7000 of Bajazet's Soldiers,
after which Bajazet kept on his way to Constantinople, where he no sooner
arrived, but he bountifully rewarded his Men: Achometes Bajazet's eldest Son
being at Amasia, and hearing what had passed, raised an Army of 20000 Horse and
Foot, and by speedy marches came to Scutari, Anciently called Christophorus,
situate upon the Straights of Bosphorus, over against Constantinople, where
incamping he sent Messengers to his Father, requesting him as he had frequently
determined to declare him his Successor, as by Seniority he ought, and to
resign him the Empire, all which Bajazet intended to do, and proposed such his
Intentions to his Captains; but they bribed by Selymus, opposed him therein,
saying they would acknowledge no other Emperor but himself, and as the Captains
said, so said the Soldiers: Whereupon he sent to Achometes, to inform him of
the Obstinacy of the Soldiers, and desired him to return to his Government of
Amasa, till he could mold them into a better Temper by his Bounty; but he
impatient of delay, not only abused the Messenger, but greatly reproached his
Father, rose with his Army and marching through the Country spoiled Bythinia,
and growing daily more and more inflamed, from being barred of his Expectation,
purposed to have seized upon Asia the less; upon which calling to him his two
Sons, Amurath and Aladine young Princes of great hope, he admonished them to
take up Arms against their Grandfather, who prone enough thereto of
themselves, and now incited by their Father, in a short time raised a great
Army, and joining with the standing Forces; Achometes had before in pay
overrun a great part of Asia, Achometes causing himself every where to be
proclaimed King.

These proceedings greatly troubled Bajazet, insomuch that to prevent
Bloodshed, he sent to him his Ambassadors to reprove him for his Disloyalty,
and to command him forthwith to set at Liberty his Nephews Mahometes, and his
Brother whom he had taken Prisoners, for refusing to aid him against their
Grandfather Bajazet; but instead of performing what his Father Commanded, he
caused the chief Ambassador to be Slain in his presence, and strictly enjoined
the other on Pain of their Lives, to depart his Camp 'ere Sun set, of which
strange and Heinous Fact, when Bajazet had knowledge, he was greatly enraged,
and caused him to be proclaimed a Traitor against his Person, and Empire,
commanding that the European Horsemen should immediately march against him.
But the Bassas that favored Selymus, thinking it now a fit time to procure his
being called home, and entering again into Favor, insinuated into the old
Emperor, that if he designed to destroy both his Rebellious Sons, he could do
it by no better means, then by calling home Selymus, and making him General of
the Army designed, to march against Achometes, and that by such means one of
them was sure to Perish, and then getting the other into his power, he might
destroy him at his pleasure; to this motion of the Bassas Bajazet hearkened,
adn commanded that Selymus should be fetched to Court, whither now Corcutus was
come to claim his Fathers promise, as having heard that contrary thereto, he
meant to give the Empire from him; to whom Bajazet again made many promises
only willing him to be content, whilst this new Rebellion was suppressed, when
in the mean while Selymus arrived, and prostrating himself at his Fathers Feet,
was received into favor, and preferred to the leading of the Army; who no
sooner he d^d it, but as it was before contrived by the Bassas, he by the
General Voice was saluted Emperor, and Mustapha Bassa sent to Bajazet
peremptorily to demand him to surrender the Empire, to his Son Selymus, whom as
he said the Soldiers had saluted Emperor, and that if he refused so to do, they
were resolved to spoil the Palace, if not commit an outrage upon his Person,
upon which Bajazet finding himself betrayed by those he most relied on, after
having expressed Indignation and Grief, finding that would, or would he not all
was one, with many curses and Execrations upon his unnatural Son, and the rest
of the Traitors he delivered the Insigns of Majesty, of which unexpected news
Corcutus having notice fled for his Life to Magnesia.

Selymus having by the means aforesaid Grasped the Empire, could not suppose
himself safe whilst his Father lived, and therefore with great rewards tempted
Hamon a Jew, and Bajazet's chief Physician to make him away by Poison, who in
order to his Hellish purpose went to Hadrianople, whither Bajazet was retired,
and there through Melancholy and infirmities incident to Age, he found him
indisposed; he offered him Physic, the which the old man not doubting to be of
fatal Consequence, when delivered by the Hand of his old approved Physician, at
the time appointed took, which he had not long done 'ere he felt a grievous
pain in his Stomach, and plain Symptoms of his being Poisoned appeared, so that
amidst Groans and Torturing Pangs, within 24 Hours he gave up the Ghost, Anno
1512, and his Reign the thirtieth.

Bajazet thus Poisoned, the Jew hasted to Constantinople to receive his reward,
which he had accordingly, for not long after his Arrival his Head was stricken
off by the Commandment of Selymus, who afterward Buried his Father in a most
stately Tomb, near to the Great Mohammedan Temple, that himself had built, and
by Reason two of his Pages mourned for him, he caused them to be put to Death,
but Heavens Vengeance was not long delayed, as will appear in the next Chapter,
in his woeful and unusual Death.

CHAP. XIV. The Life of Selymus the first of that Name, the third Emperor of
the Turks, his Bloody Reign and woeful Death.
SElymus Aspiring to the Empire by Blood and Treason, could not think himself
safe whilst any of the Othoman Royal Blood remained in the Veins of his
Relations; therefore gathering all his forces, he marched into Asia to oppress
Achometes, but missing of him at that time, he thirsty of Blood caused 5 of his
Nephews, all Princes of great hope to be straugled in his presence, causing
their dead Bodies to be Buried in Prusa, and afterward sought to surprise
Amurath and Aladin Mahometes 2 Sons, but they having notice of his wicked
intent, one of them fled into Persia, and the other into Egypt, and Vsegi Bassa
who was sent to apprehend them at Amasa upon notice beforehand, sent by
Mustapha Bassa who now was alienated from Selymus, was intrapped by an Ambush
laid by Mahometes himself, taken Prisoner, and most of his men Slain, but it
coming to Selymus his Ear, that Mustapha held Correspondence with Achometes,
notwithstanding he had helped him to the Empire he caused him to be Slain, so
little Assurance has any man in the favor of a Tyrant, who has the power of
Life and Death in his Hand; in revenge of which Achometes put Vsegi Bassa (whom
he held Prisoner) to Death.

Selymus still thirsty of Blood, with all speed marched to Magnesia, in hopes
to have surprised his Brother Corcutus in his Castle, but he having timely
notice was fled before his coming, yet he took the Spoil of all his Treasure,
and so leaving a Captain with a 1000 Horse to secure the City, and commanding
Bostanges his Son In-Law, with a Fleet to watch the Seacoast that he should
not escape, he went to Prusia supposing to have found him there, but on the
contary he poor Prince was fain to hide himself in a Cave by the Seaside, and
there for many Days feeding upon Crabs in hopes the Ships would have departed,
that he might have wafted over, at length weary of his unwonted diet he sent
his Servant to a Shepherds Cottage to purchase natural Food, who suspecting by
some words that passed, that it was the Prince, like a perfidious Swain, he
gave notice thereof to Coshmos one of Selymus's his Captains who was come
insearch of him, upon which he was apprehended, and carried toward Prusa; of
which the Tyrant having notice greatly rejoiced, and immediately sent one
Kirengi Og'ly a Squint-eyed Captain to strangle him by the way, who accordingly
performed his wicked Masters pleasure; and now none remaining alive to obstruct
the progress of his greatness, but Achometes and his two Sons, he resolved to
go against them, but in the beginning of his Expedition, he intercepted some
Letters signed by several Commanders of his Camp, and directed to Achometes,
desiring him to advance toward Selymus with all speed, and that he might be
assured upon his approach, a great part of the Army would revolt, or at least
in the Battle they would kill Selymus. Upon this discovery those that were
found to be concerned therein were Executed, and the Letters notwithstanding
sent, upon which Achometes presuming made such have, that he left his Footmen
behind, at what time 10000 Janissaries were come to Selymus out of Europe, so
that Battle joining after a most Bloody conflict Achometes was overthrown, and
seeking to save himself by flight, his Horse fell with him into a deep Ditch,
where he was taken by the pursuers, at whose hands he could not procure himself
to be Slain, tho he earnestly desired it, but was lead Captive to his cruel
Brother, who Commanded the Squint-eyed Captain that had dispatched Corcutus to
strangle him with a Bow-String, and now desiring nothing more then to get in
his possession the two Sons of Achometes, who to his great Grief heard they
were honorably received, the one in the Persian, and the other in the Egyptian
Courts, and that Amurath the Elder aided by Hysmael the Great Sophy with ten
thousand Persian-Horse, was entered into Cappadocia, wasting the Country before
him, for fear of whom most of the adjacent Provinces had submitted to do him
homage, he resolved after he had driven him back, in revenge of the aid the
Sophy had lent him to War upon his Countries in Persia, wherefore preparing a
great Army, tho many of his great Commanders laid before him the difficulty
and danger of the undertaking, and amongst the rest Chendemus Viceroy of
Natolia a man of great Experience, and of all others in greatest Credit and
Authority with Selymus, who used many Arguments to dissuade him therefrom,
which he afterward found to be undeniable truths, but some of his Flatterers
persuading him that Chendemus was bribed by Amurath, to divert his Arms another
way, and bring certain Ruffains hired for that purpose to attest what they had
said, the Tyrant caused the faithful Bassa to be slain, without hearing his
Excuse, and then Marching from Arsenga, he came to the Confines of Armenia the
Less, before whose Powerful Army the young Prince fled, but Selymus fearing
lest the Mountain Kings not being made his friends, and yet left behind him,
should fall upon his Rear, sent Ambassadors to them, to desire free passage
through their Territories, and to send him provision for his Money, at such
time as he should be entered into Armenia the greater, to all which they
accorded, whereupon with all his Army, he passed the Mountain Scodrisci, and
after 8 days Marching over an other great Mountain, called Moschi^, which the
famous River Euphrates with his mighty streams, and huge broden Banks,
separateth from the great Mountain Anti-Taurus, and with perpetual steep
ridges, runs into Iberia, and Cholchis. Here Selymus with his Ensigns
displayed, Marching along the Banks of the River, departed not from the same,
for fear in that hot Country he should be distressed for want of Water, and so
held on his way directly Eastward, leaving the Country of Armenia the less,
upon the Left, and the Kingdom of Aladeules on the right, and so along to the
Banks of Araxes, finding all the Country before him destroyed, and by reason
the Mountain Kings kept not their words, in sending him provision, his Army
began to fall into great want, which though too late made him call to mind the
faithful Council of Chendemus, yet having Marched thus far, he could not
without great dishonor turn back, and therefore passing Arazes about the City
of Coy, to defend which City Vsta Ogli the Persian General approached with his
whole power, contrary to the expectation of Selymus, whose Soldiers being
oppressed by want, and for the most part were forced to live upon wild fruit
began to Mutiny, so that whilst either Army lay Hovering at some distance,
Hismael came in Person into his Camp, and from thence sent a harauld to
Selymus, to know why he had in hostile manner entered his Country, having no
title thereto, as likewise to take a view of the Turkish Army, to which demand
Selymus replied that his Grandfather, his Uncle, and himself had greatly
Indamaged the Othoman Empire, by making several Invasions, and Aiding the
Rebels in the Reigns of Mahomet, Bajazet, and of late in his Reign, yet he
esteemed them not as sufficient causes of War, but sought after his enemy,
young Amurath his Brothers Son, who had of late spoiled Cappadocia, whom if he
would quietly and friendly deliver unto him, he would withdraw his forces, and
peaceably return into his own Kingdom, otherwise with fire and Sword, he would
destroy, not only the frontiers of Armenia, but the heart of Persia also, and
so dismissing the Herald, both the Armies for that day lay still in their
trenches, expecting the dreadful event of Battle, and after both Armies were
Marshalled and put in order, the Bloody Blast was sounded, whereupon the
Persian Horsemen came on with great fury, making great Havoc of the
Vaunt-guard of Selymus his Army, overthrowing the Alapi or common Soldiers by
heaps, which are such as the Turks for the most part carry to stand the first
Shock of the Enemies fury, and to blunt their Swords, nor did the Turkish Horse
stand firm, but charged in either Wing gave ground, which Selymus seeing caused
his orders to open, and began with his great Ordnances to play furiously, to
avoid whose Murdering shot, the Persian Horsemen, opened likewise to the right
and the left, yet the thundering of the Cannon so amazed the Horses that many
of them cast their Riders, yet Hysmale with great fury broke and disordered the
Turks right Wing, composed of Asian Horsemen, but whilst Vsta Ogli was
endeavoring to do the same to the left, he was slain with a harquibus shot,
which much dismayed the Soldiers under his command, yet could they not be
forced to retire, till Selymus came on with all his Power of Janissaries, yet
gaining little ground, whereupon he commanded all his great Ordnance which he
had reserved as his last refuge, to be furiously discharged against the right
Wing of the Persian Horse, where Hysmael fought; by the violence of which such
a slaughter was made, as well of his own men as of the Enemies, mingled
together, that what for the dust, smoke, and thundering of the Artillery,
having on both sides lost their sight and hearing, the Persian horse were so
terrified that they were not to be ruled, wherefore the battle soon became
broken and disordered, so that both Armies retired upon the Approach of night,
leaving the Victory doubtful: The Turks to express the terror of this day,
number it amongst their dismal ones, calling it the only day of Doom.

Hysmael in this furious battle having received a wound under the left
Shoulder, with a small shot, by the persuasion of his friends withdrew himself,
to have his wound searched, which past doubt was the safeguard of Selymus and
his Army; for the Persians following their King, left the Victory almost
gotten, but the Persian finding his wound not mortal, was about to return, but
hearing of the Death of Vsta Ogli his General, a man of Great experience, and
that by reason of the Thundering of the great Ordnance, his Horsemen could not
rule their Horses, he caused the retreat to be sounded, and so retired in good
order, the Turks so much dispairing of Victory, that they durst not follow him;
and so he passing by the City of Tauris, admonished the Inhabitants to open
their gates to Selymus, thereby to avoid being sacked, and so Marched into the
Confines of Media.

The Persians out of sight, the Turks then and not till then durst seize upon
their Camp, where they found diverse rich Pavilions, wrought with Needle Work,
and Gold, as also many beauteous Ladies, who had accompanied their Husbands to
the Wars, all which he presently caused to be set at liberty, unless one of
Hismaels Wives, whom he gave in Marriage to one of his Bassas.

In this Battle fought in the Galderan Fields near the City of Coy, Anno 1514.
Selymus lost 30000 of his men, and amongst them many Bassas and great
Commanders, even all the flower of his Army, which consisted of 300000 Horse
and Foot, of the Persians there fell not above 8000 Hysmaels Army not
consisting of above 30000, so that the Turks were 8 to 1; And amongst the
slain, were found the Bodies of several Persian Women, who Armed had
accompanied their Husbands, to participate of their good or evil fortune, at
which Selymus admiring, caused them to be Honorably interred, and then
received the Ambassadors of the several adjacent Cities, who upon condition
their Goods, Lives and Liberties, might be preserved, delivered up the Keys of
their respective Cities, so that having taken possession thereof, he called a
Council of his Bassas and great Captains, to consult what was best to be done,
himself being desirous to Winter in Tauris, for opposing which Mustapha his
chief Bassa, was by him disgraced and thrust from all his honors, of which the
Janissaries having notice, began to Mutiny telling him to his face, they would
not stay in that desolate Country, where they had suffered such hardship, daily
to be exposed to the fury of the Enemy, who was raising great forces to come
down against them, and that if he would not in time depart, they were resolved
to forsake him, whereupon he as needs must, changed his former determination,
resolving to return into Cappadocia, whereupon contrary to his Promise,
exacting a great Mass of Money from them of Taurus, and carrying with him 3000
families, the best Artificers in that City, especially those that were Skillful
in making Armor, he raised his Camp, and Marched toward Euphrates, a longer
way then that by which he came, fearing to return again by the head of Araxis,
and the Mountains of Periardes, lest he should meet the Iberian and Albanian
Horsemen, who as he was informed were following hard after him, who indeed came
within sight of him, as he was passing the Euphrates, which raised such
consternation in his Camp, that in hastily passing the River, 2000 Turks were
drowned, and a great many of his Ordnance, together with much Baggage left as a
Prey to the Persians, nor had he better Success in passing the Huge Mountain
Anti-Taurus, for the Mountain Kings despising him, by reason of his bad
proceedings with their savage People, laid all the ways, and by frequently
falling upon the Rear of his Army, killed many of his People and took great
spoil, though the Kings upon his sending to complain thereof, excused the
matter, promising to punish the offenders so soon as they should be known; At
length passing the many dangers he came to Amasa, where he wintered with his
broken and crazed Army, resolving to return the next spring with a far greater
Power; the cause why Hismael being Lord of such great Countries, came with so
small a Power, was for that he to win the Hearts of his People the better to be
established in his new acquired Kingdom, had remitted most of the Taxes and
Customs, formerly paid to his Prodecessors, all his forces consisting in the
Soldiers of the Court, those that were by right bound to serve him, and such
as were sent to him by the petty Princes his Neighbors, when as on the other
side Selymus had always by him an Inestimable Mass of Money, kept in seven
Towers in Constantinople; his yearly tributes and revenues exceeding his
expenses by a fourth part.

Selymus not thinking himself sufficiently revenged of the Persians, having
reised his Camp at Amasa, Early in the Spring, passing the Euphrates with his
whole Army, consisting of 300000 Horse and Foot, came before Clamassum a City
of the Persians, situate on the further Banks, which he so suddenly invested,
and so furiously assaulted, that the Gates being broken up, and the Walls in
many places won, the defendants retired into the Marketplace, and there fought
against the whole Power of Selymus to the last man; after the taking of this
City, he took two Castles not far distant from it, and being pricked forward
with the desire of Glory, purposed to have subdued the Kingdom of Persia, which
he might the easier have done, by reason Hysmael was Waring against the
Bactrians and Hyrcanians, a savage People dwelling near the Caspian Sea, who
had Rebelled against him, but considering what damage he had received from
Aladeules the Mountain King, and others inhabiting the Desolate Countries, at
the entrance into Armenia, he purposed e're he further proceeded, to subdue
him, wherefore he Marched thitherward with all his People, of which the poor
Prince having notice, gathered all his strength, and drawing his Horsemen, who
were but 15000 into a pleasant Valley, commanded his Footmen to keep the
Mountains, and from thence with shot of Arrows annoy the Turks in passing the
straights, upon which Selymus considering the disadvantage of the place,
commanded Sinan Bassa General of the European Horsemen, to charge him with a
square Battle afront, whilst himself with the Janissaries and Asian Horsemen,
followed him in the Rear, the Ground by reason of its Scantiness, not admitting
the use of Wings, upon which a fierce fight was begun, and Atadeules fighting
Courragiously at the head of his men, forced the Turkish Horsemen to give
ground, which Selymus perceiving and that his Army was sorely Annoyed by the
Archers from the Mountains, drawing out 2000 Harquibusiers out of his own
Squadorn, he sent them to reinforce his Horse, and at the same time commanded
the Janissaries to Mount the Hills, which they doing charged the Foot with such
Fury, that they being sore distressed with the Harquibus shot, not being used
to such engines scattered and fled, so that a great number of them were killed,
e're they could clamber up the steep Mountains, and the Horse at that time
being discomfited, fled by well known ways, into the fastnesses of the steep
Rocks, after whom Selymus followed burning all before him, but finding he could
not overtake the King, who retiring before him, had fortified himself amongst
the Impregnible Rocks, and there stored up much provision, in hopes to weary
the Turks with tedious delay.

Selymus having perfect notice of all that had passed, by several Prisoners
that he had taken, thought it more fit to prevent his falling into necessity in
so barren a Country, to use Stratagems, where force could not prevail,
whereupon understanding that there was no good meaning between Aladeules, and
Alis Beg his General, (by reason that the King had formerly commanded his
Father to be slain, upon suspicion he designed to seize his Kingdom) he
releasing the Prisoners, sent them to Alis Beg with great rewards, to incite
him to deliver Aladeules into his hands, and that in Lieu thereof he of his
bounty would give him the Kingdom, which so wrought with the treacherous
General, that not finding means to kill the King, as he had purposed, he caused
all his Army to revolt to Sinan Bassa, whom Selymus had sent to pursue him; so
that being left alone, flying through many desolate places, at length hid
himself in a Cave, where being discovered by a Country Peasant, he betrayed him
into the Hands of those that sought after him, who presenting him to Selymus,
he caused his Head to be stricken off, and carried all over Asia the less in
manner of Triumph, and afterward sent it to the Senate of Venice, in token of
his Victory.

Selymus having subdued the Kingdom of Aladeules as aforesaid, and reduced it
into the form of a Province, making the Traitor chief Governor thereof,
returned to Constantinople, having, at the same time he was Waring against
Aladeules by his Bassas invaded Hungaria; and now having notice from his
Correspondents in Christendom, that Maximillian the Emperor, Vladislaus King of
Hungaria, Sigismond King of Poland together with the Princes of Germany, were
entering into a League against him, it caused him to make great Preparations
for the defense of his Territories, but in the end those Princes separated
without doing any thing worthy of their meeting. So that being freed from that
Fear, he left a strong Guard upon the Fronteers of his Empire, bordering upon
Hungaria, and departed to Iconium in Order, to prosecute his War against the
Persian; but during his stay at that City, he had certain notice that Campson
Gaurus Sultan of Egypt, with a great Army levied in Egypt and Judea, was coming
to Aid the Persian King, his Confederate as hating Selymus for his Cruelty
toward his Father, Brethren and Nephews, as likewise being jealous of his
aspiring Greatness, this News was Confirmed on all Hands: Selymus greatly
feared that if he should pass over the River Euphrates, the Sultan might enter
Asia and spoil his Dominions, wherefore he thought it safe if possible, to make
him his Friend, in order to which he sent the Cadelescher, or great Doctor of
the Mahomitan Law; A man much reverenced amongst the Turks, and Jachis one of
his great Captains, as his Ambassadors to desire the renewing the League,
sometime made between the Sultan and his Father Bajazet; but the Sultan moved
by the pittious Complaints of the Princes, Aladine Son to Mahomet, and the Son
of Aladeules, who as exiled Princes remained in his Court, and encouraged by
his great Captains to restore them to their rightful Possessions, would have no
Peace unless Selymus would leave off to invade the Persian, and restore the
Mountainous Kingdom to the young Aladeules; which upon the Report thereof so
enraged Sebymus, that he resolved to lay aside his intended War against
Hysmale, and turn all his Forces upon the Sultan, and therefore with words of
encouragement, having animated his Soldiers, he passed with his Army over the
Mountains in three places, and so appointing a great Company of the Common
Soldiers and Country people, for the opening of the straight Passages; he
Commanded the rough and uneven ways to be made smooth and plain, so that in
five Days all his Ordnance and Carriages were come into the Plains of Comagena,
where he received News of Campson's Army, from Alis Beg Governor of the
Mountain Kingom, which caused him to march toward him with all speed.

By this time Campson having notice of the approach (whom he could not at first
believe to have passed the huge Mountain of Amanus) stood long in doubt what
was best to be done, whether to give the Tyrant Battle, or to retire to Damasco
and protract the War, whilst fresh Forces could come to his Assistance: In the
latter Opinion Gazelles his great Counselor, and Governor of Apamia Concurred
with him, laboring earnestly to confirm him in that Opinion, but Destiny so
ordering it, he refused the good and wholesome Persuasions of Gazelles, and
embraced that of Cayerbeius, which was presently to give the Turks Battle;
which Council he gave though he knew it to be Destructive, that by such means
he might be revenged on the Sultan; who some years before had caused his
Brother to be poisoned, for designing to deprive him of his Empire.

Battle being resolved on, and the Turks Army coming on Campson divided his
Army into four Battles; the first whereof he committed to Cayerbeius the
Traitor, the second to Sybeius the Governor of Damasco, a man of singular
Faith and Valor; these two were appointed at once to Charge both Wings of the
Turkish Army, the third was lead by Gazelles, and the last by Campson himself,
who stayed with it for the defense of the Camp: Nor was Selymus Idle, for he
had placed the Asian Horsemen in the right Wing, and the European in the left,
and in the middle the Janissaries, and Artillery before, whom between the two
Wings, he had placed his Pentioners all most expert, and valiant Soldiers, and
in this Order the Turks always fight, if the Ground will admit so to Marshall
the Army.

Both Armies being thus set in Order, the Charge was sounded; whereupon
Cayerbeius with his Squadron Charged the European Horsemen with great Fury, but
resolving to betray his trust by and by, Wheeling off fell upon the Sullians
and such other Slaves as kept the Baggage, making some small slaughter, that as
a Valiant and cunning Traitor, he might at the self same time satisfy the
Expectation of his Valor, and of his Treason; but Sybeius the Governor of
Damasco dealt otherwise, for entering over-thwart the Ranks in the right Wing
of the Turks Army; he with his Mamalukes Charged with such fury, that having
made great slaughter of the Asian Horsemen, they broak in amongst them like a
devouring Tempest, bearing down all before them, till they came to the Insigns
in the midst of the Wing: Neither could Mustapha the Beglerbeg, nor Imbrahor
Bassa with all their Forces withstand him; or restrain the Flight of their
Soldiers, so that cutting in pieces the right Wing, he resolutely thrust in
between the Battle of the Janissaries and the Pentioners, and there made such
lamentable Slaughter that the whole Army was in great fear for Selymus, by the
breaking in of Sybeius, was divided from his Footmen, in whom he reposed his
greatest trust, and now the Janissaries hardly charged by Gazelles^; who
following the Fortune of Sybeius, had set upon the Front of the Enemies Battle,
the Asian Horsemen also put to the worst, found no means how again to restore
the disordered Battle.

In this Confusion Sinan Bassa came in with the Squadron of Horse, under his
Command, who had been but lightly Skirmished with by Cayerbeius, he stayed the
Fury of the Mamalukes; whereby the Turks taking fresh Courage, soon after wrung
the Victory out of their Hands; for the great Artillery being by the
Commandment of Selymus discharged amongst them, by the terrible Thundering
thereof, their Horses were so troubled that they could not well guide them,
neither could their Riders themselves though they were men of undaunted Courage
prevail, being on every side oppressed with the multitude of their Enemies;
yet in that disaster nothing dismayed, setting themselves close together, they
brake through the midst of their Enemies, with great slaughter of the European
Horsemen and Pentioners, and so with speed fled toward the Camp and City of
Aleppo; after whom followed Sinan Bassa with the swiftest Horse, so that the
News of the overthrow being known to Compson the Sultan, he endeavored what he
could to stay the flight of his Men, but the press being great, and the Turks
pursuing hard after them making great slaughter, every one shifting for himself
in that general Calamity without Respect to the Sultan, he was overborn in the
Press, and there by reason of the weight of his Armor and great Age, not able
to relieve himself was trodden to Death; who after wards being found amongst the
slain, was laid to the view of all People, that they might not flatter
themselves with his being alive, and so on his behalf fight more obstinately
for the future.

This great Battle cost Selymus 30000 men, and the Egyptians few less, amongst
which there fell 1000 Mamalukes, and was fought on the seventeenth of August,
Anno 1516. After which Selymus received the City of Aleppo into his obedience,
the Mamalukes being departed thence to Damasco; after whom he likewise sent
Jonuses Bassa and followed himself with all the Army, but before his Arrival
they were departed to Cair, and in a full Assembly chose Tomombeius (a
Circassian born) Sultan in the stead of Campson Gaurus, who took speedy Care
for providing all things necessary to defend his Countries from the Power of
the Turks, mustering great Companies of such, of his Slaves, as he thought fit
for the War, as likewise several Moors and Arabians. His Neighbors hiering
certian Persons for great Rewards, to Travel through the Arrabian Deserts into
Mesopotamia, and so to Hysmale the Persian King with the Letters, earnestly
requesting him to invade the Turks Dominions in Asia the less, or with all
speed to break into Comagena, and so to enclose Selymus with both Armies as he
lay in the Borders of Judea, and by that means greatly destress him, by reason
he had no Fleet at Sea to relieve him with Provision; and by that means might
revenge himself, and prevent his Territories from Invasion for the future.

Whilst these things was doing, Sinan Bassa with considerable Forces passing
through part of Arabia, seized upon the City of Gaza; of which Gazelles having
notice posted thither with 6000 Mamalukes, and a considerable number of Arabian
Adventurers, thinking to surprise the Bassa; but he having notice of his
approach, went to meet him with all his Forces: So that both Armies
incountering, the Egyptians after a Bloody fight, being over-powred by numbers,
and sore Gauled with Harqucbuss Shot, left the fight and fled toward Cair; but
whilst the Turks were departed on this Expedition, the Citizens of Gaza had
plundered their Camp, supposing them to be retired for Fear, and discomfited
2000 Turkish Horses, sent by Selymus to the Aid of Sinan Bassa, who retreating
were almost slain by the wild Arabs, and had certainly all perished, had they
not fortunately met with Juleb Governor of Achaia, sent with another Power;
yet the Arabians flocking about them, greatly annoyed them with their Shot from
the Hills, not giving them any time to rest; and such through weakness, or for
to seek Provision stragled from the Army, and were cut off; so that had not
Imbrahor Bassa met them out of Syria, they had never passed alive through those
Deserts, for the Arabians as men living upon spoil still pursued them, and in a
dispersed manner were continually hovering over their Army, yet long they had
not marched ever they met with Selymus, who with the remainder of his Army was
marching toward Gaza, when having notice from those that had been put to
flight by the Citizens thereof, what had befell them; he verily believed that
Sinan Bassa and all his men were either slain or taken Prisoners, till such
time as he was by the Syrian Scouts informed to the contrary, at which he not a
little rejoiced, yet the Arabians daily molested his Army: Insomuch that he was
enforced to place his Harquebusiers, and most of his Artillery in the Rear,
with order to Charge them as they saw occasion; and so in that Order he marched
till he came to Jerusalem, which was then altogether ruinated and defaced, from
whence after having viewed the holy Sepulcher, kept by a Company of poor, yet
devout Christians, who paid Tribute for that privilege to the Sultan of
Egypt, and having made his offering, and some miles distant met with Sinan
Bassa, who having put to Death the Authors of the revolt of that City, and
Exacted a great sum of Money of the rest, came forth to meet him, whom he
bountifully rewarded, giving to the Captains Garments of Silk, and to the rest
rewards, according to their Demerits.

After he had refreshed his Army at Gaza, for the space of four days, he
leaving a Garrison therein passed over the Dangerous, Desolate, and unpeopled
Sands; which at many times moved by the Wind, worked like a rough Sea, and
rising in the Air, hindered the sight of the weary Passingers; but such was the
good fortune of Selymus, that a little before he entered them, such store of
Rain fell that it not only allayed the Sand, but furnished his Army with Water
during his passage, which took up eight days, yet was he frequently assaulted
by the Arabians.

The Deserts passed as aforesaid, the Turkish Army drew near unto Cair to
receive, or rather entrap which Tomombeius the new Sultan, near to a Village
called Rhodania had entrenched his Camp with deep Ditches filled with Water,
over which he had laid rotten Hurdles, and upon them Earth, and lined all the
Banks with Artillery, not doubting but Selymus would march that way; but this
their Device, which would certainly have gained them a Victory had it took, was
upon the approach of the Turkish Army discovered to Selymus, by four Epirot
Mamalukes, who secretly Envying the sudden Advancement of Tomombeius, had in
the Night time withdrawn themselves from his Camp: Upon which Selymus altered
his determined Courses, and marching by by-ways suddenly appeared with his
Army, drawn up in Battalia in the Rear of the Egyptian Camp, which put them
into a great Consternation, but seeing no Remedy but presently to engage, the
Sultan put his Army in readiness, and after the Charge sounded furiously with
his great Ordnance, spoke his indignation, and was answered in the same
Language from Selymus his Camp; but after the second discharge of each
particular tire, the Armies joined Charging each other with such Force, that
all the Ground lay covered with the slain, the Mamalukes enraged with mortal
Hatred, bearing down all before them, when in the mean time the Arrabians
encompassed the Turks Battle, putting the Thracian, Macedonian, and Epirot
Horsemen to the flight, the which Sinan Bassa perceiving came in with his
Squadron of Horse, to stay the wavering Battle, but being overcharged by
Gazelles and Bidon he was slain, and his men disordered: So that had not
Selymus himself advanced with his surest strength of the Janizary, the Victory
had fallen to the Sultan; but with them restoring the Battle, and the Mamalukes
being tired with continual Fighting, at the approach of Night Tomombeius
finding his men to be worsted, caused the retreat to be sounded, and retired
toward Cair, leaving his Camp to the Turks.

In this Battle, fought on the 24. of January 1517. Were slain many Thousands
on both sides, and the Turks had certainly been worsted, had it not been for
the invincible Courage of the Janissaries. The Turks in pursuit, having taken
the Diadare, a man of great Command amongst the Egyptians, and Bidon the
valiant Captain, whom Selymus unworthily caused to be slain in revenge of the
Sinan Bassa.

Tomombeius a man of a warlike Spirit, nothing discouraged at what had
happened; but rather more resolute to revenge his disgrace, gathered his Power
from all parts, and encamped Commodiously between the City of Cair, and the
River Nilus, and there consulted, how he might by stratagem most conveniently
set upon the Turks Camp; ever they understood what Power he had, not thinking it
safe so suddenly to try another Field: But whilst he was thus plotting all his
devices were discovered to Selymus, as they had been before by several
Mamalukes, who now beginning to have his fortune in Contempt revolted from him:
Insomuch that to prevent the firing of his Camp as was intended. Selymus caused
strict Watches to be kept, and great Fires to be made, that so he might
discover the Enemies approaches by night; which the Sultan perceiving by the
advice of his great Commanders, retired into the City of Caire, there to expect
the approach of the Conqueror, furnishing it with all manner of Warlike
provision, and inciteing the Egyptians, who stood all this while Newters to
take up Arms, in the defense of their Country, which the more wealthy
whillingly did, but the poorer sort, who in all Nations ever gape after change
of Government, thinking to advantage themselves thereby; yet such were the
persuasions of the Mamalukes, that in the end most of the Citizens resolved
upon the defense of that great City, toward which Selymus was advancing a
pace, wherefore Tomombeius caused Trenches to be drawn Cross the Streets, at
the bottom of which were fixed sharp Stakes, and before them, Tin being
overlaid with rotten Hurdles, so to entrap the too eager Turks, for why, the
City had no Walls but situate upon the River Nilus, was adorned with many
stately Towers, Piramides, Palaces, Temples, and Monuments of the Egyptian
Kings, served rather for Pleasure then strength: He likewise caused the Houses
to be furnished with Harquebusiers, and his Pieces of Culvering, and other
small Pieces, to be every where planted Advantagiously for the annoying the
Enemy, and in the great Street drew up his greatest strength, consisting of
Mamalukes; yet Selymus being now come before it, after his having encouraged
his Soldiers to undertake the subduing of that great City, as the last Refuge
of the Sultan, he furiously entered the Gate called Basuela, and at one instant
thrust in his Horsemen at diverse Caves, but kept his Janissaries in the high
Street, where the greatest Power of the Mamalukes were: Whereupon a dreadful
Fight was begun on all parts, insomuch that the Channels run Blood like so many
Torrents; the Artillery and small Shot still thundering from either side, made
all seem Fire, and covered the tops of the Houses with Clouds of smoke; when
from their Windows, and Roof of their Houses, the Egyptians cast down Stones,
Tiles, scalding Water, Sulphur, Pitch, Tar, and the like, to the great
annoyance of the Turks, who still pressing forward many of them fell into the
Covert Trenches, and were there impailed on the Stakes; and such was the
Clamor and Outcries of the enemy, where together with the Clashing of Weapons,
and dreadful Fires, that it seemed as if the desolation of all things was come,
and in this dismal manner continued the Fight for the space of two Days, and
two Nights, without intermission: Insomuch that Selymus finding what obstinate
Enemies he had to deal with, began to despair of winning the City, and
therefore was about to sound the Retreat, as his fainting Soldiers most
earnestly desired, at what time he had News that Mustapha Bassa had by the
Conduct of some Fugitive Mamalukes, entered the City on the other side, and had
taken the Mamalukes Horses, which they had left there ready Sadled, thereon to
make their escapes, if matters came to the Extremity, which not only Animated
the Turks, but dismayed the Mamalukes, who expected no such Matter: So that the
Fight were renewed on the third day, continuing Bloody and doubtful till the
Evening, at what time most of the Egyptians were very desirous to be rid of
their insolent Lords; the Mamalukes revolted to the Turks, which the Mamalukes
perceiving, and that by Reason of the great number of Turks, that were sent to
stop the Gaps that Death had made, they were no longer able to resist their
Fury, they betook themselves to flight, most part of them hasting to the River
Nilus with Tomombeius (who in that Battle had all in vain proved the utmost of
his Prowess and Policy) being Transported over it in Boats fled to Segesta,
others of them fled into the Houses of the Egyptians, and into Caves, and
Vaults in the City to hide themselves. A thousand five hundred of the better
sort, betook them to the Temple of their pretended Prophet, where after an
obstinate and tedious defense, being disabled by Weariness, Thirst, and loss of
Blood; they surrendered themselves upon Diseretion, part of whom the furious
Soldiers slew in the Porch of the said Temple, and the rest within a few days
after, being sent down the River to Alexendria, were there contrary to the
Promise of Selymus put to Death.

This great City subdued after the manner aforesaid, Selymus Commanded a part
of his Army to extinguish the Fire, which raged vehemently in many places,
which done he exhibited a Proclamation, that all the Mamalukes, who within
twelve hours would furrender themselves should have pardon of Life; upon which
many came forth of their secret places, and that whosoever of the Egyptians
should conceal any one of them longer then the time specified, he threatened to
impail them alive on Stakes, and having sold their Wives and Children, to burn
their Houses; which dreadful menace on the one side, and hopes of Reward, which
was also Promised on the other, caused many of the Egyptians contrary to their
Promises to their old Lords, the Mamalukes to deliver some of them up to the
Tyrany of Selymus, who caused them to be put to Death; but some of the
Egyptians impeached by their malicious Neighbors, chose rather to suffer
Death, then to prove perfidious in breaking the solemn Protestations they had
made to their Lords: Nor did the Victorious Turks spare, though contrary to
Selymus his Promise to rifle the Houses of the Egyptians, Murder many of them,
and defloure their Daughters, and ravish their Wives even in their Presence,
and to use all other Cruelties incident to so great and populous a City, upon
the entry of an Hunger-starved Army greedy of prey.

At the taking of Cair Gazales, the great and Valiant Captain of the Mamalukes
was not present, but sent by Tomombeius to raise an Army in Arabia, who upon
his return finding all lost, and that the Sultan was fled he knew not where,
not thinking it Convenient to hazard a Battle against him, whom Fortune so
highly favored; he came to Selymus upon his Faith before given, for the safety
of himself and his Followers, which were three Arrabian Captains, and a number
of good Horsemen, and being admitted to his Presence boldly declared, that
since Fortune had made him her Darling, and that he by her aid, rather
Conquered the Mamalukes, then by any Force; and that since Tomombeins was fled,
whose part as long as his Kingly Authority and Majesty remained, he had
faithfully served, he and the rest were at his Devotion; if he so pleased to
serve him with their Life's and Fortunes, of which offer Selymus joyfully
accepted, highly Commending Gazeles both for his Virtue and Valor, which for
the most part gains Credit amongst the roughest Enemies, and not long after
sending him to suppress the Moors and Arabs, that made Incursions into the
Country about Cair; he suddenly overthrew them, and ever he was expected
returned with Victory.

Tomombeius being in the Country of Segesta, whilst Selymus was settling his
matters at Cair, raised a considerable Army, and the rather for that he had
frequent advice from the Carians, that if he would come suddenly upon the
Turks, they would raise such a Tumult that he should not only recover the City,
but destroy the Army who were but few in number, and most of those weak through
their Wounds and Sickness, but ever he could put this Design in Practice, one
Albuchomar a man of great Wealth and Authority in the Country of Segesta,
discovered the design to Selymus; who caused all such Citizens as he suspected
to be shut up in the Castle, and continually guarded the Streets, placing along
the River Boats, and Men and Artillery to keep the Enemy from repassing it, and
not well assured to hold what he had got, from such desperate and resolute
Enemies as were the Mamalukes; of whom a great Power were again resorted to
Tomombeius, he resolved to send Ambassadors to him, to advise him to submit,
and in yielding to his Clemency he would provide for him in some other part of
his Dominions, but ever the Ambassadors came to his Camp, they were waylaid by
certain Mamalukes, who had vowed no Peace with the Turks, and without respect
to their Character shamefully murdered them, upon notice of which Selymus who
was of a hot fiery Nature, was so enraged that he could scarcely contain
himself: And thereupon Commanded a strong Bridge made of Boats and Planks, to
be laid over Nilus, resolving to revenge the affront done to his Majesty, the
which once finished he drew the greatest part of his Army out of Cair, (leaving
only so many as might keep the City from revolting) with an intent to pass into
the Country of Segasta, to wast it with Fire and Sword; of which Tomombeius
having knowledge, by speedy marches came to the Bridge at what time the Asian
Horsemen were passed over, and setting furiously upon them ever they had well
put themselves in Order, making great slaughter of such as resisted: Insomuch
that many to avoid the Swords of their Enemies by leaping into the River were
there drowned, others in passing the Bridge were thrust beside and miserably
perished in the Water. Nor could Mustapha Bassa with all his Courage resist the
Fury of the Mamalukes, all the Turks being filled with Fear and Consternation,
as well on the hither as the further Bank; the Artillery was for a while
rendered useless, by reason that if it had been discharged, it must have been
against the Turks only, who in fearful Troops covered the further Bank,
calling for Help to those on the other side; Selymus seeing in what state
Assairs stood, caused all his Boats to be brought, and filling them with
Janissaries passed them over, who Ranging in good order stayed the Fury of the
Mamalukes; when as Carrgolis Son to the Tartar King, and Brother-in-Law to
Selymus, with his Horsemen took the Water and Swom over with little loss: So
that now the Battle went hard on all sides, and strongly did the Mamalukes
press on to gain the Head of the Bridge; the which they had done by Cutting the
Cables that fastened it, they had set it afloat down the River, and destroyed
that part of the Army, with whom they were engaged, ever they could have been
relieved by their Fellows; which Mustapha perceiving, had drawn to that place
both his Insigns, and his most experienced Soldiers, so that the Fight was for
a long time maintianed Bloody and doubtful, but the Turks still coming over in
great abundance, true Valor was obliged to give place to Multitudes; for the
Mamalukes who had done all that men could do, betook themselves to Flight;
after whom the Tartarian Horsemen followed with great Slaughter, as likewise
did Mustapha Gazeles, and Cayrebeius, Selymus being desirous of nothing more
then that Tomombeius might fall into his Hands, which at length fell out
according to his wish; for, the next Day he was overtaken, when making head
with his slender Train, he Fought right valiantly, but at length overcome he
again fled, yet so strict was Selymus his command, that the great Captains
still pursued him, denouncing all manner of Torture to the poor Villagers, if
they did not so watch the passages of the great Marsh, whereinto he was
entered, that he should by no means escape; whereupon on the third day finding
himself hard beset on everyside, he willingly gave his followers leave to
forsake him, and laying aside his Insigns of Royalty hid himself amongst the
Flags and Bushes, standing up to the Neck in Water, where being found by the
Country Peasants, he was drawn thence and delivered to the Bassa Mustapha, who
brought him together with several of his Captains to Cair, where Selymus
resolving before hand to put him to Death, thereby to appease the Ghosts of his
slain Ambassadors would not admit him to his presence, but commanded him to be
delivered to the Tormentors, that with exquisite torments they might make him
reveal the Treasure of Campson Gourus, supposed by him to have been hid, all
which he endured with a manly courage and stern Countenance, uttering nothing
unbeseeming his Character, after which he in tattered Garments with his Hands
bound behind him, being set upon a lean Ill-favored Camel, was in division
carried through all the Public places of the City to be Gazed at as a
Spectacle of Misery, by those who not a Month before had honored with profound
Reverence, as their great and mighty King, now by the hand of Fortune thrown
from the top fo all worldly honor, into the Abyss of extremest Misery, and in
this manner the insulting Turks having brought him to the chief Gate of the
City, extended their cruelty yet farther by strangling him with a Rope, and
that he might be the better seen of all that passed by, Hanged him upon a hook
under the Gate; nor did any of the Princes of the Mamalukes who fell into the
Turks Hands fare otherwise.

The Terror of Selymus his man Victories now spreading wide, all the Cities of
Egypt submitted to the Conqueror, no place between the River Nilus, and the
Borders of India and Arabia, that were either Tributaries or Confederates to or
with the Sultan, but sent their Ambassadors with Presents to Selymus, promising
to continue the same with him, as they have done with the Sultans, only the
wild Arabians stood at defiance till such time as with large Gifts he had won
many of their great Captains to bring their People over to his obedience; at
what time Amyrases submitted himself, and delivered into his possession the
Egyptian Fleet, built to oppose the Portugise Trade in the Indias, and so
Swimming in the current of Fortunes favor, he extended his Dominions as far as
the confines of the Great King of Aethiopia called Prester-John, and thus
having reduced all to his obedience, he came down the River Nilus in his Gally
to Alexandria, and having well reviewed it, returned again to Cair, from whence
he commanded 500 Families of the Wealthier sort of the Egyptians to be removed
to Constantinople, for the Transportation of which Vessels were purposely
prepared; as also a great number of Women and Children of the Race of the
Mamalukes, thereby to prevent future troubles, and then staying a while to
observe the overflowing of Nilus, from which the Egyptians Prognosticate a
happy or unhappy Season, as it rises little or much, he resolved to depart for
Syria, having made Cayrebius the Traitor Governor of Cair, and his great
Lieutenant of Egypt, which he had reduced into a Province, whereat Jonuses the
Great Bassa greatly envying, as supposing himself greatly wronged by Selymus,
whom he had faithfuly served in all his Wars, in heaping upon a Traitor the
honor which he greedily expected by opening his mind therein, and refusing to
deliver the Largesses appointed for the Soldiers thereby to render his
Competior odious, he fell so far into the Emperors displeasure, that
notwithstanding all the excuse he made in defense of himself, he caused him to
be Strangled even in his presence, thereby to deter others from daring to
prescribe him what he should Act, or on whom he should bestow his favors, yet
was the fall of this great Bassa worthily Lamented of the Soldiers, who spared
not to tell the Tyrant to his Face of his many Barbarous Cruelties, repeating
all the Inhumane Murders he had caused to be committed, but others again
remembering how this Bassa had during his being in favor with Selymus,
causelessly Stabed his Fair and Virtuous Wife Manto, upon a jealous, tho false
and Groundless Suspicion of her Inconstancy, said it was a Judgment of God
upon him for that Barbarous and unnatural Crime.

Selymus having left Egypt, and arrived in Syria, received Letters from
Himbracor the Great Master of his Horse, whom he had left upon the Frontiers to
attend the motions of the Persians, certifying him that Hismael's great
preparations were dwindled into nothing by reason that most of his forces
consisting of Voluntary Gentlemen, who served at their own charges, and they
not bound to pass the Limits of their Country, had refused to invade the
Turkish Frontiers, during the Wars with the Sultans of Egypt. All the following
Winter Selymus stayed to settle his Affairs in Syria, but early in the Spring
having notice from his Lieutenant in Europe; that Pope Leo the tenth had
stirred up the Christian Princes, to invade his Territories on that side,
leaving Gazeles his Lieutenant in Syria, he hasted with his Army to
Constantinople, where he no sooner arrived but making great preparations, he
resolved to bend all his forces against the Christians; but 'ere he could
perform his design God (who as he pleses restrains the power of Tyrants, even
in their greatest pride, to make him sensible that he was but a mortal Man)
struck him with a grievous Canker in the Reins of his Back, which deriding Art
admitted of no cure, but daily increasing with horrible pains, he still Rotting
above-Ground, and well-nigh Poisoning such as were about him with the noisome
Contagion, in his way to Hadrianople, in order to the Solemnizing the profane
Feast called Bai^^m (or as they Term it the Feast of their Prophet) he Breathed
out his dismal-Ghost Anno 1520, near to the City Chiurlia, on the very spot
where he had formerly lifted up his Impious Sword against his Father Bajazet,
with purpose to have bereaved him of his Life and Empire, dying after he had
Reigned eight Years and lived 46, filling the World with Murders and prodigius
Slaughters, and was Buried in a new Temple at Constantinople, Erected for the
purpose by his Son Solomon, who succeeded him in the Ottoman Empire, and in
token of his restless Nature, upon his Tomb is Engraven in Greek, Turkish and
the Sclavonian Tongues, this following Epitaph.

H^^ M^ximus adsum Selymus, qui orbem Dom^i; non Bell^ retinquo, etc.

In English thus.
Lo here I lie great Selymus, who held the world in fear,
The World I leave, yet not the Wars which I seek, tho not here.
Not Fortunes chance, nor Victors Hand could take from me the Spoils.
And tho my Bones lie Buried here, my Ghost seeks Bloody Broils.
CHAP. XV. The Life of Solomon, the first of that Name, and fourth Emperor of
the Turks, who for his many great exploits, or rather Lofty Carriage, was
Surnamed the Magnificent.
SElymus being dead, his Death was Concealed by Ferha^es, the only Bassa
present at his Departure, till such time as Solomon came from Magnesia, lest
the Soldier but especially the Janissaries should have Spoiled and Plundered
the Merchants-Strangers residing in the great City of Constantinople, as is
usual with them in Interregnums, as they call them, which are accounted from
the Death of the proceeding Emperor, to the time the Succeeding Emperor is
presented to be proclaimed by the men of War; but such was the Incredulity of
Solomon, that knowing his Fathers cruel Nature, and Jealous apprehension of his
intent to Aspire to Empire, for which he had often been in danger of his Life,
could not believe what he most desired, till he had it certified from all
Hands, upon which with more then ordinary speed, he hasted to Constantinople,
and there being met by the Great Bassas, and the Aga of the Janissaries he was
lead into the midst of the men of War, drawn up for that purpose, when as the
Aga or chief Captain with a loud Voice said, Behold your emperor, upon which
immediately followed an Universal Shout, succeeded with the Joyful Acclamation
of, Longlive the great Emperor Solomon (which consent of the men of War is to
the Turkish Emperors, the greatest Assurance of their safe Establishment in
their Empire) and so in great Triumph they brought him into the Royal Palace,
and placed him in his Fathers Seat Anno 1520, at what time Charles the fifth
was chosen Emperor of Germany.

The Janissaries by this means disappointed of the Spoil of the Goods, belonging
to the Jewish and Christian Merchants, in Lieu thereof received of the new
Emperor great Sums of money, and had during his Reign, their wage Augmented;
upon the Death of Selymus, Gazeles whom he had made Governor of Syria,
revolted from Solomon, and drew after him the remaining power of the Mamalukes,
seizing upon several Cities, but being Fought with by Ferates Bassa sent
against him with a great power, he after a long and Bloody Fight was Slain, and
his forces put to Flight; upon which all the Cities of Syria were again reduced
to the Turkish obedience: And now Solomon desirous to get himself a Name, by
the Counsel of Pyrrhus-Bassa his Tutor resolved to bend his forces against the
Christians, who by Reason of the Dissensions amongst themselves, lay open to
his Invasion (a fatal oversight which ever gave the Ottoman Emperors, the
opportunity to enlarge their Dominions on the Borders of Christendom) whereupon
raising a great power, and enteriung Hungaria, he took Belgrade almost without
resistance, against which in vain Mahomet the Great, Amurath and Bajazet had
lost 500000 Men; Belgrade strongly Garrisoned he dispersed part of his Army,
and returned to Constantinople, making great preparations for Sea against the
Spring, as having an Eye upon the famous Island of Rhodes, of which the
Rhodians not being Ignorant chose for their great Master Philippus Villerius, a
man of great Wisdom and Courage, then following the French Court; but upon
notice thereof took Shipping at Marcelles, and arrived safe in the Port of the
City Rhodes (tho Solomon had sent out Cortug Ogly, a famous Pirate of the
Turks, with several Galleys to intercept them) whereupon at his arrival he was
installed by the Knights of the Order and Citizens, with great Triumph, and
more then ordinary expressions of Joy.

Solomon not a^^ering his Determination, yet desirous to know how the Rhodians
stood affected, and to learn all that was possible of their number, and the
Strength of the City, sent diverse insinuating Letters with Superscriptions of
his Thundering Titles to the great Master, of which this is one, viz. Solomon
by the Grace of God, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, greatest Emperor of
Constaminople, and Trepezond; most Mighty King of Persia, Arabia, Syria, Egypt,
Lord of Asia and Europe, Prince of Mecha and Aleppo, Ruler of Jerusalem and
Master of the Universal Sea, to Philippus Villerus Lilladamus great Master of
Rhodes, etc. But neither these thumping Titles, nor his Threats and Promises,
could move the great Master to hearken to his Request, which was that he would
become his Tributary, and to deliver into his possession the City and Island;
so that finding his Expectations Frustrated, and that his Name was not so
terrible as he supposed, after many Letters had passed and repassed, he caused
a Fleet of 200 Galleys to be furnished with all things necessary, for the siege
of that strong city, of which the great Master being Advertised, was not
wanting on his part to put all things in order for making a most resolute
defense, causing Watch and Ward to be kept in every Street, and the great
Artillary to be planted upon the Walls, and Bulwarks, opening all the Armories
of the City, and furnishing every man with Weapons, appointing to each his
Station, there to be ready when occasion required his Service, and then taking
a General Master of such as were fit for Service, he found about 5000 resolute
men, amongst whom were six hundred Knights of the order, each of them capable
of Commanding a vast Army, as likewise 500 Soldiers of Cr^^^; there were come
thither for fear of the Turks, a number of Villagers, who served to Sink Sounds
to Countermine the Enemy, and to cast up Rampires, etc.

Things thus ordered, the great Master calling together his Commanders and
Soldiers, encouraged them in a most Christian-like manner, to fight boldly
against the Enemies of Christ, and rather to dye in the defense of their
Religion, then to submit themselves to the Tyra^my of the Barbarous Infidels,
putting them in (...) of the Valor of their Ancestors, and of the aid they
were to expect from the Christian Princes, etc. Which S^ee^h so Animated the
Commanders and Soldiers, that they desired nothing more then to show their
prowess to the World.

By this time the Turks Galleys were put to Sea, and about twenty being the
forerunners of the Fleet for many Days braved the Rhodians before their own
Port, whereupon the Great Master called a Council to know whether they should
be Fought with or not, to procure which the Chancellor a man of Admirable
Courage earnestly Labored, but the de^andents being but few, and therefore the
smallest loss at Sea, tho they should gain the Victory, might be a means to
Weaken the City, yet at length it was resolved upon, that they should be
permitted to Land in any part of the Island, except the Port without
resistance, which they accordingly did, burning up the Corn, and making great
Spoil as they passed, yet durst they attempt nothing against the City, but
again entering their Galley stood off to Sea, to join with the rest of the
Fleet, which on the 26 of June, Anno 1322, was from the Watchtower standing
upon St. Stephens Hill discerned, and notice given thereof to the Great Master,
who caused Public Prayers to be put up to God, that as it was his pleasure,
that they at that time should become the Champions of the Christian Religion,
that so of his infinite Goodness, it would please him to strengthen them, and
give them Victory over the Enemies of his name, etc.

Prayers ended every man betook him to his charge, when as the fleet sailing by
in Triumph, the Vice Admiral of the Turks in the middle, having a fair Wind,
struck Sail directly before the Mouth of the Haven, and caused his Galley to
row toward the entrance of the Port, Guarded with two strong Towers, from
which he received such a thundering welcome, that he was enforced to retire, and
so with the rest of the fleet failing along the coast they came to a Promontory
called by the Inhabitants Bow, where thrusting their Galleys into a small
Haven, they landed their Artillery, and other necessaries fit for the Siege,
the whole Army consisting of 200000 men; and whilst they were preparing to
entrench themselves, the Great Master sent Ambassadors to Charles the Emperor,
and the French King, as likewise to the Pope, and Princes of Italy for aid, but
they by reason of the broils amongst themselves, returned the Ambassadors only
with fair promises in stead of performance.

The City of Rhodes is Situate upon plain ground, every where to be besieged,
except toward the North, which is defended with a good Haven, and is
encompassed about with a strong double Wall, and deep Trenches, threatening the
Enemy with 13 stately Towers, 5 Bulwarks, and many strong Gates, and what was
more available, within the City was kept a strict and orderly manner of warlike
discipline. The defense of the whole City was thus proportioned; From the
French Tower the which for its exceeding height seems to kiss the Clouds, stood
the Frenchmen with the Lillies in their Ensign, under Johannes Abinus a Knight
of the order, from thence to St Georges Gate lay the Germans with their Eagle
Ensign, in the third station were placed the French of Avernois with the
Spaniards, for that the ditches in that place were neither so deep nor broad as
in others, next to them lay the English, commanded by the great Master himself,
and lastly were placed they of Narbona and the Italians, under the Command of
Petrus Balinus, and Gregorius Morgutus, Valiant Knights of the Order.

Whilst Affairs stood thus, several Turkish Women slaves to the Rhodians, had
conspired that when the Assault was given, they would set their Masters houses
on fire, thereby to discourage the Soldiers, and draw them from their defenses
to extinguishing the flame, but this treachery being timely discovered the
Conspirators were executed; by this time the Turks had planted several
batteries, and began to play upon the English Bulwark, but without doing any
considerable damage, when on the other side, the Cannon from the Walls
furiously playing upon the Turkish Pioneers, as they were breaking Ground,
scattered their dead Bodies all over the Plain, when at the same time a strong
party Sallying out, cut off a great number of such as were sent to guard them,
during their running the trenches, which so discouraged the rest, that they
began to Murmur and Mutiny against their Commanders, seeming daily more and
more unwilling to hazard their lives against so strong a City, and such
resolute Enemies, which caused Pyrrhus Bassa General of the Army, to send
Letters to Solomon then residing at Constantinople, to inform him: That if he
would have the Siege go forward, he must without delay come in person, for that
the Soldiers without regard of shame were ready to rise in Mutiny, and to
abandon the Siege, refusing to be commanded by their Captains, upon notice of
which Solomon caused his Galleys to be made ready. And on the 28 of August came
himself to the Camp, where reading in the Countenances of his Soldiers, the
little mind they had to continue the Siege, he was exceeding wroth, when
causing them all to be disarmed, he commanded 15000 harquibusiers to incompass
them (which Harquibusiers he had brought with him) and Mounting his Pavilion
for that purpose erected, he rated with many bitter words, calling them Slaves
and Cowards, after which he encouraged them to assume their Pristine courage
and fight manfully against the City, till they had subdued it, and thereupon
pronounced pardon to all that had offended, and swore them again to his
obedience, after which the City was furiously battered, with shot of incredible
weight, and huge stones for many days, and was as manfully defended by the
Rhodians, so that in 200 shot there were but 10 men slain, though several
houses were shattered, with their force, of which the Turks having notice from
one Appella a Citizen of Rhodes, who was for the same executed as a Traitor.

The Turks perceiving the former Battery ineffectual, raised a huge Mount, on
which they placed 40 great Ordnance with which they played furiously upon the
Tower of St. Nicholas, which was valiantly defended by one Guido a Frenchman,
to whom the charge of it was committed, but ever they had made many shot, most
of their Pieces were dismounted by the Cannon from the City, nor durst they,
when they had made a Breach, enter it; but used great Diligence to undermine
the Wall, thirty two of which Mines were frustrated by Countermines; yet they
so plied it, that on the fourth of September having undermined the English
Bulwarks, they blew part of it up, and in it diverse of the Defendants; at which
Breach the Turks attempti^^ to ^^t^r, were k^^ed in the Breach to the number of
2000. Which the rest observing, betook themselves to (...) Heels, but being
forced thereby to please the Tyrant, they three days after renewed the Assault,
but with worse success then before; yet though they did as much as in them were
possible, Soly sent them a (...) to enter at the said Breach, in attempting
which ^^^0 were slain, amongst whom were many great Commanders, though not
without some loss to the besieged; for in expulsing them fifty Knights of the
Order, and 100 of lesser Note were slain. These great Losses made the Bassas
more wary, resolving not longer to assail the besieged with plain Force, but to
work under ground, and by that means to overthrow the Walls, but therein, for
the most part they were unsuccessful, as being frustrated by the Countermines;
yet by so weakening the Walls, they rendered it more liable to the Force of
their Artillery, beating down great Pieces thereof, yet stood hovering about,
being afraid to enter, and yet not daring to retire, though they were mowed
down in abundance by the great Shot, for fear of the Tyrants displeasure; yet
at length creeping under the Walls to the Spanish Bulwarks, they surprised it,
whilst their Soldiers were drawn off to relieve their Fellows, hardly Charged
by Achmetes Bassa, but ever they had kept it two hours it was again recovered,
and all the Turks either put to the Sword, or thrown over into the Ditch, where
they miserably perished: And the Bassa sore Gauled by the Flankers was forced
to retire, though not without great slaughter of his Men, who lay on heaps in
the Ditch and Breaches, which Solomon perceiving caused the retreat to be
sounded; in this Assault, by the Valor of the Christians, 20000 Turks fell,
which so grieved Solomon, that in a great rage he Commanded Mustapha Bassa, the
first mover of the War to be slain, as likewise Pyrrhus Bassa, for daring to
entreat for him; but upon the humble Supplication of his Men of War on their
behalf, he remitted the Execution of the Sentence, but would not for a long
time receive them into Favor. He also Commanded the Admiral of his Galleys to
be put to Death, for suffering Provision to be carried by Sea into the City;
but at the entreaty of Achmetes his Life was spared, but he not absolutely
pardoned; for being set upon the Stern of his Ship, he there as a Slave by the
Commandment of Solomon received 100 Stripes, and so much was the Tyrant grieved
for the re-ite-rated losses sustained in that Siege, that he was about to have
raised his Camp and returned to Constantinople, the which he had done, had not
Achmetes Bassa persuaded him to the contrary, by Promsing to make him speedily
a way into the City; at which he taking Courage again heartned his Men to
continue the Siege, whose Resolutions had long before fainted; upon which
Achmetes to make good his Promise, assailed with all the Forces under his
Command, the Vamures of the Avergnon Station, the which although they were not
high, were valiantly defended by the Rhodians; yet the Turks Power increasing,
they were at last taken, and a great Pent-House claped to the Wall, to secure
the besiegers from the Shot of the besieged, notwithstanding Persanes a notable
Engineer caused such abundance of Wildfire, Pitch, Tar, Lead, hot Ashes, and
Water to be thrown on them, that they were forced to retire; but such was the
miserable Condition of the Turkish Soldiers, that they were forced back again
by their Commanders, even into the mouth of Slaughter, or else by them slain as
Cowards, or Flyers; yet for all they could do, the Rhodians forced them to
retire in great disorder, which enraged Solomon even to Madness, but perceiving
that his Honor lay at Stake, he again by many persuasive Arguments prevailed
with them, to give another Assault, promising them great Rewards if they
prevailed, and threatening those with Death, that should be remiss in the
performance of their Duty, which either, through Hopes or Fear Animated them to
another Assault, but with no better success then before; for being miserably
rent by the murdering Shot from the Flankers and Countermurers, they were
forced to retire leaving Piles of their Dead in the Breach and Ditch; and now
being altogether heartless, yet extremely vexed that they should be foiled with
a handful of Men, they resolved for the futere to be the more wary, and rather
to tire the Rhodians with continual Alarums then venture upon them, when in the
mean time they set their Pioneers at work, to make way through the Breach deep
in the Ground, and for their defense turned their great Artillery upon it, to
prevent the Rhodians Sallying, and with their multitude proved therein so
successful, that in a short time they had gained within the City 200 paces in
breadth, and 150 in length; yet durst not Sally out to Scale the Countermurers,
which the Rhodians had made of the Houses beaten down by the Turks Shot, which
Solomon perceiving at the instance of Achmetes, caused a parley to be offered;
offering many reasonable Conditions, if the Rhodians would at length surrender
the almost ruined City; but, and in Order thereto sent Hieronymus Monelia a
Genoway, who having procured safe Conduct, would not deliver his Message but to
some particular men, which so incensed the Knights of the Order, who now had
set down a Resolution to dye in defense of the City; that one Franciscus
Farnovius a French Knight of singular Valor, bent his Piece against him, and
would not suffer him to do his Message; but the Citizens hearing there were
Terms of Life and Liberty offered by the insulting Tyrant, came to the House of
the great Master, and beseeched him to take pity on them, their Wives and
Children, and that since he well saw that the City was not long tenable, he
would in time provide for their safety, and not expose them to the Fury of
their Merciless Enemies; whereat the great Master, a man of singular Piety, as
well as Warlike Ardour, being moved to Compassion sent Antonius Groleus, and
Robartus Barusinus his Ambassadors to Solomon, having first received Pledges
for their safe return, who coming into the Emperors Presence, told him that
they were sent to know for what cause he had sent to require Parley, who in a
fuming heat as if he had been Ignorant of the matter said, there was no such
thing offered, and thereupon Commanding them presently to avoid his Camp, sent
them away with Letters to the great Master and Citizens to this Effect.

If I had not Compassion of human Infirmities, which often times tumbleth
Headlong men's Ambitions, and haughty minds into most dangerous and unnecessary
Mischiefs; truly I would not have directed to you these Letters at this time,
but as you have well deserved, persecute you with Death, and most Miserable
Servitude, which how easy a thing it were for me to do, you your selves know,
but having now sufficiently tried my force, if you be wise make proof of my
Clemency, you have already satisfied your own fury, your own mad humor:
Therefore now advise your selves, lay your Hands upon your Hearts, and without
delay yield your selves, as I command your Lives, I give you your Wealth, and
more then that your choice to tarry there still or depart, refuse not the Grace
freely Offered, which was of you to have been most heartily desired; it shall
not be always Lawful (as at this present) to make choice of both, etc.

Upon the return of the Ambassadors, the Citizens of all sorts flocked
together, to the Great Masters House, standing near the Breach to implore him
to accept of any Reasonable terms, who after he had dismissed the Multitude,
calling to him the Knights of the Order, and chief Citizens, after the Letters
read, he expressed himself after this manner.

You heard (sacred Fellows in Arms, and Valiant Citizens of Rhodes) these
imperious and sorrowful Letters, whereunto how we are to answer, requires no
great deliberation; we must as resolute men either yield or dye, all hopes of
Victory is gone, except foreign aid come speedily to our Succor; wherefore if
you will follow my Counsel, let us with Weapons in our Hands until the last
Gasp and spending the last drop of our Blood like Valiant men, defend our Faith
and Nobility, received from our Ancestors, and the honor which we have of long
time gotten, both at home and abroad, and let it never be said that our honor
dyed but with our selves.

This Speech was approved of by all the Knights of the Order, and most of the
Soldiers, but the Citizens looking back upon their Wives, Children, and Wealth,
stood mute for a good while, but at length Pity working in their Breast, they
humbly besought the Great Master; that he would yet have Compassion on them,
and accept of the Tyrants reasonable Conditions, since Fame sufficient had been
won by their doing all that men were capable of performing, and that they would
yet hazard their Lives to the utmost, if they perceived any hopes of defending
the City, or that any forain aid in time would come to their assistance, but
since neither of them were to be expected it was but reasonable to yield to
inevitable necessity. After these and many the like Arguments, and others of
the resolute Soldiers, and Commanders on the contrary, it was concluded that
the City was not capable of being defended by so small a Power, against such a
numerous Army, whereupon Messengers were sent to require a Truce for 4 Days,
which was accordingly granted, during which time the Turks presuming on the
Truce, came in great number to View the Works, at which Fornovius a French man
being greatly offended, in a great heat without any command from the Great
Master, caused a Fire of Artillery to be discharged amongst the thickest of
them; whereupon they pretending a Breach of Truce on the part of the Rhodians,
thrust in at the Breach in great Troops, but after a sharp Skirmish were forced
to retire, in revenge whereof one of the Turks Fencers having taken 3
Christians, cut off their Hands, Noses and Ears, and in that posture sent them
into the City, threatening within 4 Days to serve the Great Master after the
same manner; yet Solomon dissembling the matter, signed and swore to the
Articles of Peace brought to him for that purpose by Nicholas Vergotus, and
Georgius Sandriticus, which were to this Effect; That the Churches should
remain unto the Christians inviolate, that no Children should be taken from
their Parents, or any Christians be enforced to embrace the Mohammedan
Superstition: That such Christians as were Contented to remain in the City,
might so do at their Pleasure, and that such as would depart, might have
Liberty so to do with all their Substance, to be furnished with Convenient
Shipping, Provision, and Ordnance as far as Creet, that the Christians should
appoint a reasonable Day for their Departure, and that in Consideration
thereof, the City to be delivered up to such as Solomon should appoint to take
Possession thereof.

Upon the aforementioned Articles, though they were not all observed by the
Turks; the City was delivered up Anno 1522. after it had endured six Months
Siege, and cost Solomon the Lives of 80000 of his Soldiers, having been in the
Possession of the Knights of the Order 214 years: Upon which the great Master
being for his Gravity, Virtue, and Valor highly Honored, and applauded by the
Conqueror embarked (together with the Knights of his Order, and such others as
would accompany him) and the Galleys for that purpose ready in the Port, and
sailed to Mesina, where he was joyfully received, and after invited to the
Courts of most of the Christian Princes, having with Indignation refused
Solyman's great Offer made to him, provided he would have accompanied him to
Constantinople, and have spent the remainder of his Days in his Service.

And thus for want of Relief (the Christian Princes at that time being at
Variance amongst themselves) the famous Rhodes was lost, where Solomon having
stayed awhile to settle his Affairs appointed a Governor, and so breaking up
his Army returned to Constantinople, where for the space of three years he
lived Peaceably, giving himself up to all manner of Pleasures; but at the end
thereof perceiving the Discord amongst the Christian Princes, managed by Pope
Adrian the sixth to grow hot (a fatal oversight that ever gave the Ottoman
Kings and Emperors opportunity of extending their Dominions) he conceived it
best to fish in troubled waters, and thereupon raising an Army of 200000 Horse
and Foot; he fell like a Tempest upon Hungary, subduing all before him till he
came within sight of the Walls of their chief City, at what time Lewis the
young King persuaded thereto by Tomoreus a Friar, who assured him of the
Victory, and several other rash Counselors, not regarding those of more
Gravity, that diswaded him from so rash an Attempt; with an Army of scarce
30000 raw Soldiers gave him Battle, but was overthrown with miserable Slaughter
of his men, and himself seeking to escape, passing over a Fenny Ditch his Horse
fell backwards, upon which, he was laden with his Armor, and none coming to
his Relief, he was smothered in the Water and Mud: In this Battle fought on the
29. of October Anno 1526. perished most of the Hungarian Nobility, and well
near all the Common Soldiers.

After this great great Victory obtained, Solomon having most of the strong
Cities delivered into his Possession; gave the Kingdom to Joannes Sepusius
Vayvod of Transylvania, and taking with him such things of Price as he thought
convenient, leaving two of his Bassas with flying Armies on the Frontiers, he
returned to Constantinople, but he was no sooner departed and John Crowned by
the Consent of the remainder of the Hungarian Nobility (who durst do no other
for fear of the Turks) but Ferdinand King of Bohemia laid Claim to the Kingdom,
and to make his Title more apparent, sent his Ambassadors to the Courts of
diverse Christian Princes, to declare from whom he derived his Claim; when aided
by Charles the Emperor his Brother, he entered Hungary with a great Army, and
without any considerable Resistance took the strong City of Buda; at what time
many of the Hungarians joined with him, as not in the least favoring John; so
that fearing delays might be dangerous, he caused his Army under the leading of
his expert Captains to pass over the River Tibiscus upon a Bridge of Boats, and
marched directly to the Cattle of Tocai, where King John lay with his Army;
where the Battle being joined after a sharp Dispute, the Victory fell to
Ferdinand; when as King John seeing all lost and past recovery, fled with
several of his trusty Followers into Polonia; upon whose departure Ferdinand by
the advice of such Hungarians as favored his Cause, was Crowned King at
Alba-Regalis the usual place for the Coronation of the Hungarian Kings:
Whereupon having disposed all things to the best advantage, and appointing
Stephanus Bator his Viceroy, hereturned into Bohemia.

King John by the means aforesaid thrust of his Kingdom, grew extreme
impatient, and often consulted with Sigismond King of Polonia to re-in-throne
him in his Kingdom, offering to bear the Charge of the War; but the Pole being
already in League with Ferdinand, would not seem unless underhand to favor
John, but wished him to take counsel with Hieronymus Lascus a great Politician,
what was best to be done in his Affairs, the which Lascus advised him to crave
Aid of Solomon now at Leisure to assist him; and urged so many Reasons for it,
that he was content to send him his Ambassador to Constantinople, who there
with Treasure and fair Speeches, so allured the Bassas of the Court to second
him in his Request, that Solomon promised again to enter Hungaria with a
puissant Army, and by the Insinuation of this sly Councellor, that when King
Ferdinand sent Ambassadors to him, to make out his Title, by which he laid
Claim to the Kingdom, he would scarcely give them Audience; and when he did,
instead of an Answer to their Ambassy, he Herauld-like denounced against their
King, all the Calamities that attend on War, and so commanded speedily to
depart the City; all which upon their Arrival at Vienna, they made known to the
Kings Lieutenant, who was so far from believing them, that he looked upon them
as vain and idle Tale-bearers, which they perceiving hasted to the King at
Spires, who then was Laboring to get himself chosen King of the Romans, and
declared to him all they had in Charge: Whereupon he well knowing, that the
Turk desirous of Glory, and the enlarging of his Dominions, seldom broke his
Word on such occasions; he put all his Forces in a readiness, earnestly, both
in Person and by his Ambassadors, craved Aid of the German Princes for the
Defense of his Kingdom of Hungary, against the common Enemy; but his Brother
Charles having his hands full of his Wars in Italy, and he wanting Money to
raise a sufficient Army to fight so powerful an Enemy, was forced to suffer him
without Control to enter Hungaria, for fear of whom the Citizens of Buda
mostly fled to Strigonium, Alba-Regalis, and Possonium: So that marching from
Belgrade (where King John came to wait upon him, and received a Confirmation of
the Promise he had made to Lascus, of restoring him to the Kingdom of Hungary)
he came before it, and had it yielded with little or no Resistance, as likewise
the strong Castle, though contrary to the Will of the Captain, yet contrary to
his Promise, he caused all that were found in the latter to be put to the
Sword, except the Captain, whom the Soldiers had cast in Bonds, for refusing to
join with them in their treacherous delivery of that strong Piece.

Buda taken most of the other Cities of Hungary surrendered; whereupon he
resolved to invade Austria, a part of King Ferdinands other Dominions, in Order
to which he sent Achometes Bassa with the voluntary Horsemen, who running
through the Heart of Hungary, entering into Austria with Fire and Sword passed
by Vienna, miserably burning and destroying the Country before them, even as
far as Lyntz, driving the Country People like Sheep, deflowring Vigins, riping
up Women alive, dashing Infants against the Rocks, with all other imaginable
Cruelties; after whom Solomon followed with the gross of his Army, consisting
of 500000 Horse and Foot, as many Writers affirm, who by the way having taken
the Castle of Altenbury, and in vain assaulted Neapolis; he came before the
great City of Vienna, and encamped about it in five places, covering the Ground
with his Tents, and the multitude of his People 8 miles in Circumference. So
that Fredrick Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Bavaria General of King
Ferdinand's Forces, not being able to get into the City with his Army sent for
that purpose, was forced to stay at Chremse; yet was his Nephew Philip the
Palsgrave, a little before the coming of Solomon to the great joy of the
Citizens, entered with several Troops of valiant Horsemen, as likewise Nicholas
Count of Salma, the Lord William Regendorf Steward of the Kings household,
Johannes Cazzianer, Nicholaus Turianus, Johannes Hardecus, Leonardus Vels^^s,
Hector Ramsack with diverse others, all men of great Experience and Valor, and
daring Resolution; yet was the City but badly defended with a Brick Wall,
without Grafts or Flankers, the Ditch altogether dry, and although at that time
there were found 400 Pieces of Ordnance, yet they could find means to mount no
more then a 100, notwithstanding the Citizens and Soldiers used all diligence,
in raising Rampires, and Barocading the Gates, unless those they reserved to
Sally at, and by the Command of the Governor every man was assigned his
Quarter, keeping strict Watch upon the Walls, to prevent the Enemies approach,
for that the Bulwarks were not of Considerable strength: The Count of Salma,
and the Lord Regendorf, walking hourly from one place to another, to see all
things put in a posture of defense, the Citizens labored continually in
strengthening the Fortifications, and raising Batteries, whereon to plant such
Pieces as lay useless, for want of where to mount them: they made likewise
diverse Fireworks, and continually kept Coppers of Tar, Pitch, Rosin, Oil, and
scalding Water, in a readiness to pour upon the Enemy, by that means to prevent
their Scaling the Walls, every one from the greatest to the least, expressing a
Cheerfulness for the defense of this place, the Metropolis of Austria, and
chief Hope of the German Empire, which the Turks conceived so Considerable,
that they doubted not, but it won, all Austria, Stiria, and Corinthia, would be
soon at their Devotion.

The City by this time strengthened and provided, of many necessary for a
strenuous Defense; Messengeres were sent to Count Fredrick to draw near with
his Army, the more to terrify and amaze the Enemy, whose numerous Camp could
not long subsist, if supplies of Provision were cut off; upon the Arrival of
the Messenger, the Count highly approved of the Resolution of the besieged, and
declared he would be always at hand, and omit no Endeavors to succor them,
admonishing the Messenger to remember him to his fellow Soldiers, and in his
Name entreat them to play the Men, for the defense of the Christian Religion,
and Glory of the German Nation, whose Ruin the Infidels sought; and so with
several presents, he dismissed the Messenger, who returning related what he had
in Charge: Whereupon the Lord Regendorf assembled all the chief Commanders, and
principal Citizens, and with an undaunted Courage, made this short Oration.

Christians and fellow Soldiers, the time is now come, wherein we are to fight
under the Banner of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom these barbarous Nations have
defied, let us then show forth our Courage to the utmost, even in the Mouth of
Slaughter; let not Death nor Danger terrify us, since we fight in a good
Cause, even for our Religion, our Lives, our Wives, Children, and all that we
hold dear, for what it can be but Ambition, and thirst of Christian Blood, that
drew this Bloody Monster with his numerous Host, from such remote Countries:
Therefore I say, rather let us dye like Men, fighting it out to the last Drop
of Blood, then yield our selves to these Barbarous Infidels, who know not how
to show Mercy, whose Leagues, Vows, and Solemn Protestations are all but Wind,
kept no longer then they prove Advantageous to themselves; I for my part, have
fixed my unalterable Resolution to defend this Place to the last Gasp,
resolving not to survive its loss.

This Oration spoken with great Earnestness, plainly Demonstrating the Zeal of
a brave General, was seconded with loud shouts, every one promising to Live and
Dye with him in the defense of the City: Whereupon it was resolved, that the
next Morning a Sally should be made upon the Enemies, to give them a Taste of
Christian Valor, and how little they valued their Lives fighting in so good a
Cause; whereupon every one being dismissed went to his Quarters, to give
necessary Orders, and take a View how the Turks lay encamped, whose multitude
covered all the Hills and Plains before the City. The Watch being set, the
General went round the City, attended by several Officers; Carefully to survey
each Quarter, and to see that none neglected his Duty; so that all things being
in good Order, about Midnight six Reigments drew up with a Resolution to fall
upon the Enemies Camp, but whilst Orders were in giving, in what manner they
should make their approach, a Christian Captive having made his escape from the
Turks, came running almost breathless, and begged to be received into the City:
Whereupon the Soldiers drew him up with a Pike, who being questioned about the
state of the Turkish Camp declared, that every night since they came forty
thousand men were driven up in Battalia, to Guard the Camp; which was not as
yet well entrenched, upon notice of which the General changed his Resolution as
to the Sally.

During the preparation within Solomon was not idle, (having sworn to carry the
City by force e're he departed, if he could not have it otherwise) but
appointed to every man his station, dividing his Army under Ibrahim the Great
Bassa, Michael Ogli and Becrambeius, so that all things being in a readiness,
many salleys were made by the Christians with great slaughter of the Enemies
though the Asapi and Janissaries from their Trenches poured showers of Arrows
into the City, for as yet the Turks great Artillery were not come up the
Danubius, but were daily expected; of which Wolfgangus Hoder a Valiant Captain
understanding by several Turkish Prisoners sailed out of the Bay of Possonium,
and meeting with the Turks Galleys, sunk those in which the Ordinance were,
taking a great Booty, of which Solomon having notice, was greatly enraged, and
finding that his small pieces did little other damage than beat down the
battlements, and over-jets made of wood in stead of Flankers, he caused the
Miners to be set to the Wall, but this their chief hope which with wonderful
labor attempted in thirteen places at once, was not so secretly done, but that
it was by Drums laid upon the Ground, Basins filled with Water, and deep
sounds perceived by the defendants, who with Countermines not only defeated
many of them, but destroyed in them by Wildfire, and other Combustible matter
Eight Thousand Turks, when to prevent such discovery, Solomon commanded
continual Alarums should be given, that so the Christians being employed in
defending the Walls, might not regard the Miners which succeeded so to his
wish, that a great part of the Wall near the Gate that leads toward
Carinthia was thrown down by the springing of a Mine; at which the Turks in
great numbers endeavoring to enter, were miserably cut off with the Murdering
shot bent against the breach for the purpose; which no sooner ceased, but they
were furiously charged by the Germans; and in despite of all resistance beaten
back with incredible slaughter: Not long after, the Wall being blown up in two
other places, they again attempted to enter; but were repulsed as before,
leaving heaps of slain in the Breaches, and Ditch; nor was their third Assault
any more successful; so that after three hours withstanding the fury of the
resolute Defendants, they retired to the Camp Ten Thousand less than they came.
A while after, the Lord Regendorfe perceiving the Turks by parties scatter from
their Camp, came with a Company of German Horse, set upon a Party of Five
Thousand Three Hundred with such slaughter, that not above One Hundred and
Forty of them returned to tell the News: Nor did other Commanders of the
besieged less indamage the Enemies by frequent Salleys, which so enraged the
Tyrant, that he animated to a fourth Assault, promising them great rewards if
they prevailed, which so far prevailed with them, that they resolved amongst
themselves either to win the City, or dye in the undertaking; but when they
felt the shot from the besieged like a tempest fall on them, they were of a
different opinion, so that leaving many Thousands of the slain and wounded
behind them, they retire to the Camp; which Solomon perceiving, and fretting
that his Honor had so much suffered by so great a loss of his Men, and so many
Repulses, dissembled the matter as well as he could, and that the Germans
should not suppose he raised his siege, because he despaired of winning it; he
caused several Prisoners to be richly clothed, and giving them store of Money,
sent them into the City to inform the Commanders that he came not to take the
City of Vienna, but to fight King Ferdinand, and restore the Kingdom of
Hungaria to King John: therefore since he could not draw his Enemy into the
Field to give him Battle, he would remove thence to seek him, wherefore they
should do well to yield themselves; the which if they would, he promised not to
enter into the City, but to receive both the Citizens and Soldiers into his
protection, reserving unto 'um their Lives and Goods with perpetual freedom,
which offer coming to the knowledge of the Princes and great Captains of the
Christians scornfully refused, whereupon the Imperious Turk perceiving his
desires not answered as he expected, having caused all the Prisoners to be
murdered, in a great heat raised his siege and departed, not staying till he
came to Buda, where having restored the Kingdom to John in consideration of his
becoming his Tributary, he returned to Constantinople, yet plotting in his mind
to disturb the Christians, and revenge the disgrace he had received before at
Vienna, the next year, viz, 1530, he leavyed an Army greater than the former,
purposing with himself to overrun Austria, Carinthia, Styria, and most part of
the German Empire; to effect which, he allowed three years, but was altogether
deceived in his expectation: for Charles the Emperor having ended his Wars in
Italy, was now at leisure to attend upon the Insolent Turk; who calling
together his Valiant Captains, sent them into Spain, Italy, Flanders, and other
Countries to leavy Forces, which they did in such abundance to oppose the
common Enemy, that upon the Muster of the Army there were found Ninety Thousand
old experienced Foot Soldiers, and Thirty Thousand Horsemen well appointed,
all the flower ^^^ermany, Italy, Bohemia, and Hungaria, as likewise One Hundred
and Forty Thousand of less experience, the whole Army consisting of One Hundred
and Sixty Thousand Men; the approach of which so terrified Solomon, that after
he had in vain besieged Gonza, and harazed the Country, though with the loss
of Ten Tousand of his Men, he returned to Constantinople, carrying with him
into miserable Captivity Thirty Thousand poor Christians taken in diverse
Countries through which he passed, and to appease his fury, put no less a
number to the Sword. And now had the Christian Army, composed of diverse
Nations, pursued the Turk by Land and Sea, as the Emperor earnestly desired
they might have driven him quite out of Europe; but Emulation arising amongst
the Commanders and the Soldiers, frequently mutining this great Army, effected
nothing more than to oblige Solomon to retire.

The Empire mindful of the damage sustained by the Turks in Austria, Hungary,
and other Countries to revenge the same early the spring following, set forth a
Fleet consisting of Thirty Five great Ships, and Forty Eight Galleys, under the
Conduct of Andreas Aurea, a most expert Captain, who sailing to the Bay of
Ambracia, thought there to have met with the Turks Admiral, who had under his
Command Sixty Galleys, but he having notice of his coming from the Venetians,
who stood Newters, was sailed to the strong Haven of Calcide; whereupon Auria
directed his course to Corone, a strong City upon the Coast of Peloponesus, and
had it yielded unto him upon condition that the Garrison might depart with bag
and baggage; where leaving a Garrison of Spaniards, he sailed to Patras another
City in the same Tract; took it, and ransacked it, permitting the Garrison
nevertheleless to march out in safety; after which, he took all the Castles
that guarded the straight of Naupactum without any hindrance, which gave
Saluiatus General of the Malta Galleys opportunity to waste the Coast of
Corinth, and take great booties; which done, he returned laden with spoils to
Naples, and from thence to Genoa the place of his birth and residence.

The Turks grieving at their great loss, early in the Spring, Anno 1533, laid
siege to Corone both by Sea and Land; of which Mendoza the Governor by Letters
advised the Viceroy of Naples, craving speedy aid, with all, assuring him, he
would defend the Town to the utmost extremity; upon which, Auria was sent with
a well appointed Fleet; the terror of whose coming so frighted the Turks, that
they left the siege, having lost many Men before it, and for haste left all
their heavy Carriages, which became a Prey to the Garrison Soldiers, which
exalted their courage to that degree, that they requested Macicaus the
Governor to lead them forth to the siege of Andrusa a Garrison of the Turks
not far distant from Corone, but their coming being discovered, they could not
surprise it as they intended, yet ransacked the Suburbs, and made great
slaughter of the Turk, Horsemen, quartering therein, though with the loss of
Macicaus the Governor, and diverse others; yet not long after they took the
City, being abandoned by the Garrison as not tenable; but upon their return to
Corone, the Plague began to rage so fearfully, that fearing if they stay, they
should all perish, and fit opportunity offering it self by reason of the
Arrival of several Galleys from Sicily with Corn, all the Spaniards, together
with as many Greeks as would imbarqued with the Cannon, and what else they
thought convenient; leaving the Town to be again possessed by the Turks, though
not without the consent of the Emperor. Anno 1534 Aloysus Grittus, Son to the
Duke of Venice, and Solymans great Favorite, being by him ^ade Leiutenant of
Hungary inwardly envying at Ameri^us Vayvod of Transylvania at the instance of
one Docia, caused him to be murdered in his Tent, which so incensed the
Transylvanians, that they Arming themselves to the number of Forty Thousand,
under the Leading Maylat, a Valiant Gentleman, and Kinsman to the Vayvod,
pursued the Murderer, who sled to Mega, which the Transylvanians besieged, and
not without great difficulty took, and in it Aloysus and Docia; the former of
which they beheaded, and the latter tore in pieces, taking the spoil of their
Goods, which was very great; for about Aloysus were found as many precious
stones as were esteemed worth Forty Millions.

Solomon thirsting after Glory, and resolving not to let his Soldiers lie idle,
resolved to invade at once both Africa and Persia: the charge of the first he
committed to Barbarusa, (who of a poor Fisher-Boy became a Pirate, and
afterward King of Argire, and then traveling to Constantinople, was upon the
recommendation of Achometes the Great Bassa, made one of the Bassas of Solymans
Council.) Whereupon he cansed all his Galleys to be in a readiness, appointing
the aforesaid Barbarusa Admiral of all his Sea Forces; who had no sooner taken
upon him the Command, but sailing out of Hellespontus with Eighty Galleys,
(leaving Amurath with twelve to transport Solymans Army in to Asia,) he shaped
his course for Italy, when passing the Straights between Italy and Sicily, he
brought such a fear upon the Inhabitants on either shore, that they fled with
all their substance further into the Country; after which, he laid siege to
Saint Lucidius, formerly called Tempsas which he took, putting most of the
Inhabitants to the Sword, from whence with a rich booty, and many Prisoners, he
marched to Citrarium, which he took and burnt, together with Seven Galleys that
lay in the Port; and so sailing by Naples, he seized upon Spelunca, from which
he marched over Land to Fundi, ten miles from Spelunca, on purpose as was
thought to have seized on Jula Gonzaga, a Lady of incomparable Beauty, whom he
intended to have presented to Solomon, but she though half naked getting on
Horseback, fled to the Mountains, yet he took the City, and put most of the
Inhabitants to the Sword; and so coasting along Italy, and taking many Cities,
Towns, and Castles, he brought such a fear upon Rome (once Mistress of the
World) that many conjectured that if he went directly thither with his Fleet,
the Romans would have forsaken the City; but then contrary to the expectation
of most, he shaped his Course for Africa, resolving to invade the Kingdom of
Tunes, over which Reigned one Muleasses, having a little before stepped into
the Throne, by treacherously causing to be Murdered all his Brethren, except
Roscetes and Abdemelech; the former of which having tried his utmost fortune
for the recovery of the Kingdom, in right appertaining to him as Elder Brother
to Mueasses, he for his safety was fled to Constantinople, which opportunity
Solomon laying hold on, to advantage his Wars in Africa, kept him as a Prisoner
at large, so that Babarussa landing, and every where proclaiming the Name of
Roscetes, whom the Moors and Numidians greatly favored, hating Muleasses for
his extraordinary Tyranny; he had Biferta immediately pat into his possession,
the Moors thinking, as indeed the Turks gave it out, that Roscetes was in the
Fleet, and that the Turks had made so great a Preparation to restore him to his
Fathers Kingdom.

Barbarussa having secured Biserta with a strong Garrison, doubling the
Promontorie where old Carthage stood, came to Gulletta, a strong Castle
standing within the Bay of Tunis, where in token of Friendship he saluted it,
and had the like returned; but upon the requesting the surrender thereof, he
was answered, that it should be always at his Command, who ruled the City of
Tunes, so that returning from thence, he came before the City, upon which by
the persuasion of such as affected Roscetes, Muleasses fled with a small number
of his Favorites, and for haste left behind him most of his Treasure, which
afterward became a prey to the Enemy; Muleasses fled, the people joyfully
received Barbarussa into Tunes, and with eager Eyes, and longing expectations,
flockt into the high streets to have a sight of their new King, but when they
perceived him not, and heard the Soldiers in their Acclamations name none but
Solomon and Barbarussa, they began to doubt as the truth was that, instead of
their new King, whom they so much desired, they had received the Turkish
Government, which above all things they utterly abhorred; which suspicion once
confirmed by several of Roscet's Friends, whom Barbarussa had brought with him
on purpose to delude the people, who grieved to see the ruin of their Country
at hand, for fear of present danger did not spare to tell their Friends and
Acquaintance, that in vain they expected Roscetes, who remained in Bonds at
Constantinople, which wrought so sudden an alteration in the minds of the
Citizens, that perceiving themselves deceived at the instance of Abdahar the
Mesuar, or chief Magistrate, who had before persuaded Muleasses to fly, in
hopes of bringing in Roscetes, they every where run to their Arms, and from all
parts of the City assailed the Turks, but for the most part being slightly
Armed, and in a tumultuary disorder they were not able to stand the fury of the
Harquebusiers; but after a long and obstinate Fight, wherein a great number
were killed on both sides, they submitted themselves; of which Muleasses having
notice, fled to Constantina, the Regal City of Dorax, a Numidian Prince his
Kinsman, where he remained in safety till the coming of Charles the Emperor
into Africa, as will appear in the sequel of this History.

Tunes thus taken, or rather surprised by Barbarussa, all the other Cities
thereto appertaining, were won with little difficulty, and annexed to the
Turkish Empire, till they were again sundred by the Germans, and Muleasses the
Exiled King restored by the Emperor: And in this posture, leaving the Affairs
of Africa, I shall take a view of Solyman's proceeding against the Persians.

Hismael being dead, and Tamas his Son succeeding him, Ibrahim the Great Bassa,
who could do all with Solomon, persuaded him that now a fit opportunity offered
to be revenged on the Persians, and the rather by the revolt of Vlemus, a Noble
Man of Persia, who had Espoused King Tama's Sister, who having Imbesled the
Revenues of the Crown, for fear of being called to account for so doing, was
fled to Constantinople: But Solyman's Mother, and fair Concubine Roxolan
greatly desirous of his Company, much opposed the Motion of the Bassa, laying
before Solomon the danger and inconveniency of so tedious and dangerous an
Expedition; but not being able to prevail, they ever after became Ibrahim's
Mortal Enemies, not leaving to urge Solomon, till at last he gave command that
he should be murdered.

Solomon resolved upon an expedition against the Persian, to revenge, as he
pretended, the manifold injuries done to his Grandfather, Father, and himself,
raised a great Army, part of which he sent before him, under the Command of
Ibrahim the Great Bassa, and Vlemas the Fugitive Persian, who by hasty Marches
over the Mountains, and along the Banks of Euphrates, that setting down before
the great City Taurus, and the Citizens despairing to be relieved by their
King, he had the City delivered into his possession, of which King Tames having
notice, hasted thither with his Army, but e're he attempt any thing for the
recovery thereof, Solomon with a great multitude of Soldiers had joined the
Bassa, whereupon he thought it not good to give Battle to so powerful an Enemy,
but to hover about his Camp, and take all advantages, well knowing such a World
of people could not subsist, without exceeding store of Provisions and other
necessaries; which device of the Persian, Solomon well perceiving, left a
strong Garrison in Taurus, and marched against him, who still retired before
the Turks, even to the Walls of Sultania; near to which, Solomon pitching his
Camp, lay many days to expect him; during which time, such a horrible Tempest
arose, that the Winds driving the Snow off from the steep Hills, buried many
Thousands of the Turks alive, overthrowing most of their Tents, and although it
was but the middle of September, froze so hard, that many were froze to Death,
others lost the use of their Limbs, and most of the Camels and Horses perished;
which bad Omen, together with their Apprehensions they had of the approach of
the Enemy, and the horrible darkness of the Night, so discouraged the Soldiers
that they would all have fled, had they known which way. This Tempest they
concluded to be raised by the Persian Magicians to destroy them, but whether
so, or not, it greatly discouraged Solomon, so that raising his Camp, he
marched into Assyria, and set down before Babylon now Bagdat, which being
altogether unprovided, upon the flight of the Governor, fell into his hands,
as likewise did most of the Cities, both of Assyria and Mesopotamia; and so far
extended the terror of his Name; that most of the Countries round about, sent
their Ambassadors to tender their subjection; and in Babylon he Wintered his
Army, placing Governors in the adjacent Cities. And a Beglerbeg, as they
proudly term him, that is, a Lord of Lords. In Babylon, and under him, diverse
Sanzacks, or petty Lords, during his abode here, he also caused his chief
Treasurer to be executed for Imbesling his Revenues.

Tamas the Persian King having by this time raised a considerable Army, marched
to Tauris, at whose approach the Garrison fled; of which Solomon having notice,
and being strengthened with new supply out of Egypt, Syria, Judea, and Comagena;
he left Babylon, resolving to provoke the Persian to Battle, or to sack his
regal City Tauris before his face, but Tames knowing himself too weak to give
him Battle, at his approach drew out his Army, and fled into the Mountains of
Hyrcania, destroying all before him, to prevent its falling into the hands of
his Enemies; upon whose departure, the Citizens opened their Gates to the
Turks, whom they were no ways able to resist: yet notwithstanding, at the
Commandment of Solomon, the City was sacked, the Kings Palace, and other
stately Buildings levelled with the Ground, and a great number of the Citizens
lead into miserable Captivity, and thinking himself sufficiently revenged, he
resolved to return with his Army into Mesopotamia; but having notice that the
Persian was following, even at his heels, he divided his Forces, leaving the
Bassas of Cair and Syria with Vlemus the Fugitive Persian, with Eighteen
Thousand to follow in the rere of his Army, to repel the assaults of the
Forerunners of Tamas's Army; he marched with the rest by speedy Journeys to
Amida, now called Caraemida: In the mean while Tamas coming to Tauris with his
Army, being the flowr of Parthia, Media, Iberia, and Armenia; and beholding
what desolation the Turks had made in that famous City, was so enraged thereat,
that he would have pursued them with all his Army to revenge the injury at the
hazard of a Battle, but being persuaded they were gone too far to be overtaken,
and the Gentlemen of which his Army chiefly consisted, seemed altogether
unwilling to undertake so tedious a march, he was content to stay at Tauris,
and send Delimeuthes, a Noble Man of Persia, (who freely offered himself to
undertake it) with Five Thousand swift Horse to follow them; and as he saw his
advantage to cut off the Enemies rear, the which he so speedily performed, that
surprising the Eighteen Thousand under the Command of the two Bassas, and
Vlemas, as they lay securely near the Castle of Belthis, that being assisted
with the Garrison Soldiers, he put them almost all to the Sword,, the Bassas
and Vlemas hardly escaping upon their swift Horse to tell the news, for which
service he was highly rewarded by Tamas.

These reiterated losses greatly perplexed Solomon, so that calling to mind the
presages his Mother had made of his evil success in that expedition of that he
was wholly lead thereto by the Council Ibrahim, Bassa, he therefore conceived
such a displeasure against him, as ended in his destruction: for upon his
Arrival to Constantinople, he gave such countenance to those that brought
complaints, against which before they durst not do; that at the earnest Request
of Roxo^ana^ whose Son Bajazet the Bassa hindered from aspiring to (...) Empire,
and rather favoring Mustapha, Solym^^ (...) another Woman, that he consented
to his (...) made away; and by reason he had sworn never to injure his person
whilst he lived; he caused for the saving of his Oath, an Eunuch to cut his
Throat whilst he slept; which Jesuitical Evasion he learned of the Musti, or
Chief Mohammedan Priest, who being consulted on the matter, gave his opinion
that Men only are alive, when they Move, Act, and Enjoy their perfect Senses:
and that sleep depriving them of their reasonable Faculties, rendered them as
dead Men. Some there are that report the fall of this great Man, who whilst he
stood high in his Masters favor, in effect ruled the Turkish Empire to be
caused by his too much favoring the Christians, who having in his younger
years been brought up in that profession, still continued a Christian in his
heart; and that to spare the shedding of Christian Blood as much as in him lay:
He turned the Emperors Forces against the Infidels; yet, however it happened,
his Body with a great weight fixed to it, was cast into the Sea, and all his
Wealth, which was inestimable, except a small portion allotted for the
maintenance of his Wife and Children, was seized to the behoof of Solomon.

Tunes as aforesaid being taken by Barbarussa, and all the other Cities obliged
to submit to the Turkish obedience, Charles the Emperor, who was likewise King
of Spain, not liking so potent a Neighbor, leavyed great Forces, solicited
thereto by Muleasses the Exiled King; and in revenge of the Injuries sustained
by Barbarussa, resolved to drive him out of that part of Africa, when
appointing Alphonsus, D'valus, Vastius, General of the Footmen; he with Seven
Hundred Sail of great and small Ships and Galleys, stood with the African
Coast, when dubling the Promontory of Carthage came to an Anchor before a
Castle, which by reason of a great Well beneath, is it called by the name of
Aquaria, or the Water Castle; whose unexpected arrival so terrified Barbarussa,
dreaming of nothing less that he was about to have fled with all his Turks; but
then fearing to fall into Solymans displeasure, which to do, he knew was
certain death; upon second thoughts, though he resolved to make all the defense
he was able against so powerful an Army as the Emperor lead after him, and
thereby get him the name of a valiant Soldier, though he despaired with the
Forces he had to keep either the Cities or Castles; whereupon he did what he
could to encourage his men with many vain-glorious-speeches; and into the
strong Castle of Guletta, standing upon the bottom of the Bay of Carthage upon
a point of Land encompassed almost round with the Sea, and the great Lake; he
thrust his most resolute Captains and Janissaries, himself remaining in Tunis to
expect supplies out of Numidia; at what time the Emperor having with his great
and small shot obliged those that guarded the shore to retire. He landed his
men, and entrenched them every Nation by themselves, during which, they had
^equent skirmishes with the Numidian Horsemen, nor were they less molested by
the Garrison, who sallyed as often as they saw their advantage; when one days
sallying under the Command of Salacia^ Arch-Pirate, they came up to the Mount,
near the Castle, commanded by Count Serney, a man famous both for the Honor of
his House, and great Exploits in War; who not using to be so braved, descended
with the Italians under his Command to drive them back by force; but the Enemy
being far superior in number, and the Spaniards who were entrenched next him,
looking on, and not coming out to succor him, he there fighting valiantly, was
slain; but the Spaniards, though they secretly rejoiced at the overthrow of the
Count, who had so often eclipsed their Glory, fared not better; for the next
day Tobacches another of the Turks Captains sallying out, charged them in their
Trenches, killing many of them, and taking what they found therein.

These Losses made the General sharply reprove the Captains of their neglect of
duty, in watching to prevent the dangerous attempts of so politic an Enemy;
which so wrought with the Captains and Soldiers, that to regain their credit,
they vowed to shun no danger, nor were they inferior to their promise; for
Giaffer, Captain of the Janissaries sallying out against the Spaniards, was
himself slain together with most of his Men whom the Christians pursued, even
to the Gate of the Castle, and had entered with those that fled, had not those
that were entered, shut out a great number of their Fellows to prevent it, who
were all slain or taken Prisoners: after which, the Emperor caused his
Batteries to be mounted, whilst Auria with the Fleet blocked up the Castle to
the Sea-ward, so that what from the Ships and the Mounts, the great Ordnance in
manner of an Earthquake so terribly roated, that their continual (...) made it
seem as if the Earth would have ^ent in sunder, and caused the Sea, which
before was calm, to mount, as if it had been enraged with a Tempest; the Air
likewise became thick, and the Sky was darkened with smoke, so that after ten
hours incessant battery, the Vamures, and Walls of the Castle were in many
places beaten down: the Turks Canon and Canoneers lying buried together in the
Rubbish, so that the defendants utterly despairing longer to hold it, fled over
a wooden Bridge laid for that purpose, who being fiercely pursued by the
Christians, were most of them slain; insomuch, that the Surface of the Lake was
well nigh covered with dead bodies.

The strong Castle thus taken, and most of the Turks Fleet of Galleys at A^^hor
in the Lake, yielded to the Conqueror; upon notice of which, Muleasses the
Moorish King came to the Emperors Tent, and humbled himself at his Feet,
promising to become his tributary, desiring as his Vassal to be received into
his protection, swearing never to forget so great a Benefit, with many the like
expressions; which so moved the Emperor, that he promised to restore him
without any other Tribute, than yearly paying a brace of Falcons, and a brace
of Barbary Horses; as likewise to maintain a Thousand Christian Soldiers to
keep for him the Castle of Guletta, and ever after to be kind to all Christians
either Inhabiting, or that should have occasion to pass through his Country,
telling him further, that if he failed in any point, those Arms that restored
him, could again depose him.

Matters thus concluded, the Emperor marched against Tunis, where Barbarussa,
with the remainder of his Forces were in Garrison, who upon the approach of the
Christians, drew out his Forces, consisting for the most part of Numidian
Horsemen, but scarcely endured the first charge, e're he betook himself to
flight, and again entered the City of Tunis, where in his mad mood, he
determined to kill all the Christian Prisoners; and had put his bloody intent
into practice, had he not been dissuaded therefrom by Sinan a Jew, one of his
chief Captains, which turned to his great disadvantage; for the Captives, to
the number of Six Thousand, hearing in what danger they were in, burst out of
the Dungeons in the Castle where they lay in Irons, and killing such Turks as
they found therein, barracaded the doors, seizing on such Armor as came first
to hand, made signs to the Emperor, from the Battlements, that they kept the
Castle to his behoof; which Barbarussa perceiving, and that all his entreaties
for the rendition of it was in vain: he in a great rage abandoned the City with
such of his followers as would attend him, and fled by Sea in Fourteen Galleys
to the City of Bona.

The Turks having deserted Tunis, the Magistrates came forth with the Keys to
meet the Emperor, who without any resistance entered the City, which he
labored to save from the spoil, but such was the fury of the Soldiers, that
they could not be restrained neither by the Emperor, nor Vastius the General,
but seizing upon all they found, killed such of the Moors as resisted them; so
that in a short time all was in a confusion, and great riches carried to the
Ships and Galleys, together with many Captives: most of which the Emperor
caused to be restored, and the rest were redeeme^ by Muleasses.

Barbarussa not thinking himself safe at Hippona, upon the coming of Auria with
the Fleet, fled to Argier, of which the Emperor having notice, he placing
Muleasses in the Kingdom of Tunesses, and furnishing Guletta with all manner of
Warlike Provision, with a Thousand Spaniards to secure it, returned in Triumph
to Naples, Anno 1537; when the same year Solomon envying at the Portugals trade
in the East Indies, sent Solomon Bassa, accompanied with Asau Beg, a famous
Pirate, commonly called the Moor of Alexandria, with a Fleet to molest them,
who sailing through the Red Sea, came as far as the River Indus, where with all
their power they assaulted Dium a Castle of the Portugals, situate upon the
mouth of that great River; but after many days siege, both by Sea and Land
having tried their utmost force, they were glad to retire, leaving behind them
for have most of their great Ordnance: when coming to Aden, a rich City in
Arabia Foelix, they allured the King thereof on board their Galleys, with
promise of safe conduct, but having him in their power contrary to their Oaths,
they hanged him up at the Yards Arm of the Admirals Galley, and plundered the
City; the like they did to another City in the same Tract called Zibith, and
returned to Constantinople, one by Sea, and the other by Land; at what time
Solomon solicited thereto by John Forest the French Kings Ambassador, was
preparing for the Invasion of Italy, and having for that purpose raised Two
Hundred Thousand Men, sending before him Lutzis Bassa, and Barbarussa, with a
great Fleet, who landing at Otranto, and conducted by one Troilus Pignatellus,
a Fugitive Italian, seized on Castrum, which contrary to their Faith given,
they plundered; carrying most of the people Prisoners, at what time Solomon had
by night sent over several Troops of Light-Horsemen in great Palendars, who
running all along the Sea Coast from Tarentum to Brundusium, for the space of
Forty miles, rummaged the Country, carrying away a great booty, and had been
likely enough, had Solomon, as he intended, seconded them with his great power
to have overrun all Italy; but providence so ordered it, that by the wilfulness
of Alexander Contarenus a Venetian Captain, who meeting with the Admiral of
Callipolis, and he not vailing his top-sail, nor in token of Reverence and
Friendship discharge his great Ordnance, offended with his proud insolency,
fiercely assailed the Squadron of Galleys under his command, of which he sunk
two, the Admiral himself perishing in one of them, and not long after, for the
like insolency, the Venetian Admiral caused Junusbeus, Solymans chief
Interpreter, passing by Coreyrae to be assailed, when to save himself and his
Turks, he forceing his Galleys on shore near unto the Mountains, called
Acroceraunii, he fell into a worse danger, for being taken by the Mountainiers,
most of his people were slain, and himself hardly released for a great sum of
money.

These Breaches of Peace, as the Turks termed them, so much incensed Solomon,
that he recalled his Forces then in Puglia, resolving to turn his whole power
upon the Venetians, upon whose return Auria falling in with Twelve Galleys
laden with Janissaries, and chosen Horsemen of the Court after a sharp conflict
to them all, which proved a great weakening to the Tyrants Fleet, yet he
desperately bent against the Venetians, resolving to take from them the rich
Island of Corcyra, but by the way himself had like to have been slain in his
Tent by a Mountainier, which had been effected, had he not been discovered by
the cracking of a bough; to revenge which, he sent his Janissaries, and other
his approved Soldiers, who hunting the people inhabiting the high and rough
Mountains of Chimera, like wild Beasts killed many of them, and returned with
such spoil, as they found, after which, he with a great Fleet landed on the
Isle of Corcyra, now called Corfu, (for fear of whom, the Venetian Admiral
^^thdrew with his Galleys into the Adriatic Gulf, (...) to expect the other
part of his Fleet) yet (...) long while battered the chief City, in vain (...)
himself with the spoil of the Villages, (...) Thousand Christian Prisoners
departed; (...) return landing on the Isle of Naxos, (...) the City, which not
being furnished to (...) so powerful an Army, consented to pay the T^^ant Five
thousand Duckates a year Tribute, and to hold the Seigniorie of him, whereupon,
without doing further harm, he departed to Constantinople; at whose return
Lutzis Bassa was accused by his Wife, Solymans Sister of Sodomy, and for that
she having in private reproved him thereof, he had struck her a box on the Ear,
and confined her as a Prisoner to her Chamber; which complaint so incensed
Solomon, who for his Sisters sake had raised him from a low Degree, to the
highest Honor next himself, that he banished him into Macedonia, where he
spent the remainder of his days in a poor and private life.

Though Solomon was returned to Constantinople, yet his Wars with the Venetians
ended not, for he sent strict command to his Governors and Lieutenants
bordering upon their frontiers, to vex them them with all manner Hostilities;
who were not wanting to satisfy him therein, nor the Venetians on their part
to revenge the injuries; but the fierceness of the Turks were somewhat
restrained by a War undertaken by King Ferdinand against them, to revenge
former injuries, who raising a great power of gallant Soldiers of diverse
Nations, sent them under the leading of Cazzianer, by whose Cowardice in
leading them through Woods, and by-ways, many of them perished for hunger;
others to avoid that calamity, deserted him, and in fine, the General forsaking
his Army (for which he was afterward executed) It was overthrown near Exek, and
all the Soldiers either slain, or taken Prisoners.

The news of this great overthrow much troubled the Christian Princes to
repair; which disgrace the Emperor, the Venetians, and the Pope set out a great
Fleet of Galleys, which meeting at Corcyra, the Admirals consulted what was
best to be done, when upon notice that Barbarussa lay with the Turkish Galleys
in the Bay of Ambracia, they resolved to sail thither, where having a while
braved him, the bold Turk incited thereto by one of Solymans Eun^chs, came
forth to give them battle, which Auria perceiving contrary to the minds of the
Captains, stood away to Corcyra, in the rear of whom the Turks fall, took
several of the straggling Galleys: This retreat, or rather flight, much eclipsed
the fame of Auria, who before was accounted a second Neptune; but being still
followed by Barbarussa, he returned into Italy, to the great dislike of the
Venetians, without effecting any thing worthy of memory; which gave the proud
Turk opportunity to make great spoil on the Sea Coast, and on the Islands of
the Sea, yet held by the Venetians, and to recover Castronovum, a little before
taken by the Christians, though not without infinite slaughter on either side;
it being for a long time manfully defended by Sarmentus a Valiant Spanish
Captain, who amongst heaps of slain expired in the bed of Honor.

Things being at this pass, the Emperor made a peace with the French King, both
which Potentates solicited the Venetians by their Ambassadors to continue the
War against Solomon, but they weary thereof, as lying most obnoxious to his
fury, could not be persuaded thereto, but labored to procure a peace, which
with much difficulty they obtained. In consideration whereof they yield unto
him Nauplium and Epidaurus, two Cities of Peloponesus, together with Nadium and
Labrania, two Castles of Dalmatia, which happened by reason the secrets of
their Embassey was beforehand discovered to Solomon by several treacherous
Venetians, bribed by him for that purpose; some of which being afterward taken,
were worthily executed at the same time; a secret consideration between John
King of Hungary, and Ferdinand King of Bohemia (including that upon the decease
of the former, the latter should enjoy his Kingdom) was discovered to Solomon,
which grievously incensed him against the Hungarian King, whom by his Arms he
had restored to his Kingdom to appease, which he was content to marry Isabella,
Daughter to Sigismund, King of Polonia, by whom he had Issue a Son, who after
his Fathers Death was crowned King of Hungary, and taken into Solymans
protection, by that means bereaving King Ferdinand of his hope of a peaceable
possession; whereupon after having requested it by his Ambassadors of Solomon,
and despairing that way to obtain it, he with a great Army entered the Kingdom,
and seized upon Vicegrade, Pesth, Vacia, and Alba Regalis: To oppose which
sudden Tempest e're it had swept away all her Cities; the Queen sent her
Ambassadors to Solomon to crave Aid against King Ferdinand, whereupon he not
only sent the young King her Son several Rich Presents, but his Letters
Mandatory to his Lieutenants on the Frontiers, with all their Forces to assist
her, threatening that if by their neglect she received any damage, their heads
should make satisfaction; and withal, caused Lascus, King Ferdinands Ambassador
at that time residing at Constantinople to be imprisoned.

This news was joyful to the Queen, whereupon she drawing together all her
Forces, joined them with those Mahometes, and Vstref, two of Solymans Bassas
had brought into the field, and immediately laid siege to Vacia which they
took, and to prevent its again falling into the hands of the Bohemians, set it
on fire; Vacia thus laid waste, they removed to Pesth, to which they laid
straight siege, but after many unsuccessful attempts to carry it by storm,
raised their Camp, and returned over Danubius, upon which King Ferdinand sent a
great Army under the Leading of the Lord William Regendorff, who entering the
Kingdom, laid siege to Buda, and sent Messengers to summon the Queen to
surrender the City to his Master, and that in lieu thereof, and of the other
Cities, she should have bestowed on her freely the Seignory of Sepusia, to
which George, Bishop of Veradium, who altogether governed the Queen, answered
that she should accept no such proffer, and with many opprobrious words
dismissed the Messengers, whereupon Regendorff having mounted his Canon,
furiously battered the City, making several wide breaches, but they were so
notably defended, that the Germans nor Spaniards could not enter, which they
perceiving, so dealt with one Bornemissa a great man in the City, that he
promised to deliver them a Gate in the night to enter by, which accordingly he
performed, but having agreed that none but Hungarians should enter, the better
to prevent the effusion of blood; and Regendorff contrary to that agreement,
sending in Germans under the Leading of their Captains, to be more sure of the
City, the Traitor repenting of what he had undertaken, refused to lead them to
the Market place, and they still remaining in the narrow streets, and not
knowing which way to go, a sufficient number could not enter e're the Alarm
was taken, upon which the Citizens, and Garrison Soldiers running to their
Arms, assaulted them on every side, who being in a strange place, and their
fear augmented by the terror of the night, fled back faster than they advanced.

Spring being come, Solomon sent a great Army under the Leading of Mahometes
Bassa, to the Assistance of the Queen; which passing, the Danubius entrenched
within half a mile of the Bohemians, Germans, and Italians, under the command
of the Lord Regendorff, and daily with skirmishes perplexed him, having
likewise fortified an Island lying in the River, called Ceppelia, as the
General of the Christians had done another opposite to his Camp, between which
passed likewise many skirmishes, but at length the Turks pouring a great number
of their men on shore in the Island held by the Christians, caused them to
leave the Fortifications, and fly over the Bridge laid to pass, and repass to
the Camp, but by the valor of the German Soldiers all was quickly regained,
and the City furiously assaulted, though without success, for that a great
number of the besieged continually kept such breaches as the Canon had made,
and the Besiegers, by reason of the nearness of the Turks Army, durst not go to
the assault in such number as otherwise they might have done, yet they had so
battered the Walls, that they despaired not to win it in a short time; but in
the height of their Expectation, news came, that Solomon with a great power,
was near at hand to join the Bassa already encamped, which infused such a fear
into the Christians that the Soldiers whether their General would or no,
resolved to raise the Seige and pass the Danubius. So that he was constrained
to accord to the resolves, and in the dead of the night raised the Siege, but
not so secretly but the Turks had notice sent them of what had happened, by
those in the City: Whereupon bursting out of their Camp, and the Citizens at
the same time sallying by the light of a stack of straw, and pursued them with
great slaughter; insomuch that most part of the Army was either drowned in the
hasty passage, or fell by the Sword, not above a third part of them escaping to
Comora. So that a great booty by that means fell into the hands of the Turks.

Upon this defeat Pesih being deserted of her Garrison, was taken without
resistance by Cason, the Turks Fleet then in the Danubius, and most that were
found therein put to the Sword. The Lord Regendorf as a man not desirous to
outlive so foul a dishonor brought upon him by the wilfulness of his unruly
Soldiers, would have died fighting amongst the thickest of his Enemy, had he
not against his will by strong hand been forced into a Pinace, and so carried
by his Captains to Comora, within five days after Solomon came to Buda, and
according to his wonted cruelty caused all the Prisoners to be put to death,
and one amongst the rest a German Soldier being of wondrous height, he
appointed to be slain by his Dwarff, whose head reached not past his knees,
which he ordered to be done in derision of the German Nation.

Solomon having pitched his Camp near Buda, sent his Ambassadors with Presents
to the Young King, viz. Three beautiful Horses, with their Bridles of Gold, and
their Trapings set with precious stones, and three Robes of cloth of Gold, and
unto every one of the chief Nobility a chain of Gold, and rich Gowns; upon the
delivery of these presents, as they had it in charge, they requested that the
Queen would cause the young King to be sent to the Camp to Solomon, who was
greatly desirous to see him and that he was resolved to take him and his
Kingdom into protection, until such time as he should of himself be able to
defend it against his potent Adversary. This request of the Ambassadors (though
not without some scruple) was granted, and the young King being then in his
swaddling Cloths, was sent in a rich Chariot, together with his Nurse and
several great Ladies, attended on by such of the Nobility, to whom Solomon had
sent presents; upon whose Arrival the Tyrant took him in his arms, and looked
upon him commanding his sons then present, viz. Selymus and Bajazet begotten on
the fair Ro^colana to kiss him, in token of there love to him: from thence
forward yet notwithstanding these fair shows, he consulted with his Bassa's
whether he should retain the King and seize on the Kingdom of Hungary, having
before caused his Soldiers to possess themselves of one of the Gates of Buda,
called Sabatina, it was likewise debated whether all the Nobility then in his
possession should be put to death, or carried into bondage; of all which
opinions were some of his Bassa's, and others of a far more mild opinion. So
that Solomon, when he well considered what had been argued, resolved upon a
method between the one and the other, when entering Buda on the 30th. of
August, anno 1541. after he had sacrificed to his vain Prophet, in the
Cathedral, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, he published a Decree (the fatal doom
of that flourishing Kingdom, under which it at this day groans.) That Buda
should from that day be kept with a Garrison of Turks, and the Kingdom be
converted into a Province of the Turkish Empire, that the Queen with her son,
the young King should presently depart the City and live in Lippa, a fertile and
quiet Country beyond the River Tibiscus near to the borders of her fathers
Kingdom, and to be safely conducted thither with all her Wealth and Jewels by
the Janissaries; of which hard conditions the Queen was glad to accept upon
which the Hungarian Nobility, all but Valentinus her General were set at
Liberty, having before been retained as Prisoners in the Turkish Camp.

King Ferdinand residing at Vienna, upon notice of what had passed, and that
Solomon was purposed to invade his Territories; first sending to collect his
dispersed Forces, afterward he sent Count Salma and Sigismund Lethestaine,
noble and grave Counselors his Ambassadors to Solomon with rich presents which
were a standing cup of Gold after the German fashion, richly beset with pearls
and precious stones, and a wonderful Silver Globe of most rare and curious
device, daily expressing the hourly passing of the time, the motion of the
Planets, the Change and Full of the Moon, the motion of the Superior Orbs,
ever moving by certain wheels or weights curiously conveyed within the same,
exactly keeping due time and motion, lively expressing the wonderful motion and
conversion of the celestial frame, a curious and strange piece of work devised
and perfected by the most cunning Astronomers of Maximilian the Emperor, whose
noble mind never spared for any cost to obtain things rare of strange device.

The Ambassadors arriving at Solymans Camp, after they had been feasted by the
Bassa's with Mutton and Rice only, and delivered their Presents, they made it
their request that he would deliver Hungary to their Master, to whom of right
it appertained, and that in lien thereof he would become his tributary; but
were so far from having their desires granted, that the proud Turk demanded
tribute for Austria, the which being refused with disdaign he sent the
Governor of Belgrade to spoil that Country, as likewise Moravia, to whom he
joined Cason the Admiral of his Fleet; but by reason of the overflowing of the
Rivers and great Rains, it being now Autumn they were forced to return without
doing any considerable damage: after which Solomon appointing a Hungarian of
his own name Governor of Buda returned to Constantinople, having first set
Lascus King Ferdinand's former Ambassador (whom he held Prisoner) at Liberty,
and within a while after having caused Mayle Vayvod of Transylvania to be
apprehended, and imprisoned contrary to his promise, by Mahometes his great
Bassa; he to recompense the Queen of Hungary and her son for what he had taken
from them, gave the young King the Province of Transylvania.

Whilst these things passed, the Emperor Charles at the earnest request of his
Subjects of Spain, to whose Trade the Pirates of Argier had put a stop,
prepared a great Fleet to invade the Kingdom, and take the City, at that time
commanded by Asan Aga, or Asan the Eunuch, whom Barbarossa in his absence had
appointed his Lieutenant, when as the Emperor after considerable damage by
shipwreck coming before the City of Argier; sent a Herald on shore to demand
the City, and upon the refusal of its delivery landed his men, who with great
courage beating the Turks, Moors, and Numidians from their defenses, leaped on
shore, where after diverse skirmishes they encamped in three Battles, being in
all 60000 Men but long they had not considered which way to make their
approaches, e're by a horrible Tempest (supposed to be raised by Enchantment)
which continued for the space of two days, the greatest part of the Fleet
consisting of 280 Ships and Galleys was beaten, and such as by swimming escaped
the danger of the Sea, were killed by the Numidians and Moors, who came down
from the Mountains to enrich themselves by the misery of the Christians. In
this storm which was accompanied with prodigious Rain, Thunder and Lightening
almost all the Prevision, and great Ordnance were lost: nor fared they on shore
much better, for there three parts of the Tents were torn up, and all things in
them spoiled by the deluges of Water, so that Famine within three days sorely
vexed the Camp; yet the Emperor, a man of invincible Courage, comforted his
men in the best wise, causing such Horses as were on shore to be killed, and
their Flesh distributed amongst the Soldiers, which at than time proved
excellent fare; but finding he could not subsist, by the persuasion of the Duke
of Alva his General, he resolved to imbark on those few Ships and Galleys that
were left, and return into Italy, whereupon to make room for the Soldiers he
caused all the Horses to be thrown overboard, but such was his hard fortune,
that he was no sooner embarked but another Tempest terrible as the former,
arose and scattering his Fleet, drove two Ships laden with Spaniards into the
Port of Argier, who by reason of the departure of the other Galleys had been
there slain by the Moors and Numidians, had not Asan Aga at their earnest
request taken them into mercy, and driven away the barbarous people, who like
ravening Wolves sought eagerly to prey upon their Lives: Many ships in their
return were likewise swallowed up of the Sea, but Heaven so ordered it that at
length the Emperor with the remainder of his shattered ships arrived at the
Port of New Carthage in Spain, not being overcome by the Enemy but by the
Tempest, his sad disaster being at the beginning of his Expedition foretold, by
a Witch then living in the City of Argiers.

Frances the French King being greatly offended with the Emperor, for that
Antonius Rinuo his Ambassador, upon his negotiation to Constantinople, was by
some of the Emperors Captains slain, for that it being reported that he there
discovered all the Emperors intentions, and incensed Solomon to take up Arms
against him, being the principal occasion of his last Expedition into Hungary;
whereupon he having sent Polinus in the stead of Rinuo, he incited Solomon to
revenge the indignity as well offered to him as to himfelf, by sending Barbarus
with a squadron of Galleys to molest the coast of Spain, and the Emperors
Territories in Italy, whilst his Master warred on his Countries in Flanders and
other places. To undertake the like he solicited the Venetians, but at that
time both his negotiation proved ineffectual, for the Venetians utterly refused
to intermeddle, and the Turk at that time being but slenderly provided with
shipping, and those was enforced to use on the Danube for the defense of
Hungary, which King Ferdinando in confederation with the German Princes invaded
with a great Army, under the leading of Joachimus Marquess of Brandenburgh, who
passing the Damibius encamped before Pesth, which they battered for several
days, making diverse large breaches, but upon notice that Mahometes Bassa was
coming from Belgrade, with a great Army to relieve the City, though the story
was altogether feigned, the cowardly General raised the siege, and returned to
Vienna where that great Army consisting of 50000 Horse and Foot was broke up,
without doing any thing worthy of name.

Solomon being rid of this fear began to hearken to the request of the French
Ambassador, and having Commanded Rustan Bassa his Son-in-law to Feast him, he
gave order for the making ready his Fleet of Galleys, which he sent under the
command of Barbarossa to the Aid of the French, who to wreck his private
revenge called in the common Enemy, too prone of himself to lay Christendom
wast. In their way when once dispatched they took Rhegium, burnt it, and
carried away the Garrison, and Citizens, at which time Solomon with a great
Army entered Hungary, to revenge himself upon the Authors of the late
Hostilities, and had the strong City and Castle of Walpo delivered to him by
the Soldiers, contrary to the will of the Governor, but he was no sooner
possessed thereof then he gave them the due Reward of their Treachery, by
causing them all to be put to the Sword; and then having left there a
sufficient Garrison, he marched to Strigonium, sending Amurathes Bassa with a
part of the Army to take in Soclosia, which he having won, put most of the
Inhabitants to the Sword.

Solomon having laid siege in the mean while to Strigonium, in which commanded
as Governors Liscanus and Salamanca, two proud and covetous Spaniards, with a
Garrison of 1300 Soldiers, but e're Solomon began to batter the City, he sent
to promise them Life, Liberty, and whatever Goods they were possessed of if
they would surrender; or upon refusal to denounce against them all the miseries
that attend on stormed Cities, yet this nothing daunted the Soldiers, who
returned for answer, that they reposed their last hope in their Arms, and were
not to be won by gifts, nor terrified with threats, upon notice of which their
stout resolution he commanded his Cannon already mounted to play from several
Batteries, the which was put in Execution with such fury, that the Walls were
beaten down in several places, at which breaches the Turks in great number
attempting to enter were beaten back three times successively, with great loss
and slaughter, and amongst the slain fell Bultaces Sanzack of Selymbria, a man
of great account amongst the Turks, but in the end the weakness of the City
being discovered to the enemy, by a fugitive Calabrian, the two aforesaid
Governors consulting for their own safety, intended secretly to leave the
City, and carry with them all their Riches; but their purpose being discovered
to the Captains and Soldiers, they proposed a parley, persuading the defendants
that the City was not to be held against so powerful an Enemy; upon which the
City was yielded, and the Garrison such as would marched to Possonium, where
the two cowardly Governors (who notwithstanding the promise of safe conduct
had been robbed by the Turks) were by Count Salme committed to safe custody, to
answer for their cowardly yielding up the City.

Strigonium being thus obtained on the 10th. of August, Anno 1543. and the
Christian Churches converted to the Mohammedan superstition, he marched toward
Alba regalis, taking in his way the Castle of Tatta anciently called Theodota,
which he utterly rased; after which coming before Alba regalis, a City famous
for the Coronation of the Hungarian kings, s^ituate in a Marsh, and encompassed
with a Lake. He caused the said Lake with infinite labor to be filled up and
thereafter many terrible Assaules, in which he lost 20000 of his men, took the
Suburbs, putting all he found therein to the sword, and afterward had the City
delivered into his possession, where entering, he contrary to his faith
plighted, he caused the most wealthy Citizens to be slain; after which, leaving
Ballabanus Governor thereof, and placing Governors in other places by him
subdued; in this Expedition he returned to Constantinople.

By this time Barbarussa and Polinus were arrived at Marselles, where having
refreshed themselves, they departed to Province, where they laid siege to Nice,
a City belonging to the Emperor, which after a long siege they took, but the
Castle being defended with a strong Garrison, they in vain assaulted it, which
so enraged Barbarussa, that he threatened to imprison Polinus for not
performing his promise made at Constantinople to furnish his Army with all
necessaries, when as he said Powder and shot were wanting even in the Country
of France, which division between the French and the Turks was ended, by the
raising the seige, upon notice that Alphonsus Vastus the Emperors General was
coming out of Italy with a great Army, when as the French Forces retiring,
Barbarussa sent most part of his Fleet to Argeir, with a command to return
early the next spring to Marselles.

The great preparations of Barbarussa to aid the French King gave Muleasses
suspicion that they were intended against him; whereupon leaving the management
of the Affairs of his kingdom of Tunes in the hand of his trusty Counselors,
as he supposed, and the management of his men of war, his son Amida, he went to
Naples to wait upon Charles the Emperor, and of him to crave aid, when in the
mean time by the persuasion of such as hated Muleasses his son usurped his
kingdom, who upon notice thereof returning with such Forces as he could gather
in Italy, was overthrown, taken prisoner, and by his unnatural Son deprived of
his sight, dealing to him therein the same measure that he had dealt. Yet the
unnatural Son escaped not altogether scotfree, for Tovarres Governor of Gullet
for the Emperor, sending for Abdamelech brother to Muleasses, of whom I have
before spoken, he in the absence of Amida surprised the City and Castle of
Tunis, but enjoyed no more then 26 days e're he died when leaving his Son
Mahometes a Child his Successor, he was soon thrust out and Amida restored,
whereupon Muleasses fled first to Guletta, and afterward into Sicily, where at
the Emperors command he was maintained at the common charge of the Islanders.

The French King being by this time weary of his new come Guest, the Turks
having first largely rewarded them sent them away, who in their return spoiled
the Island of Elba belonging to the Duke of Florence, upon the Governors
refusing to deliver the Son of Sinan the Jew, held Prisoner there, since his
being taken at Tunis, and after that committed many outrages upon the Coast of
Italy; burning many Towns, and carrying away the people into miserable
Captivity, but he long enjoyed not his Triumph ere himself was by death lead
into Captivity, viz. anno 1547. In which year died Mahomet, Solyman's Eldest
Son, Frances the French King, and Alphonsus-Daualus-Valtius the Emperors
renowned General.

Solomon having now not made any personal Expedition for the space of three
years resolved to invade the Persian King, being solicited thereto by Ercases
Imirza King of Sirnan, and that Kings Brother, but after great toil to little
or no purpose for the space of 1 year and 9 Months, he returned with his (...),
to Constantinople, Imirza in the mean while being delivered to his brother
Tamas the Persian King by Treachery was put to death, during which Transaction
one Dugat a notable Pirate, having taken Africa a City in Tunis, formerly
called Aprodise, he greatly troubled the Moors by Land and the Christians by
Sea, when to remove so troublesome a man, the Knights of Malta passed over with
a considerable power, and after a furious assault possessed themselves of the
said City, the which by reason it was not tenable without excessive charge they
razed, carrying away a rich booty, and 7000 Captives, whereupon the Pirate fled
to Constantinople, craving aid of Solomon, who sent with him Sinan the Jew made
Admiral in the stead of Barbarossa, with a great Fleet; who in revenge of what
had happened to Africa, landed on the Island of Malta, and attempted (though in
vain) the winning that strong City. Yet sailing into Africa, they after great
slaughter of their men took Tripolis in Barbary, at that time possessed by
certain of the Malta Knights, for which Sinan Bassa having as it were
Triumphed, left Drugat Governor thereof, by the Title of Sansack returned to
Constantinople.

Anno 1551. Solomon, notwithstanding the five years peace made with King
Ferdinand, sent Achmetes his Lieutenant in Europe, to invade several Towns in
Hungary, who upon his Arrival took Temeswar and Zolnock, which Queen Isabel
perceiving, and that the Turk contrary to his Faith plighted, daily incroach
upon her Territories, whose power she was not in a capacity to repel by force,
she agreed with King Ferdinand to resign her and her Sons Title to the Kingdom
of Hungary in consideration of Cassovia, and a yearly pension of 100000 Ducats.
After which the King recovered most part of the Kingdom from the Turks, and for
the better keeping thereof as some say caused George Bishop of Veradium, a
great favorite of Solymans though by Birth a Hungarian to be murdered, in his
own House. Upon which the Bassa of Buda drawing together what Forces be could
Besieged Agria, but after the loss of many of his best Soldiers he gave over
the siege.

Henry succeeding his Brother Francis in the Kingdom of France, and desirous to
molest the Emperor, sent the Lord Avomont to incite Solomon, to wast the Coast
of Italy; whereupon he sending a great Fleet in the Tyrrenan and Tuscan Seas,
wasted the Coast of Calabria, S^cilia, Majorca, Sardinia, Elba, Corsica and
Cerbe, the Frontiers of the Emperors Dominions, and the same year, viz. anno
1554. Solomon incited thereto by Roxolana, once his Slave and Concubine, but
now his imperious Wife, and by the Treacherous insinuation of Rustan Bassa, who
had Married Chameria her Daughter by Solomon, caused his Son Mustapha the chief
hope of the Oth^man Family, begot on a S^yrcassian Woman to be strangled in his
Pavilion, without suffering him to clear himself of what had been falsely laid
to his charge during his absence, the which barbarous cruelty when Tzihunger,
Roxolana's Son by Solomon, whom she purposed to raise to the Empire after his
decease, and for that purpose had procured the death of Mustapha, came to know
he had detested his Fathers cruelty, with his Dagger killed himself, and fell
down dead upon his Brothers dead body; nor was Solomon in safety when the
matter came to be once known, for the enraged Soldiers with their drawn Swords
(after they had killed a great number of those that came thither to fetch the
Riches in Mustaphaes Tent) came to his Pavilion Threatening him with present
Death, and after many reproaches were hardly appeased, swearing at their
departure if the Accusers of Mustapha were not brought to light they would
nevertheless kill him, when to satisfy them in their demands, he deprived
Rustan Bassa of all his Honors, taking from him the seal whereof he had the
keeping, and delivered it to Achomates Bassa, and Rustan commanded to leave the
Camp upon pain of Death, but not long after by the means of his Mother-in-Law,
who had by the means of a Jew, bewitched Solomon with her charms he was again
restored, and to make way for him Achomates who had stepped up into his places of
Honor by Solyman's command, in the Divano causelessly was strangled. Whilst
these things were doing Haly Bassa having for a long time besieged Zigeth,
defended by Marcus Horworth, a valiant Captain was beaten off, by Polviller and
Serineus two of King Ferdinandoes Captains with the loss of half of his Army.
Nor fared the Turks better at Sea, for Guise Lord Prior of the Knights of St.
John in France, took six Ships and Galleys richly laden, and now God intending
to punish the Tyrant for so many Murders suffered his Son Bajazet gotten upon
Roxolana, to rise up against him Arms under pretense of supplanting his Brother
Selymus, all the remainder of the aforesaid wicked stock, who by setting up a
counterfeit Mustapha (and pretending he that was killed was no other, but one
much resembling the true Mustapha, sent for great rewards to try his Fathers
fury) drew after him a World of people being secretly encouraged thereto by his
mother, who preferred him before his Elder Brother whom Solomon would have his
Successor, and such was her power with Solomon, that after the Plot was
discovered the counterfeit taken and executed, she made Bajazets peace and
restored to favor as much as ever; yet such was the fiery nature of the head
strong youth, that knowing his Life was dated with his Fathers, if his Brother
succeeded him he again took up Arms, being generally favored of the Soldiers,
against whom Selymus was sent with a great Army, between whom was fought a
dreadful Battle, in which 300 Turks were slain, and Bajazet put to the worst,
who after much adverse fortune flying to the Persian King, was by the
procurement of Solomon contrary to Faith given by the Persian, he together with
his four Sons was mur^^^^ed.

Anno 1558 Charles the Fifth, and warlike Emperor of Germany, stricken in
years, and worn out with the toils of tedious War, resigned the Empire to his
Brother Ferdinand, having before put his son Philip in possession of all
Hereditary Kingdoms, and then retiring lead a private Life, and shortly after
changed it for Life Eternal; after he had with great reverence and integrity
Reigned 39 years, after whose death at the earnest request of the Knights of
Malta, the Christian Princes set out a Fleet for the recovery of Tripolis in
Barbary, when coming to the Island of Zerbi belonging to the Turks they spoiled
it, and after a small battery to the Castle in which the Islanders put their
chief hope, but this Expedition proved unfortunate to the Christians: for Pial
Bassa Solymans Admiral, coming upon them with a great Fleet, suddenly
surprised many of the Ships and Galleys out of order, and unable to make
resistance, took them and put most of those he found therein to the Sword, and
such as could stand off to Sea fled, leaving Don Alvarus De Sandee a valiant
Gentleman of great Spirit, and long Experience, General of the Christian Forces
on shore, who together with such as were sied from the Fleet entered the
Castle, which was most resolutely defended till such time as hunger and thirst
compel him to surrender, not less then 18000 Christians by one means or other
being lost, from the setting out of the Fleet to the time the Castle was
delivered to the Turks, the which by the Bassa being strongly Garrisoned, he
with the Christian Captives there taken returned in Triumph to Constantinople,
and long was ere the Spanish and Italian Nobility there taken could be
ransomed; and to make up this unluckly year, viz. 1560. on the 25th. day of
November, Auria the great Sea Captain died being 94 years old, to the great
Rejoicing of the Turkish Pirates whose terror he had been for more then Thirty
years, nor was the following year fortunate, for King Philip of Spain sending
out his Fleet under Mendoza his Admiral, Five and Twenty Ships and Galleys by
stress of Weather were broken on the Coast of Sicily, on one of which the
Admiral perished, little or nothing being saved in that dismal and unexpected
Calamity.

Anno 1562. The Emperor Ferdinand so labored with the Electoral Princes, that
he procured his son Maximillian then King of Bchemia, a Prince of great hope to
be chosen K. of the Romans, who likewise the year following, on the 8th. of
September with all solemnity Crowned at Presburg King of Hungaria, to confirm
which choice Solomon sent Ibrahim Bassa as his Ambassador, to the Emperor, as
likewise to conclude in his name an eight years peace, and the better to gain
credit, he sent his Letters of credence not usually done by the Turkish
Emperors, whose proud style therein, I think not amiss to insert which take as
follows.

I the Lord of Lords, Ruler of the East and West, who am of power to do and not
to do whatsoever pleases me, Lord of all Grecia, Persia, and Arabia, Commander
of all things which can be subject to King and Command, the great worthy of
these times, and strong Champion of the wide World, Lord of all the white and
black Seas, and of the Holy City of Mecha, shining with the brightness of God,
of the City of Medina, and of the Holy and Chaste City of Jerusalem, King of the
most noble Kingdom of Egypt, Lord of Jovia and of the City of Athens, Senan, of
the Sacred Temple of God, Zabilon, and Bassio, Rethsans and Magodini, the Seat
and Throne of the great King of Nashin Rettam, and Lord of the Island of
Argiers, Prince of the Kingdom of Tartary, Mesopotamia, Media of the Georgians,
Morea, Anatolia, Asia, Armenia, Valachia, Moldavia, and of all Hungary, and
many other Kingdoms and Territories whereof I am Emperor. The most mighty
Monarch Sultan Solomon, Son of the great Emperor Sultan Selym, who has power
from God to rule all People with a bridle, and strength to break open the Gates
and Bars of all Cities, and strong places, into whose mighty hand are delivered
all the ends of the World, none excepted, I Ruler of the East, from the Island
of Tsein unto the farthest bounds of Africa, whom God has appointed a mighty
Warrior in the edge of Sword, amongst whose most mighty Kingdoms the
impregnable Castle of Caesarie, is reputed the least, and in whose Hereditary
Dominions the Kingdom or Empire of Alexander the Great is accounted of us a
trifle, with me is the strength of the whole World, and Virtue of the
Firmament. For as much as thou King Ferdinand, etc.

Their audacious style being read in the German Court, moved some to
indignation, and others to secret laughter, yet the necessity requiring it,
peace was concluded, but kept no longer then the Emperor lived; for upon his
Death which happened two years after, viz. 1564. new troubles arose in Hungary,
and several Towns and Castles were won and lost on either side, whereupon
Solomon resolved in person to come into Hungary, but upon second thoughts he
changed his mind, and bent his Forces against the Island of Malta lying between
Africa and Sicilia, in length twenty and in breadth twelve miles, exceeding
fruitful and pleansantly situate were it not in Summer time too much scorched
by the Sun, which deprives the inhabitants of their fresh water, before which
the Turks coming with a Fleet of Two Hundred Ships and Galleys, after some loss
sustained both by the Sea and Islanders, Landed and laid siege to St. Michaels
Castle, which they furiously battered, but it being defended by several Knights
of the Order, they received great loss before it, whereupon they consulted
amongst themselves to leave the siege of St. Michael and besiege the Castle of
St. Elmo, the which with the loss of 18000 of their men they took, when in the
mean while Valetta, the Great Master fortified St. Michael both City and Castle
sending to the Viceroy of Sicilia for aid, but the Turks encouraged by the
coming of the King of Argier, with his Ships and a great supply of Victuals
besieged St. Michaels Castle a second time, as also the City Thundering against
it for the space of eight days without intermission, but such was the courage
of the besieged, that they either repaired the breaches, or beat back the
Assailants who made such slaughter of those that attempted to enter, that their
dead bodies filling the breaches served as a Rampire to keep out the rest, and
thus they continued furious to assault the City almost every day, till upon
notice of the Viceroy of Sicily's approach with a great power both by Sea and
Land, they raised their siege and departed to meet him near Melita, where in a
set Battle they were overthrown, and most of them slain with the loss of 5000
Christians only, yet those that escaped in their return landed on the Island
Chios and took it, it being before almost deserted of its inhabitants, by
reason it lay always obnoxious to the fury of the barbarous Infidels.

Solomon enraged at this defeat resolved to revenge himself upon the Christian
Princes, and therefore with a great Army undertook his before determined War
against Hungary, solicited thereto by the Vayvod of Tra^sylvania, who hoped to
be made King thereof; but Maximilian being Crowned Emperor, he railed a great
power being aided by the German Princes, and sent them under the leading of
several valiant Captains, but especially Count Serenus, and Count Helffeustin
whose good Fortunes proved such, that within a short time the Turks were
stripped out of most of their Garrisons, and a great number of them slain, for
Maximillian the Emperor, long before advertised of Solymans purpose had raised
as is said, a gallant Army, consisting of 40000 Horse and Foot, the flower of
all Christian Nations, besides a Fleet upon the River Danubius, which hindered
the Turks Provisions and other necessaries from being brought by water.

By this time Solomon coming to the River Dromus, over which with infinite
labor he caused a Bridge to be made for the passage of his Army, which done he
encamped before Sigeth, of which Count Serenus was made Governor, a valiant
man, and mortal Enemy to the Turks attended on by a Garrison of 2300 resolute
Germans and Hungarians, who like a brave Soldier with a most Christian Oration
encouraged his men, not to be dismayed at the multitude of their Enemies, but to
trust in God, and be of good courage, for he by his Almighty power was able by
a few to confound the Armies of the proud. Concluding that as for himself, as
he was a Christian and free born so he would by the Grace of God, in the same
Faith and Freedom end his days, and that no proud Turk so long as he could
hold up his hand should have power to command over him, or the ground whereon
he stood, nor failed he in his resolves, for after he had done all that man was
capable of doing, killing such numbers of Turks, that the Plains lay scattered
with the dead, the Walls being for the most part beaten down, and the Town
fired about his Ears, the Turks in great number entering every where, and no
relief coming to his assistance, he called the poor remainder of his Soldiers
about him, with whom he was retired into the Castle and with an undaunted
resolution, spoke these his last words.

The hard fortune of this sinful Kingdom, has together with our own overtaken
us, but let us, noble Hearts, endure with Patience whatsoever is by God to us
assigned, you know what we have before promised, which hitherto God be thanked,
we have accordingly performed, and now let us with like resolutions perform
this last, the place you see is not longer to be kept, the devouring fire grows
fast upon us and we in number are but few; wherefore let us as becomes valiant
men break out into the utter Castle, and there dye fighting in the midst of our
Enemies to live afterward with God for ever, I will be the first that will go
out follow me like men.

Thus having said, the Heroic Count worthy of Eternal fame, or a name greater
then ever Roman yet could boast, with his Sword in his hand charged the
thickest of his foes, laying them round him on heaps, even till the Rampart of
the dead hemmed him in, nor durst the Turks with their multitude encounter him
long at close fight, but cowardly at a distance shot him through the head upon
which he fell dead amongst the heaps of his Enemies, in token of whose
matchless prowess the Turks buried his body and sent his head as a token of his
being slain to Count Salma his kinsman in the Emperors camp with this
following Letter.

Muhamet Bassa to Eccius Salma, gree^ing.

In token of my Love, behold here I (...) thee the head of a most resolute and
valiant Captain, thy Friend, the remainder of his body I have honestly buried,
as became such a man, etc.

That which lightened the Christians sadness for the loss of so brave a
Captain, and the taking of Sigeth, was the Death of Solomon, who far spent with
years and distempers died at Quinque Ecclesiae of the Bloody Flux, on the 4th.
of September, anno 1566. when he had lived 76 years, and reigned 46, not living
to see the end of the siege; his death was by the Bassa kept secret to prevent
disorder in the Army, who according to their wonted policy satisfied the
inquisitive Janissaries by showing them his dead body sitting in his
Horse-litter, giving it out that he was extreme ill when after Sigeth having by
Treason taken Gyula, for which the Traitor was afterward deservedly put to
death by Selymus Solymans successor, the Bassa's with the Army returned to
Constantinople where they published the death of Solomon, and proclaimed
Selymus his now only remaining Son Emperor in his stead.

CHAP. XVI. Selymus the second of that name, and fifth Emperor of the Turks,
His Life and Actions.
Solomon being dead upon the return of the Army out of Hungaria toward
Constantinople, Mabumet Bassa by letters advertised Selymus thereof then
residing at Cutai a City of Galatia who glad of the news hasted to take
possession of the so long expected Empire, when being conducted over the
straights of Bosphorus, he was by Bostanges Bassas, and Scander Bassa
conveyed into the Imperial Palace on the 23 of September, Anno 1566, from
whence he departed to meet his fathers Corpse, not yet arrived at
Constantinople, upon the meeting of which he caused the Insignes to be let
fall, in token of the Emperors death, which had been till that time kept secret
from the Soldiers, to prevent disorders, and so with it Marching in the head of
the Army returned to Constantinople, being first by the men of War saluted
Emperor; who upon his Arrival, to quiet the unruly Soldiers distributed a large
sum of money amongst them, with a Promise to augment their wages as is usual at
the installment of the Ottoman Emperors, or else by reason of the insolency of
the Janissaries and other Soldiers of the Court of their Palace would prove too
hot to hold them.

Selimus thus settled in his Empire, with Royal solemnity buried his father, in
a Chapel which he afterward built, together with a College and Hospital,
erecting over him a stately Tomb, near unto which is at this day to be seen the
Magnificent Tomb of his beloved wife Roxolana, mother to Selimus, and of
certain of his Murdered children. By him hangs his Scimiter, in token that he
dyed in war, an honor not otherwise granted to the Mohammedan Princes. The
Revenues arising of the Country about Sigeth, won from the Christians a little
before his death, were given to maintain the houses by him built for devotion,
which for Magnificence exceed all others Erected by the Mohammedan Kings and
Emperors, except those of Mahomet the Great, and Bajazet the Second. It was by
many thought that Soliman was in good time taken out of the way, for that he
resolving to winter in Hungary the next Spring purposed with himself to have
overrun Austria, and a great part of Germany.

Anno 1567, Solomon being dead great trouble arose notwithstanding in Hungary,
occasioned by John the Vayvod of Transylvania, who used his utmost endeavor to
dispossess Maximilian the Emperor of those Cities and Fortresses he held in
that Kingdom, but they were soon after appeased by a peace concluded between
the two Emperors, Maximilian and Selimus. The principal points on which the
peace depended being these. That the German Emperor should yearly pay 30000
Ducates to Selimus, as a Tribute for Hungary, the Tribute to begin upon the
conclusion of the Articles of Peace. That the Subjects of the Turks should pay
nothing to the Subjects of the Emperor, nor on the other side the subjects of
the Emperor pay nothing to the Subjects of the Turks, but to remain both of
them exempted from payment of Tax, Duty or Contribution, and that either Prince
should inviolably hold what he was in possession of at the conclusion of the
Treaty, which peace was confirmed for the space of 8 years; in which was
included the Vayvod of Transylvania, as the Turks Tributary. This peace was
concluded Anno 1568, as was likewise the year following a peace concluded
between Selymus and Tamas the Persian Kings after which the Turk desirous to
undertake some (...) exploit, that might get him a name, and out of the
Revenues of which he might build him a Temple exceeding any of his
Predecessors, which those superstitious people hold to be for the good of their
souls; be plotted in his mind many things, but at length being by his
mischievous Counselors, of whom he wanted not, he was ^^ged to the conquest of
the rich Island of Cyprus, lying in the Cicilian Sea, and has on the West
Pamphilia, on the East Siria, on the South Egypt, and on the North Cilicia, now
called Caramania. This Island at such time as Selymus was intent on the
conquest thereof, was in the possession of the Venetians, with whom he had
contracted a League since the death of Solomon; but in vain are Leagues with
Infidels any longer then they serve their own turns, yet Muhamates the Great
Bassa labored all he could to dissuade him therefrom; and Marcus Antonius
Barbarus the Venetian Ambassador then residing at Constantinople so wrought
that he procured the lascivious Turk to send Cubates as his Ambassador to the
Senate of Venice, with a letter to certify them upon what grounds he undertook
to invade their Territory since the League had till that time been kept
inviolable, which was done more to gain time, then for any hope he had that
Selymus would alter his determination; which Ambassador not obtaining what
Selymus desired, which was to have the fertile Island peaceably put into his
possession, but on the contrary finding the Venetians resolved to desend it
with all their power he returned again to his faithless Master, and related
what he had in charge; whereupon the Great Fleet before prepared for the
invasion of Cyprus, put to Sea, Mustapha Bassa being General of all the Forces,
and within a while stood with the said Island, where the greedy Turks landing,
spoiled many goodly Villages, and after some deliberation having by prisoners
taken, understood the constitution of the Country, and of what strength the
Islanders were, resolved to besiege Nicosia, a City standing in the midst of
the Island, in a plain and Champain ground, being in circuit about five miles,
encompassed with a strong wall, defended by eleven strong Bulwarks, and three
great Fortresses, raised by the Venetians, the Governor of which was Nicalaus
Dandalus, a man too weak for so great a burden, as having been always brought
up in civil affairs; in Garrison were 8000 horse and foot, but most of them raw
soldiers, and not acquainted with Martial discipline, too few to oppose so
powerful an Army as the Bassa drew after him, which consisted of near 150000
horse and foot.

On the 22 of July Anno 1569 the Bassa with his Army Encamped within a mile and
half of the City, covering with their Tents the hill called Mandia, and with
incredible labor bringing their Trenches from far, cast up several Forts which
they raised so high, that they overlooked the walls of the City, and from their
Mounts terribly battered the walls with seventy pieces of great Artillery,
whose dreadful thundering made the earth to tremble, and having by this time run
their Trenches to the brim of the ditch, hotly assaulted the City in several
places, which was as valiantly defended by the besieged, insomuch that the
ditches were well nigh filled on that side with the bodies of the slain, and
what was beaten down in the day time was with great labor repaired in the
night.

During these passages the Venetians having leagued with the Pope, King of
Spain, and several of the Italian Princes, prepared their fleet, consisting in
all of one hundred and seventeen sail; but whiles they lingered for the
Additional Forces of the King of Spain, the plague so raged amongst the
Mariners and Soldiers, that twenty thousand dyed ever its fury was abated, and
amongst them many men of account, but it ceasing, and the summer half spent,
the Venetian Admiral no longer expecting the coming of the Spaniards, sailed to
Corcyra, and there calling a Council, it was resolved they should pass over to
Cyprus and destroy the Turks fleet; but in the height of this expedition dyed
Petrus Loridanus Duke of Venice, Leaving the care of the war to Aloysius
Mocenicus, who succeeded him in the Dukedom.

Mustapha advertized of the approach of the Christian fleet, used his utmost
endeavor to carry the City by assault, but being valiantly repulsed, he caused
several letters to be shot over the walls fastened to Turkish Arrows, therein
persuading the Citizens to open their gates, and receive him their Mild and
Merciful Conqueror, and that in so doing they should deliver themselves from
the miseries that attended on besieged Cities; but these fair promises nothing
prevailing, he encouraged his soldiers to a fresh Assault, in attempting which
he lost 4000 of his men, and was forced to sound the retreat; but in the many
conflicts the Christians being wasted either by death, sickness, or wounds,
expecting succors from the Princes of the West, and none coming to their aid,
wearyed with continual watching, the Turks in the dead of the night secretly
entered a Bulwark the day before sore battered by the Ordnance from the mount,
and putting the drousie Italians and Epirots, they found therein to the sword,
ever the Allarm could be taken; let in such a number of their fellows, that the
besieged were not able to repel them, but with the continual Vollies of shot,
were on all sides overwhelmed, which Eugenius a valiant Captain perceiving, and
as a man desperate, endeavoring to retain his flying Soldiers, in thickest
danger, was slain by a Harquibus shot; and now the Turks like a Torrent flowing
in at all the Ports, made such destruction that it was lamentable to behold,
sparing in their fury neither man woman nor child; whereupon the Soldiers and
many of the Citizens, casting themselves in a Ring in the Marketplace, with
their weapons in their hands, as men desperate, resolved to dye fighting,
against whom the Governor of Aleppo caused several Murdering Pieces to be
bent, which they perceiving, and finding they should be killed at a distance,
without having power to revenge themselves on their Enemy, cast down their
weapons, and yielded themselves to the mercy of the Enemy, and were thereupon
for a while spared; but the Gates being strongly guarded, that none should
escape, Dandalus the Governor, Contarenus Bishop of Paphos, and other the
chief men of the City, having retired themselves into the Town Hall, there
resolving to dye like men, if they could find no other means to escape, sent to
the Bassa for life, which request he seemed well to approve; but whilst
messengers passed too and fro, the barbarous Turks broke in upon them, and put
them all to the sword, when raging on they likewise killed all those that had
submitted themselves, and were taken to mercy, as is supposed not without the
secret command of the Bassa, a deadly enemy to the Christians; and so great was
the inhumane slaughter that eighteen thousand were in all reported to perish by
the sword, neither was there any end of the spoil, till the avaritious enemy
had carried away all that long peace had accumulated, which according to the
moderatest computation amounted to 20000 Millions of Ducates; and
notwithstanding the fury of the Barbarous Enemy 200 youths were reserved, and
sent as a present to Selymus in order to his training them up in the order of
Janissaries. In the City likewise were taken two hundred and fifty Pieces of
Great Ordnance. This City was won on the 9 of September, 1570, and to this day
remains in the hands of the Turks, as does the whole Island.

Nicosia won, the Bassa sent one of his Sanzacks to summon the City of Cyrene
of which Palacius was Governor, who upon sight of the Turks Army cowardly
yielded the same into their hands; which so heightened their courage, that they
laid siege to Famagusta, sending to Summon it to Surrender, but finding the
resolution of the Garrison to defend it, and withal having notice that the
Christian Fleet was at hand, he raised his siege, and billeted his soldiers for
that winter, in certain villages adjacent, nor was Fames rumor founded upon
idle report, for the Fleet set out by the King of Spain, the Venetions, and the
Pope, commanded by Auria Zanius and Columnius loosing from Crect, had given the
Turks battle, had not Auria the Spanish Admiral opposed it, and after him many
of the Great Commanders; for Zanius and Venetian Admiral, and Commnius the
Popes Admiral absolutely declared that they had express Command to fight the
Turks, but the other alleging the great disadvantage they should receive by
fighting upon the Enemies Coast, and the weakness of the Fleet by reason of the
Pestilence that had destroyed the most expert Seamen abruptly departed for
Messina, leaving the other Admirals to shift for themselves, who not able to
contend with so powerful an Enemy returned likewise to Corcyra, where by a
Decree of the Senate, Zanius the Venetian Admiral was discharged of his
command, and sent prisoner to Venice, and Sebastianus Venerius Governor of
Coroyra Commissioned Admiral in his stead.

The rich prey for the most part taken in Nicolia, being put on board the
Admirals Gally, a Woman Captive taken there, in a desperate Mood giving fire to
the Gunpowder blew up the Gally, and by that blow beat in pieces two others
that lay near it, destroying thereby a great number of Turks, the Bassa himself
narrowly escaping by being a little before gone on shore.

The new Admiral of the Venetians to get him a name resolving to attempt
something upon the Turks, and having a fit opportunity offered he sailed into
the Bay of Ambriaca, and by the aid of the Mountain people inhabiting.
Acroceraunian took the strong Castle of Chimaera putting to the Sword and
taking Prisoners 300 Turks there ingarrisoned, and not long after Querinus the
Vice Admiral sailing along the Coast of Peloponesus, Landed his men near the
Bay of Maine, and in five hours took a strong Castle of the Turks, built to
guard the pass, and in it 500 Turks, whom he caused to be put to the Sword, and
taking out the Ordinance caused the Castle to be razed. The City of Famagustan
being again blocked up by the Turks huge Camp, the Governor sent Hieronimus
Ragazonius Bishop of the City, and Nicholaus Donaius to Venice, they to make
known to the Senate the danger the besieged were in, and to require them not to
delay sending them succor, whereupon the Senators wrote to the Admiral, to put
a supply both of men and provision who commiting the care thereof to Quirinus
the Vice Admiral, he as an undaunted Captain filling four Ships with all manner
of Provision, and 1700 select Soldiers, waiting his opportunity with Twelve
Galleys, accompanied them to the mouth of the Port which Ships the Turks that
lay at Anchor beholding, came forth in hope of a prize, but being set upon by
the Galleys were obliged to retire in great disorder, and run themselves for
the most part on shore; where they were beaten in pieces by the great Ordnance
from the Venetian Galleys, and then entering the Haven relieved the Citizens as
he had in charge, to their unexpressible joy; when coming forth again and
roaming about the Seas, he took two of the Enemies Ships richly laden, who were
coming to the Camp in Cyprus, and then wasted the Coasts of Pamphilia he
returned to Venice, the news of which coming to the knowledge of Selymus, it so
enraged him that he caused the Governor of Chios his head to be stricken off,
the Governor of Rhodes to be discharged of his Government and Pial Bassa, to
be turned out from being Admiral.

The Turks encroaching thus upon Christendom did not a little Alarm the
Confederate Princes, insomuch that they again consult how to withstand the
barbarous Enemy, and if possible to relieve the remaining Cities of Cyprus, but
were a long while ere they came to any conclusion. In which space after many
terrible assaults, and the loss of 14000 Turks, Tramogusta was taken, and all
manner of cruelties exercised (contrary to the Faith of the Bassa before given)
on the Soldiers and Citizens, and the same risque soon after run all the other
Cities of Cyprus, but by this time the Ambassadors sent by the Venetians to
Tamas the Persian King to join in League with the Confederate Princes being
returned, with only this answer, that the Persian would not hastily enter into
a War against the Turk, but would for two years expect the success of the
Christians Arms, the King of Spain, Venetians and Pope, with several of the
Italian Princes entered into a perpetual League, and with all diligence prepared
their Fleet against the spring, every one being proportioned his charge in the
War, and to have proportion of the spoils, to be taken according to the number
of Ships and Galleys set forth.

By this time the Turks having possessed themselves of the famous Island of
Cyprus, and not content therewith gaped for Crete, now called Candia, lying in
the Mediterranean, and once as Seneca and others witness possessed of 100
Cities, being exceeding fruitful, and then in the possession of the Venetians,
on which the Turks landing in great number, did what harm they possibly could,
by burning and spoiling all they found in their way, till at length they were
incountered by Francisous Justinianus who but a little before their Landing
came into the Island with a 1000 Soldiers, and now joining with the Islanders,
charged them as they dispersed to seek for prey with such fury, that killing
many of them he obliged the rest to make a swift though a disorderly retreat to
their Galleys, but the next day they again landing in greater number burnt
diverse Towns, ransacked Setia and Rhetimo, wherein they found much riches, and
carried away most of the inhabitants into miserable bondage. But loaded with
their booty dispersed and dreading no danger they were suddenly charged by
Lucas Michael a valiant Captain 2000 of them slain, and all the prey recovered
together with the prisoners, and they again forced to betake themselves to
their Galleys, after which they weighed Anchor and sailed along the Coast,
passing by Cythera, Zazinthius and Cephalemia Island belonging to the
Venetians, doing much damage in diverse parts of them, and carried 6000 of the
Islanders into Captivity, and departing thence failed along the Coast of
Epirus, which the Venetians had stirred up to Rebel against the Turks, but not
sending them the promised Aid they were enforced to submit to the Mercy of
their mercyless Enemies, after which they recovered all the Castles and Towns
the Venetians had taken on the Sea Coast, which brought a great fear upon most
of the Islands yet possessed by the Christians, especially when that part of
the Fleet which had done so much harm was augmented, by the arrival of Haly
Bassa, and within a while after all the Fleet met at Aulona, and on the 26 Aug.
1571. sailed directly to Corcyra, which little Island seemed to be encompassed
with their huge Fleet. There Partus Bassa Vice Admiral of the Turk upon his
arrival landed 800 Horsemen, and 1000 Foot, who ranging up and down the Island
did great harm by burning and destroying all before them, till they came to the
Suburbs of Corfu which they attempted to set on fire, but were beaten off by
the Garrison Soldiers, who sallyed upon them with great fury killing a great
number of them, and amongst the rest Paphus Rays a man of great account causing
the rest to betake themselves to flight, who coming on board the Gally, weighed
Anchor and sailed to the Bay of Corinth otherwise called Lepanto, having on
board the Fleet 15000 Captive Christians, taken in the Islands belonging to the
Venetians.

The outrages of the Turks made the Christian Confederates hasten out their
Fleet, which met at Messina where the Admirals and other great Commanders
called a Council, to consider what was best to be done in the management of the
War against so powerful an Enemy, not doubting the victory for why the Venetian
Fleet, consisted of 108 Galleys, 6 Galliasses, 2 great Ships, and many small
Galliots to whom were joined 12 Galleys of the Popes, Commanded by Columnius.
And with Don John General of Spain, Base Son to Charles the 5th. and Auria the
Spanish Admiral came 81 Galleys, of which three appertained to the Knights of
Maita. In this Fleet besides Mariners were reckoned to be 20000 Men, an Army
not only most beautiful for show, as consisting of able Men, but for the most
part composed of old experienced Soldiers, amongst whom were a great number of
the Christian Nobility, who came to serve against the Infidels of their own
accord, drawing after them a number of their Favorites, whom they at their own
charge maintained. The chief of which were Alexander Farnesius Prince of Parma,
Franciscus Maria Prince of Vrbin, and Paulus Jordanus Vrsinus of the Honorable
Family of the Roman Vrsini.

All things being thus in a readiness, the Venetian Admiral in the Counsel,
called to determine what was to be done, vehemently pressed the General and the
rest of the great Commanders instantly to give the Enemy Battle, and was
seconded by several others of Note, as well Spaniards as Romans, whereupon
Commandment was given for putting the Fleet in order, which by the three
Admirals of Venice, Rome, and Spain being brought into the Ocean was martialed
in this manner. In the right wing which consisted of 53 Galleys, was Auria the
Spanish Admiral placed. In the left wing Augustinus Barbadious with the like
number of Galleys, and in the middle Battle stood the General himself, with 70
Galleys, on the right hand of the General stood Columnius, and on the left
Venerius his Associates, and thus with equal form the Fleet set forward as if
they instantly had been to join the Enemy.

During this preparation of the Christians the Turks were not idle, but calling
a Council of the chief Commanders held a long debate, whether they should give
the Christians Battle, or decline it, but at length those that held it
dangerous to give Battle being over-ballanced by those that were of the
contrary opinion, it was resolved that the whole Fleet should be put in order
of Battle, which at the command of Haly Bassa, General of the Land Forces, and
Great Admiral of the Turkish Galleys, coming out of the Bay of Corinth or
Lepanto, they were put into order of the Battle after this manner. The middle
Battle in number much like the Christians, was conducted by Haly Bassa and
Partau, attended upon by Agan Master of the Turks Arsenal, Mustapha Zelibi the
Treasurer, Achmat Bay with Mahomet his younger brother, the sons of Haly Achmat
Aga Governor of Teuthrania, Assis Caiga Governor of Calipolis, Caracoza
Cassanes Son to Barbarossa Malamur Governor of Mytilene, Dely Solomon Gider
Captain of Chios, Cassambeius Governor of the Rhodes, Provi Aga Captain of
Nauplium, Giaper Zelibi President of Calabria, Dordagnan Dondomeni, with many
others too tedious to recite. The right wing was by the appointment of the
Bassa's commanded by Mahomet Bey, with 56 Galleys, to whom were joined many
Captains of great Experience in Sea affairs. The left wing was commanded by
Vluzales Viceroy of Argiers, an old experienced Pirate composed of 90 Galleys,
accompanied with Cariolo, and Araby, his two sons, attended on by a multitude
of Pirates who entered into the War, in hopes to get great spoil. In the
Rearward was placed Amurath Dragut with 30 Galleys, and diverse other small
vessels.

Both Fleets being set in order of Battle, about noon a fierce engagement
happened in the beginning of which God so ordering it, the Wind turned about to
the great advantage of the Christians, driving the smoke of the great
Ordnance, and vollies of small shot in the face of the Infidels, whereupon for
a long time the fight continued with equal success, victory inclining to
neither side, but after four hours space the Turkish Admiral being slain, his
Gally taken, and about 40 others sunk and fired, victory began to declare her
self for the Christians. Yet the desperate Turks as searing Selymus Anger if
they should return vanquished fought desperately, but true valor prevailing
and all the chief Commanders, except Vluzales slain or taken Prisoners, and he
resolving to reserve himself to his better fortune, fled (after 5 hours
desperately fighting) with between 30 and 40 Galleys into the Bay of Lepanto,
leaving the victory to the Christians, who having pursued him as far as they
thought convenient, returned to take the spoil, where it was a horrible
spectacle to behold the Sea colored with blood, and covered with the bodies of
the slain, fragments of broken Ships, and such weapons as were subject to float
upon its surface. The number of the Turks lost in this great overthrow, could
not be known by reason of the Multitude that were buried in the Sea, but
Antonius Gnarnaerius writing the History of this war reported 32000 to have
perished and amongst them these of Note, viz. Haly Bassa General, Mahomet Bey
(otherwise called Chiroche or Siroche) Governor of Alexandria, Cassanes the
Son of Barbarossa, together with his son Mulaune Governor of Mitylene, Gider
Governor of Chios, Cassambaunes Governor of Rhodes, Provi Aga Captain of
Nauplium, Mustapha Zelibi the great Treasurer, Caracoza Viceroy of Argiers,
with many others. The chief Prisoners taken in this Battle were Achmet and
Mahomet sons to Haly Bassa, and Nephews to Selymus, who being afterward sent
as a Present to the Pope, the Eldest died at Naples, and Machmet Bey Governor
of Euboea, and of lesser note 3500, of the Enemies Galleys were taken 161, and
40 sunk in the fight, and taken about 60 Galliots and other small vessels.

This notable Victory thus obtained, Don John Venerius and Columna coming
together, friendly embraced each other, and afterward in a most Christian
manner on their knees returned most hearty thanks to Almighty God for giving
them so Great a Victory over the Enemies of his Name; which pious example was
seconded by all the Captains, Mariners, and soldiers of the Fleet of the
Christians in this bloody fight died about seven thousand five hundred sixty
six, the chief of which were John and Bernardinus of the Honorable family of
Cordona in Spain, Horatio Caraffa and Ferantes Bisballus Virginius and Horatius
Noble Romans of the Venetian Nobility were flain; Augustinus, Barbadicus,
Benedictus, Superantius, Vincentius, Quirinus, Johanes Lauritanus, Marinus
Contarenus, Catharinus, Malepetra, Georgius, Andreas Barbadicus, Marcus
Antonius, Laudus Franciscus, Bonus Hieronimus, Contarenus, Antonius
Paschaligus, and Hieron Venerius, all of the Order of the Senators, besides
diverse other Honorable Gentlemen, well deserving to be enrolled in the Records
of Fame. There were likewise many of note wounded, and amongst the rest
Venerius the Venetian Admiral by a small shot that passed through his foot.

This great and welcome victory published in the City of Venice, caused such a
General joy as the like was never till that time; nor only did the Venetians
alone rejoice, but likewise all Christian Nations; for in this fight the Turks
lost so many substantial Gallyes, able Commanders, Seamen, that to this day
that loss has been a weakening to that so mighty Empire, and such was the
Grief conceived by Selymus thereat, that he retired himself for certain days,
not permitting any to speak with him, and then in his fury passed a Decree for
Massacring all the Christians within his Dominions, which bloody and barbarous
Edict had been put in Execution had not Muhamat the chief Bassa by many
persuasions averted his wicked purpose; yet that his loss might seem the less,
he dissembled it as well as he could, giving strict orders for the speedy
building of new Galleys, to supply the place of those that were lost, which he
had the more leisure to do, by reason that after this so signal a victory, the
Christian Fleet separated, with a resolution to meet again the next spring at
Coreyra; yet the Venetians not satisfied for the loss of Cyprus spoiled the
Turks Frontiers winning strong holds, and amongst the rest, the strong Town of
Suppoto, formerly taken from them, which caused Selimus to put to Sea all the
Galleys he had, appointing Vluzales a Renegado Christian, but now turned Turk
Admiral, in the room of Haly Bassa, slain in the battle of Lepanto, of which
the Venetian Admiral having notice, sent to Don John to come to his Aid, but he
bearing a grudge against the Venetians for hanging up one of his Mutinous
Captains, stood a long time in doubt whether he should send any of his Galleys
to his assistance or not; but at length being by his Captains persuaded, that
his honor would suffer, if through his neglect the Christan cause should be
prejudiced; he sent Lilly of Andradu, with twenty two Galleys to join with the
Venetian Fleet, then lying before Corcyra; nor was the Pope slow in sending his
Galleys, insomuch that the whole Fleet consisted of 155 Galleys, 6 Galliasses,
and twenty ships of war; nor was the Turks inferior in number, lying about
Maluasia in the entrance of the Bay called Sinus Argolicus, of which the
Venetian Admiral having notice, resolved to give them battle what ever
happened, but the wary Pirate Vluzales could not be drawnthereto, having before
to his cost tried the courage of the Christians lying still in the bay, hoping
thereby to gain some advantage, without which he resolved not to fight, but
finding the Christians every day ready to charge him as he lay, he for his
better security found means to sail to Corona, upon which the Christian Fleet
retired to Cerigo, not finding any opportunity of giving the enemy battle

Whilst matters went thus Don John sent a Frigate to advertise the Venetian
Admiral that he was arrived at Corcyra, commanding him to meet him at
Zacynthus, there to consult about the carrying on the war; but when they came
thither, the General not regarding his word delayed to meet them, which did not
a little trouble the Venetians; but not staying there they sailed to Cocyra,
where joining the ships newly sent to their Aid by several Christian Princes,
they resolved to seek out the Enemy, and if possible to oblige him to fight;
whereupon they loosed Anchor, and for the most part sailed by night, thinking
by that means to oppress the Enemy ever he was provided to defend himself; but
this purpose being discovered by some of the Turks Scouts, the Christians were
prevented in their undertaking; yet so resolute was the Venetian Admiral that
he pressed the other Generals to enter the Bay, and give them Battle even in
the mouth of the Harbor; but this his resolution (though it had past doubt
proved successful, had it been put in execution) was opposed by the Spanish
General, and Columnius the Popes Admiral, as not seasonable, but altogether
dangerous, even to the hazarding the Christian Fleet, which as they allege was
the Bullwark of Christendom; yet lying before Nauarinum, they resolved to
besiege the Castle of Modon both by Sea and Land, which Castle lying in mouth
of the Bay, defended the Turks Fleet, whereupon Sailing before it, they landed
seven thousand of their most resolute Soldiers, and at the same time appointed
several of the Galleasses and Galleys to batter it with their Great Ordnance;
the which more advantagiously to effect they joined two Galleys together, with
Masts, Ropes, and other tackling, in the nature of a floating battery, on which
they planted Baskets of Earth, and several Pieces of Great Ordnance; but being
overcharged with too great a weight, they became useless, by reason of the
abundance of water that entered them, and at the same time having notice that a
considerable number of Turkish horsemen had entered by night into the Castle,
they thought good to give over the siege, which made the Turks so adventurous
as to send several of their Galleys out of the Bay to seize upon a great ship
of the Venetians, that was coming from Zacynthus with provision for the Fleet,
but they were soon obliged to retire, which all of them did in safety, except
Mahomet, Nephew to Barbarussa the famous Pirate, who to get him a name, stayed
on purpose to dare the Christians; but being Grapled by the Marquess of St.
Crux, after a fierce Engagement he with almost all his men were slain, and the
Galley taken in the sight of the Turks Fleet, they not daring to come to his
assistance; after which the Christians besieged the strong Castle of Nauari^^m,
anciently called Pylus, the charge of which was by General consent of the great
Commanders committed to Alexander Farnesius Prince of Parma, whom the Venetians
furnished with Munition and Victuals for the better performance of that
service, which he no sooner received, but landing 2000 Italians, 1000
Spaniards, and five hundred Germans, with twelve Pieces of Ordnance, did batter
the Castles incessantly; but not encompassing it, as he ought, in the night
time a Great number of Turks having made their way through a pathless Forest,
entered at an unsuspected Port, whilst those of the Garrison were skirmishing
with the besiegers; whereupon the Princes dispairing to carry it by assault,
raised the siege.

The Turks Fleet shut up in the Bay of Modon, and as it were besieged by the
Christians, by this time felt great want, which caused a Pestilence to rage so
violently amongst the Soldiers and Mariners, that many of the Galleys were
deserted, and the rest so slenderly manned, and so unprovided of necessaries,
that had the Christian Fleet rode it out a month longer before the Bay, the
Enemies fleet had fell into their hands almost without fighting; but such was
the perverseness of the Spanish General, that he would needs return with his
Fleet, notwithstanding all the pregnant reasons, and arguments the Venetian
Admiral used to persuade him to the contrary, and so resolutely was he therein,
that he resolved to depart not only without the consent of the Venetians but
without their privity, he having in order thereto strictly commanded all his
Captains, and Masters of his Galleys, speedily to weigh Anchor, and to stand
for the Coast of Sicily; of which the Venetian Admiral having notice, and not a
little troubled thereat, came on board his Galley, and renewed his persuasions
for his stay; but finding all arguments vain, he at least requested him to stay
so long, till the 2 Galleys fastened together for a floating Battery might be
fetched off, and not be left there as a prey, to which he hardly consented,
alleging that his victuals fell short, and if he should stay longer abroad his
Fleet would be oppressed with famine, yet promised that if he met with the
ships he had sent for out of Sicily laden with provision, he would instantly
return, but kept not his word, though he incountred them upon the Coast of
Corcyra; so that the half starved Turks, upon his departure by degrees got out
of the Bay, to their no small joy, most of them getting in safety to
Constantinople. For after the departure of the Spaniards to Messina, the
Venetian and Popes Admiral departed likewise, the one to Rome, and the other to
Venice, having done nothing worthy of so great preparations as were set forth
by the Christian Princes.

About this time Amida King of Tunes being driven out of his Kingdom fled to
Don John for Aid, humbly requesting him that he would restore him to his
Kingdom, to which the crafty Spaniard seemingly hearkened, but having landed his
Forces, taken possession of Tunis and other strong places, he sent Amida
together with his wife and children into Sicily, there to remain as prisoners
at large, during their lives, and placed Mahomet his brother in his stead, who
by reason of his Seniority was rightful Heir to the Kingdom. But withal taking
of him a solemn Oath, that he should become and from thenceforth remain a
vassal to the Spanish King, and always be ready to do whatsoever he commanded,
and having beaten the Turks and wild Arabs out of the Country, he built a new
Castle in the Middle way, between Culetta and Tunes, and having put a strong
Garrison therein, as likewise into Guletta, he returned into Sicilia.

The Venetians sinding no trust to be reposed in the Spaniards, and of
themselves too weak to deal with the Turks, resolved if possible to conclude an
honorable peace with Selymus, thinking it more for their advantage than to be
subject to the insolent humors of the Spanish General; and thereupon after
much debate in the Senate house it was resolved that Ambassadors should be sent
to sound the mind of the Turk; who as it afterward appeared, was no less
desirous of peace then themselves, though he a long time dissembled it;
whereupon the Ambassadors arriving at Constantinople, after much debate
subscribed the Articles of Peace; the substance of which were these. First,
that the Venetians should pay unto Selimus 300000 Ducates, 100000 to be paid
down, and the rest in two equal portions the two succeeding years. Secondly,
That such places of the Venetians, as were in the possession of the Turks
should still remain in the hands of the Possessors, but that such Towns and
Places as the Venetians, during the war had taken from the Turks should be
instantly restored.

This Peace thus concluded, was proclaimed in Constantinople on the twentieth
of March Anno 1574, and at Venice the thirteenth of April following, to the
great amazement of the Confederates, when the better to justify themselves in
what they had done, the Venetian Senators sent for the Spanish Ambassador and
Popes Nuncio, into the Senate house, to whom the Duke in a Grave Speech,
addressed himself to this purpose. That anger and Hope two evil Counselors
being set aside, he had concluded a Peace with the Turk, not for that he was
desirous of the Turks friendship, which what account it was to be made of, he
right well knew, but for the love he bare to the State, which was not only with
loss but even with death it self to be maintained; how he had been spoiled of
the Kingdom of Cyprus; he further declared, that the Venetian State grew weaker
and weaker by continual war, and therefore before it was reduced to extremity,
and they not being able to maintain war against so Potent an enemy, were to
take a surer course for the preservation of what yet of their Signory remained
unto them, for that the safety of the Venetian State should at all times be a
sure Fortress and Defense of the Christian Commonweal, against all the furious
attempts of the enemy, and uncertain events of time.

This Peace though disliked of other Christian Princes, was advantageous to the
Venetians, for as much as the war had made their Trade to cease, both in the
Adriatic and Mediterranean Seas, which upon the conclusion of Peace with the
Turks, returned again more then ever, by reason few other Christian Merchants
had the like liberty. This peace was the easier obtained of the Turk for as
much as the Spaniard had reduced the Kingdom of Tunis to his obedience, and
that the Knights of Malta had an eye upon Tripolis and other Sea port Towns
holden by the Turks, upon the Coast of Barbary, that he might be the more at
leisure to defend what he possessed, and if possible to recover that which his
father had lost, viz. the Kingdom of Tunis; yet declining that enterprise for a
time, he converted his Forces against John the Vayuod of Valachia, who a little
before having driven Bogeanus out of Moldavia, had possessed himself of that
Province, but upon his refusing to pay Selymus double the Tribute he agreed
for, he held him in such distrust, that he resolved to take from him both his
Principalities, and annex them to the Ottoman Empire, to prevent which if
possible, the said John raised a great power, calling to his assistance the
Cossacks a warlike people of Polonia, who living upon the Frontiers secure the
kingdom from the incursions of the Tartars, and maintain themselves for the
most part by spoils taken from the enemy, who now in great number under the
leading of Suserceuius their Captain, came to the assistance of the Vayvod.

Selymus hearing what had passed, sent 30000 Turks, and 2000 Hungarians, to
join such Forces as were raised by the Palatine of Valachia Transalpine with a
Command that he should take John the Vayvod, and send him in bonds to
Constantinople, and in his stead placed Peter his brother, of which the
Palatine an utter Enemy to John was not a little glad nor delayed, but upon the
Arrival of the Turks and Hungarians, with an Army of 202000 fighting men passed
over the River Moldavius, not doubting but with his multitude to oppress his
adversary, but putting too much confidence in his strength, and by reason
thereof incamping disorderly, on the Bank of the River, the Vayvod and Captain
of the Cossacks set upon with such fury, that ere his Soldiers could recover
their Horses then dispersed in the adjacent Medows, or put themselves in a
posture of defense, they overwhelmed with shot, and every where disordered so,
that flying in great confusion most of them were slain or drowned, in
attempting to repass the River, the Palatine and Peter his brother hardly
escaping to the Castle of Brailonia in Valachia. In the Palatines Camp, were
found store of Riches, which the Vayvod bestowed upon his Soldiers, and with
Fire and Sword entered Valachia Transalpine, putting all to the Sword that came
in his way, without respect either to Age or Sex till he came to the Castle of
Brailonia, in which he understood that the Palatine and his Brother were in
this Castle, together with a fair City bearing the same name, stands on the
Banks of Danubius, which at that time was defended by a strong Garrison of
Turks, near unto which incamping his Army he wrote to the Captain thereof,
commanding him to deliver into his hands the Palatine and his Brother, who had
causelessly invaded his Territories, and being overthrown in Battle was fled
unto him, the which if he refused to do, he vowed never to depart from thence
till he had constrained him to yield them up; which Message being sent to the
Captain by two Valachian Prisoners, he returned four Messengers, with ten great
shot, ten small shot, and two Turkish Arrows; giving them in charge to tell the
Vayvod, that forasmuch as he knew him to be a servant to his dread Sovereign
Selymus he did respect him, but would in no wise deliver into his hands those
he required, but forasmuch as he understood that he of late had slain a great
number of his Lords Servants, who by his commandment were bringing Peter the
Palatines Brother into Moldavia, he therefore commanded him to raise the siege
or he would make him and his Soldiers seed upon those dishes (meaning the
Bullets and Arrows) till gorged to the full they dangerously surfeited and
cast. This answer so incensed John, that he caused the Messengers to be cruelly
entreated by cutting off their Noses, Lips, and Ears, and nailing them by their
feet to a piece of Timber hung them up before the City, with their heads
downwards as a terror to the rest, and they furiously battering the Walls till
large breaches appeared, the Soldiers entered by plain force put all to the
Sword that they found therein: Insomuch that the blood running like a Torrent
into the Danubius, crimsoned ore its stream for many a mile. There the greedy
Soldiers found inestimable Wealth, heaped up in many peaceful years; but
perceiving the Castle not so easily to be won as the City he upon notice of the
approach of 15000 Turks to the relief of the former, razed the latter, and
suddenly went to meet them with his Cossacks and 8000 Moldavian Horsemen, and
by speedy Marches entered their disordered Camp ere they heard he had raised the
siege, where the enraged Soldiers so laid about them that scarcely 1000 of the
Turks escaped, which were afterward put to the Sword in Teira, which City the
Vayvod took and utterly razed, and returning from thence overthrew another Army
of the Turks with incredible slaughter, so that his name became terrible to the
Turks, and made Selymus doubt the keeping of his Dominions in Europe, but as
Treason is always the wreck of prosperous affairs, so it happened to the
Vayvod, for he dissolving a part of his Army and appointing Czarnieuiche, one
of his great Captains, and a man singularly by him beloved, for the Guarding
his Frontires and preventing the Turks passing the Danubius, corrupted with the
Turks Gold he suffered Peter with a great Army the next Spring to enter
Valachia without resistance, of which the Vayvod having notice, lying then
before the Castle of Teine, he sent the Captain of the Cossacks, and the
Moldavian Horsemen to oppose their passage, who meeting with 6000 of the
forerunners of the Turks Army, after a light skirmish put them to flight and
taking one of them though mortally wounded, inquired of him the state of the
Army that had passed Danubius, but he dealing unfaithfully with them, would not
make them sensible of the great power which was at hand; yet the Captain of the
Cossacks doubting to be oppressed by multitudes, and having in distrust the
fidelity of Czarnieuiche, sent to the Vayvod to advertise him thereof, and to
desire him to provide for himself and the safety of his Army, but he as a man
resolved to give the Turks Battle, returned for answer that in the first place
he little doubted of the Faith of him whom he had found most faithful in the
time of his greatest distress, and used as a most trusty companion in all his
Travels, and that it was no time now to stand in doubt or be afraid, and that
as for himself, he would ere long come with the rest of the Army, and take a
view of the Enemies Camp, for that he was not come so far to fly but to fight
in the defense of his Subjects and Country, and so within four days after he
joined with the forerunners of his Army, and encamped near a Lake, which
runs out of Danubius, and with several of his trusty followers ascended a
high Hill, the better to take a veiw of the Enemies huge Camp, upon which
plainly perceiving that he was betrayed by Czarnieuiche, who had then under his
command 13000 of his choice Soldiers, he sent for him, but he doubting his
Treason was discovered, sent him word that he could not now come, the Enemy
being so nigh at hand, but that he should without delay see him in the Field as
forward as the most courageous against the Enemy, but herein he failed his
Lord; for Battle being joined he caused his Ensigns to be let fall, and
revolted to the Enemy, which so discouraged the rest of the Soldiers that
after a desperate and bloody fight, finding themselves oppressed with
multitudes, and their Contrymen who should have assisted them, fighting
against them, they gave back, which the Vayvod perceiving caused the retreat to
be sounded, and with 20000 Foot men, and such Horsemen as escaped the Battle,
retired in as good order as the danger would permit, into the ruins of an old
Town which a little before he had razed, and therein strongly Fortified himself
round about, which next day the Turks encamped, but perceiving that it was not
only difficult but dangerous to assault him in his strength, they sent
Messengers to him, to persuade him to yield to Mercy and not expose his own
Life, and the lives of so many of his Subjects to the fury of the enraged
Soldiers, or miseries they would be shortly reduced to by Famine, offering the
Oaths of all the chief Commanders for his own security and the security of his
people, to which proposals he being persuaded to hearken he in consideration
that the Cossacks might be permitted to return with their Horses and Arms,
into their own Country; that himself might be alive conveyed into the presence
of Selymus, there to make his defense, and that his Subjects might return to
their respective homes, or take service with the Turks; agreed to come out of
his strength and submit himself, to which his demands Capucius Bassa General of
the Turks Army consented, and himself with the rest of the great Commanders
swore seven times (a usual custom amongst the Turks for the solemnly obliging
themsleves) to fulfill his request. Whereupon he came forth only accompanied
with Osmolius a Polonian Captive, but after four hours continuance in the Turks
Camp the perfidious Bassa sending for him unexpectedly with his Scimiter struck
him cross the face, and afterward wounded him in the Belly, upon which signal
the Janissaries present took him and cut off his head, which they fixing upon
the point of a Lance, carrying it in derision through the Camp: nor satisfied
with barbarous and base indignities, they at the commandment of the Bassa tore
his body in pieces with Camels, and soon after put all the Christians whom they
had allured out of their strength to the Sword who yet fell not unrevenged, for
the Cossacks perceiving the hard plight they were in, sered together, and with
their weapons in their hands made a great slaughter of the Enemy, but being few
in number except their Captain, and some other men of note they were all slain.

After this shameful Murder the Turks over run all Moldavia and Valachia,
recovering in a short time the strong places that were possessed by the Vayoods
Garrisons, after which Selymus intent for the recovery of the Kingdom of Tunis
in possession of the Spaniards sent 300 sail of Galleys under the command of
Sinan Pial, and Vluzales his chief Bassa's to reduce it to his obedience, who
after the loss of 30000 Turks, with great difficulty took the strong Castle of
Guletta, and the new Castle built at the Commandment of Don John in his late
expedition against the Moorish Rebels, which strong hold lost, Tunes
surrendered without making any considerable resistance, and in it was taken
Mahomet the late invested King, whom the Turks sent Prisoner to Constantinople.
But Selymus long survived not this victory over the Spaniards, but being spent
with Wine and Women, to whom he had given his greatest strength he died on the
9th. of December, anno 1574. having lived 51 years, and thereof Reigned eight,
he lies buried at Hadrinople, leaving his Empire to Amurath his Eldest Son, who
succeeded him by the name of Amurath the Third, as will appear in the series of
his Life and Reign.

CHAP. XVI. The Life, Reign, and Memorable Transactions of Amurath the Third of
that Name, and sixth Emperor of the Turks.
SElymus dead, and his Death kept secret from the Janissaries for the space of
twelve days, at the end of which Amurath arriving at Constantinople, was
received into the Seraglio, and took possession of the Empire, when having
pacified the unruly Soldiers with great liberality, he caused according to the
Turkish policy, Mustapha, Solomon, Abdula, Osman and Tzihanger his five
brethren to be strangled, with how strings even in his sight, the reason of
which strangling is because they would not spill any of the Othoman sacred
blood as they term it on the ground, upon the death of whom the Mother of
Solomon overcome with grief and despair, stabbed her self to the Heart with a
Dagger, at which Tragical sight it is reported that Amurath wept, as not
delighted with such unnatural cr^elty, but that the manner and nature of his
Government so required, for that by reason of the largeness of the Ottoman
Empire, if many of the Princes of the blood lived at one and the same time,
they would probably with civil dissensions rend it in pieces.

Anno 1575 Amurath established many wholesome Laws, altered the Coin, and
bountifully relieved the poor, and albeit he was of a mild and peaceable
nature, yet that he might seem like to his Predecessors he prosecuted his
Fathers Wars, and aided by the Tartars entered into Ruscia part of the
Territories of the King of Polonia, where he burnt and destroyed 200 Castles,
besides a great number of Towns and Villages, putting multitudes of the poor
people to the Sword, and carrying as many into miserable Captivity, but the
Tartar had little joy of their success, for whilst they were busy in Ruscia
the Cossack brake into their Kingdom, and destroyed all before them for the
space of 100 miles.

That which gave the Turks encouragement to enter the Territories of Polonia,
was the division amongst the nobility for Henry D' Valoys their King, upon
notice that his brother Charles the Ninth French King was dead, secretly
departed to take upon him the Kingdom of France, to which he was rightful
Heir, whereupon one party was for Electing Maximilian the German Emperor, and
the other strongly opposing them would have introduced the great Duke of
Muscovy. Of which Amurath having notice, and supposing that to which soever of
them it fell he would prove a troublesome Neighbor, he sent a Letter to
dissuade the Nobility and Counselors of the Kingdom to choose neither, but to
Elect a King amongst themselves, or else Stephen Buttor Prince of Transylvania,
and in so doing they should find him their constant Friend, or in refusing to
comply with his desire to expect all the calamities that attend on War. In this
Letter the proud Turk styled himself God of the Earth, Governor of the whole
World, the Messenger of God, and faithful servant of the great Prophet. Yet so
it effectually wrought with the Polonian Nobility, that notwithstanding
Maximilian the Emperor was by the Arch Bishop of Gnesna and some others,
Elected King; yet was that their Election by the great part of the Electors
disannulled, as also the great Duke of Moscovy rejected, and the Noble Princess
Anne of the most Honorable Jagelionian house chosen Queen of Polonia, upon
condition that she should Marry Stephen Prince of Transylvania, which she
afterward performed, as in the series of this History will appear.

Amurath upon the aforementioned conditions having drawn his Army out of
Ruscia, and taking advantage of the discord arising in the Kingdom of Persia,
upon the death of Tamas resolved to bend his Forces to the Conquest of that
great Kingdom, which (the dissension amongst the Sons of the deceased King
about the succession, made him suppose) was easy to be effected, whereupon
raising such great Forces as held Christendom in suspense, he yet declined
attempting any thing till he had knowledge what effects the civil broyls had
wrought, which were that after a long contention, and the Murder of many of
the Sons and Grandchildren of the deceased King, Mahomet Eldest son to Tamas,
who had before rejected the Diadem, to prevent the ruin of his Native Country,
took upon him the Regency, though not without the envy of many of the great
Sultans, whose guilt upon his being proclaimed King had caused them to fly, who
like through paced Traitors in their exile solicited Amurath by all means
speedily to invade the Kingdom of Persia, laying before him the facility of
conquering that noble Kingdom, abounding with all manner of riches, and that
the Georgians and Saracens evily affected toward the new King, would not fail
upon the approach of his Army to join with him. These and the like persuasions
fired the Turk with hopes of so glorious an achievement, that notwithstanding
he was in League with the Persian, yet after long debating the matter in the
Divan, it was resolved that the War should be undertaken and carried on with
all vigor, and that the first attempt should be made upon the Country of
Servan, the better to effect which by alaruming the Enemy in diverse places, he
sent to his Bassa's Governors of Babylon, Van, and other places on the Persian
Frontiers, to molest the Territories by frequent inroads, to perform which they
were no ways wanting. And now Stephen the Prince of Transylvania having married
Queen Anne, and being confirmed by the free choice of the Nobility King of
Poland, he sent his Ambassadors to Amurath, to conclude a firm and inviolable
League, which was granted by the Turk very advantageous to the Christians, that
he might not be hindered in his Persian War, which in Anno 1578. he undertook,
sending a great Army under the leading of Mustapha Bassa (who in the Reign of
Selymus had Conquered Cyprus) into the Country of Servan, composed of these
following Nations, viz, 12000 Mesopotamians, 14000 Babylonians and Assyrians,
2000 Syrians, 10000 Natolians, 1000 Jews of Palastine, 4000 Cilicians, after
which followed the Soldiers of Grecia, the Glory and Hope of the whole Camp to
the number of 10000, as likewise 10000 Janissaries, Harquibusires, to whom 4000
of the Citizens of Er Zicshum were added besides many Volunteers of diverse
Nations: insomuch that the whole Army consisted of 110000 Horse and Foot,
besides this multitude of men, Mustapha brought into Persia 500 pieces of
Artillery, and 50 Wagon loads of Money to leavy other Soldiers, if occasion
required it.

The Bassa with the Army aforesaid, arriving at Chars, after three days
staying there, during which time being marvellously troubled by reason of a
sudden Tempest, he raised his Camp and departed to the foot of the Mountains
of Chielder, otherwise Periardo, where he had knowledge of the Persian Sophies
Army Approach, which caused him to put his Army into order of Battle, dividing
it amongst his great Commanders, which were Deruis Bassa of Caraunt, and Osman
Mahomet, and Musta Fada Bassas; as for the Persian Army under the leading of
Tocomac an experienced Captain, whom for his known valor and Loyalty, the
Sophy had made General, it consisted not of above twenty thousand, all
Horsemen, gathered out of Georgia, Media, and Antropatia, who misinformed by
their Scouts of the Turks number, boldly held on their way, resolving to give
them Battle, who from the Hills perceiving their intent, put themselves in a
posture to receive them: whereupon about one in the Afternoon, a dreadful sight
began, wherein at the first charge were slain seven of the Turks Sanzacks, with
a Great number of Soldiers without any apparent loss to the Persians, who
fighting close together slew the Turks at a distance with their shot of Arrows,
and the continual thundering of their Harquibuzes, of which Engines by this time
they had learned the perfect use. But Mustapha, who with a great power of his
choice soldiers, having waited a fit opportunity, peirced the Squadrons of the
horse, having first made a lane by the reiterated Vollies of his Artillery, and
charged with such fury, that although the Persians encouraging each other did
all than men were capable to perform, yet being overpowered with number, were
at length broken and disordered; they under the shelter of the night retired,
which the Turks without much difficulty permitted, they not having any cause to
rejoice at the Victory so gotten, their loss was so great, yet keeping the
field all that night, the next morning in token of his good success, Mustapha
sent the heads of five thousand Persians, and three thousand live prisoners to
Amurath, and for the greater terror of the enemy, caused the heads of three
thousand others to be stricken off, and piled on heaps; the Turks lost in this
battle near twenty thousand, many of their chief soldiers.

The next day after the battle Manuchlars, a Prince of the Georgians sent a
messenger to Mustapha, to acquaint him that he was coming to confer with him,
which did not a little rejoice the Turk; insomuch that he caused all his Great
Commanders with Trumpets, Ensigns displayed, Drums beating, and the discarge of
all the Great Ordnance to receive him, and in like manner to conduct him to his
Pavillion (not doubting but that the revolt of this Prince would greatly
further his affairs) which being being done, and he entering the Bassa's Tent,
he there was caused to sit down on his right hand, when after having made him
presents of such chings as for that purpose he had brought, he gave the Bassa
to understand, That for the honor and estimation he conceived of the Turkish
valor, he was ever devoted to the house of the Ottomans, and as he had often
times desired to venture his life and fortune in their service, so at this
present time he moved by his former desire, allured by the strange fame of his
wonderful and victorious Army, and stirred up by a particular Fanta^e to learn
the Turkish Discipline in martial affairs, under such a General as was the
Bassa, to whom he offered all his devotion and service, things as he said not
offered to any before, and in sine besought him to accept of him in the name of
Amurath, whose obedient vassal he had vowed himself.

This Speech ended the Bassa highly commended him for his prudent choice and
good will toward the Turks; and the more to confirm him in the opinion he had
of the Ottoman Greatness, he caused him to be led throughout his Camp, that so
he might take a view of the Turkish Magnificence, where amongst other things he
with detestation beheld the Pile of Persian heads, and then returning to
Mustaphas Tent, he was presented with Garments of cloth of Gold, a Gilt Battle
Ax and Target enameled with diverse precious stones, and never permitted him to
go from his Pavillion without a train of his slaves attending on him.

Things being at this pass, the Bassa was about to raise his Camp, to march
into the very heart of Persia, when lo the face of the Heavens became black as
Egyptian darkness, and upon a sudden such Prodigious Thunders, Lightning, Rain
and Hail, broke from the yielding Clouds, that it seemed to most that the
dissolution of all things was at hand, the wind every where renting the Turkish
Tents in pieces, and carrying them into the Air; which Tempest and the noisome
stench arising from the Carkases of the dead, caused such a Pestilence in the
Camp, that upon the muster taken four days after forty thousand Turks were
wanting, yet when the weather cleared up he removed, passing by the sides of
the Great Mountain, and in his way taking in several Castles and Fortresses,
though not without the loss of many of his men; nor were the Persians wanting
to cut off his rear and the straglers of his Camp, as they found opportunity,
by which means many thousands of their Forragers and such as greedy of booty
left the Army, were cut short, yet having received a great supply of Provision
from Aleppo, he marched into the Country of Siruan, when by the way Alessandro
another Prince of the Georgians came to the Bassas Pavillion and submitted
himself, as the former had done, being thereupon welcomed in the same nature,
receiving rich presents from the Bassa as a token of his favor, as likewise a
promise that upon his return he would pass through his Country to pay him a
visit.

The Turks traveling twelve days by long marches came into the confines of
Sirvan, but finding all the Country destroyed before them, they fell into many
ill conveniences, for by the means aforesaid pale famine began to stare them
in the face, which obliged them to search for provision in all places, yet
finding little, as they were about to return to the Camp they happened on
several Persian spies, out of whom they extorted that after they had passed
certain Marshes where Canac discharged it self into Araxis they should find
certain fields of Rice and standing Corn, together with diverse herds of Cattle,
enough to suffice the whole Army for a months space, which being made known
unto the Bassa, he not greatly credited the Report, and therefore would not
pass thither with the whole Army, but freely permitted such as would, to go, so
that about ten thousand of the most hungerstarved, with such necessaries as
they thought fit, went to seize upon this booty, but had no sooner passed the
River and some sew Marshes, but they fell into the Persian Ambush, laid for
that purpose, who put them almost all to the sword; but whilst they were taking
the spoil Mustapha having notice by the flyers what had happened, came upon
them with the whole Army so suddenly that he hemmed them, as it were in an
Island, made by the meandring of Araxis and Canac, where setting upon them,
after a bloody fight put them to the worst, killing a great many of them, and
forcing other to take the River, wherein many of them perished, Tocomac the
General and three other great Captains hardly escaping.

After which Mustapha resolved to pass the River Canac, of which the Soldiers
having notice, began not only to murmur but to Mutiny throughout the Camp,
alleging that he carried them to their certain destruction for that being in a
strange Country, where all necessaries whereby to subsist were wanting,
whereby they should subsist, they must inevitably perish, but he urging that it
was the command of Amurath, and if no man but himself would pass over he
himself would obey his Lords command, whereupon notwithstanding the
unwillingness of three parts of the Army the next day the better to encourage
his Captains and Souldiiers himself waded over, and after him followed a great
number of his slaves, and the rest of the great Commanders, but so slowly by
reason of the swiftness of the River, that night approached ere half the Army
had gained the farther bank, when the stream swelling with the force of the
Wind and darkness making the Soldiers fearful, 8000 of them were driven
headlong down the current into the deep places, where they miserably perished
together, with a great number of Camels and Horses, so that the Persians living
upon the Banks many miles distance, perceiving the number of dead Turks
together with their weapons floating with the stream, concluded the Army was
overthrown, nor was the fortune of those that passed over for a time much
better, for coming into a barren Country, a great number of them died for
want, yet having passed thus far a greater mischief would have befallen them
had they returned, and therefore being every way beset with danger they
resolutely marched forward, either to find relief or to end their days in
misery. But contrary to their expectation, after two days hard marching they
came into a plentiful Country stored with all manner of Provisions which did
not a little revive them, being before even at the point to perish, after which
having most of the Cities of Sirvan yielded to him, he put Garrisons therein
and furnishing them with all necessaries at the importunity of his Soldiers
resolved to return home and so passing through the Country of Prince
Aleflander, where he revictualled and relieved the Garrison of Testis, who
through Famine were reduced to such necessity, that no unclean thing was left
uneaten, and so passing through the straights of the rough Mountains, where he
lost a number of his people, he at length arrived at Erzirum where without any
muster he discharged his Army; thereby to hide the great loss he had sustained
from the knowledge of Amurath, and forgot not by Letters to magnify his own
exploits; sending withal the two Georgian Princes who had submitted themselves,
with Letters of recommendation to Amurath.

It was not long after the departure of Mustapha, but the Tartars in
confederacy with the Turks, having left the Fens of Moetis, and the unmountable
shoars of the Black Sea, passing over the Rocks upon Colchis, and the frozen
crags of the Mountain Caucasus, entered Sirvan with an Army of 30000 Horse,
under the leading of Abdilcherai, who no less terrified the Persians then had
the Turks, but after the taking of many Cities, and ranging about the Country
for prey, as one day they lay dispersed in a Valley near to E'res, Emire Hamze
Mirize Eldest Son to Mahomet the Persian Sophy, came upon them unawares with
12000 Horsemen, and ere they could put themselves in a posture of defense, slew
15000 of them and took almost all the rest Prisoners, and amongst them
Abdilcherai Son as he pretended himself to the great Cham, who being sent
Prisoner to Cabiu the Regal seat of the Persian Sophy, so won upon the favor
of the King and Queen, but specially of the latter, who was said to be more
prodigal of her favors toward him then stood with her honor, and at the same
time Mahomet intending to match him to his Daughter, thereby to procure the
Friendship of the great Tartarian Cham: it so far moved the Sultans or great
men of the Court with envy that they slew him in the Palace, and at the same
time as many reported strangled the Queen, whom they found over familiar with
him in his Chamber, but whether so or not certain it is she was never
afterward seen.

The Tartars Forces thus destroyed, the Terror of the young Persian Prince was
so great, that what by Stratagem and plain Force, he wrested out of the Turks
hands most of the Cities they had before possessed. Insomuch that (the City of
Derbent of which Osman Bassa was Governor with the title of Vizar of Sirnan
excepted) the Turks were driven out of all their strong places, nor was it long
ere the Persian Sophy practiced with Shahamel, Lord of the Mountain of Brus,
whose Daughter Osman had married to betray him and the City into his power, for
that he was the only man amongst the Georgians whom Osman trusted, who won by
the great promises of the Sophy, without any respect to the Turk as he was his
Son-in-Law, undertook to gratify him in his desire, but he carried not the
matter so close but his Daughter understanding what that passed, and more
studious for the preservation of her Husband, than furthering her Fathers
purpose, she still revealed all she knew; which so inwardly perplexed Osman
that he resolved to prevent the Treachery of his Father-in-law by taking him
out of the way, whereupon as his usual manner was inviting him to a solemn
Feast with a cheerful countenance he commanded 500 of his Soldiers to be in a
readiness, and that as soon as Sahamel was entered the Court off his Palace to
seize him, and after having cut of his Head to put all his followers to the
Sword, which was accordingly put in execution, and not so contented, he sent
out 2000 Horsemen to spoil his Country, to the great astonishment of all the
neighboring Princes, but to the exceeding grief of the Sophy who found his
hopes frustrated by the death of Sahamel.

The year following, viz. 1578. Amurath calling to him his Bassa's, consulted
what was further to be done in relation to the Persian War; when after a long
debate, it was upon mature deliberation resolved that it was a matter of
dangerous consequence to send an Army into the heart of Persia, where they
should not only have a fierce Enemy to deal with, but likewise many other
difficulties, as hunger, overflowing of Rivers, passing craggy Mountains and
the like: But that it was therefore necessary, that by degrees they should pass
conquering on from the Borders still securing all at their backs, the care of
managing which being referred to Mustapha, he sent into all the Heredatary
Countries of the Empire, commanding the respective Governors to send him store
of Pioners, and men skilled in Architect, as likewise a great number of the
most expert Soldiers, but especially those that had been disbanded the year
before, upon notice of which great multitudes flocked to the service, who early
in the Spring met at Erzirum, from whence they marched under the command of the
Bassa to Chars, a City on the Frontiers of Sirnan, which in the late War had
been demolished; yet now again Rebuilt and Fortified within the space of 23
days, notwithstanding the abundance of Snow that fell during their laboring
therein, the which was no sooner finished but news came that the strong Castle
of Testis was besieged by the Persians, who had reduced the Garrison to so
great a straight that through Famine, they would be obliged to yield up the
place if they were not speedily relieved. Upon which in great perplexity he
sent Hassan Bassa, Son to Mahomet Principal Vizar of the Court, and Resuan
Captain of the Adventurers with 20000 Horse and Foot, furnished with Provisions
and others Necessaries for the relief of the Besieged, who passing the straits
of Tomanis, were set upon by 8000 Persians under the leading of Aliculi Cham
and Simon two expert Captains, who in those intricate mazes slew many of them,
and took considerable spoil, which so hightened them that within a while after
setting upon the Turks, and thinking to have the like advantage fell into their
Ambush, so that most of the Persians fell by the Sword or were taken Prisoners,
and amongst the latter Aliculi Cham; wwhich gave Hassan opportunity to march
without further control to Testis, where through Famine he found half the
Garrison lost, yet encouraging them in the best wise, and storing them with all
manner of Provision and Warlike Munition, he having at their request displaced
Mahomet the Governor, and constituted Amet Bassa in his stead he was about to
return the same way he came, but upon notice that Simon had strongly possessed
himself of the aforesaid straights, and barrocadoed them with his great
Artillery, he was wonderfully perplexed as dispairing of his safe return, which
Aliculi perceiving promised upon consideration that he would release him, to
show him a way both plain and easy, through which he might pass without any
danger from the Persians, whereupon the Bassa swore to perform what he
requested; but afterward, as is very usual amongst those Infidels revoked his
Oath excusing himself, by saying, it was not in his power to release any
Prisoner taken in War without the consent of his General: of which perfidious
dealing Sinan having notice, who before in consideration of the delivery of
Aliculi had winked at their passage, he with his Light-Horsemen pursued hard
after them, when overtaking the Rear he charged them with such fury, that in
great confusion they fled. In which flight a great number were slain and taken
Prisoners with a great booty, especially the Treasure of the Bassa, and of
Resuan Captain of the Adventurers, which loss so sensibly afflicted Mustapha
that upon notice thereof he broke up his Army, not thinking it convenient to
attempt any thing further that year, and soon after he being discharged of his
Generalship was called home, where upon his arrival at Court, he was accused by
Sinan Bassa, for neglecting the Emperors affairs, wasting his Treasure in
unnecessary buildings, and rather giving the Enemy cause to contemn the Ottoman
Forces, then to fear their Prowess.

These and many other such like complaints being exhibited against him so
incensed Amurath, that he resolved he should be strangled; in order to which he
sent his chief Gentleman Porter, attended on by fifteen others to the Bassas
Palace, but the crafty old blade being forewarned of what was intended against
him, caused himself for a long time to be denied, but when the messengers
impatient of delay, urged that he must and should render obedience to the
Emperors warrant (which they then produced) they were admitted to his presence,
but frustrated of their design, by a Guard that enclosed the Bassa with
weapons, forbidding any access further then a circle made for that purpose,
which they perceiving, thought it no time to put their design in practice, but
rather to entreat him by fair means to come to Court, which he refusing, they
presented him one of the Emperors Letters, in which he commanded him that if he
would not come in person, yet to send his Chancellor and Treasurer, to give up
their accounts, and to answer to the accusation against him and them, to which
he consented, upon promise that they should not be prejudiced thereby, yet upon
their arrival they were sent prisoners to the Tower called Jadicula, but by the
Mediation of certain Great Ladies of the Court, bribed with Jewels of
Extraordinary price, the Bassas peace being made, and he coming into the
Emperors presence, all was blown over, and his two Ministers set at liberty,
without any further examination.

During these passages the Great Vizar Bassa Muhamet was stabbed in the Divano
by a private Soldier, whom he had bereaved of his Pension, got at the price of
his long service in the wars, for which the said soldier was put to death with
most exquisite Torments, in whose place Mustapha Bassa labored to be chosen as
his right by course, but Amurath inwardly displeased with his proceedings,
rejected his suit, and sent the seal to Sivan Bassa, whom he also made General
for the Persian war, who preparing a great Army marched to the Frontiers, and
there expected the success of Maxut Chau the Persian Ambassador then arrived at
Constantinople to sue for peace, but not obtaining his desire on such Articles
as he insisted on, both Potentates prepared for a resolute and vigorous war,
the one to offend, and the other to defend, during which time Mustapha Bassa
dyed at Constantinople, supposed either to have been poisoned by the command of
Amurath, or else that to prevent the fate of strangling he had poisoned himself.

The Persian Ambassador being returned to his Master, and giving him to
understand that there was no peace to be had with the Turk unless he would
peaceably deliver into his possession the Country of Sir^an, and that himself
being taken for a Spy in the Turkish Court, was glad to give Amurath great
hopes of obtaining his desire, to prevent death or imprisonment, yet that it
remained at the pleasure of the King whether he would stand to any thing that
had been by him proposed; for which good service of Mexut Chau the Sophy made
him Great Treasurer of Tauris, which at that time was Governed by Emir Chau his
mortal enemy, who sought by all the means he could to destroy him; wherefore
declining to go thither in person, he officiated his Office by his Deputy, of
which Emir taking hold of as a fit opportunity to work his destruction,
secretly induced the Sophy to believe that he held secret correspondence with
the Turks, and for that reason lay hovering on the Frontiers, placing a base
fellow as his Deputy to officiate so great a Trust which was not a little
dishonor to the Majesty of the Persian King; whereupon the Sophy gave him
power to seize Mexut Chau and most of his principal servants, and by Torture to
wring out of them the truth of the matter.

Glad was Emir to have so fair an opportunity to destroy Mexut, and thereupon
without further delay sent fifteen stout fellows to Caffangich Mexuts place of
abode to fetch him and his servants by force, who arriving there, and having
admittance to his presence, he promised to go with them, and gave to each of
them a present, ordering his Steward to make them merry, whilst he prepared
himself to accompany them to their Lord Emir, but with secret command to make
them drunk, which his Steward so suddenly effected, that within an hours space
they fell fast asleep, which Maxut perceiving, fast bound them with ropes, and
throwing them into a deep well, with all his family fled to the Turkish Bassa,
then with his Army on the Frontiers, who upon notice of what had happened
kindly received him.

Sivan Bassa having stayed at Chars with the Turkish Army eight days, he by
easy marches came to Teflis, having by the way lost many of his Forragers cut
off by the Georgian Horsemen, but arriving at the place aforesaid he was
recruited out of Syria and Judea, and having distributed part of his Treasure
amongst the Soldiers, and set all things in order, he with his Army departed
thence; when passing the Strait of Tomanis, he had notice from Mustassad
(afterward Governor of Aleppo) that not far distant on the right hand, were
several fields of standing Corn and Herds of Cattle grazing slenderly guarded,
which the Bassa induced to believe, sent the said Mustafsad with a strong power
to seize upon that booty, of which his Army stood so much in need, but they
were no sooner within danger, but the Persians and Georgians burst out upon
them in great numbers, putting them on every side to flight, whom they pursued
so fiercely that seven thousand of them were slain, many taken Prisoners, and
all their Cammels and other beasts of burden taken, of which Sivan, having
notice, in a great rage dispatched the Bassa of Caramania, with twenty thousand
horse and foot to pursue the Persians, after whom himself followed with the
whole Army, but too late, for that perceiving from a high mountain what was
intended had withdrawn themselves, yet some straglers fell into the Turks
hands, part of whom they slew, and part they saved alive; yet the Turks holding
on their way came to Triala, where they understood that the Persian King being
departed from Tauris, was coming against them with a great Army, resolving to
give them battle, upon which Sivan gave strict command throughout his Army,
that every man on pain of death should be in a readiness to March, he resolving
to meet the King on his way; after which he descended into the large Plains of
Chielder, where a former battle had been fought between the Turks and the
Persians, where not hearing of the Kings approach, after having mustered his
Army, he resolved to March to Tauris to enrich himself with the spoils of that
City, but by the way under pretense of trying his men, he caused a counterfeit
battle tobe fought amongst his own Soldiers, as in case of a General muster,
which ever after rendered him a byword to his Soldiers, and loytering in the
aforesaid plains for the space of eight days; in the mean space Aider the Aga
as an Ambassador from the Persian King came to his Camp, offering in the name
of his Master such proposals as Maxut had before done at Constantinople, which
were that Chars and Teflis should be quietly possessed of the Turks, that so a
good correspondence might be continued between the Subjects of both Potentates,
for accomplishing of this desired peace, Sinan promised to deal with Amurath,
provided the Persian would send an Ambassador to Constantinople, which being
resolved on, the proud Bassa returned to Chars, and from thence departed to
Erizirum, where he dismissed his Army, having done nothing worthy the name of a
General.

In the year 1581 Amurath caused his son Mahomet to be circumcised after the
Hebrew manner; in honor of which solemnity he made a feast which continued
with shows and sports, for the space of forty days, where all, or most of the
Christian and Mohammedan Princes Ambassadors were present; and amongst them the
Ambassador of Persia, whom Amurath (after suffering many affronts to be put
upon him) caused to be imprisoned with all his Retinue, so straightly, that
though one hundred of his servants dyed of the Plague, yet much ado had he to
get himself removed to Erzirum. This hard handling of the Ambassador made the
conceived hopes of Peace to vanish, insomuch that either Potentate prepared for
war, when as Amurath not well liking the proceedings of Sivan, constituted
Mahomet Bassa, nephew to Mustapha Bassa deceased, which choice Sivan greatly
inveighed against, though all in vain; for early in the spring, he taking
charge of the Army designed for the Persian war, departed from Erzirum
accompanied with the Bassa of Caramite, carrying with him great store of
provision, and a huge mass of money, but such was his bad fortune that in his
way to Teflis, passing a River his Army was routed by the Persians and
Georgians, and most of his best Soldiers slain or taken prisoners, a great
part of the money and provision, fell likewise into the hands of the enemy; so
that not having sufficient to relieve the Garrison, hardly oppressed by famine,
he had much ado to persuade the Soldiers to continue in it, and exceedingly
to straighten his discomfited Army to supply that place with money and
provision; all which calamity being supposed to happen by the Sinister Council
of one Mustapha a Renagate Georgian, then in the Turks Camp, who was more then
suspected to hold correspondence with his Country; wherefore Mahomet with other
his trusty Counselors resolved his death, whereupon he called a Council in his
own Pavillion, pretending letters of instruction from the Emperor, and secretly
gave order that upon the coming of Mustapha, whilst the Letters were in
reading, the Janissaries should cut off his head, but the Georgian having
notice, chose out fifty of his faithful followers, and imparting to them what
was intended, commanded them to be near at hand and at the first call to enter
the Pavilion, where if they perceived any violence used toward his person,
they should not spare the General himself. Matters being brought to this pass,
and Mustapha entered the Pavilion of the Bassa, the counterfeit Letters were
ordered to be read, which done, and the Georgian about to depart, promising to
perform what ever the King should command, Capagi Bassa Mahomets Great usher,
came to him and plucking him by the sleeve, would have forced him to have sat
down, which he perceiving, and knowing his life was in danger, drew his sword,
and struck Mahomets Lieutenant so forcibly on the head, that he clove him to
the stomach, then reversing his blow, wounded the Bassa of Caramite, as
likewise many others, and had killed the General himself, had not the uproar
caused many to enter the Pavillion, and amongst others his fifty followers, who
carried him in safety to his Tent. This action caused grievous complaints to be
sent to Amurath from either party, whereby he understanding the evil state of
his affairs in those Parts, exceedingly blamed his Bassa's for pushing on into
such a dangerous war, and in a rage thrust Sivan Bassa from his Vizarship,
placing Sciaus Bassa (a Hungarian born, and to whom he had married his sister)
in his stead.

The Turks affairs being at this pass Anno 1582, they had small mind to proceed
in their war against the Persians, nor was the Persian King less desirous to be
rid of so troublesome a guest, that he might be the better at leisure to
suppress the Rebellion raised by his Son Abas Mirize, who countenanced by the
chief of the Sultans, had seized upon many strong places, and was now
Fortifying himself in Ateri, whither his father passed with a great Army by the
way, recovering such Towns as had revolted from his obedience, and putting such
of the Traitors as he found therein to death; but coming before the City, the
young Prince wrote such submissive Letters to his father and elder brother,
then in his fathers Camp, that the old man was well content, that he should by
his Ambassadors be admitted to purge himself of such crimes as were laid to his
charge, which he did so effectually that the whole matter appearing to be
framed and contrived by Mirize Sulmos, who notwithstanding had persuaded the
King to make that Expedition against his Son that he might advantage himself by
being made General of the Army; to put an end to further differences the said
Mirize Sulmus was by the Kings command beheaded, as being indeed the Author of
those intestine troubles.

These things thus disposed, the Sophy was now at leisure to oppose the
invading Turks, wherefore gathering a great Army he striped them out of many of
their holds, which so enraged Amurath that appointing Ferat Bassa his General,
whom with full instructions he dismissed with a great Army, with which having
roamed about Sunan and Georgia all Summer, Anno 1583. with the loss of many of
his men, and the revolt of Mustaffa, he in September returned to Erzirum having
done nothing more, then destroyed the Country of Mustaffa, and relieved Teflis.

The following year the P^^sian King resolving to drive the Turks out of his
Country, raised a great Army, and encamped in the Plains before the City of
Tauris, of which Ferat having notice would not depart from Erzirum before he
had sent to Amurath to have his opinion therein, who sent him an express to
relieve if possible the Garrison of Teflis with a small power to oppose the
rest of the Army against the Enemy, whereupon he resolved to put in practice
the pleasure of his Lord. In order to which the better to secure the passage or
strait of Tomanis, he built a Castle in the entrance thereof 1700 yards in
compass, furnishing it with all necessaries, and then sent a detachment of
20000 Horse and Foot, under the leading of Resuan Bassa for the releif of
Teflis, but fearing that power not sufficient sent others after him, under the
leading of the Bassa of Caramite, of which Simon the Georgian Prince having
notice yet deceived in their number, hasted over the Country by short cuts to
give them Battle, which he was the readier to do because he at first discovered
no more then 6000 Turks, the rest lying behind a Hill, but Battle once joined
they came down upon him like a Tempest, and so oppressed his small number not
exceeding 4000, who yet fought desperately, that he and all his men had been
slain, had not the other Turks sent by Ferat to strengthen Resuan, appeared
upon the Hills at a distance, whom those Turks that were fighting supposed to
be Persians, and by that means not daring to pursue the retiring Georgians for
fear of being drawn into an Ambush, they easily found means to escape, and the
Bassa the like, to relieve Teflis, and with the same facility to return to the
Camp which by this time began to be sorely oppressed with Famine, insomuch that
a bushel of Wheat was sold for 100 Ducates, which caused the Camp to rise, and
march toward the Country of Mustaffa, formerly called Manucchiar the Georgian
Prince who now revolting from the Turks took part with the other Georgian
Princes, but the many difficulties being apparent to the Soldiers by reason of
the advancement of the Season, they flatly denied to obey his command
threatening him with great mischief if he did not speedily return to Erzirum,
nor did they forbear to assault him in his Tent threatening him with present
death, if he continued to expose them to the miseries of Hunger and Cold, which
so that finding no means to restrain their insolency, or to quiet their
continual clamours, but a speedy return to Erzirum, he was forced to yield to
their requests where arriving after a tedious march wherein he lost many of his
best Soldiers, he broke up the Army. The Persian King hovering about Tauris,
and having notice of all that had passed, sent away a great part of his Army,
an forasmuch as Emir Cham Governor of that City had neglected to oppose the
Turks during their building several strong Fortresses to keep the passages of
the straits, nor assisted him as he ought, he caused his Eyes to be put out and
himself to be cast into prison (where shortly after he died of grief) and made
Aliculi Cham who a little before had escaped from the Turks Camp Governor in
his stead.

About this time the League between Amurath and R^dolphus the German Emperor,
by reason of some Hostilities committed between their Subjects, had like to
have ended; but upon more mature consideration of what had passed, and
reparation on the part of the Aggressors for damages sustained, it was again
renewed for the space of 8 years, after which Ferat Bassa upon the complaint of
the great Captains falling into disgrace with Amurath he was deposed from his
trust of General, and Osman Bassa Governor of Sirvan (who for his many
victories over the Tartars was become famous) appointed General in his stead,
and made chief Vizar; (The greatest honor that can be conferred on any person
by the Ottoman Emperors.) And now Amurath casting in his mind the subduing of
Tauris, caused a great Army to be raised, and the better to make the Persian
neglect the Fortifying of that City, caused it to be bruted that he intended to
invade Nassivan; but whilst these preparations were intended against the
Persians, the Villainy of a Venetian Captain had gone near to turn them upon the
Christian, the manner thus. The Widow of Ramadan Bassa late Governor of
Tripolis in Barbary, with her Children and Servant being imbarqued in three
Galleys, in order to their being transported to Constantinople, sailing by the
mouth of the Adriatic were by contrary Winds driven into the Gulf where,
Petrus Emunius a Venetian Captain, of the order of the Senators, lying with
certain Galleys set upon those before mentioned and boarded them, where he
exercised most barbarous cruelty, as well upon the Women as the Men. For having
slain the Mariners in number 250, and the Son of Ramadan, a Child in his
Mothers lap, he caused the Women first to be Ravished, and then having their
Breasts cut off to be cast into the Sea; nor did he exercise this cruelty upon
the Turks only, but upon such Christians likewise as he found on board, using
such barbarity as was thought to prevent the discovery of the great Riches he
found in those Galleys. Yet was it afterward made manifest by one of the
Turks, who during the slaughter had hid himself in the hold, and was afterward
saved by a Cretian, who had in like manner been formerly preserved by the said
Turk, who coming to Constantinople declared what had happened, which so enraged
Amurath that he sent to the Venetians speedily to make reparation or to expect
their Frontiers to be invaded. To which the Senators answered, they were
altogether Ignorant of what had happened, but if so as the Messengers related,
upon enquiry, reparation should be made, which being found according to the
relation of the Turks, they caused Emus to be beheaded, the Gally to be
restored, and to supply the loss of the slaves delivered them a like number of
Turks and Moors, which for that time appeased the indignation of Amurath.

Amurath anno 1585. having constituted Hassan Bassa the Queens Eunuch Governor
of Caire, afterward casting his Eyes upon Ebraim Bassa, a Sclavonian about 23
years of Age, resolved to make him his Son-in-law, and to raise him to a
condition worthy so great an honor as to marry the Daughter of an Emperor, he
made him sovereign Judge of Egypt, of which Hassan having notice, and by reason
of the sudden advancement of Ebraim, doubting his safety fled to
Constantinople, and fell at the Emperors feet, desiring to know what crime he
had committed to have a Master so suddenly set over him, but had no other
answer then that he must to Prison, where after he had continued a long time
still expecting the fatal hour, he was at the earnest intercession of the
Empress, and the great Ladies of the Court set at Liberty, but all his riches
seized and converted to the Emperors use.

Ebraim being settled in his Government of Egypt, by extorting great sums of
money from the Egyptians and other people subject to his rule, in a short time
heaped up great Riches, when at the end of three years Amurath sent for him to
Constantinople, to Celebrate the intended Marriage, charging him withal to pass
through the Country of the Drusians, a people inhabiting a large Country
environed with Joppa, Caesaria, Palestina, and within the Rivers Orantes and
Jordan, stretching it self even to the Plains of Damasco near to the Hills that
compass it about, upon the Coast of Mount Libanus, and are said to be the race
of those Christians that seated themselves there in the time that the Princes
of the West sent their Armies to subdue the Holy Land, but have since bin
perverted to the Mohammedan Superstition, and at the coming of Ebraim into those
parts with his Army, they were divided under many Princes of which these were
the chief, viz. Ebne Man, of the Turks called man Ogli, Serafadin, Mahamet
Ebne-Mansur, Eben Frec, and Ali Ebne-Carfus, by the Turks called Ali
Carfus-Ogli, under whom were diverse Lieutenants called their Macademi or
Agents, all of which except Eben Man Ogli, upon the arrival of the Bassa sent
him rich Presents; whereupon he entering the Country of the said Ogli wasted
it with Fire and Sword, which made the rest of the Princes exceeding angry, and
underhand to send aid to their Compere, with which incamping himself
advantagiously, he fell upon Veis Bassa who lead a part of the Turks Army and
discomfited him, putting 500 of his Men to the Sword, and carrying away a rich
booty, which so enraged Ebraim that he used his utmost diligence to entrap the
aforesaid Prince, but finding no means to effect the same, he began with fair
Promises and Presents, to corrupt his Macademes, one of which together with 300
Drustans, he got into his power, whom in revenge of Veis his overthrow he
caused to be flead alive, and all his followers slain, and again raged with
Fire and Sword throughout the Country, when afterward by dissimulation and
feigned Friendship, he got Eben Mansur into his power, whom he caused to be
fast chained and sent to the Galleys, after which he took the spoil of his
Country, and afterward with a great Booty returned to Constantinople, where he
was in triumph received by his Friends, amongst whom he bestowed Liberally the
spoils taken from the Drusians, even to the value of one Million of Ducates,
and 200000 Sultanies. But upon his departure out of the Drusians Country, they
joining with the Arabian to revenge the injuries themselves sustained, entered
the Turks Confines and committed many outrages, burning and destroying all
before them, not in their anger sparing Man, Woman or Child, passing on even to
the Gates of Jerusalem, being assisted covertly by the Sub-Bassa of Bethlehem,
who displeased with the rule of Ebraim, watched his opportunity to revolt to
the Enemy, but was prevented by being slain, alive at the Commandment of one of
the Sanzaks of Jury.

Whilst affairs stood thus in Egypt and the Drusians Land, Osman had completed
his Army at Erzirum, which upon Muster was found to consist of 180000 choice
Soldiers, with which on the 11th. of August 1585. he marched toward Tauris
keeping on his way till he came into the vast Chalderan, memorable for many
Battles fought therein between the Turks and Persians, where straightened for want
the Soldiers mutined against him, upbraiding him with many reproachful words,
and threatening him with death, for that as they said contrary to his promise he
had drawn them into a place of danger to become a prey to the Enemy; at which
the Bassa being much perplexed sent for the Captain, and by telling them it was
the Sultans express Command, and that he did not in the lest doubt but to
become victorious, and therefore prayed them to rest contented, and not Eclipse
their honor by their civil dissensions amongst themselves, which would rather
give the Enemy advantage against them then any thing else, and that if it was
given out upon the raising the Army, that it was intended for Nassivan, that
specious pretense was as he said to render the Persian more secure, and thereby
to hinder his great preparations. These and such like speeches, together with a
small distribution of money calmed the Tempest the Mutiners had raised, and
thereupon the Army rising passed on toward Cay, from thence to Marant a City
Subject to the Persians, and so keeping their way came within sight of Tauris
the mark at which they aimed, upon which proposing to themselves a kind of
security, the Van of the Army fell to spoiling the Country, and seizing upon
what best liked them, keeping little or no order in their March, of which Emir
Hamze King Mahumets Eldest Son perceiving, with 10000 Horsemen lay in Ambush in
a way where they must pass, and having got them within his danger, burst out
upon them with such fury that he overrun that part of the Army, put 7000 to the
Sword, and carrying away a number of Prisoners, and so with great spoil retired
ere the gross of the Turks Army could come up. Yet Osman upon notice of what
had happened, sent Mahomet Bassa and the Bassa of Caramite after him, the
victorious Prince with 14 Horse and Foot, who by speedy Marches overtaking him
had with him a bloody conflict, in which 6000 Turks were slain, nor had any
escaped had not the darkness of the night caused the retreat on both sides to
be sounded.

The next Morning the Turks Camp removed, and came within two Miles of Tauris,
where Aliculi Chan of whom I have before spoken was Governor, who desirous to
revenge himself upon the perfidious Turks issued out of the City with about
6000 resolute Persians, and charging those that were advanced beat them back
into their Trenches with great slaughter, but upon the opening the Tires of
Ordnance, and advancing of the Janissaries, finding himself not capable of
incountering such a multitude he retired into the City, after whom the Turks in
a confused manner pressed, but in the entrance so strongly resisted, that the
passages were filled with their dead carcasses, and all the Ditches swum with
their blood, but fresh supplies coming on and the City Walls no way built for
defense, badly furnished with Defendants, and worse with Ordnance, at length
the Turks entered, spoiling with incredible barbarity that great City the Regal
seat of the Persian Kings. Yet such compassion wrought in the breast of Osman
the General, that he caused Proclamation to be made, that upon pain of death
none should kill any that made not resistance, and when the tumult was over
came himself to take a view thereof, and gave Orders for its Fortification,
sending out partys daily to reduce the other place adjacent to the Turkish
obedience, and so speedy were they in Fortifying, that within the space of 36
days a strong Castle was erected.

Five days after the building of the new Castle was began, even when the
Taurisians thought themselves secure, news was brought into the Turkish Camp
that 8 Janissaries and diverse Spaoglians were seen strangled in a Bath, within
the City of Tauris, whereupon the Zani Spahini and Janissaries in a great rage
went to the Generals Pavilion, telling him that although he had with too much
clemency given Order that none should molest or hurt the Taurisians, and that
according to his pleasure every man had used his modesty toward them, and
obedience to him, yet the Taurisians themselves had most audaciously strangled
several Janissaries and Spaoglians, which injury and insolency they said was not
to be suffered. This outrage (whether true or only raised by such as desired to
satifie their inordinate lusts, is uncertain) so moved the Bassa, that without
any further delay hecommanded the City to be sacked, leaving it wholly to the
discretion of the Soldiers, who like hell hounds greedy of blood run with full
cry into the City, filling every place with slaughter of the amazed Taurisians,
Matrons were Ravished, Virgins defloured, young Children dashed against the
pavement, houses fired, and other outrages committed that are commonly
attendants upon such General calamities; so that it was a misery almost
inexplicable to behold that City so populous, so rich, honored with the Palace
of the Persian Kings, now subject to the fury of the Turks plunged in calamity
and utter destruction.

The outrages committed in Tauris coming to the knowledge of the Persian King
he was greatly offended, insomuch that he resolved with the hazard of a Battle,
to revenge the indignity, of whose approach Osman who then lay sick in his
Pavilion having notice, Command Sinan Bassa and Mahumet Bassa should with all
the Greek Soldiers, and others, to the number of 74000 should go out and meet
the Enemy, who by the craft of the forerunners of his Army drawing the Turks
within his strengths, had with them there a mortal Battle, wherein 10000 of
their Soldiers were slain, and the two Bassa's in great confusion obliged to
fly to the Camp, leaving most of their Insigns, and all their baggage as a prey
to the Persians: who hightned with this success advanced within sight of the
Turks Camp sending a Herald to the sick General to demand of him Battle, of
which accepting though not able to be there present, when as Battle being
joined, after a long and doubtful fight victory inclined to the Persians, who
in the end slew 20000 of the Turks, and amongst the rest the Bassa's of
Caramite and Trepez^nd, and Sanzack of Brusia, with five other Sanzacks, and
among the Prisoners were taken, Amurath Bassa of Caramania, and diverse other of
note.

Upon news of this bad success, the Genral fearing to have his Army wasted to
nothing by continual skirmishes in a strange Country, having Fortified Tauris,
and made Giaffer Bassa of Tripolis Governor, he was about to decamp, when on a
sudden the neighing of Horses, the noise of Drums and Trumpets were heard,
which putting the Army into a great consternation, and soon caused them in
great confusion to run all to that side, where they supposed the noise was,
when in the mean while Emir the Persian Prince on the other side, without any
sound of Trumpet, or beat of Drum, with 28000 Soldiers entered their Camp,
took 18000 Camels laden, whom he sent away by 6000 of his Soldiers, and then
charging furiously upon such as he found, insomuch that after a hard Battle
fought 20000 Turks lay scattered on the Plain, many of which were slain by
their own Artillery, which by Osmans Command being furiously discharged at the
Armies, the murdering shot made lanes before them without discerning between
Friend and Foe, but night coming on, and the Persians weary with slaughter
retired, and were for a while faintly pursued by the Turks.

Osman lying all this while sick in his Pavilion, sore afflicted with the
Bloody Flux, and hearing what havoc the Persians had made died, the grief of
so great a loss hastening his end. Yet was his death for a long space kept
secret least thereby the Army should be discouraged which now was returning
under the leading of Sinan (or Cicala as some called him) Bassa, Osman in his
Will having delivered to him the charge of the whole Army. Yet the Persian
Prince with 14000 Horse and Foot followed them at the heels, still cutting of
the straglers, and had utterly destroyed them had not his design been
discovered, which obliged him to retreat with the loss of 3000 of his Men; so
that by long and tedious marches, the Turks wasted Army arriving, the Van after
the publication of the Generals death were discharged, all but a certain number
retained, who under the leading of D^ut Chan a Renegado Persian, were sent to
the relief of Teflis, which without any loss they performed. Now the Castle
built in Tauris much grieved the Persians, to take which they used their utmost
endeavor, but it being strong of it self, and defended by a strong Garrison
their attempts proved unsuccessful. When at the same time great mischief arose
in the Kingdom of Persia, for 10000 Turcomans a people bordering upon the
Georgians, and resolving to revenge themselves for the death of Emir Chan
offered their service to the Persian Sophy, under the leading of their two
Captains, Mahomet Chan and Calife Chan, to whom the Sophy as a pledge of his
love and their safety delivered Tamas his young Son, whom they had no sooner
got into their power but they proclaimed him King of Persia, and in all have
marched toward Casbiu the Regal City in hopes to surprise it, and seat young
Tamas, on his Fathers Throne of which the Sophy and his eldest Son having
notice pursued hard after them when overtaking them at a place called
Calisteza, a days journey on this side Casbiu, the Prince gave them Battle,
and after a dangerous and doubtful conflict put them to flight. In which they
being swiftly pursued the two rebellious Captains were taken, and by the Kings
Command had their heads stricken off, young Tamas being likewise taken was sent
Prisoner to the Castle of Cabaca, those that escaped the Battle fled to Solomon
Bassa of Babylon, which put an end to the Rebellion.

Giaffer Bassa Governor of Tauris after the departure of the Turkish Army
understanding that the Persian Prince was Levying a great Army to Besiege the
City, sent an Express to Sinon or Siculi Bassa to send him Aid, for the defense
of the City and Castle, the which by reason of the flight of some and death of
othersome of his men, must otherwise fall into the hands of the Enemy: now
notwithstanding great preparation for that purpose were made, they could not be
put into the City, by reason of the near approach of the Persian Army without
manifest hazard, of exposing them to the mercy of their Enemies. Yet it so fell
out that the Governor without any recruits maintained the City and Castle, the
Persians not being so urgent for the recovery of the same as was expected.

Upon notice of Osmans death, Amurath chose Ferat Bassa once more his General,
who departing from Constantinople in the month of April 1586, and passed over
into Asia, where having completed his Army at Sinas, upon notice that Tauris
was in danger, he marched thitherward, though with great caution the enemy
should charge him at unawares, and by reason of the dissensions arisen amongst
the Persian Captains sent to oppose him, and the Treason of Aliculican, now
alienated from his Prince, and holding secret correspondence with the Turkish
General, he without any loss relieved Tauris, and having caused a strong Fort
to be built at Churchine, near unto the said City, and two others at C^y and
Carn, and left therein sufficient Garrisons, and store of provision, he sent
succors to Teflis in Georgia, and so with little or no loss returned to
Erzirum.

By this time the Persian Prince (who and Mahomet his father, now grown old,
ruled the Kingdom) had notice of the Treason of Aliculi Chau, and Emanguli
Chan, whom he had drawn into his confederacy, he prepared his Forces to march
against them, whereupon the latter submitted, and was received into favor, but
howsoever it happened, whether with his knowledge or not, the Prince the chief
glory of Persia sleeping in his Pavilion, was by an Eunuch run through the
body, supposed to be done at the instance of Abas Miriza his younger brother,
to advance whom to the Persian Diadem, Aliculi Chan, had revolted from the
obedience of the Sophy, and plotted with the Turkish General to betray Emir
Hamzes the Prince into his hands, whose death so unfortunately happening,
caused great miseries to befall the Persian State.

Christendom having thus long been Exempted from the fury of the Turks, who had
their hands full of the Persian war, now as it were, destiny so ordering, they
having time to breath by reason of the divisions in Persia, turned their
restless Arms upon Hungaria, which storm the Christians perceiving, to hang
black over their heads, resolved to provide against it; and therefore to show
the Tyrant, that they dreaded not his utmost indignation, seized on the Castle
of Coppan in Hungary, not far from the Lake of Ballaton over which being hard
frozen, they passed undiscovered; to requite which, the Turks drawing five
thousand horse out of several Garrisons, entered the Christian Territories, and
destroying seventeen Villages, returned laden with great spoils, and many
miserable Captives, whereof George Count Serine Son to the renowned Count of
that name, slain at Ziget, having knowledge, raised such Forces as the time
would give leave, which exceeded not two thousand, and laying the ways by
which the Turks must pass, encountered them ere they could recover any strong
hold, and put most of them to the sword, recovering all the booty and Captives;
amongst those that were made prisoners the Sanzack of Quinque Ecclesiae, son to
Haly Bass, slain in the Battle of Lepanto; the Bassa of Ziget, Sanzack of
Koppan, and diverse others, Sinan Beg Sanzack of Mohaz, endeavoring to escape,
and his horse sticking fast, was shot through the head; of the Turks horses
were taken, fifteen hundred, and of the Turks five hundred, besides three
thousand slain. This bad beginning so discouraged Amurath, that in a rage he
caused the Bassa of Buda to be strangled, for that he had began the hostilities
in Hungary, and by that means violated the League between him and the Emperor;
at what time a great fire happened at Constantinople, which consumed seven
Temples, twenty five great Inns, and fifteen thousand houses, with their
warehouses and shops, kindled as was supposed by the Janissaries a little
before, in a tumult for want of their pay, due since their last Persian
Expedition; which was the rather believed, for that it being their duty to
endeavor the extinguishing any fire that should happen in the Imperial City;
They not only refused to put their hands thereto themselves but hindered such as
attempted it.

These things happening in Anno 1587 and 1588, the year following to prevent
tumults which are usual where the soldiers are unimployed in the wars, the new
Bassa of Buda, with Amuraths good liking, having drawn to him a strong power,
invaded the upper Hungary, but being encountered by Claudius Russel, General of
the Christians in those parts, he received a great overthrow, three thousand of
his Turks being slain and drowned in the River Seago; upon which the General
pursuing his good fortune, broke into the Turks Territories, and took from them
the Castles of Blavestine, Gestes, and several Forts in the upper Hungary; upon
which Sinan Bassa of Buda was called home, and Ferat the late General against
the Persians appointed Bassa in his stead.

Amurath having not a little been terrified with the great preparations of King
Phillip of Spain, in 1588, wherewith he invaded England, and now understanding
that he had received a fearful overthrow, with the loss of thirteen thousand
of his Mariners and Soldiers, and most of his ships and Galleys; he sent a
Letter to Queen Elizabeth to congratulate her happy victory, and to entreat her
not upon any terms to make peace with the Spaniard, in which Letter he styles
her the most honorable Matron of the Christian Religion, Mirror of Chastity,
adorned with the brightness of Soveraingty, and power amongst the most chief
women of the people, which serve Jesus, Mistress of great Kingdoms, reputed of
Greatest Majesty and Praise amongst the Nazarites; Elizabeth Queen of England.

Anno 1590 the Tartars having broken into the confines of Polonia, and taken a
rich booty, were driven out by the Cossacks, who making of them great
slaughter, recovered all, which Amurath taking in evil part as done to his
confederates, but indeed seeking occasion to war upon the Christians, that had
not the Queen of Englands mediation prevented it, he had turned his Arms upon
Polonia; yet impatient of Peace he called his Bassas to consult what war was
most expedient to be taken in hand, amongst whom there were eight sundry
opinions, whereof the first was that the wars against the Persians should be
renewed, the second for the Invasion of the Kingdoms of Fess and Morocco, the
third was for a war to be taken in hand against the King of Spain, The fourth
for the besieging of Malta, The fifth, to war upon the Venetians, The sixth to
invade Italy, the seventh, to war upon Sigismund King of Poland, The eighth and
last to invade the Territories of Rodolphus the Emperor; all which being
patiently heard by Amurath, with the sundry reasons of the Bassas: at length,
the eighth opinion was confirmed, and the Tyrant resolved once more to turn his
Forces toward the West. Whereupon he caused great preparations to be made,
resolving if possible to annex the remaining part of Hungary and Austria, to
his other Territories, having by this time and for this purpose concluded a war
with the Persian King, wherefore he commanded his Garrisons on the Frontiers as
they saw occasion to molest the Christian Frontiers, with fire and sword, which
they let not to do, prone enough of themselves to act any great wickedness,
nor was it long ever they surprised Willitz the Metropolis of Croatia, and
committed therein many outrages, and their Army still increasing, they upon an
unexpected advantage enclosed 6000 Foot, and 500 Horse of the Christians (who
had taken the Mountains, Woods and Straight passages, and so hardly beset them
that few of them escaped; those that were slain the Turks cut off their heads
and therewith loaded six Wagons.

Upon this Alarm the Christians drew forth their Armies, and to put a stop to
the Infidels, who by reason of the unexpected breach of the League had seized
upon many Castles and Strong holds, in that security unprovided of such
necessaries as would have rendered them impregnable, and least A^^rath should
allege that those Hostilities were committed without his knowledge, the
Emperor sent to him by his Ambassadors to understand the reasons that induced
him to break the League, but being able to get no satisfactory answer, he
thought it high time to stand upon his guard, and caused all his power joined
with Forces of the German Princes to march directly into Hungary, under the
Command of Rupertus Eggenber his General, who approaching the Enemy consulted
with his chief Commanders what was best to be done, who were all of opinion
that to give speedy Battle was most convenient, thereby to prevent the Enemies
for joining the other Forces, coming to their Aid, so that upon a sign given
the whole Army (in number 40000) forthwith removed and with great speed hasted
toward the Turks, of which they having notice by their Espials, put themselves
in Battle Array, and after their vain glorious manner dreamt of nothing but the
spoil of the Christians, whom they already concluded overthrown by reason of
the disproportion of number, they being indeed much inferior in that nature to
the Infidels. Yet had the Emperors General so ordered his Battles, that
placing the Crotians and Hussars in the Vauntguard, those of Carolstat and the
Harquibusires of Keriva in the Left wing. In the Right the Borderers of Carania
all Horsemen in the main Battle, the rest of the Soldiers with the Horsemen of
Silesia, under the conduct of Sigismund Paradise, the Rereward was encompassed
with three Companies of the Emperors Soldiers, nor were the Turk idle but
Marshalled their Battle in the best wise, when as the Charge being sounded the
Crotians and Hussars in the Vaunt-gard gave the first onset with such fury,
that being seconded by the Lord Anersburgh, they after a cruel Fight obliged
the Turks to give ground, and with Hassan Bassa their General retire toward
the River Odder, after whom the Christians following furiously many
endeavoring to save themselves by passing over were drowned, and those that
stayed in a fearful manner on the Banks overwhelmed by the continual Tempest of
shot, from the Flankers, so that within three hours space all the Army was in a
confusion, every man seeking for his own safety, insomuch that 18000 Turks
perished, either by the Sword, or in the Rivers Odder and Kulp, and amongst the
rest Hassan Bassa, Mahomet Beg, Achmet Beg, Saffer Beg, Meni Beg, Framatan Beg,
Curti Beg, Operd Beg and Goschus the Bassa's chief Counselor, together with
Sinan Beg, Amuraths Nephew, the only Son of his Sister, after which signal
victory obtained, the Christian Army falling on their knees gave Thanks to God,
to whom alone they ascribed their miraculous preservation. The news of which
overthrow coming to the knowledge of Amurath he like a frantic man blasphemed
the God of Heaven, and persuaded thereto by the tears and entreaties of his
Sister, to revenge the death of her Son, sent a proud and blasphemous
denunciation of War to the Emperor Rodolphus, wherein he styled himself, The
only Monarch of the World, a great and mighty God on Earth, an invincible
Caesar, King of all Kings from the East unto the West, etc. and proceeded to
threaten the said Emperor and his People, with all the miseries that attend on
War, impiously declaring that the Crucified God of the Christians long since
dead and buried, had not been able to deliver his own Country out of his
hands, much less the German Empire, which in despite of him he was resolved to
take, knowing himself a subverter and sworn Enemy of the Christians, and of all
that called upon the name of Christ. And thereupon the more to terrify the
Christians, he sent a great Army under the Command of Sinan Bassa their
implacable Enemy, who upon his Arrival laid siege to Ciseg, which he took
putting all he found therein to the Sword, and after that took several other
places of lesser note; yet not without considerable loss, and breach of Faith
to the besieged, who finding themselves often too weak to defend places of little
strength against so powerful an Enemy, would surrender them upon promise of
Life and Liberty, but falling into the hands of the barbarous Infidels seldom
obtained either.

These proceedings of the Turks did not a little alarm the Christian Princes,
who having mustered 18000 Men under the Command of Count Hardeck Governor of
Rab, he with marching from Comara came before Alba-Regalis, which by force of
his Artillery he in a short time made saultable, to the relief of which the
Bassa of Buda sent Sinan Bassa, with 20000 Horse and Foot, but he being
encountered by the Christians was put to flight with the loss of most of his
men, whereupon as victors the Christians returned to the siege, but finding the
season far advanced, and a great number of Turks that escaped in the overthrow
to be got into the City, the Count raised his Camp and returned again to Rab,
but early in the Spring assisted by fresh supplies the Emperors Captains
dividing the Army, took the strong Castle of Sabatzka, the City of Fileck, the
Towns of Seeteschiu, Blanestine, and Salleck, the three latter being through
fear abandoned by the Turks, having first set them for the most part on Fire.
At the same time the Lord Palfie with a strong party marching to Dregel, and
Palanka found them like^ise abandoned by the Turks, the which having furnished
with strong Garrisons of his own he took by force Ainacke, Sellecke, Westkee,
and diverse other places, so that the Turks were in a manner driven out of the
Lower Hungary, and new Buda, and Alba-Regalis the only Strong holds, possessed
by the Turks in those parts began to doubt their security, for whilst a party
out of the latter coming forth to bury the dead, that lay scattered round the
Walls, and by their contagion infected the City, they were so suddenly
incountered by a Captain of the Hussars, Commanding a Troop of Light Horsemen,
that near 200 of them were slain, and 50 taken Prisoners.

These proceedings coming to the Ears of Amurath, and he from all hands
certified that the strength of the Christians daily increased, he began to
doubt his Empire in Europe, and therefore to defend the same raised a puissant
Army anno 1594. at the head of which he resolved to march in person, a thing he
had not done since his taking upon him the Government, but on the 11th. of
January, as the Army was upon its march, not far from Constantinople such a
terrible Tempest of Hail, Rain, Snow, Wind, Thunder and Lightning arose, that
by its impetuosity it overturned the Tents, Chariots, Wagons, Horse and Men,
few being able to stand upright before it. The which the Tyrant taking as
ominous to his proceedings, in great perplexity returned with his formidable
Army to Constantinople, where casting himself upon his bed, after much tumbling
and tossing, falling asleep he dreamed that he beheld a man of exceeding
Stature, standing with one his feet upon the Tower of Constantinople, and the
other over the straight fixed on the Asian shore, who stretching out his Arms
held the Sun in one hand and the Moon in the other, at whom whilst he was
wondering the Monster with his foot struck the Tower, which forthwith fell
down, and in its fall overthrew the great Temple with the Imperial Palace,
whose Thundering awaking the Turk he much troubled with the strangeness of the
dream imediatly sent for his Necromancers and Wizards to Interpret it, who to
curry favor with their Prince hypocritically answered, That for as much as he
had not with all his Forces, as with a Tempest impugned the Christians, their
great Prophet Mahomet threatened by that dream to overturn the Tower, Temple,
and Imperial Palace, which by a symbolical meaning denoted the Turkish Religion
and Empire: which vain and fictitious Interpretation so moved the superstitious
Tyrant, that having first asked pardon of his Impostor Prophet, he swore from
henceforth to turn all his Forces upon the Christians, and not to give over War
till he had done his utmost to subdue them. These vain threats did not in the
least dismay the Christian Princes, yet to engage a sure Friend on their side,
they caused public prayers to be put up in all Churches, and that people
might perceive on what slender and impious grounds the Tyrant, had resolved the
prosecution of the War, had the vain Dream and the vainer Interpretation, read
in the Churches of Transylvania and most of the Churches of Hungary.

The Christian Army having taken the Field, and a Present of the Turks spoils,
taken some time before sent to Rodolphus the Emperor, the Archduke of Austria
besieged Novograde, which after several assaults was delivered by capitulation,
in consideration of Life and Liberty, which strong Town after it had been
Turkish for the space of 60 years, was by the Archduke committed to the care
of Lord Rebei a Noble Hungarian, and the Turkish Governor upon his arrival at
Buda was by the Bassa's Command imprisoned.

Whilst these things were in doing the Emperor sent his Ambassadors to the
great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Poland, and Prince of Transylvania, in all
whose Courts their Negotiation proved successful, nor in the mean time was the
young Count Serinus idle, for that he with 300 Harquibusires, and certain
Troops of Horse, and Companies to the number of 10000 took the Castles of
Bresenza, Sigesta and Babostcha, by the recovery of which strong holds he
opened a safe passage even to Ziget, the Bassa of which standing at that time
in no small doubt to be besieged. These things perplexing the Turkish Tyrant,
who was preparing great Forces for the securing his Province on this side the
Danubius, he in the mean while sent a Fleet into the Adriatic to besiege
Zegna, an Imperial City, situate upon the Sea Coast in the Bay of Quernero,
called in ancient time Flanaticus Sinus, in order to the prosecution of which
he sent his Ambassador to the Venetians to require the use of their Ports in
those Seas, and that his Galleys might pass and repass without any molestation
from the Galleys of that State, but the Senate doubting the fidelity of the
Turk, and loath thereby to disoblige the Christian Emperor would by no means
consent, yet used the Ambassador honorably, and sent him away without
obtaining his purpose.

In the Upper part of Hungaria the Lord Tenffenbeck, Commanding as the
Archdukes Lieutenant, with an Army of 2000 Horse and Foot besieged Hatvan, a
strong Town of the Turks, lying about six miles from Buda, Fortified with a
Triple Ditch and Bullwarks of exceeding strength, to the relief of which the
Bassa of Buda came with fifteen thousand Soldiers, thinking at unawares to
surprise the Christian Camp but was frustrated in his project, for the Lord
Tenffenbeck drawing off from before the City, passed through with much
difficulty the River Sagijvay, when setting upon the Bassa's Army after a hard
fight he put it to the Rout, having the execution of the Turks for many miles,
so that about Ten Thousand of them were slain and taken Prisoners, with a great
Booty of Provision and Ammunition, after which the Christians returned to the
siege, yet finding the hazards and difficulty that they should meet with in
winning it, by the directions of the Archduke who with Forty Thousand Men at
the same time besieged Strigonium, the Siege of Hatvan was given over, yet upon
the raising thereof the Lord Tenffenbeck discomfited the Bassa of Buda a second
time, as he was again coming to the relief thereof, in which conflict Five
Thousand Turks were slain.

Strigonium after a long siege, and the burning of the old Town, being relieved
by the coming of Sinan Bassa with a great Army, the Archduke thought it not
yet convenient to let him take breath, but on the 28th. of June passed Danubius
to expect the motion of Sinan Bassa with his huge Army, composed of Turks and
Tartars, and by frequent onsets daily weakened his Camp, nor were the Rascians
slow to revolt from the Turkish obedience. So that having raised a confused
power, to the number of Fifteen Thousand they took many strong Places, and
obtained two notable Victories, one over the Bassa of Temeswar, in which
himself and three of his Sanzacks, and about Nine Thousand Five Hundred of his
Turks were slain. And the other over another Bassa that succeeded him, upon
which they sent to the Archduke to receive them and their Country into the
Emperors protection, and that in consideration thereof they would maintain Ten
Thousand Men in the Field, whose Proposals were by the Imperial General
accepted.

About this time the Emperor the better to consult the defense of his
Provinces, called a Diet at Ratisbone, where in the assembly of the German
Princes, he declared how matters stood, and repeated the manifold injuries he
had sustained by the Turks, contrary to the League made with Amurath, and that
amongst the rest he contrary to the Law of Nations had imprisoned Frederick
Creckovitz his Ambassador first at Constantinople, and caused the greatest part
of his followers to be thrust into the Galleys, and afterward to have sent him
with a few of his attendants to Belgrade, and thereto have kept him in prison
till he ended his days. To revenge which indignities those daily offered, and
such as were like to ensue from the great Army at hand, he desired the Princes
to consider a most speedy way, and not by delay to endanger the greatest part
of Christendoms falling into the hands of the mercyless Enemy. To which the
Electoral Princes after a due consideration, replied, That they had a regard to
his Imperial Majesty, and for the preservation of Hungary, and others his
Hereditary Countries, as also for repressing the fury of the Turks, yet by
reason of the late dearth, they were not capable of maintaining such Forces as
might be expected, yet besides their Annual Contributions they would for the
space of six years, grant such further relief as they well hoped would prove
sufficient for the maintenance of a defensive War, both for the present and for
the time to come, after which resolves of the Princes the Diet broke up, and
all diligence was used for increasing the Army, and Fortifying the strong Holds
in Hungaria, Austria, Styra, and Carinthia, Countries most obnoxious to the
Incursions of the Turks.

Sinan Bassa all this while not ignorant of the Emperors proceedings, lay with
an Army of One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Fighting men, between Buda and Alba
Regalis, frequently sending out Parties to wast the Countries in possession of
the Emperor, yet with such indifferent success that he had no cause to boast,
which made the Bassa to raise his Camp, and in sight of the Christian Army
which still attended his motions, battered Dolis and St. Martins with such fury
that within a short time they fell into his hands, the Imperialists at so great
an odds not thinking it convenient to hazard a Battle to relief their besieged
Friends, and after doing other mischief in their Territories laid siege to the
City of Rab situate on the Southside of Danubius, where the River dividing it
self makes a most fertile Island called Schut, about twelve German miles from
Vienna, in which Island lay the Christian Camp. This City was defended by a
Garrison of Five Thousand Men, under the Command of Count Hardeck a more
valiant then at this time faithful Friend, for when every one supposed the City
impregnable, and that the Turks for many days had without intermission
battered it with Sixty pieces of Cannon, and made several unsuccessful assaults
with the loss of Fourteen Thousand of their men the said Count contrary to the
minds of his Commanders and Soldiers capitulated with the Bassa, and in
consideration of his departing with all his Treasure, delivered that strong
piece in his hands. For which upon his arrival at Vienna, he by the judgment
of Sixty of his Peers, had his Head and his right Hand stricken off, it being
proved against him that he in leiw of the surrender had of the Bassa received
two bags of Ducats.

During the siege of Rab the Christians in the Island of Schut received a great
loss, for Ten Thousand Turks and Tartars getting over in Boats or swimming upon
their Horses, came so suddenly upon their Camp, that having slain Two Thousand
of them and put the rest into a great consternation, they entered their
Trenches and carried thence a booty valued at Five Hundred Thousand Ducats,
which loss for a while after sore weakened the Christians. Nor were the Turks
only busy in spoiling Hungary, but Italy also, for with a great Fleet under
the leading of Ciala Bassa Amuraths Admiral, they surprised Rhegium in
Calabria, and utterly razed it, after which they spoiled all the Country about
it, as likewise the Sea Coasts of Italy in many other places, taking several
Ships richly laden in the sight of the Garrison of Messina, and carrying away a
great number of poor people into miserable Captivity. Sinan Bassa having by
this time received new supplies and repaired Rab, putting therein a strong
Garrison marched to Comara, before which he encamped, but upon the approach of
Matthias the Archduke with a puissant Army of Germans, Bohemians, and
Hungarians to relieve it, he raised his siege not thinking it safe at that time
to hazard a Battle, and by a Bridge of Boats Transported his Army over Danubius
to Dolis, where he the following day dismissed them, upon which the Archduke
without any hinderance coming to Comara, caused the breaches to be Repaired,
and then leaving it to the protection of the Governor, viz. The Lord Bruun,
who had faithfully defended it, he departed to take a view of the other Cities.

About this time Sigismund Prince of Transylvania, weary of the grievous
exaction and injuries they sustained at the hands of the Turks, resolved to
cast off their servile yoke which being known to certain of the Nobility
pensioners to Amurath, they secretly advertized him of the Princes purpose,
promising to send him in Chains to Constantinople, and with the Turks good
liking to set up one Balthazor Bator the Princes nigh Kinsman in his stend, but
the Treason being discovered most of the Traitors were taken and executed, upon
which the Tar^ars to the number of Forty Thousand brake into Transylvania
burning and destroying all before them in a fearful manner, which obliged the
Prince to raise the whole power of his Country, and to crave aid of the
Rascians and other his Neighbors giving freely to his Subjects and
Confederates what ever they could take from the Turks, who in their first
interprize were so successful, that they surprised seven of the Turks Galleys
laden with Provision, Rich Merchandise, and store of Treasure, and missed but
narrowly of the eighth, which was the Admiral which loss was so great to the
Turks, Sinan Bassa upon notice of what had happened is reported to have said
that if those Galleys had come to him in safety he could with the Treasure have
bought Vienna, as he had done Ra^b, after which the Transilvanians hightened
with this success marched toward Temeswar, but hearing that the Tartars were
about to return, they retired for the defense of their own Country; yet by
this time headed by their Prince they took many strong Holds from the Turks,
and still following their returning Army in the rear cut many Thousands of them
short, and by his example soon after the Valachians and Moldavians rose up in
Arms against Amurath and Confederated themselves with the Transilvanian Prince
who with one consent sent to Rodolphus the Emperor to make a League with him
against the common Enemy which was accordingly concluded very Honorable to the
Confederates which made Amurath begin to doubt his safety even in
Constantinople, and much more when they with their victorious Armies overrun
his Countries on every side, for grief of which, and the disorderly tumults he
found amongst his Janissaries and his other Soldiers of the Court, he fell
Sick, when greatly afflicted with the Stone and Falling Sickness, his wonted
Disease, as a man both in Soul and Body tormented, he with great Impatiency and
Agony of mind gave up the Ghost, departing this Life on the Eighteenth of
January, Anno Domini 1595. When he had lived One and Fifty years, or as some
say Two and Fifty years, and thereof Reigned Nineteen years. At the time of
whose Death arose so Terrible a Tempest at Constantinople that many thought the
world should have presently been dissolved, his dead Body within a while after
was with all Funeral Solemnities used amongst the Turks, buried by the Body of
Mahomet his Eldest Son, in the Moschie which himself had builded near unto his
Palace.

CHAP. XVII. The Life of Mahomet Third of that Name, seventh Emperor of the
Turks.
A Murath being dead, his death to prevent tumults was kept secret till such
time that Mahomet his Eldest Son then living, came from Amasia to
Constantinople, where contrary to the mind of the Janissaries, who generally
affected Amurath his younger brother, he was saluted Exmperour; when by a wile
getting his Ten Brethren into his power, he caused them to be strangled, nay so
far extended his barbarity that at his Commandment ten of his Fathers Wives
and Concubines, whom he suspected to be with Child were drowned in the Sea, one
of which number as some affirm was his own Mother. These violent proceedings
made the great Commanders envy him, and the better to wreck their spleen
secretly to stir up the Janissaries, who committed for the space of several days
such disorders that the like in no Interregnum had happened, and great had the
disorder been even to outraging the Emperor himself, had not the Bassa
Governor of the City causedall the great Ordinance to be bent against them,
and swore by the head of Ali to discharge them amongst u'm.

Whilst these troubles happened at Constantinople, the Christian Princes were
not wanting to revenge the injuries they had sustained by the Turks, especially
the Princes or as the Turks call them Vayvod of Transylvania, Valachia, and
Moldavia, who with many fortunate inroads into the Othoman Dominions greatly
enriched themselves and Soldiers, taking and Fortifying many strong Castles,
and destroying an Army of Four Hundred Thousand Tartars, with which they had
often conflicts. Nor was Rodolphus the Emperor behind with the forwardest, as
well knowing that he had to deal with an implacable Enemy, who would have no
peace any longer then it served his own purpose, wherefore the said Emperor,
and th States of Hungary sent their Ambassadors to the King of Poland, who then
had assembled a Parliament at Cracovia, to solicit his Aid against the common
Enemy; of which Mahomet having notice, sent likewise two Chiaus in nature of
his Ambassadors to frustrate the negotiation of the Christian Ambassadors in
the Polish Court, and to engage that King to take up Arms on his behalf, but
passing through Valachia, they were contrary to the mind of the Vayvod slain by
some of his followers; yet the Turk sent two others who fetching a greater
compass through the Tartarian Dominions arrived safe in Polonia.

These proceedings of the Christians roused Mahomet, and inspired him who was
of a feirce and froward nature, to take revenge, in order to which he sent for
Sinan Bassa out of Hungary, to confer with him about the management of the war,
which once stated, he returned again to Belgrade, where upon his first Arrival,
by what mischance, yet supposed to be by the contrivance of the Janissaries, the
cords of his Tent were cut, and it was let fall about his ears; now at his
coming, so great was the dearth in all the parts of Hungary, where the Turks
had their possessions, that several Tartarian women following the Camp, killed
their own children, and ate them, which samine ingendered such a Pestilence,
that the Turks and Tartars dyed in abundance, insomuch that of eighty thousand
of the latter, which the year before came at diverse times to the assistance of
the Turks, not above eight thousand remained alive. And now the Christian Army
hastened from all parts to the Imperial standard; so that of Germans, Saxons,
Bohemians, Hungarians, Spaniards, Italians, Romans, Flemings, Franks and
Sweeds, in a short time there were found fifteen thousand nine hundred horse,
and fifty thousand foot, under the conduct of most resolute Commanders, of
which Matthias the Arch Duke was General, and Count Mansfelt sent by the King
of Spain with 2000 horse, and 6000 foot, was appointed by the Emperor his
Lieutenant.

Thus all things being in a readiness, nothing wanting but an enemy, on whom to
exercise those Arms, which long was not wanting, for Mahomet by this time had
raised a great power, yet had but a bad welcome, for at first the Bassa of
Buda, with a great number of Turks, attempting to do some memorable exploit in
Transylvania, was overthrown by Gestius Ferents, a valiant Captain, with the
loss of most of his men; when almost at the same time a great power of the
Turks under the leading of their General, entering Valachia, were incountred by
the Lord Nadasti, commanding there for the Emperor, who assisted by the
Valachians and Transylvanians, and in a great battle discomfited, with the loss
of ten thousand men, and their sttandard imbroidered with Pearls and Precious
Stones, valued at 30000 Dollars, which the said Lord sent to the Transylvanian
Prince, then at Alba Julia, and had it returned him again as a reward of his
good service, which evil success being perceived by the crafty Tyrant Mahomet,
he dealt under hand by great promises with Aaron Vayvod of Moldavia, to revolt
from the Transylvanian and by any means if possible to depose him, which thing
coming to light, and made manifest by several intercepted Letters, the said
Vayvod with his wife and children being then retired into Transylvania, were
secured, and a while after by the consent of the Moldavian Nobility, one
Stephen Rozwan, placed in his stead, which Mahomet perceiving, and that his
practice was brought to naught, sent an Ambassador to Sigismund Prince of
Transylvania, to be at peace with him, and suffer, as formerly, his Armies to
pass through his Country into Hungaria, and that in lieu thereof, he should
have peaceable possession of Transylvania, Moldavia, and Valachia, paying no
more then a small acknowledgment which should not be exacted by the way of
Tribute, but the Prince having too often experienced the perfidious dealings of
the Turks, would in no wise accord to what was demanded, but resolved upon
prosecuting the war to the utmost, the which his resolution once made known to
the Bulgarians, they sent messengers in secret to assure him that if he
proceeded with any good success, they would be ready to follow his fortune, and
by joining hands with him, against the cruel Tyrant, shut up all the passages
that way into Valachia, Moldavia, and Hungaria.

The greatest part of the aid, promised by the Christian Princes, for the
maintenance of the war, being come to Vienna, Count Mansfelt called a council
of the chief Commanders, to consult whether they should lay siege to some place
of Importance, or march to give the enemy battle, whom he said he had
Intelligence was on his way; in which Council the former proposal being
resolved on, the whole Army in number aforesaid, was mustered at Altenberg,
after which he besieged Dolis, but at the same time had his eye upon
Strigonium, the other being undertaken only to amuse the Turks, and exhaust the
Garrison of Strigonum, both of men and warlike provision, to relieve their
brethren in Dolis, which supply the Count permitted to enter the Town, and then
when he was least suspected, suddenly raiseing his siege set down before
Strigonum, to the great amazement of the Turk, who not in the least dreamed of
any such matter, yet was it not carried so privately but ever he could entrench
himself, several Walloons Heidons, straggling from the main battle, were set
upon by the Turks, and put to the rout, but the Pioniers having run the
Trenches within half Musket shot of the wall, fired so smartly upon the
defendants, many of them were slain, none being able to appear upon the wall,
yet the Christians at at the beginning of the Siege, having taken a little
Island in the Danubius, and put on shore several Hungarian Companies, of which
the Turks of Buda having notice, they in several Boats and Galleys, coming down
the River by night, landed three thousand men, who unawares setting upon the
Christians, put most of them to the sword, and recovered the said Island, but
that loss was soon repaired; for after many furious assaults (notwithstanding
the threats of the Bassa of Buda to Impail the Strigonians if they sought it
not out to the last man) the higher City was laid open to the Christians, who
just as they were about to enter, had notice that the Bassa of Buda (whom
Mahomet had threatened with the loss of his head, if he suffered that City which
he esteemed worth a whole Kingdom, to be lost) was coming to relieve it with
twenty thousand Turks, resolving to fight his way into it; whereupon diverse
parties were sent out to skirmish, and by retiring to draw the enemy into the
danger of the Christian Army, which project was not unsuccesseful, for the
resolute Bassa coming on between the hills of St. George and St. Thomas near to
the Suburbs called the Ruscian City, put his Army in order of Battle, as did
the Christians, when in the mean while the Lord Paifi with his Hungarian
horsemen fetching a compass about the hill, on the one side and the Lord
Swartzenburg with such horse as he had under his command, on the other side, so
enclosed the Turks rear, that they could not without great danger retire, when
as both Armies were orderly ranged, the signal of battle was given, the Turks
without any great harm to the Christians discharged seventeen Pieces of
Artillery, after which, with showers of Arrows and the smoke of the Harquibuses
the Sky was darkened, and in a trice, not without great slaughter, the battle
was brought to the sword, at what time Victory declared for the Christians, the
Turks being every where most miserably beaten down, crying out for mercy, and
flying as they found opportunity, and in the end the Bassa himself from his
stand, perceiving his Army in the rout, and that the day was irrecoverably
lost, fled for his life, and about midnight recovered Buda, with not above
twenty of his followers, filling that City with the laments of such as had in
the battle lost their friend. The slain and those taken prisoners were fourteen
thousand, and the spoil of the Camp consisting of rich Pavilions, Money, Plate,
Ammunition, fair horses, provision, Camels, and the like, was valued at 300000
Ducates, part of which was sent to the Emperor, part to the Arch Duke, and
part distributed amongst the Soldiers, to every one according to their deserts.

The Turkish Army thus overthrown, the Christians returned again to the siege,
when as the Count sent to Summon Alis Beg the Governor to surrender the City,
and that in consideration thereof, he and all that were with him should be
suffered to depart, but the messengers finding the froward old man obstinate,
notwithstanding the great dearth that was then in the City, he returned without
effecting any thing; upon which a terrible battery being placed against the
lower City, it thundered against the walls and Bullwarks so long, that laying
open a fair breach, the Soldiers entered with such fury, that bearing down all
before them, they upon the coming of the Marquess of Burgave with fresh Troops,
they possessed themselves of it, driving the Turks into the Castle and upper
City, with great slaughter, sparing in their rage none that came in their way,
yet the malicious Turks ever their departure, to deprive the Christians of the
benefit they might reap by the spoil, had by Trains laid for that purpose,
fired the building in several places, so that enraged by the wind, the flame
could be hardly extinguished, till it had laid most of the goodly building
waste, yet was this great Victory accompanied with sorrow for the death of the
Count Mansfelt, who by drinking cold Liquors, after his great pains taken in
the late battle, fell into a fever, which turning to the bloody Flix, deprived
him of his life, to the great grief of the Christian Princes, who on his
Courage and Conduct, had reposed next to God the success of their Arms, yet the
Christians continued the siege, nor was it long ever the besieged lost Alis Beg
their Governor, who walking upon the wall to give directions in places of most
danger, had his arm struck off with a great shot, of which he dyed, when in his
stead the Janissaries in Garrison chose the Bassa of Natolia, who upon the
overthrow of the Bassa of Buda, had escaped into the City with a hundred
horsemen; when upon notice of the death of Count Mansfelt the Arch Duke came to
the Camp, who when he had well viewed the Army, and the manner of the siege, he
assembled his chief Commanders, to consult what was best to be done, who after
some debate resolved to give a general assault, which was maintained with
great resolution, but the besieged as obstinately defending their walls; the
Duke caused the Retreat to be sounded, and then by his Espials understanding
that the Turks near Buda were gathering together, to relieve the besieged, he
commanded 8000 chosen horse speedily to march thither, who a little before
sunset setting upon them, expecting nothing less, made of them a great
slaughter, and taking a number of prisoners, and amongst the rest the Sanzack
of Copan, returned again to the siege; when as the besieged finding there was
no hope of relief, and that the famine was grievous amongst them, the Governor
overcome with such like difficulties, and the continual cries of the Citizens
and Soldiers, at length consented to parley upon reasonable conditions, so that
in fine it was agreed that the Garrison and all the Citizens Turks should be
sent with bag and baggage to Buda, and in consideration whereof Strigonium the
Metropolis of Hungaria, which for the space of 52 years, had groaned under the
oppression of the Turkish Tyrants, was delivered into the hands of the Arch
Duke, and the conditions with the Turks accordingly performed, twenty Ships
being for that purpose employed by the space of two days, after which the Duke
sent 18 thousand to besiege Vicegrade otherwise called Plindenburg, a strong
Castle of the Turks, situate upon Danubius, between Strigonium and Buda, which
they took, and in their march brought such a fear upon Buda, that had not the
Bassa shut fast the Gates, most of the Inhabitants had fled over the Danudius.

During this good success of the Imperialists the Prince of Transylvania was
not idle, but with an Army of his best Soldiers, setting upon thirty thousand
Turks (who as unbidden Guests were coming to his wedding, which he was then
solemnizing with Maria Christina, daughter to Charles the late Arch Duke of
Austria) he gave such a welcome, that few of them returned to tell the news,
after which, prosecuting his victory he took Lippa, a strong Town, with diverse
other Towns and Castles of the Turks, out of which they had for a long time
annoyed the Countries round about them; about the same time the Lords
Herbenstien, Lucowitz and Eckenburg incountered with the Bassa of Bosna, as he
was returning with ten thousand Turks and Tartars, from the taking of Babotzka,
whom after a hard fight they overthrew, putting most of them to the sword, the
Bassa himself, upon a swift horse hardly escaping.

These successful proceedings of the Christians so enraged the Turk, that
imputing several of the disgraces that had happened to the neglect of Ferat
Bassa, he by the advice of Sinan Bassa, sent for him, who trusting to his
innocence, boldly came to answer to what should be objected against him, though
warned to the contrary, but he was scarce arrived ever by the command of Mahomet
he was strangled and his goods to the value of five hundred thousand Ducats
confiscated.

After the death of Ferat, who was somewhat a favourer of the Christians, Sinan
the proud Bassa, son to a Fisherman, and their mortal enemy, was sent with a
great Army into Valachia, to reduce that and the other revolted Countries to
the Turkish obedience, but being encountered by the Transilvanian Forces, his
Army was overthrown with great slaughter, and himself in his flight falling
into a Limepit, hardly escaped with life; after which he fled to
Canstantinople, to plead his own cause, having promised upon his undertaking
that Expedition at the price of his head, to reduce Valachia, Moldavia, and
Transylvania, to their former obedience.

Not long after the overthrow of Sinan, the Lords Eckenberg and Leucowitz
overthrew twenty thousand who under the leading of the Bassa of Bosna, invaded
the country of Crotia, and following their Victory, entered the Turkish
Dominions and burnt 15 Villages, carrying away a great booty, and soon after
took Petrina, which after a close siege, and some furious assaults was
abandoned by the Turks. In the mean while Sigismund the Transylvanian Prince,
raised a greater power than before, upon notice that Sinan Bassa was again upon
his march to invade his Countries; at what time the Ziculi or Sciculy, a people
bordering on the North of Transylvania, sent to him to offer him their service,
as weary of the Turkish thraldom; who according to agreement, besides many rich
presents, and store of provision, sent him forty thousand men well appointed,
which no sooner joined him, he had notice that Sinan had passed Danubius, by a
bridge of Boats; whereupon he marched with all diligence to meet him, and in
another set battle, gave him a fatal overthrow, in which there were thirty
thousand slain and taken prisoners, besides a rich booty; nor did the River
Danubius upon their hasty repassing the bridge, which was near two miles over,
devour a less number, insomuch that Sinan swore in a great rage, that the young
Prince had in a short time Eclipsed all the renown he in the course of his
whole life had got.

After this overthrow of the Turks, which they number amongst their great
mischances, the Castle and Island in the River with little loss were recovered,
and then in great Triumph laden with the Turks spoils the Prince returned to
Alba Julia, at what time by his Captains he took the strong Castle of Jenna,
and intercepted about 70 wagons richly laden, which they of Temeswar fearing
to be besieged were sending, together with their wives and children, to places
of greater strength.

These things perplexing the proud Turk, he sent his special Messengers to stir
up the Crimesian Tartars, (a people living for the most part on spoil) to
invade Moldavia, Transylvania, and Valachia, who were likewise encouraged
thereto by the Chancellor of Polonia, he so far insinuating with the King, that
Moldavia was taken from the Transylvanian Prince, and a new Vayvod placed
therein, who opened (contrary to his faith given) three ways for the Turks and
Tartars to invade Transylvania, of which perfidious dealing Pope Clement the
Eighth by his Letters to the King of Polonia, grievously complained; and
likewise against Cardinal Zamoskie, the Chancellor, and first mover of this
mischief, whom he cited to appear before him at Rome, there to answer to what
should by the Ambassadors of the Christian Princes, be objected against him,
charging them both with breach of faith, and disloyalty to the King of Heaven,
by betraying the Christians into the hand of the sworn enemies of the Christian
Religion, yet both the King and Chancellor used such endeavors that they
satisfied the Pope in the necessity of their writing better to him to that
purpose, when at the same time Cham Kazikieri the Tartarian King wrote to
Sigismund King of Polonia, to put him in mind of his promise to give his Army
free passage, as likewise to destroy the Cossacks, who as he said by daily
incursions wasted his Frontier, and to make a perpetual League with him yet
only the former request was observed.

The Christians not pleased with the proceedings of the Polonian, to show how
little they esteemed his Friendship, enraged as it were with his revolt burnt
and destroyed all the Turkish Garrisons upon his Frontiers, whom he durst not
protect for fear of having his own Dominions wasted in the like manner, but
what happened this year 1596 advantageous to the Christians was the death of
Sinan Bassa their sworn Enemy, who having by his Friends and many rich presents
escaped the fury of the angry Sultan Mahomet who had vowed his death, soon
after through grief and shame of his late overthrow died, after he had for
Fifty years wasted the Earth with Fire and Sword, Yet the following Spring
Mahomet with a great power purposed in person to pass into Hungary, but by
reason of the Plague and Famine, that raged throughout his Empire he could not
accomplish his design, but was more and more perplexed by the revolt of the
Georgians, and the great Army the new King of Persia was raising for the
recovery of Tauris, notwithstanding to prevent the worst the Transilvanian
Prince in person went to the Courts of the Emperor and Pope to crave Aid,
where he was with great kindness received, and promised such supplies of Men
and Money as his occasion should require, but during his stay there the Sciculi
rose up in arms against him, yet the Rebellion was blown over by the execution
of the chief Promoters of the Tumult, and Ten Thousand Rascians in a fit time
proffered him their service, for the Tartars were by this time on their way,
whereupon having received several rich Presents he returned home, being every
where joyfully received of his People. All this time the Lord Palfi with the
Garrison Soldiers of Strigonium was not idle, but used his utmost diligence
to surprise the Turks Convoys and Garrisons, nor was his expectation
frustrated, for overrunning the Country as far as the Walls of Temeswar he got
many rich booties, and removed such Christians as were in danger of the Turks
Garrison nearer his own missing but narrowly of the Bassa of Temeswar with all
his Treasure, as he was going to Belgrade to give place to a new Bassa, but
however he fell into the hands of the Hungarian Heidons, who overthrew his
Convoy, slew him, and took all his riches laden in Seventy Five Wagons to the
value of Two Hundred Thousand Hungarian Ducats, which so enraged the Turks that
gathering Forty Thousand strong they besieged Lippa, but after the loss of six
Thousand of their number in many furious assaults, they left their Trenches and
in great confusion retired, which flight was occasioned by the Governor of
Lugaz his surprising the Suburbs of Temeswar, and setting them on fire, which
being seen in the Turks Camp caused amongst them that great consternation, as
thinking the Prince of Transylvania with his whole Army was coming on, and even
at their backs. After whose flight the Hungarian Heidons passing the Danubius
took Plenia, in revenge of which the Turks took Clissa, out of which they had
not long before been driven; not long after the Lord Palfi took the strong
Castle Sombock, which the Turks in a rage upon the entrance of the Christians
set on fire, but thereby so exasperated the Soldiers that they spared none
they found therein, but put them all to the Sword without respect either to Age
or Sex.

These continual currants of Victory carried the Transilvanian Prince to the
Siege of Tameswar, which he for many days furiously battered, but upon notice
that the Bassa of Natolia the forerunner of Mahomets Army, was come to Belgrade
with Fourteen thousand Turks, and Mahomet with an Army of One Hundred and Fifty
Thousand was coming after him to the Relief of the City, and he not having yet
received the supplies promised by the Christian Princes his Confederates,
thought good to raise his siege and depart for Lippa, where having left a
strong Garrison he kept on his way to Alba-Julia, and assembled there the
States of his Principality to consider the most expedient means for raising
more Forces to repress so potent an Adversary.

Mahomet approaching with his Forces which daily increased, sent to Michale the
Vayvod of Valachia to promise him great rewards if he would become his
Tributary and revolt from the Transilvanian Prince, but finding nothing would
prevail with the Vayvod to break his Faith he came with his whole Army now
increased to the number of Two Hundred Thousand to Buda, yet ere he could
attempt any thing Maximilian the Emperors General, (made so in the stead of
Matthias the Archduke, who upon the Death of Ferdinand the Emperors Uncle, had
the rich County of Tirol bestowed upon him whither he was retired) had taken
Vacia, Hatvan, and several other places, but long rested not Mahomet before, he
with his huge Army besieged Agria, which after the loss of Twenty Thousand of
his Men not by force but by surrender, for the Soldiers perceiving the new
Castle, the place in which they only put their trust, undermined; and about to
be blown up, and that all hopes of being relieved were vain, they laid hands
upon Paulus Niari and Terskie the Captain of the Garrison Soldiers and
Governor of the City, and casting them in Prison capitulated with the Turks to
deliver the City and Castle, in consideration that they might depart with bag
and baggage, but the faithless Infidels ere they had passed through the Camp
contrary to their faith given cut them in pieces, after which the Bassa of
Bosua with a strong power laid siege to Petrina, but upon notice that the
Lords Herbenstein and Bencowitz were coming to relieve it, and in their way had
overthrown Six Thousand Turks he raised his siege in great have leaving behind
him part of his Carriages. But now the two puissant Armies of the Christians
and Turks coming in view of each other and nothing but a small River parting
them, drew frequently up in Battalia, and had several skirmishes at a distance,
but the vain glorious Turks not thinking it sufficient to discharge their great
Artillery, and skirmish in small parties at the Command of Mahomet, Ten
Thousand of them, and Six Thousand Tartars passed the River, but were so hotly
welcomed that few returned, which advantage the Christians following pursued
the flyers, and set upon the gross of the Turks Army, putting all into
confusion and consternation; so that Mahomet fearing a total overthrow
retreated to his Camp, whither the Christians as eagerly pursued, but whilst
they disordered themselves to take the spoil, (although the General had caused
Proclamation to be made, that none on pain of death should attempt it till the
victory was obtained.) They being afresh charged and many of them cut off by
the Turks great Artilery, betook themselves to plain flight not to be stayed by
the threats nor entreaties of their Commanders, so that the German Horse
disordering their own Foot put all into confusion, which the Turks contrary to
their expectation perceiving followed hard after them, making great slaughter,
yet so conscious were they of their weakness, that fearing the return of the
Christians, that in the night they secretly raised their Camp and returned to
Agria, leaving their Cannon and Baggage in the Trenches for the space of three
days, so slenderly guarded that Five Thousand men might have taken the spoil;
Mahomet himself confessing that he feared to have been taken Prisoner, and
would not for the future venture his person in places of such imminent danger.

In this Battle or rather running fight, called from the place where it
happened, the Battle of Karesta, Forty Thousand Turks and Fifteen Thousand
Christians were slain most of the latter in the rash and unadvised flight, the
which had it not contrary to all reason happened never had a more glorious
victory been obtained over the Infidels. Yet Mahomet after he had furnished
Agria with a Garrison of Ten Thousand choice Soldiers returned to Belgrade,
and having divided his Army in two parts, the one he left in the Country to
secure it against the Christians, and with the other departed to
Constantinople, but by the way being set upon by Barbelius Jancaechie the
Transilvanian Princes Lieutenant, and the Vayvod of Valachia, who with a strong
power for that purpose had passed the Danubius, they cut off seven Thousand of
his men.

Early in the spring as ashamed of their disgrace the Christian Princes
recruited their scattered Forces which meeting together near to Passonium and
Altenburg, marched to Papa, which they besieged and after eight days battery
took it, and so again returning to Altenburg the Army mustered, from whence
they marched to Rab and besieged it, but upon the approach of the Turks Army
under the Command of Mahomet Bassa, raised the siege, as finding it both
difficult and dangerous, and so marched over into the Island of Schut, when in
their sight they permitted the Turks to take Dolis.

Michael the Vayvod of Valachia, having his Country almost destroyed by the
Turks, and they promising him great favors and bounties more then ever, if he
would again return to his obedience; he to save his Country from utter
destruction, complied with the Tyrants desire in part, viz. to own him for his
Sovereign, and to pay him half the wonted Tribute, but denied upon any terms to
aid him against the Christians, which the Turk for a while dissembled and
seemed well contented with his submission, but afterward contrary to his Oath
oppressing him with great Taxes, both he and the Prince of Transylvania
recommended the protection of their Countries to Rodolphus the Emperor, who
thereupon called a Diet to consult about raising contributions sufficient for
the management of the War against the Turks, and such success had his arms
immediately thereon, through the good conduct of the Lord Swartzenburg, Rab was
surprised for certain Engineers coming by night to the Gates, finding the
Portcullises drawn up in expectation of Wagons laden with Provision to come
from Alba Regalis, they fastened several Petards to the said Gates which deadly
Engines once fired rent 'um in pieces, so that the Army which followed at their
heels pressing in, after a long fight killed two of the Turks Bassa's, and put
the rest to the flight, who such as could escaped over the Wall, and those that
could not fell by the Swords of the enraged Soldiers, who in the City found so
great a booty that many of them were greatly enriched thereby, besides One
Hundred pieces of great Ordnance, and store of all manner of Provisions. That
City though so easily recovered, being one of the strongest Fortresses in
Christendom, the taking of which so encouraged the General of the Imperialists,
that (upon notice that great differences were arisen between the Janissaries and
the Sphai, the Turks best Footmen and Horsemen upon a point of preheminency) he
resolved to besiege Buda the Turks chief strength in Hungary, and thereupon
marching thither with all his Army, on the 16th. of October, 1598. he sar down
before it, and for many days battered it with sixteen pieces of Cannon. But in
fine seeing no hopes of winning it, and having notice that a great Army of
Turks was hasting to its relief having plundered the Suburbs the General drew
his Army out of the Trenches and departed to Strigonium.

The Transilvanian Prince having exchanged his Country with the Emperor for
the Dukedoms of Oppel and Ratibor, and yearly Fifty Thousand Joachim, or the
Revenues of the Bishopric of Vratislavia, Territories lying in Silesia and
repenting him of what he had done, he came again into Transylvania in disguise,
and was joyfully received by his Subjects, at what time Maximilian the Emperors
Generals was marching with the Army to take possession of it, which had like to
have caused great dissensions amongst the Christian Confederates had not the
Prince by many submissive Letters pacified the Emperors displeasure. Now were
the Turks Army arrived in Hungary and had laid siege to Veradinum, which City
being at the point to be yielded, was relieved by the Lord Basta the Emperors
Lieutenant, who making semblance to give the Turks Battle, and by that means
drawing them out of their Trenches, in the mean time by an unsuspected way,
thrust Eight Hundred Soldiers into the City and so drew off, through which
supply the City was so long defended that the Turks weary of the siege, and by
reason of the approach of Winter departed, leaving for have many of their Tents
and great Ordnance as a prey to the besieged, after which the Imperialists
spoiled that part of the Lower Hungary, which was in the possession of the
Turks even to the gates of Buda, which brought a great fear upon the Garrison
and Citizens. When at the same time Michael the Vayvod of Valachia, having
gathered a strong power took and sacked Nicopolis, the rumor of which coming to
Constantinople where the Plague then raged, it greatly perplexed Mahomet and
brought a fear upon that great City. Yet to put a stop to the Vayvods
proceedings, he caused a great number of Turks under the leading of Taut Bassa
to march against him, who joining the forces of Mahomet Satergi with which he
had besieged Veradinum; yet the Vayvod not in the least dismayed, marched 100
Miles into the Turks Territories, and destroying all before him obtained a
great Booty. But now contrary to the expectation of all men the Transilvanian
Prince, instigated thereto by the Polonian King, resigned the right he had in
that Principality, to his Cozen Andrew Battor, and thereby defrauded the
Emperor of that which by way of Exchange was properly his, the Transylvanians
having thereupon sworn him fealty, yet not to discourage his Confederates the
Emperor set light thereby, though the proud Cardinal, to whom it was resigned
submitted himself a Vassal to Mahomet, and thereby deprived the Christian
Commonwealth of one of her surest Bulwarks.

Buda blocked up by the Christians, and thereby reduced to great extremity,
the Bassa thereof upon notice that several wagons laden with provision, were
on their way, issued out with six hundred horse to conduct them safe; but being
set upon by the free Hadducks, his Guard was overthrown, his son slain, and
himself taken prisoner; and within a while after the Lord Palfie incountering
the Bassa of Bosna, who was coming with ten thousand men to relieve the said
City, overthrew his power, slew the Bassa, and took all the wagons laden with
provision, and at the same time five thousand Tartars being set upon by the
Lord Swartzenburgs Regiment, were all cut in pieces; upon notice of Ibraim
Bassa with a great power set forward from Constantinople, but part of his
Forces being encountered by the Imperialists under the command of the Lord
Palfis Lieutenant, were overthrown, and rich booty taken, containing all the
provision of the Camp, and one hundred thousand Dollars which were coming up
the Danubius to pay the Soldiers, which loss greatly discontented the Bassa,
and then when he had notice that the Imperialists intended again to besiege
Buda, which he by reason of the said loss was not in a capacity to relieve, as
also at the same time news came of a great slaughter of the Turks before the
City of Agria, the which City had the Christians assaulted in any considerable
number, the consternation was so great, that they might easily have surprised
it, yet as it happened they took a hundred prisoners and five hundred horses,
the free Haducks also entering the Turks Territories, did great hurt by burning
their Villages and carrying away a great number of Inhabitants.

Buda now had not escaped falling into the hands of the Christians had not
Ibraim Bassa received an unexpected supply, which increased his Army to the
number of one hundred and thirty thousand, with which upon his approach the
Christians too weak to encounter him were obliged to raise their siege, yet so
much was the Bassa out of love with war, that having relieved the City, he by
the command of Mahomet the Turkish Emperor, labored to procure a peace with
Rodolph the German Emperor, in order to which several great Commanders on
either side met, but the Turks proud demands seemed so unreasonable to the
Christian Commissioners, that they rejected them with disdain, and so all hopes
of peace vanishing, the Vayvod of Valachia invaded Transylvania, now wholly
devoted to Mahomet, against whom Cardinal Batter prepared his Forces, being
strengthened over and above with thirty thousand Turks and Tartars, sent by
Ibraim yet in a mortal battle he was overthrown by the Vayvod, and the Cardinal
in endeavoring to escape was slain, and his head sent to the Emperor, after
which most of the Cities of Transylvania revolted from the Turkish obedience.
The news of which greatly troubled Sigismund the late Prince, who resided in
Polonia, but more Mahomet the Turkish Emperor, imbroiled in new troubles by the
revolt of Chusahin or Cassan the great Bassa of Carra^^^^, who had caused most
of the Countries in the letter Asia, to cast off the Turkish yoke, but Mahomet
sending great Forces against him under Mahomet Bassa, who after several
conflicts spoiling the possessions of the Rebels in Arms, he so dealt with the
chief of them, that by bribes and large promises, he prevailed with them to
leave their ringleader, he was taken and brought in chains to Constantinople,
where with most exquisite torments, he was put to death. The end of which
dangerous Rebellion, gave the Ottoman Emperor more leisure to prosecute his
wars in Hungary, to oppose whose Forces, the Christians were not wanting, for
in an other Diet assembled, new supplies were granted by the Electoral Princes
for the carrying on the war, toward which the Bishop of Rome contributed very
largely, so that Anno 1600 the Christian Army early in the Spring took the
field (though to breed delay therein the Turkish Bassa in the name of his
master, had made many offers tending to peace) but ever any notable action was
performed, the renowned Lord Palfie, the greatest Commander of that Age dyed at
his Castle of Bibersperg, whereupon the Lord Swartzenburg was by the Emperor
appointed Governor of Strigonium in his stead, who to the great grief of the
Army, soon after slain with a shot as he was reducing Papa to its obedience, it
having a little before at the instigation of De la Mot, a seditious French
Commander there in Garrison revolted from the Emperor, and yet stood neuter,
not permitting the Turks to enter, yet was it again reduced notwithstanding the
death of the Lord Swartzenburg and most of the Rebels Executed, after the
severest manner that could be invented.

These things passing, the troubles in Hungary daily increasing, and the Turks
were every where put to the worst, and amongst the rest the Bassa of Sigeth
with five thousand of his Turks, and his head sent to the Emperor. Jula was
likewise surprised, and the Bassa thereof with two Sanzacks, and Five Hundred
common Soldiers slain, and now the Government of Transylvania being vacant (by
the death of Cardinal Battor and the absence of the Prince) the Emperor
confirmed it to the Vayvod of Valachia, who raising a great power went against
the Prince who aided by the Turks, Tartars, and Polonians, was coming to try a
field Battle for the recovery of his Inheritance, and in a set battle overthrew
him with great slaughter of his men, himself hardly escaping, after which he
seized upon the Country of Moldavia, causing all the inhabitants to swear
Allegiance to him, when the better to encourage him to invade the Turks
Dominions the Emperor not only confirmed him in that Principality also, but
sent him six Thousand Men under the leading of D. Petzen, with a mass of money
to pay his Soldiers appointing him one of his Council, and chief Intendant for
those Countries, but he behaving himself roughly toward the Transilvanian
Nobility, they sent Ambassadors to Basta the Emperors Lieutenant General
praying, him to take then into the protection of the Emperor only, and that
they might obey no other Sovereign Prince, whereupon Basta after mature
deliberation resolved to grant their desires, and to protect them from the fury
of the Vayvod, whom he yet not able to appease by fair means he resolved to
compel by force of Arms to acquiesce with what he determined, and therefore
gathering such forces as he could with Eighteen Thousand well appointed
Soldiers he awaited on the Frontiers of Transylvania his coming, and near to a
Village called Mivislo adventured to give him Battle, though under his standard
he had double the number, and after six hours desperate fighting put him to
flight, with the loss of Ten Thousand of his men, taking likewise several
Prisoners, and a great spoil, yet nevertheless the Vayvod bating of his proud
temper by the mediation of Friends they were afterward reconciled. Yet the
Vayvod jealous of the Imperialist as being also without cause persuaded thereto
by the Polonians, to prevent as was suggested to him his being taken Prisoner,
with a few of his followers fled into the fastness of the Mountains, whereupon
one Simon was placed in his stead by the haughty Chancellor of Poland, which
choice Basta altogether disliking resolved to displace the upstart Vayvod, but
the Transilvanians desirous of freedom, and in order to recover it raising many
rumors portending the mischief intended against the Imperialists, at that time
hindered his violent proceedings, so that for the future the whole matter was
referred to the Emperor. The Transilvanians likewise casting themselves upon
him, and when they perceived no remedy, desired that Maximilian the Archduke
might take upon him the Government of that Province; but whilst these affairs
were in controversy, the Turks with a huge Army besieged Canisia a strong City
of Stira, to the relief of which came the Imperial Army consisting of Forty
Thousand Horse and Foot, composed of diverse Nations, under the leading of Duke
Mercury General of the Emperors Forces in Hungary, to oppose which Ibrahim
Bassa drew out of his Trenches, thinking by their multitude to oppress the
Christians, but was therein deceived, for after a bloody and doubtful fight for
the space of eight hours victory declared her self against him, yet not so
apparently but that the next day by reason of the discord amongst the Christian
Captains, who at the Command of their General refused to charge the Turks in
their strengths the scale was turned, and their Convoy of Provision upon its
way to the Camp being taken by the Tartars, they were so straightned that after
having layn still for the space of three days, they rose in the night but not
so secretly but that the Turks following hard after them cut off Three Thousand
of the rearmost, took several pieces of Cannon, and a great part of their
Baggage, and afterward had the City of Canisae yielded to them upon condition
that the Garrison should be safely convoyed over the River Mur, with Bag and
Baggage, and hightened with this success they afterward forraged the Country
of Stira, for fear of whom the Inhabitants with such of their substance, as
they conveniently carry with them fled to the Mountains, whereupon the Bassa
sent forth a Proclamation commanding them to return, and that such as would
willingly submit themselves to the Turkish obedience should be taken into safe
protection, upon which Proclamation many of the half starved people returned
and submitted themselves, but the ever renowned mirror of Virtue and Valor,
the Heroic Count Serenus being the man that the Bassa aimed at, as well
knowing whilst he went free his new Conquests were slightly cemented to the
rest, he the better to decoy the Noble Youth into his power wrote to him as
follows.

We Ibraim Bassa Chief Vizar Bassa, Cosen to the most Puissant Sultan Mahomet,
to the Count Serenus, sends Greeting,
WE have often heretofore written to thee, concerning the matter thou know
of, but what the cause is we received no answer we know not; yet could I not
but write unto you again, that if thou can be content to begin the matter
aright, and to submit thy self to our protection we will be ready to receive
thee: thou see what we foretold thee is now more then fulfilled, both upon
thee and thine, which thou would never believe; nevertheless for the staying
the further effusion of blood as well of thy Subjects as our, and to come to
some good atonement, it is high time for thee to lay thine hand upon thine
heart, and to consider how much more it concerns thee then us, and that the
benefit thereof redoundeth more unto thine then to ours, what our affections
are toward thee Hierom the Vayvod can tell thee, etc.


This Letter the Count well enough knew were but an outward show of Friendship,
and therefore he thinking it not good to trust the Infidel, so long as he had
his Sword in his hand, would not so much as dain to return him an answer,
whereupon he in a great rage returned to Belgrade vaunting that if Mahomet so
Commanded, he would the next year lay siege to Vienna, and so much extolled his
exploits to the great Sultan, that he commanded public Triumphs for the space
of four days in Constantinople, for joy of his good success in Stira, and sent
the proud Bassa a Robe of Gold, and a leaders Staff set wit Pearl and precious
Stones.

The loss of Canisia sore troubled the Christian insomuch that Paradiser the
Governor, who had so tamely yielded it into the hands of the Turks, coming to
Vienna was there imprisoned, and many things being proved against him, his
Ensign Bearer, Lieutenant, and the Mayor of the Town, they after many strict
Examinations were at the command of the Emperor executed.

Notwithstanding the death of the Bassa of Carramani in manner as aforesaid,
the Rebellion was not altogether thereby extinguished but secretly kept alive
by the countenance of the Persian Sophy, so that now it again began as if
revived from its Embers to break out into a flame, and in a trice swept away
several Towns, whereupon Mahomet sent to the Persian to demand for the more
assurance of the League one of his Sons as Hostage, which was so evilly taken
that the Sophy commanded the Turks Ambassador to be slain, and although that
rigorous sentence was remitted, yet by the second Commandment of the Sophy he
was bastinadoed, and in despite of him that sent him returned with great
disgrace, the which though it highly offended Mahomet, yet he finding himself
at that time not in a condition to revenge it, only blustered a little and to
prevent the worst, put strong Garrisons into his Frontire Towns.

Anno 1601, The Christian Confederates brought a strong Army into the Field,
for fear of which the Turkish General proposed many ofters of Peace, but ere
any was concluded, the said General Ibraim Bassa died, when as the Christians
not to omit any opportunity took diverse strong places, and amongst the rest
after a terrible battery, and the loss of Eight Thousand men Alba Regalis, one
of the chiefest and strongest Cities of Hungary, into which the furious
Soldiers entering through Streets of fire and over heaps of the slain, put all
they met to the Sword, few or none except the Bassa being taken to mercy,
enriched themselves with a great spoil, especially the Walloons, who spared not
to rifle the Tombs of the Hungarian Kings, which barbarity the Turks themselves
had abstained from. Yet hardly was the spoil taken but news came that Assan
Bassa made General in the stead of Ibraim, was coming with a great Army to
relieve it, whereupon Duke Mercury drew out his Forces and in a mortal Battle
slew the Bassa, and most of his men, taking his rich Camp, and a great number
of Prisoners, and amongst the rest Fifty of the Rebels that fled from Papa, who
yet at the instance of the said Duke were pardoned.

The Christians hightened with this success, were now resolved to attempt the
recovery of Canisia from before which (after they had a long time besieged it,
and laid open with their furious battery several breaches, killing in the
several assaults a number of Turks) they were by the unseasonableness of the
weather obliged to depart, to the great grief of the Commanders, though joy of
the Soldiers, who through the excessive Cold that then happened were become
unserviceable, many of them being frozen to Death in the Trenches. The Turks
now greatly disinaid and almost driven out of Hungary, unhappy chance turned
the Christians Swords, upon themselves for although Michael the Vayvod of
Valachia was reconciled to the Emperor, yet the Transilvanians desirous to be
Governed by Sigismund their natural Prince, cast Basta the Emperors
Leiutenant, and by him appointed Governor of that Province, into Irons; and
immediately submitted themselves to Sigismund, and likewise imprisoned several
of the Nobility, whom they suspected to favor the Emperor, returning again to
the Turkish obedience, and this by the contrivance of the Chancellor of Polonia.
Yet at the mediation of Friends Basta was set at Liberty; who thoroughly
enraged at the disgrace done to him, and the indignity offered thereby to the
Emperor his Master, raised an Army and joying with Michael the Vayvod, invaded
Transylvania, and in a dreadful Battle overthrew Prince Sigismund with great
slaughter of his men, upon which Claudiopolis and diverse other Cities of
Transylvania returned to the Emperors obedience.

After this great victory the Vayvod still envying at the success of the
Imperialists, and secretly grudging against Basta, by Letters held secret
correspondency with the Bassa of Temeswar, intending in consideration of
Valachia, Moldavia, and Transylvania, to become the Turks Tributary, and by the
assistance of the Bassa's drive out the Imperialists, to prevent which it was
agreed that he should be sent Prisoner to Vienna. In order to which a Walloon
Captain was sent into his Tent with sixty followers, but he making ressistance
was by the said Captain slain, which caused a great uproar amongst his
Soldiers, but when they understood the cause by Letters produced under his own
hand, their anger was allayed, themselves protesting that had they known so
much they would long before dispatched him. After the Death of the Vayvod the
Transilvanians wholly submitted to themselves to Basta. Yet continued not long
in that obedience ere stirred up by some restless spirits they again Revolted
and Proclaimed Sigismund, denying obedience to any other; at which sudden
mutation of this unstable people Basta not a little troubled to prevent his
being again imprisoned, (as he had been formerly by them, withdrew himself with
his Followers, into a strong Town on the Frontiers, from whence he by Letters
advertized the Emperor of what had happened, and requested him to send him
speedy Aid, whereby he might be able to reduce them to their former obedience.

During these troubles in Transylvania, the Turks taking the advantage did
mischief in Hungary, yet were often met with by the Imperialists, and amongst
the rest the Bassa of Agria, as he was going to besiege Toccaie with ten
thousand Turks, who being encountered by Ferrant Gonzaga the Emperors
Lieutenant was overthrown, with the slaughter of almost all his followers; nor
was Mahomet the Emperor less perplexed with the Carramanian and Natolian
Rebels, who now getting to a great head under the leading of one Scrivano, had
given several overthrows to his Bassas sent against them, and spread their
borders wide, drawing into their Confederacy all Asia the Lesser, and a part of
the Greater, and at the same time the Janissaries were in an uproar in
Constantinople, threatening the Emperor and charging him with Cowardice, and the
neglect of his affairs, to appease whom Cicala Bassa was obliged to bestow
amongst them a great sum of money, and the Musti or chief Mohammedan Priest
declaring that all these disorders happened, for that Mahomet their Prophet was
offended at the excess of wine that was drunk in the City; whereupon
Proclamation was made that upon pain of death all those that had any wine in
their houses, the Ambassadors of the Christian Princes excepted, should
immediately bring it forth and stave it; whereupon such abundance was spilt,
that boats in the high streets might have swam in wine of all sorts.

By this time Basta having received Forces from the Emperor, had so straightened
the Transylvanians, that Sigismund sent to offer him all the Towns that were in
his possession, at the time of his being expelled Transylvania, of which offer
Zachel Moses the Princes Lieutenant, having notice, resolved not to suffer any
agreement upon such conditions, and therefore with the Forces under his Command
composed of Turks, Tartars, and Transylvanians, he hasted to oppress Basta in
his Camp, but finding him as ready as himself, a dreadful battle was fought
between them, wherein Basta with his Germans prevailed, making a great
slaughter of the enemy; To excuse which rash action Sigismund sent several of
his Nobility to the Imperial Camp, offering to perform what ever he had
promised, and to go in person to the Emperor, which once put in practice all
the Country returned again to the Emperors obedience, nor was Valachia at this
time less troubled about Election of a Vayvod, that Province being divided into
two Factions, the one was for choosing Radol a Noble man, affecting the
Emperors interest, and the other for Electing Jeremias, who had promised to
hold his Province Tributary of the Turk; whereupon many Battles were fought
with various success, but in the end Rodolph assisted by the Emperors Forces
overthrew his competitor, and obtained a great Victory; in which battle two of
the Turkish Bassas were slain, with all their followers, and soon after, having
overthrown a great power of the Tartars, he recovered the Principality; nor was
Hungary free from the Turkish outrages, who bearing themselves upon their small
success, attempted to surprise Alba Regalis, but were by the Christians
overthrown with great slaughter, and soon after two hundred of their Wagons
laden with provision and Ammunition, was taken by Count Serinus, on its way to
Canisia, and about the same time took Ali Bassa Governor of Pesth prisoner,
and with him seventy thousand Hungarian Ducates, which Bassa for his ransom
over and above offered 300000 Sultanies.

Mahomet not a little troubled with the continual news of his Losses in
Hungary, and resolving to revenge himself on the Christians sent Hassau Bassa,
with an Army of one hundred and fifty thousand Turks and Tartars, who upon
their arrival, passing the Danubius, laid siege to Alba-Regalis, of which the
Count Ysolon was Governor, when raising three Batteries, they incessantly
thundered against the wall and Bulwarks, and was by the Defendants answered in
the same Language, and by frequent Sallies, cut off a number of the enemies,
but having all their walls on the West side beaten down, and most of the
Soldiers either killed or disabled, the Count himself wounded in the thigh,
their powder being almost spent, and no hopes of relief, they capitulated to
deliver the Town upon condition that they should depart thence with all their
Goods and be conducted in safety to the neighboring Garrison, which was sworn
to by all the Turkish Commanders; but having once entered the City, they not
only spoil and plunder it, but destroyed and put to the sword all the Soldiers
and Citizens, sparing none alive but the Count himself, and some few Captains,
whom they sent in Chains to Constantinople, insomuch that the streets flowed
with the blood of three thousand Christians, in revenge of this loss, the Lord
Russworm with thirty thousand men laid siege to the strong City of Buda, and
took the base Town, where he got store of Riches, and afterward laid hard
siege to the upper City, but finding it a work of great difficulty, he resolved
to turn his Forces upon Pesth a strong Garrison lying on the other side the
River, from whence the Turks with their great Ordnance annoyed his Army before
Buda, which place he without much difficulty won, and then again returned to
the siege of the upper City of Buda, but having lost eight thousand of his men,
and having notice that the Tartars were at hand with a great Army, resolving to
relieve it, he raised his siege, having first repulsed the Vizar Bassa before
Pesth, with the loss of half his Forces.

Scrivano having rent the Turks Dominions in Asia, by taking from them their
principal Cities, fell sick, of which sickness he dyed, to the great grief of
the Rebels, who nevertheless chose his younger brother to lead them, who soon
after in a great battle overthrew the Turkish Army, that was sent against him,
under the leading of Hassau Bassa, and slew the Bassa himself, together with
almost all his followers; whereupon Mahomet doubting his Empire in Asia, was
obliged to withdraw his Forces out of Hungary, yet incited the Tartars by
frequent inroads to busy the Imperialists, till he could be at leisure to
return his Captains with a greater power, who according to their wonted
mischievous natures committed sundry outrage, burning and destroying all in
their way, but in the end were most of them cut off by the Christians against
whose joint Forces, they were no ways able to stand, as being rather inured to
spoil than fight.

Anno 1603 The Turks in the several Garrisons roaming abroad in the depth of
winter, when Danubius it self was frozen over, committed many outrages in
Hungaria, but in their return, being met by Colonel Coblonitz, a great number
of them were cut in pieces, and all the booty recovered, so that for want of
Victuals Buda was greatly distressed, but see again the change of fortune, for
the Turks coming out of Buda upon the Frozen River, braving the Garrison of
Pesth, the Soldiers sallyed out upon them, but being overpowred were two
hundred of them slain, yet this loss was shortly revenged by the Garrison
Soldiers, who surprising several of the Turkish Nobility, sporting with their
wives in the hot Baths not far from Buda, put all the men to the sword, and
suffered the women to escape naked into the City, to whose flight, fear added
wings, and so with the spoil of their rich garments returned in Triumph, but
want of Victuals increasing, they were obliged to feed upon all manner of
unclean things, when at the same time their neighbors of Buda having received
a great Convoy of Victuals, derided them, and sent three or four thundering
Peals of Cannon over the river against the Town, but their mirth was soon
spoiled, for by the carelessness of the Engenier several barrels of Powder
taking fire not only killed a great number of them, but likewise overthrevv
four yards of their Wall, and thus the Winter passed over with many
skirmishes, and the taking of several places in Hungary on either side; When
early in the Spring the new Vayvod of Valachia over run the rich Country of
Silistria, reducing the greatest part of it to his obedience, and soon after
Colloninitz gave the Turks another great overthrow, and took a great booty on
its way to Canisia, and afterward laid siege to Baboz, but finding it strongly
Garrisoned, and furnished for a long siege, he withdrew from before it, yet he
surprised many of the Turks and intercepted several Wagons laden with
provision, about which time news came that the Janissaries were up in Arms at
Constantinople, as likewise Sphai, and that they committed several outrages on
the Bassas, and spared not to abuse their master, telling him they would
(seeing he neglected to) reform his Government, swearing that unless he would
deliver into their power the Capi Aga, and such others as they should require,
they would turn all into confusion, which threats so scared the Pusillanimous
Tyrant that he was contented to yield to their demands, who having got those
Favorites they most inveighed against, they with all despite put them to
death; whereupon the Tyrant not to be outdone in cruelty, caused several of the
Bassa's and chief men of his Court, whom he knew the Soldiers affected, to be
slain, which caused such a hatred against him, that many of his great Bassa's
conspired to depose him, and set up his son Mahomet in his stead, which they
were the more animated to put in practice, for that he had at the same time
made a dishonorable peace with the Asian Rebels, giving most of their
ringleaders great Commands, whilst those that had faithfully served him were
rejected, of which intent of his men of war, the Tyrant having notice, caused
his son, and so many as he could understand were any ways concerned therein to
be put to death.

These things happening in the foregoing year, the year following the Tartars
in great numbers intending to invade Hungary, were denied passage by the
Polonians, whereupon they resolved to make their way through Valachia, with
whom the Vayvod had many hard conflicts, killing at one time three thousand of
them, but their number being great, he was forced at length to let them pass;
who upon their arrival in Hungary and Stira, made great spoil ever Collonitz
could take the field, who at length joining with Count Serinus, gave them a
fatal overthrow, and recovered about five thousand Christian Captives; yet
those that escaped from the battle roving about did great harm, till such time
as they were met with by the Lord Nadasti and his Hassars, who with a furious
charge overset their battle, and brought them to final destruction, when soon
after Collonitz returning fell upon Two Thousand Turks all or most of which he
slew, and then passing on besieged the Castle of Loqua which in a short time he
took, but by neglect of the Soldiers enjoyed not long, for the Palizadoes being
fired set fire to the Castle and laid it wast. After which he marched toward
the Castle of Boulouvenar, upon whose approach the Garrison fled, but in their
flight being met were overthrown with great slaughter, and such as were taken
Prisoners together with all their substance brought back to the Castle, into
which the Colonel having put Four Hundred Haducks, and Two Hundred Hussars,
returned to Comara, where with a great Booty he arrived in safety.

Turning a little from the troubles of Hungary, a Country subject to the
continual Inroads of the Turks, I shall return to Transylvania, which by this
time was for the most part reduced to the Emperors obedience. For Moses the
Rebel after his being overthrown by Basta, doubting his safety in the Castle of
Solemose, delivered it to the Turks and fled to Temeswar, a City in their
possession of which Basta the Emperors Leiutenant having notice resolved to
recover the Castle, which the Turks supposed impregnable by reason of its
situation, as being founded upon a steep and hard Rock, but the Germans having
by strength of Arms drawn their Cannon to the top of a little Hill, not far
distant from it, after a terrible battery made had it delivered to them, the
Turks well perceiving they were no longer able to keep it.

This strong place thus gained many of less account that held out against Basta
surrendered, whereupon assembling the principal men of Transylvania, he in a
short Oration admonished them to be steadfast to the interest of the Emperor,
and not to have any regard to the faithless and wavering Turks, etc. To which
they replied, That they were willing to obey the Emperor in all things, but
that their people in continual Wars being wasted, they desired him to consider
how little able they were to keep an Army in the Field, without which the
Country could not be defended; but if the Emperor would protect them, and
secure them with a standing Army, they would yearly pay toward the defraying
of the charges Fifteen Thousand Hungarian Ducats, and furnish them with all
things necessary. It being a thing more Honorable and Profitable for a Prince
moderately to use his Subjects, then for covetousness to devour them in one
day, and in their loss to lose himself for ever. This their offer was by Basta
accepted, and the minds of the people by many persuasive arguments kept in
their dutiful Allegiance to the Emperor. But whilst peace was expected on all
sides Moses the Rebel, with a great power of Turks and Tartars entered
Transylvania, at such time as Basta was absent dreaming of no such matter, and
seizing upon Wisceborongh, some other places of small importance, his name
began to spread wide. Insomuch that Mahomet the Sultan understanding what he
had done, promised to send him more Aid, and to make him his Leiutenant if he
prospered in his Wars, which puffed up the Rebel to that height that hearing of
Basta being with small Forces in the Town of Somosinar, he resolved to march
thither and besiege him, but that experienced Captain knowing how much it
impaired the credit of a General, to be enclosed within Walls, upon notice of
his approach, after he had put that place in a posture of defense departed
thence, and after having received a supply of eight Thousand men from the
Vayvod of Valachia, he went to oppose the Torrent, but ere he could prevent it
the City of Claudinople fell into the Rebels hands, who used the Citizens with
all manner of cruelties. Yet at length meeting with them before he was aware,
fell into their danger, not expecting them to be above half the number, he
found them so that he not exceeding Nine Thousand, and the Rebels not less then
Thirty Thousand, when he had done all that became a valiant Soldier retired in
good order, leaving his Baggage, Tents, and Artilery with the dead Bodies of
One Thousand of his men as prey to the Conquerours; but they more greedy of the
spoil then to pursue him, fell to plundering the Tents with such eagerness,
that he thereof advertized, and turning his recollected Forces suddenly upon
them, who dreamed of nothing less entered amongst them unarmed as they were,
every one with his hands full of spoils, made such a slaughter that scarcely a
third part of them escaped, so that by their carelessness within less then four
hours, the vanquishers were vanquished and amongst the slain fell Moses
himself, whose head was after fixed upon a Lance and set up upon the Walls of
Carolstadt.

This Rebellion suppressed another Rebel aided by the Turks Tartars and
Cossacks to the number of Six Thousand, made head about Lippa, but Three
Thousand Haducks being sent out against him, his Forces were defeated and
himself, for the safety of his own Life glad to fly, after which good success
One Hundred of the Rebels Insignes, and the Horse on which Moses fought,
traped richly with Gold and Precious Stones were as a grateful present sent to
the Emperor, and afterward the Army under the Command of Basta, being
increased to Twenty Thousand, he with Five and Twenty pieces of Cannon marched
to besiege Temeswar, but ere he long had lain before it, by his Soldiers
eating of green Fruit, the Bloody Flux raged so in his Camp, that death
triumphing every where over his men he was forced to depart.

Spring being come the Christian Army in Hungaria being Five and Thirty
Thousand strong took the Field, under the Command of the Lord Rusworm, who
having carefully provided for the several Garrisons encamped near to Pesth at
what time an Army of One Hundred Thousand Turks showed it self on the other
side the Danubius, for fear of which several of the Garrison Soldiers of Pesth
fled over to Buda, and there were highly entertained by the Bassa, who thought
to use them as decoys to train their fellows over, but this project failed
though at that time their wants were great, though not long, for in spite of
the Turks endeavors to hinder them, two Convoys of Provision and other
necessaries, the one by Water, and the other by Land were brought thither, at
what time a Turkish Captain upon some displeasure flying from Alba Regalis to
Rab, informed the Governor that if he would march thither he would show him an
easy way to surprise the Suburbs if not the City it self, whereupon the
Christian Soldiers giving credit to the Infidel by his direction succeeded in
taking the Suburb as they wished, and in it a great Booty, but despairing in
any further advantage returned with great joy to Rab.

The Rebels in Asia being again in Arms, Mahomet finding himself not strong
enough to suppress them by Force, labored by his Ambassadors to reconcile them
offering such advantageous terms of peace as should to all men seem reasonable,
but they not caring to trust the Tyrant rejected his offers and would have no
peace, whereupon what the Infidels refused he thought fit to offer to the
Christians, but on this side he demands so unreasonable ( viz. that in
consideration of his delivering up Agria and Canisia he might have
Transylvania, Strigonium and Pesth) that the Emperor would not accord to any
peace upon such terms, so that the treaty broke off, upon which Hostilities
that for a while ceased began afresh, so that Collonitz with Six Thousand
Imperialists falling upon the Rear of the Turks Army, cut off seven Hundred
men, taking a great spoil and many Prisoners, amongst whom was Saxur Beg, a man
of great repute amongst the Turks, who upon Examination confessed the design
Hassan Bassa had to besiege Strigonium, and Pesth, and the number of Turks and
Tartars that were daily expected to join him, of which General Rusworm being
informed, as also of the state of the Turks Army, and also that upon some
discontent the Tartars were returned into their own Country, to the great
weakening of the Bassa's Forces, wherefore to prevent their putting a Convoy
into Buda, he caused several Forts to be built, and permitting the Turks to
pass ever the Danubius by a Bridge trained them into an Ambush laid in the
Flags and Osiers for that purpose, so that with little loss on the part of the
Christians, 10000 Turks were slain, drowned in the River, and taken Prisoners;
so that a great booty consisting of eighteen Ensigns, two Cornets, four Brass
pieces, much rich Armor, and many Wagons laden with Provision fell into the
hands of the Christians, whereby the Turks were so much discouraged that they
for a long while attempted nothing.

Affairs standing thus in Hungary, Asia was still in a flame, especially upon
the revolt of one of Mahomets great Bassa's, whom he had despightfully deposed
from being General, of which confusion the Persian King taking the advantage,
laid siege to Tauris a strong City, taken by Amurath from his Father, as is
beforementioned, the which by the Aid of several Christians, after a terrible
battery made against it he took, so that the Turk on every side beset, was
greatly perplexed in mind not knowing which way to turn himself, nor fared he
better by Sea for the Asian Rebels, under pretense of a reconciliation and
transporting themselves into Europe to serve him in Hungaria, seized upon many
of his Galleys sent to Transport them, as also the great Duke of Florence's
Admiral meeting with Amurat Raise an old Pirate and Mahomets Admiral overthrew
his squadron of Galleys, taking some and sinking others, so that few escaped:
and his great Army in Hungary after the loss of Thirty Thousand Men in diverse
conflicts with the Christian, atchieving nothing worth mention, except putting
a Convoy of Victuals into Buda, returned to Belgrade under the covert of
darkness, in manner of a fearful flight which was no sooner perceived by the
Lord Rusworm who had often in vain urged the Bassa to fight, but he sent his
Light Horsemen to pursue them who cutting off the Rearmost for many Miles,
returned with a considerable booty, after which he laid siege to Hatvan, and
had it (after several fierce assaults delivered into his possession, the
Garrison and Citizens, as it was agreed on marching out were conducted by
certain Troops of Hussars to Solvock, when having put a strong Garrison into
it, and relieved such other places as he thought convenient, and now the depth
of Winter coming on he broke up his Army, sending as a certain token of several
successful exploits sixty four of the Turks Ensigns, to the Arch Duke Matthias,
so that till the next Spring nothing of moment happened.

No sooner was the frozen Earth freed from the cold embraces of Winter, but new
stirs began in Transylvania as likewise in Moldavia, where the Tartars in great
number destroying the Country were overthrown, and almost all of them slain;
at what time Zellali the chief of the Asian Rebels whom Mahomet by great
rewards had allured to his interest, entered the Kingdom of Bosna with a great
power of his followers, where having trained Zeffer Bassa the Governor thereof
into his danger, he set upon him and slew most of his men, and seized upon the
Kingdom, upon notice of which Mahomet in a great rage sent his Letters to him,
commanding him forthwith to repair to Constantinople, but he not thinking it
convenient to trust the Tyrant with his head, he returned for answer that he
was already possessed of the Kingdom promised him for his service, and that he
as a Loyal Subject would keep it to his behoof, with which answer Mahomet was
forced to content himself, as fearing that if he should go about to expulse him
by force he would revolt to the Christian Emperor, and so prove a more
dangerous Enemy to him in Europe then he had done in Asia. Wherefore to prevent
the worst he resolved if he could obtain such conditions as might suit with his
greatness to have Peace with the Emperor, in order to which Commissioners met
at Buda, and many Presents were given and received on either side, the Turks
expressing great joy for the hopes they conceived, that at length they should
rest from the toils of War but after many proposals on either side, the demands
of the Turkish Sultan was so unreasonable that nothing was concluded, so that
after a short truce Hostilities began afresh, when as the Turks seeking to wast
Valachia were with great slaughter by the Vayvod overthrown, at what time the
Lord Nadasti the Valiant and Renowned Captain of the Christians died, to the
grief of all the Confederate Princes there not being a man left whose Council,
and Conduct in Martial affairs equalled his, but this grief was somewhat
alayed upon certain News that Mahomet the great Sultan was likewise departed
this Life, dying about the latter end of January, Anno 1604. When he had lived
44 years, and thereof Reigned 8, being altogether pusillanimous and given up to
pleasure, and lies buried in a Chapel of white Marble at Constantinople, near
to the Church of St. Sophia; in whose stead Achm^^ his Third Son was saluted by
reason of the death of his two Elder Brethren, one of which was strangled by
the Commandment of his unnatural Father and the other very young died a natural
death.

CHAP. XVIII. The Life of Achmat the Eighth Emperor of the Turks, and first of
that Name.
UPon the death of Mahomet the Third his Son Achmat then but fifteen years of
Age, was by the great Bassa's and men of War saluted Emperor, having purchased
the good will of the latter at two Millions and a half of Aspers; upon which
after he was solemnly Crowned, he sent Ambassadors to the King of Persia, as he
likewise did to the Emperor, but according to the proud humor of his
Predecessors his demands were so unreasonable, that they would not be accorded
to, neither in Europe nor Asia, whereupon the Turks ere the Treaty was ended
with the Emperor, under pretense of Friendship endeavored to surprise Pesth,
but by the vigilance of the Garrison Soldiers were put by their purpose, which
Treacherous dealing made manifest the Treaty was utterly broken off, whereupon
great preparations were made for War on either side, during which time the
Persian King was not idle, prosecuting his Wars had recovered almost all that
the Turks had taken from his Predecessors. Yet the Turks lessened his victory,
and the more to amuse the Christians spread a false report, that near unto
Babylon his Army was overthrown, and himself taken Prisoner, not forgeting to
magnify the Forces of their Emperor, who indeed for his years was very active
in the affairs of Government though cruel withal toward his own Subjects, and
farther they gave it out that at once he intended to invade with puissant
Armies, both Hungary and Persia; purposing to annex them to the Ottoman Empire:
but these great words (though in truth the Christians were more negligent in
their preparations then the occasion required) proved but Air.

But leaving the Turks awhile I shall survey the miseries of the once fertile
Country of Transylvania, which now through civil discord amongst themselves,
and Rebellion against the Emperor was so spoiled, that Famine coming fast on
them for want of the Earths due increase, it by long continuance reduced them
to that extremity that the Peasants and poorer sort of people, having eaten up
for dainties all the Dogs, Cats, Mice, Rats, and live Horses, fell to eating
such starved Beasts as through want they found to have perished in the Woods
and Fields, and at length when nothing was left they fed upon human flesh, men
eating men, and Women their Children; yea Thieves and Malefactors hauged for
their Villainies, were by the miserable people cut down and eaten, to remedy
which the Emperor caused to be assembled the States of the Province, wherein
it was accorded that all Hostilities set apart, the Gentlemen of Transylvania
having by their Rebellion forfeited their Lives and Lands should be pardoned as
to Life, with three fourth parts of their Lands reserved unto them, and that
for ready money they might of the Emperor redeem the fourth part, but
concerning the movables of such as were dead in the time of trouble, and
already confiscated to the Emperor, they should so remain, and that they
should pay their tenths of their Wines and Fruits to the Emperor, and that no
other then the Romish Religion should be exercised in that Province, and that
Clausenburg and Cronstad should within three weeks after pay the one Twenty
Thousand Dollars, and the other Eight Thousand, and that the Governors of
those Towns should put their Keys into the hands of the Emperors Leiutenant.
And lastly, That the Gentlemen who would not be accounted in the number of the
Rebels, should for the safety of their persons take Letters of Pardon from the
said Lieutenant. This pacification gave some little hopes to the distressed
Transylvanians, but I lasted not long, for the Nobility weary of the German
yoke soon revolted from the Emperors o^^^^ence, and again took up Arms, which
plunged them into their former miseries; wherein for a while I must leave them
and return again to the Turkish affairs.

The several Hostilities having banished all hopes of Peace, several skirmishes
passed between the Christians and Turks, in which the latter were for the most
part put to the worst, and had been more distressed had not the Imperial
Soldiers mutined, and for want of pay spoiled the Country of Austria even
within the sight of Vienna, the Suburbs of which City they had sacked, had not
the Governor come against them with a great power, and forced them to lay down
their Arms, causing the Ringleaders to be punished with death and
imprisonment. But whilst these things were doing Zellaly was driven out of
Bosna, by Zeffer Bassa sent in order thereto by the Sultan with a great power,
yet the better to calm his high Spirit, and to make the Asian Rebels have a
better opinion of the young Emperor, he was made Governor of Temeswar, and so
became a mortal Enemy to the Christians, his first undertaking being to
surprise Lippa, but therein found such bad success, that he hardly recovered
his own Garrison, leaving most of his men dead behind him, and soon after a
terrible fire happening in Canisia laid it almost wast, firing the Magazine of
Powder and blowing up the Citadel, Towers, Houses, and Wall, so that had any
forces of the Christians been near in that General consternation, they might
easily have surprised it, after which lost the Turks sustained another for Two
Hundred of the Garrison of Buda, going abroad to forage, were by the sallying
of the Garrison of Pesth all cut off.

During these stirs the restless Transylvanians having called to their
assistance diverse Turks and Tartars, had seized upon several strong places,
driving out the Imperial Garrisons to repress whose insolency Basta sent the
Haducks, under the leading of Horwal their Captain, who lying in ambush for
them who were but few in number, and easily overthrown, as being by Famine
bereaved of their strength, they were most of them put to the Sword; after
which the Haducks robbed the poor Villagers at their pleasure, killing such as
refused to contribute to their greedy desires. So that all was again reduced to
the same extremity as before, and when the said Captain was by the Leiutenant
Commanded to restrain his men from committing any more such outrages, he
answered, that it was impossible to keep Soldiers in order amidst extremity of
Famine, for that the belly was an inexorable usurer, which took pity upon
nothing but with great rigor exacted that which it thought due for the
nourishment of it self.

The Forces of the Christians increasing in Hungary, the Bassa of Buda to
retard their proceeding made many fair shows of the great desires his Lord the
Emperor had of peace, and the better to make it be believed, he wrote a
dissembling letter signifying as much to the Governor of Strigonium, but his
fair Glozing was not of force to lull the Christians into a security; which
hypocrisy of the Bassa's soon after appeared by his surprising Simnin, a
Castle held by the Christians, upon the banks of the Danubius, and setting it
on fire.

The Persian King having joined hands with Caracas the chief Leader of the
Rebels, a man of great power, in a set Battle overthrew Cicala Bassa, with the
loss of almost all his Turks, taking the Bassas son prisoner, by secret
Messengers invited the bordering Nations to revolt from the Turkish obedience,
to prevent which, the same Bassa was with another huge Army sent into those
parts, where in a short space, he received two several overthrows, in which,
besides what he lost in the first battle, seventy thousand Turks perished; so
that now the Terror the Persian breathed even upon Constantinople it self,
having overrun the greatest part of the Turks Dominions in Asia, at what time
Achmat fell sick of the small Pox at Constantinople, and hardly recovered, when
during the time of his sickness it was agreed amongst the Bassas that his
brother Mustapha the only surviver of the Ottoman family if he had dyed, should
have been taken out of the Seraglio, where he remained no better then a
prisoner, and have been proclaimed Emperor, nor would the Soldiers believe but
that he was dead, till such time as he recovering his strength, rode for their
better satisfaction through most of the Principal streets of the Imperial City
of Constantinople.

The Persian still prevailing, and it being rumoured, that he advanced apace at
the head of one hundred thousand fighting men, to whom Bagages the discontented
Bassa had joined himself, Achmat sent Hassan Bassa his General to maintain the
wars in Hungary, and Cicala Bassa (notwithstanding he had been thrice
overthrown) against the Persian and Asian Rebels; but amidst his great
preparation the Tartarian Cham sent him word that he could not come to his
assistance in person, but that he would send his son with a great power into
Hungary, (now the reason that this great Monarch is so ready at all times to
serve the Turk, is for that they often interchange in Marriages, and that if
the Ottoman family fail, the Empire descends to the Tartar Cham, and lastly,
which indeed is the greatest motive, by reason of the large Pension that Prince
living in a needy Country receives yearly from the Turkish Emperor.)

To oppose the Turks and Tartars, Rodolphus the Emperor sent Maximilian his
nephew in the quality of an Ambassador to the Pope and Princes of Italy, to
crave aid, who upon his arrival at Rome, was honorably received, and after
having finished his negotiation, sent back with many presents and a full
assurance of a speedy supply, the Pope for his part having promised out of his
Treasury 150000 Crowns, to be paid toward the defraying the charges of the
war, in which he was not less then his word; but by this time the Tartars being
upontheir march toward Hungary, (where Hassan Bassa was with a great power of
Turks arrived) and denied passage through Polonia, brake violently into
Valachia, miserably spoiling and destroying the Country, to abate whose fury
the Valachians aided by Bastas Forces still following them in the rear, cut off
a great number of them, yet at length they passed into Hungary, and there
joined the Bassas Forces, whereupon (after several skirmishes, and the taking
of some (not important) places on both sides) he set down with all his power
before Strigonium, to prevent whose intrenching, the Christians Sallyed out,
killing many of them, and driving the rest from their works, upon news of which
siege, Basta taking a new oath of the Transylvanians, came with all his Forces
to endeavor its Relief, who upon his arrival confronted the enemy, and raising
a huge Fort of Earth, not far from their Camp, from thence with several Pieces
of Cannon greatly annoyed them, so that what with continual sallyes of the
besieged, and the skirmishes Bastas Soldiers had with them after a tedious
siege, and the loss of twenty thousand men, the haughty Bassa raised his Camp,
and departed toward Buda, Basta still following them, and cutting off a great
number of such as marched in the rear, and took several prisoners of note, yet
such was the fera, that the Turks brought upon Hatvan, during their besieging
Strigonium that the Garrison abandoned it, carrying with them all their
movables, and several Pieces of Cannon, though the Turks had attempted nothing
against it.

During these troubles in Hungary, Bethlem Habor, chief of the Rebels in
Transylvania assisted by Beckberes Bassa, with four thousand Turks, entered the
Province, to have taken possession thereof, in the absence of Basta, but being
incountered by Count Tambire, when he suspected no such matter, he was
overthrown, and a thousand of his men slain, himself and the Bassa hardly
escaping, and three days after the said Count, lighting on several Troops of
Turks sent to the assistance of the Rebels, by the Bassa of Temeswar, put most
of them to the sword, yet the Rebellion ceased not so, for one Botscay a
discontented German, having drawn a great number of desperate fellows to take
part with him, and countenanced by the Grand Signiour, took the field in the
upper Hungary, against whom Belgiosia a valiant Captain advanced with such
Forces as he in haste could muster up, but such was his ill hap, that joining
battle he was overthrown by the Rebels, and most of his Soldiers slain, after
which defeat of the imperialists the City of Cassonia was surrendered to the
Rebels, upon notice of which Basta having gathered a considerable Army marched
against Botscay, to put a stop to his proceedings ever he possessed himself of
any more of the Hungarian Cities, yet the people Generally favoring their
causE which wore a mask of Religion and Liberty, the number daily increased,
and notwithstanding the diligence of Basta, many strong holds were put into
their hands, yet after a tedious march, the renowned Lieutenant, put to flight
the forerunners of their Army, and after many difficulties, and the loss of
several of his Soldiers, came to a pitched field, of which after a cruel and
bloody fight he won, putting Botscay and his Rebel followers to flight, with
great slaughter, and by that means recovered many Cities and Castles that had
cast off the Emperors obedience, and taken part with the Rebels.

The Turks in Persia fared little otherwise then those in Hungary, for Cicala
Bassa, with all his Forces were overthrown by the Persian King, and the City of
Babylon, now called Bagdat taken, of which he sent to advertize the German
Emperor, entreating him to join hands with him for abating the Turks pride,
which he was resolutely determined to do, resolving not to give over the war
till he had stripped him out of all his Cities in Asia, and therefore desired
the Emperor to send an Ambassador to confer with him about a lasting peace,
which was accordingly done; nor were they all the trouble the Turkish Empire
sustained, for by reason of some differences between the Bassas of Damasco and
Aleppo, they wage mortal battle one with the other, wherein the latter was
overthrown, and flying to his City, there besieged, till compelled thereto by
famine, he yielded to what the Bassa of Damasco demanded; about what time
Sultan Achmats first son was born, for which there was great rejoicing at
Constantinople.

Anno 1605. The troubles in Hungary and Transylvania more and more increased,
the former being occasioned by the Bishops (in their late assembly) passing a
decree that all of the reformed Religion should be burnt, or banished, against
which wicked Decree, though the Nobility of the Kingdom openly protested
against, yet were their Churches seized, and Public and Private worship
forbidden, as also the reading of the Bible; to redress which grievances, Basta
promised redress, but Botscay having made them a stirrup to help him into the
saddle would hearken to no peace, unless Transylvania might be delivered to
him, and that the Lieutenant of Hungary might be a Hungarian born, and that all
offices might be bestowed upon Hungarians, and the Soldiers of other Nations
withdraw except such as were in Garrison, and those not to pass their appointed
limits; and lastly, that Hungarian Soldiers should receive the Emperors pay,
and that when ever an Assembly of the Estates was held at Presburg, the Emperor
himself should be there in person. These proposals were sent to Basta by two
Hungarians, but without success, whereupon all manner of Hostilities were used,
and more spoil made in a short time, then the Turks had done in many years.

These intestine troubles gave the Turks opportunity to possess themselves of
the Cities of Vacia and Vicegrade, and committed great outrages in many places,
and what was more to the disadvantage of the Emperor, the Haducks his chief
strength favoring the Rebels, revolted from him, which Basta perceiving, and
finding his Forces daily to decrease, procured of the Emperor a General pardon
for all offenses past, as well Temporal as Ecclesiastical, promising upon their
submission to restore them to their Liberties, privileges, and Religious
worship as formerly exercised, and that no man should be molested, by virtue of
any Decree made by the Bishops, etc. this pardon was proclaimed with the beat
of Drum and sound of Trumpet in several places upon which some of the Nobility,
whose Estates lay in danger to be spoiled by the Soldiers, came in and
submitted themselves, yet the Rebels Army was no whit lessened, but rather
increased, insomuch that the Haducks drawing themselves apart besieged Sacinar,
in which was an Imperial Garrison, and after diverse assaults took it, and
marching from thence endeavored to have surprised the strong Castle of Tocay,
but their design was frustrated by the stout resistance of those in Garrison;
but that which had like to have proved worst of all to Basta was the mutiny of
his own Soldiers, which he hardly appeased with a great sum of money.

The Haducks still roaming about as men greedy of prey, lay siege to Fileck,
which after some loss they took, and placed a strong Garrison therein; upon
which Ambassadors were sent to Boscay the head of the Rebels, to treat with him
in the Emperors name, about a peace, but without receiving any satisfaction,
they were forced to return, the Rebel declaring that if they came from the
Estates of Hungary he would give them Audience, but if from the Emperor the
Articles of peace he had proposed, he expected to be confirmed without delay,
if the Emperor expected any, and after the departure of the Ambassadors; he
sent forth his Letters mandatory to Assemble the Nobility at Serentium, on the
seventeenth of April to settle the affairs of the Kingdom, many of which
accordingly met, but concluded on nothing material, the Rebel and such as were
of his faction still overruling them in all their consultations, as well
knowing the Emperors Forces for the most part had their hearts with him, which
caused them frequently to mutiny and reproach their Commanders, under pretense
of wanting their pay. The Haducks now increased in number possessed themselves
of Newhawsel, Cibinium, Dort. feld and Schemnitze.

Thus whilst all Hungary, Austria, and Stira were as it were in a flame. The
Turks again besieged several Castles which at that time were governed by
valiant Captains, so that they prevailed not greatly yet the General confusion
made the Emperor desirous of Peace, in order to which he sent Sigismund Forgot
with full instructions to Kyrpa where the Estates of Hungary were to assemble,
thither likewise came several Commissioners from Botscay and the Turkish
Bassa's of Buda, Pesth, etc. when as in the mean time other Imperial Ministers
were sent to Comara, to Treat only with the Turks, they having so required but
the demands of the Turks and Rebels were so unreasonable, that many believed
they only set that treaty on foot to protract the preparations of the
Imperialists, so that all hopes of an amicable conclusion vanishing, fierce War
began to rage more terrible then before, all the Countries round being covered
with the smoke of flaming Villages by day, and illuminated with shining ^ires
by night, nor did the Rebels spare to sell the poor Christians like beasts to
the merciless Turk, by them to be carried into perpetual slavery, nor desisted
from comitting such cruelties as even amazed the Infidels to see themselves out
done. To prevent which outrages the Imperialists drawing together in a body,
set upon a strong power of the Turks and Rebels, who thought to have surprised
them in their Camp, and after a sharp dispute drove them with great slaughter
to the Walls of Canusia, and afterward put strong Garrisons into most of the
important towns and Castles, which bad success made the Rebels again bethink
themselves of a timely peace so that Botscay their Ringleader having received
Letters of safe conduct from Matthias the Archduke, came with his Wife and
Children to Vienna, and there by frequent by conferring with the Imperial
Commissioners, matters were so ordered that peace was concluded between the
Emperor and his Rebel Subjects of Hungary according to the Tenor of these
Articles.

Articles of Peace agreed upon Anno 1606. between the Emperor and his
discontented Subjects of Hungary.

1. That from thenceforth it should be lawful for every man throughout the
Kingdom of Hungary, to have the free use of his Religion and believe what he
would.

2. That if the Hungarians so thought good, they might choose a Palatine for
their Governor, and that in the mean time the Archduke Matthias should no more
use the Title of Governor but Viceroy.

3. That the Crown of Hungary should still be left in the Emperors keeping.

4. That the Bishops that were nobly descended in Hungary and had Lands of
their own, should be forthwith admitted into the Council but the other Bishops
not to be so received.

5. That Botscay for himself and his heirs male should ever hold Transylvania.

6. That the same Country of Transylvania should be still subject to the
Kingdom of Hungary.

7 That for his Arms he should bear three Royal Crowns, and three open Helmets.

8. That he should not more style himself Prince but Lord of part of Hungary.

9. That they should pay the Heyducks their wages who had leavyed them.

10. That the harms done on both sides should for ever be forgotten.

11. That Bohemia, Moravia, Lansnisium and A^stria should not only with their
Letters and Seals confirm the Articles, but also swear at Vienna to keep the
same, so far as they conerned them.

12. That the Hungarians likewise should send some to Vienna, who in their
behalfs should with their Letters, Seals and Oaths, Confirm and Ratify these
Articles.

13. That the assembly of the States of Hungary should be referred unto a more
convenient time for their meeting.

14. That these things being done this Agreement should be publicly confirmed
and enrolled in the Records of the Kingdom of Hungary.

15. That it should be lawful for the Hungarians by their Ambassadors, to
invite the Princes of the Empire to the Approving and Confirming of these
Articles.

Peace thus concluded with the Hungarians, the Treaty of Peace between the
Turkish Sultan and the Emperor went on, and with such good success that a
Peace was soon after concluded to the joy of all the Emperors Subjects, who
weary with the continual toils and miseries of War, were now desirous of
nothing more then to repose themselves in the downy arms of Peace. After which
Botscay called an assembly of the Estates of Hungary recommending to them the
care of preserving inviolable the Articles, and the speedy Election of a
Palatine, and that above all things they would maintain and encourage the
Reformed Religion, and in the next Assembly labor to have the Articles for
burning Heretics repealed, and as much as in them lay to restore the lost
Trade of the spoiled Provinces.

These things done Botscay fell sick, which sickness increasing he greatly
bewailed his late Rebellion, and the blood therein shed, wishing nothing more
then that before he died, he could beg pardon for the same of the whole Roman
Empire, yet had not his wish, but of that sickness died at Cossovia, on the
30th. of December, 1606. persuading in the time of his sickness such as had
been his followers to adhere to the Emperors interest, yet his Counsel was not
so well observed, but that after his death (notwithstanding Matthias the
Archduke had caused himself to be Crowned King of Hungary, including the
Principality of Transivania) there wanted not some who aspired to the Title of
Prince, which caused new discontents, but with relinquishing of that Title they
vanished.

Achmat having made Peace with the Emperor, resolved to turn his arms against
the Persian King and Asian Rebels, against whom Anno 16^7. early in the Spring
he sent the Vizar Bassa, who by Policy more then strength appeased the latter,
when upon notice that the Bassa of Aleppo had overthrown the Bassa's of
Tripolis and Daucasco, and that at the request of the Sultan he refused to lay
down his arms, he marched against him with One Hundred Thirty Thousand men,
which puissant Army the Bassa of Aleppo incountered with Forty Thousand, and
in three Battles remained victor; but upon notice that the Bassa's of Damasco
and Tripolis, were coming to the Aid of the Vizar Bassa with great Forces, and
he by reason of the loss he had sustained not able to withstand their united
power fled, with most of his Friends to the Mountains. Yet at the intercession
of the Vizar Bassa but more for fear he should revolt t the Persian, he was
afterward pardoned and received into favor: upon which the King of Persia
wrote to the King of Spain, entreating him to join Forces with him against the
common Enemy, but more especially to send his Ships of War into the Gulf, and
the rather to induce him so to do he sent him several rich presents.

Whilst these things passed the Turkish Garrisons, who for the most part lived
by spoils, impatient of Peace with the Christians committed some outrages, and
secretly encouraged the Heyducks to commit more, of which Achmat having notice
sent strictly to charge the Bassa of Buda, not (upon pain of his head) to
infringe the Capitulation, whereupon Six Hundred Heyducks being abroad, and not
assisted by the Turks as they expected, were intercepted by Humanoius an
Imperial Captain and almost all of them slain; yet soon after the kind of
proling men assembling to the number of Fifteen Thousand laid siege to Tilesk,
having for their encouragement received Three Hundred Thousand Duccates, by the
order of the Turkish Sultan, and great Ordnance (the better to enable them to
take the Town, which they were to deliver to the Turks) from Agria, upon notice
whereof the Hungarian Estates Assembled at Presburg, but by reason of the
absence of the Archduke, who by the Emperors appointment was to have sat as
President, there was nothing worthy of mention transacted, whereupon an
Imperial Diet was assembled at Ratisbon, where after debating many matters the
Deputies of the several Princes fell at variance amongst themselves, which
still increasing notwithstanding the endeavors used to prevent it, the
Archduke then President dismissed the assembly.

These great Councils proving fruitless, Troubles and Discontent in the
unsettled Provinces of Hungary, Austria, etc. arose, to alay which the
Archduke came to Presburg and assembled the Estates, who out of themselves
choose Commissioners to appease the Tumults on foot, to hear and determine all
Grievances, who so well performed their trusts that Peace for a while insued.

Affairs Anno 1608. standing thus in Hungary, etc. about the beginning of
Spring Jerome Prince of Valachia died leaving behind him a Son about 13 years
of Age whom the Emperor admitted (as yet not being capable to manage the
affairs of Government under Tutors) unto the Succession of the Principality,
which thing the Valachians not being willing to endure, and bearing themselves
upon the Turks, went about to Elect another Prince, for which cause the
Princess, Widow to the deceased Vayvod, by Letters certified Polloscie her
Son-in-Law of the intended outrage of her Subjects, and having received of him
a great sum of money, Leavied Ten Thousand good Soldiers to secure her Sons
right, who in a great Battle overthrew such forces of Valachians, Turks and
Tartars as the Nobility had raised to oppose the Succession of the young
Prince, and by that means preserved the Principality to the behoof of her Son,
but what had like to have proved fatal to Christendom, was the difference
arising between the Emperor and the Archduke Matthias upon the ^atters laying
absolute claim to the Crown of Hungary, without acknowledging to hold it of the
Empire, but when both parties had armed and matters had like to have come to
extremity, several Princes labored so far therein that a Pacification was
made, and the Archduke having received the Insigns of Royalty, from the
Emperors Ambassadors upon acknowledging him his Sovereign, broke up his Camp
and returned to Vienna, where he was joyful received. Yet the Protestant
Estates of Austria, refused to swear Allegiance to him, till he had confirmed
the Article of free exercise in matters of Religion, which he for a
considerable time refusing to do, great Troubles had thereupon like to have
arisen; for the Protestant Estates not regarding his Regal Authority further
then stood with the Articles of Pacification, for non performance thereof
betook themselves to Arms, but the Estates of Bohemia and Moravia interposing,
all was for a while quiet, the King promising that although for fear of
displeasing the Pope and King of Spain, he could not tolerate the Reformed
Religion, yet he would wink at the free exercise throughout his Dominions, and
that as to the disposal of Offices and places of Trust, he them according to
the merits of his Subejcts: Upon which the Estates proceeded to the Election of
a Palatine, which honorable Dignity they bestowed on Illishascius, a Noble man
of Hungary, who faithfully discharged his trust for the space of one year and
then died to the great grief of the Hungarians, of whom for his great Wisdom
and Uprightness he was generally beloved, in whose stead the Nobility elected
George Turson, who got a good esteem amongst them, by his pacifying the
Troubles that immediately upon the death of Illishascius arose in Bohemia about
Religion.

Anno 1608 on the 19 of October, the Turkish Ambassador came to the Emperors
Palace at Prague, having by the way visited the new King of Hungary, where
being received with the respect due to his Character, he delivered the present
sent by his Master the Grand Signeor, which were principally a Rich Tent of
diverse Colors most curiously wrought with Pearls of great value, four
courageous horses trapped with Gold and precious Stones, certain Turkish
weapons set and garnished with precious Stones, a Princely Turkish Robe, such
as they use at their Marriages, Glistering with Gold and precious stones, with
diverse other rarities of lesser value, together with which he delivered Achmats
Letters, and withal desired the confirmation of the Peace before made for
twenty years, to be again renewed; after which he was honorably treated and
dismissed with the Emperors Letters to the Sultan, and many rare presents, no
whit inferior to those he brought, and with a train of two hundred horse
conducted him to the Turkish Frontiers.

In the year 1609, nothing worthy of mention happened, but the year following,
the King of Persia having overthrown the Turks Forces, sent to stay the current
of his Victories, entered into the Province of Babylon, with an intent to annexed
it to his other Conquests, which so alarmed Achmet, that Leavying a great power
he sent them under the Leading of Nassut Bassa, to secure his Territories on
that side, but such was the evil fortune of the Bassa, that joining battle, he
was overthrown, and twenty thousand of his men slain; after which good success
the Persian King sent other Ambassadors to the Roman Emperor, with many rich
presents to incite him to break his League with the Turks, but notwithstanding
the many pregnant arguments used by the Amassador, the Emperor could not be
induced to break his faith, but dismissed him with a return of presents, and
many thanks to his master, for the respect he had toward him, and his care for
the Christian Commonwealth.

About the same time the Knights of Malta putting several Galleys to sea,
fought the Turks Galleys with various success, sometimes one prevailing, and
sometimes the other; nor did the Duke of Tuscany less annoy them with a
squadron of Galleys, under the command of Admiral Jughiraim, who running along,
the coast of Barbary took many Turkish Gallyes, and landing his men in diverse
places, spoiled the Country and took great booties; nor fared the Morisques or
new Christians in Spain this year to their contents, for the Spanish King upon
a Capricio Banished them out of his Dominions to the number of 900 thousand
persons, most Moors and Jews, who for profits sake had suffered themselves to
be baptized, but now upon the Publication of the Kings Edict, they were forced
to wander like vagabonds over the face of the earth to seek new places to
reside in; at what time there happened a contest between Muley Xequy King of
Fess, and Muley Sidan his younger brother, which increased to that height that
mortal wars arose, when after many fields fought, the latter prevailed, and
possessed himself of the Kingdom, which caused the former to fly into Spain,
there to crave aid of King Phillip, who in consideration of the Barbarians
promise to deliver Alarache a strong Town seated on the mouth of the River
Lucus, in the Kingdom of Fess, into his possession, furnished him with 100
thousand Duccates, therewith to leavy Soldiers in his own Country, and sent
with him likewise his ships of war, under the conduct of the Marquess of St.
Germans, manned with ten thousand Spaniards, who coming before the Town,
landed the King, who was received by several of his friends into a strong
Castle that guards the mouth of the River, which he put into the hands of the
Spaniard, but it was no sooner known that he had so done, but the Mores from
all parts run to their Arms, so that ever they could possess themselves of the
Town, an obstinate fight was maintained for the space of three hours, in which
space five hundred Spaniards and three thousand Moors were slain, but in the
end the former prevailed, and possessed themselves of that strong place, which
had by them been so often desired, the news of which caused great rejoicing in
Spain. This year was fought a great battle between the Son of the late deceased
Cham of Tartary, and his uncle, upon the latters usurping the Imperial dignity,
during the formers remaining a hostage at Constantinople, in which 40000 men
were slain, and the Victory rested upon the rightful Heir.

Anno 1611, such a Contagion happened in Constantinople that it ingendring a
Pestilence, which raged so vehemently that thirty thousand died in one month,
and amongst the rest, one of Achmats sons, nor did the Barron of Salignac the
French Kings Ambassador escape, to succeed whom as soon as the Mortality
ceased, the Barron of Mole was sent, who upon his arrival, after having visited
the Mufti or chief Mohammedan Priest, and the great Bassa's of the Court,
himself and his retinue were attired in Turkish habit (no Ambassadors being
permitted in the proper habit of their own Country to approach the Sultan) was
conducted to have his Audience of the Grand Seigneour, through a litte Court
paved with Marble; after which, he entered the Royal Chamber, which was enriched
on one side with many Pillars of Marble, and square stones of the same,
beautified with two Fountains, on either side the planchers were gilt with
Gold, and the Walls Inameled with flowers, and the flour covered with cloth of
Gold and silver, at the entery of which stood six Capigi or Royal Porters, two
of which took the Ambassador by either arm to lead him to the Grand Seigneor (a
Ceremony pretended for honors sake, but indeed to prevent any violence, that
upon such near access may be offered, and has been in use ever since Amurath
the first was stabbed in the fields of Coss^via) and the rest carried the
presents; so that the Ambassador having kissed the hem of the imperious Turks
Garment, was carried out another way backward, because it should not be said
that the Minister of any Foreign Prince turned his back upon the Emperor, in
like manner his attendants fared, being obliged to withdraw till the Infidel
was more at leisure, for as then he stood peeping out at a window to view some
disports that were made below for his diversion and a while after being
admitted, he delivered his letters written in the Turkish Language, and in a
pithy Oration, delivered what else he had in charge.

Notwithstanding the Peace between the Imperialists and the Turks, the latter
ceased not covertly to stir up dissensions, by which means they procured the
revolt of Gabriel Battori Vayvod of Transylvania, who raising a great power,
chased Raduille Prince of Valachia out of his Principality, who thereupon fled
to Constantine Vayvod of Moldavia, when reinforced by the Moldavian, he
returned again, and in a great battle overthrew Gabriel, forcing him to fly
with his scatered Troops to Hermstad, where he committed many Cruelties under
pretense that the Citizens went about to deliver him into the hands of his
mortal enemies. The division stirred up Fortga^sie the King of Hungary to pass
into Transylvania, to reduce the revolted Cities to the Kings obedience, but
being waylaid, he was forced to travel through desert places, where through
famine and diseases that raged in his Camp, most of his men dyed; so that
fearing to fall into the hands of those he intended to oppress, he fled into
Polonia with a slender Train, yet ended not the trouble, for by this time the
Turks had stirred up discontents in Moldavia, by sending thither a Competitor
to wrestle with Constantine for his Principality, but finding himself too weak,
and not assisted as he expected, fled to Constantinople, there to crave aid of
Achmet, but finding many delays he traveled to the Courts of many Christian
Princes, and amongst others came into England, and made his application to King
James, who moved with his heavy complaints, and specious pretenses of just
claim to the Principality of Moldavia, that his Majesty was pleased bountifully
to relieve him, and by his Letters to recommend him to the care of Sir Thomas
Glover, his Ambassador then residing at Constantinople, who recommended him to
the Grand Signeur, but such were the counterplots of Constantine, that by
bribing the great Bassa's he not only prevented him in his purpose but greatly
endangered his being made away, which had certainly happened had not Sir Thomas
sheltered him under his protection, and by fortifying his house, daunted the
bloodthirsty Janissaries, whom the Grand Vizier had employed to take him thence
by Force, but Sir Thomas being soon after recalled; The Moldavian despairing to
obtain the Principality he so much desired, in a rage renounced the Lord that
bought him, and embraced the Turkish superstition, whereupon he was made Bey of
Bursia in Asia, but enjoyed not that dignity long ever Nassuf Bassa returning
from the Persian war, dispossessed him.

This year the Gallyes of Florence, Malta and Naples, greatly endamaged the
Turkish Dominions on the Seacoasts, taking likewise several rich prizes, and
amongst the rest the Carravan Gally coming from Egypt, to Constantinople, with
the Tribute of that rich Kingdom, sinking at the same time five others, and
descending upon the Isle of Lango, and took the Town from which the Island
takes its name, putting a number of Turks to the sword, and taking a great
spoil, and soon after entered the Bay of Corinth so secretly, that Landing they
surprised the City, sacked it and carried away, besides a rich booty five
hundred slaves.

These things made the Turkish Sultan wish for peace with the Persian, that he
might be at leisure to turn his Arms upon the Christians, especially upon the
Knights of Malta, who greatly obstructed his Navigation, and that which
furthered his purpose was the arrival of the Persian Ambassador at
Constantinople, whereupon to welcome him he concluded a Marriage between Mehemet
Bassa, son to Cicula, late deceased, and his Sister, and another between
Mechmet Bassa his great Admiral, and his Eldest daughter, which were
cellebrated with all imaginable splendour, but soon after the Pestilence began
again to rage in that great City, whereupon Achmat withdrew himself to his
rural Palace at Durat Bassa, where whilst he was viewing the Mosque that he had
caused to be built, a Dariveler or Turkish Monk, cast at him a stone with such
force that it overthrew him; whereupon the Traitor was seized, and ordered by
Torture to be constrained to confess what moved him to that outrage; but the
officers of the Port with out further examination the next day executed him,
which made some conjecture, that either they or some great men whom they
favored, set him on work.

During these Passages Moldavia groaned under Clandestine Tumults, the Turks
still endeavoring to depose Constantine, and he with all his power on the
contrary, laboring to support his dignity, so that the Villages in all places
went to Rack, the Country for the most part being laid wast; to calm which
differences the Polonian Ambassador came to the Court of Constantinople,
expecting a sudden Audience, but was contrary to his expectation, after six
weeks attendance clapped up in prison, with notice that he could not be delivered
till such time as the two Capigis which Constantine carried Captive into
Polonia, nor was Transylvania free from fraction and civil dissension
occasioned by one Giezy set up by the Bassa of Buda, to oppose the Palatine of
Hungary, to whom that Province, according to the late Articles of peace does
appertain, but the upstart finding his Forces too weak too grasp the Government
soon after relinquished his claim.

Achmat the more to amuse the Persian Ambassador, and oblige him to wonder at
his greatness, resolved to show himself in all his pomp, and thereupon making
as if he went to Darut Bassa to take the air, after a days stay, returned in
this manner. Before him a great number of men at Arms marched on horseback,
and after them some Troops of Foot; The Cadies of Constantinople, or his chief
Justicers; Then all the Talismans, or those of Mahomets Law in great number;
then the Vizar Bassas in great splendour; after whom followed ten of the Sultans
household, leading ten goodly horses in rich Caparisons, the last of which had a
Bridle and Saddle pondered with precious stones, and unto the saddle was
fastened the Sultans Target, and upon it were fastened Tassels of Pearls,
hanging almost with the ground, and over these a horse-cloth richly imbroidered
with Pearl, after which followed the rest of the Sultans household in diverse
Troops, first fifty Janissaries on foot, every one of them leading dogs in
Leshes, for the most part Irish-greyhounds, presented to him a little before by
the French Ambassador, next to whom in order succeeded the Sultans Footmen
called Pelks, who were Persians born, all well attired, wearing on their heads
bonets of Silver, after the Indian fashion, Then sixty Archers, in the midst of
whom came Sultan Achmat attired in a rich robe of Cloth of Gold, imbroidered
with Pearls and Diamonds, and his slave clad in the same manner, his Turbant
was covered with a Plume of black Feathers, enriched with great Diamonds, and a
chain of the same stones, about the lower part of it upon his fingers he had
Diamonds of such largeness, as they cast admirable light; his horse had
Caparisons imbroidered with Diamonds, Pearls, and other precious stones, the
Ground being Gold, and the stirrups of beaten Gold set with Diamonds, and from
his Horses neck hung great Tassels of Pearl, of a more than ordinary size;
after him there followed three men on Horseback, the one carrying his Cloak,
the other his arms, and the third his Imperial Turbant, and these were attended
on by certain Esquires on horseback. Then came the Music after the Turkish
manner, consisting of sixty men on Horseback, which played upon Fiets, Chardons
and Trumpets; next followed one hundred of the Sultans Pages bravely mounted,
followed by as many Eunuchs, fifty of which carried each of them a Falcon upon
his fist, having their heads enriched with Diamonds; after them came thirty
Guards of the Port, and fifty Falconers and Huntsmen, richly attired, each of
them carrying upon his saddle bow a Leopard covered all but the head with a
Cloth of Gold attended on by an other train of Pages, very beautiful, chosen
from amongst the Tribute infants, having their Garments beset with precious
stones, the ground being Cloth of Gold curled, and after these followed a
Troop of youths in plain attire, who were appointed to serve the pages; The
rear of which procession was closed with all the great Officers of the Turkish
Empire, that were then resident at Constantinople, and to make the Magnificence
more complete, as the Archers passed by the Sultans lodging 100 pieces of Silk,
were cast amongst them.

Four days after this pompous show Achmat gave Audience to the Persian
Ambassador, who presented him on the behalf of the King his Master, with 100
Bales of Silk, a Beazor stone, as big as a man's fist, 9 bags of Turquoises of a
foot and half long, and above a finger broad, several rich pieces of Tapistry,
interwoven with Silk and Gold, with some other things of great price, amongst
which he delivered his masters Letters; whereupon they began to treat of peace,
which soon after was accorded principally upon these Articles: First, That the
Persian King should pay unto the Turkish Sultan yearly by way of Tribute two
hundred Camells Loads of Silk, That the King of Persia's Son should be called
Bassa of Iauris, and that the Cadi or Sovereign Judge of that City should be
sent from Constantinople.

The Peace thus concluded to the advantage of the Turks and dishonor of the
Persians, the Ambassador with many rich presents, was dismissed, leaving
almost all his Retinue behind him dead of the plague; nor did he long survive
them, for upon his arrival at Tauris, his master understanding upon what
dishonorable Terms he had concluded the peace, caused his head to be cut off,
and sent back the Chiaus that was come with his Ambassador to see him swear the
peace, so that not long after all vanished into nothing.

During these Transactions, Rodolphus the Emperor died, to succeed whom the
Electoral Princes made choice of his brother Matthias King of Hungary, who upon
his taking upon him the Imperial sway, sent his Ambassadors to Constantinople
to entreat a confirmation of the peace made between his brother deceased, and
the Sultan, and to complain of the daily outrages committed in his Province of
Transylvania, but the Turk who keep no League any longer then it turns to their
advantage, not only refused to redress the grievances in Tansylvania, but
denied the Emperor to have any right to that Province, although in the League
it was expressly mentioned, that Botscay dying with out Heirs male, the
Principality should totally remain a member of the Roman Empire, but after all
was said that could be said, the Ambassador was dismissed without the
satisfaction he expected.

About the end of September, Anno 1612, great troubles arose in the Kingdoms of
Fess and Morocco occasioned by a quarrel between the Prince Xerif-Muley-Cidan
and Xerif-Muley-Achet-Ben-Abdula his nephew, when after many, battles fought
between them, the latter was overthrown, and in his flight slain, having drawn
the people into Rebellion against his uncle under the pretense of a Prophecy
that foretold his rise, and the flourishing State of Barbary under his
Government, which Prophecy himself not long before invented, yet many imagined
that he dealt by enchantment, and often would he boast that no Bullet could
hurt him, and indeed many were the Victories he gained over Cidan, even with a
handful of men in comparison to the great Armies which Cidan lead against him,
his Allegation was that he was sent from Heaven to purge the world of wicked
men.

About this time the Estates of the United Provinces under Prince Maurice, sent
Cornelius Hage their Ambassador to Constantinople with Commission to treat of
the deliverance of the captive Hollanders, that had bin taken by the Turkish
Galleys, and to require free Traffic in all the Ports of the Ottoman Empire in
consideration of which to propose perpetual Amity with the Sultan, in all which
he succeeded so well, that the Spanish King was not a little grieved thereat,
though himself was afterward obliged to enter into League with the Turk.

Transylvania altogether disquieted, and weakened by civil discord, the Sultan
thought it a fit time to reduce that Province to his obedience, and therefore
raised a mighty Army and marched directly thither but whilst he was on his way
Fortifying all the important places in his passage, Cosmo d' Medicis the great
Duke of Tuscany, setting out a Fleet of Galleys spoiled the Sea Coasts in the
Mediterranean, and took many places from the Turks and amongst the rest the
strong City of Agliman, with 2 Galleys that lay in the Port putting a number of
Turks to the Sword by whose example an. 1613. the Galleys of Sicily set out and
destroyed the Turks Galleys in the Levant, making terrible spoil on the
Seacoast landing several times on the Islands of Chios, Samos and Cyprus,
taking rich spoils and freeing many Christian Captives, to oppose whom Ten
Turkish Galleys came but after a terrible engagement, seven of them fell into
the Christians hands, and one was sunk, the other two hardly escaping under the
shelter of the night.

Achmats Army arriving in Transylvania committed many outrages, but upon notice
that Bethlem Gabor was acknowledged Prince under the protection of the Sultan,
and had sent his submission to him, the Tempest fo War grew calm, and the
Turkish power dreadful to the German Empire returned to Constantinople, at what
time S^gismund Battor the Warlike Prince of Transylvania, who had deposed
himself and was retired to Prague, there to lead a private Life died; but the
Turks upon their arrival at Constantinople found the City almost desolate by
reason the Plague raged there so, that Achmat and all his followers retired
themselves to Darut Bassa, till the Contagion ceased, and then in great pomp
entered the City, publishing an Edict that all the Dogs therein should be
transported to Scutary in Asia, formerly called Chirsopolis, but the
Inhabitants of that place, not willing to be trouble with such Guests, although
provision was allowed them, humbly besought the Emperor to dispose of them
elsewhere, so that they were to the number of Fifty Thousand put on shore in a
desolate Island where they all perished. The reason why they were not killed
was for that the Mufti had told Achmat it was not lawful, alleging that Dogs
had Souls.

To conclude this year 1613 the Persian King upon a suspicion that the
Armenians were about to reconcile themselves to the Pope, and yield obedience
to the Sea of Rome, which suspicion was grounded upon forged Letters, he caused
Twelve Hundred of them to be put to death, and kept straightly imprisoned
double that number which made the Grcassians, Georgians, and Armenians with
other Eastern Christians send their Ambassadors to Achmat imploring Aid to
protect them from the rage of the Persians, to counterpoise which the Persian
King sent likewise his Ambassador, but the Sultan would not admit him to
Audience, till such time as he heard his Master had stayed the Persecution.

Anno 1614. diverse direful Prodigies were seen in Hungary, Silesia, Austria,
and other parts of Christendom, which greatly amazed most people, who supposed
them to be the forerunners of great calamities but nothing followed except the
downfall and death of the Nassuf the grand Vizar, who fell from the top of
Honor into the depth of misery by offending his soon offended Master, and by
the Sultans Command was by Bestanges Bassa slain in his own house, and that
Head which during the time he stood high in the Sultans favor, had Governed
the whole Ottoman Empire, stricken off and carried as a present to Achmat, and
in his stead Mechmet who had Married the Sultans Daughter was made chief Vizar.

Transylvania now rent from the German Empire, the Emperor labored to recover
it, and for that purpose sent several trusty Councelors to deal with the
Nobility to cast off the Turkish yoke, and to return to their former obedience;
of which the Turkish Sultan getting notice, sent to the Emperor to admonish him
to keep inviolate the peace concluded between them, and not to meddle in the
affairs of Transylvania, though at the same time, by his Hostilities in Hungary
he had manisestly broke it, to which the Emperor replied he was on his part
resolved to keep the peace inviolate though the Sultan had already broken the
Articles of the League, but as to his tamely parting with his Province of
Transylvania confirmed to him by the same League, he would resolve nothing
therein till he had consulted Princes of the Empire, with which answer the
Chiaus returning to Constantinople.

The Emperor Assembling the Estates, laid before them the just Grievances of
his Subjects, and the indignities offered to himself, with the manifest breach
of the League on the part of the Turks, in not only assisting his Rebels, but
with great Companies of themselves, making great spoil in his Hereditary
Countries. To which the Estates answered, that with all their power they would
maintain the Dignity of the Emperor, and defend the Empire, of which resolve
Achmat was no sooner advertized, but the better to encourage Bethlem Gabor, to
invade the Emperors Frontiers, he sent him a strong power under the command of
Sander Bassa, with which he besieged Lippa, and had it delivered to him, as he
had also had several other places of less importance, which places were put
into the possession of the Turks, but to remain part of the Transylvanian
Principality.

Affairs standing thus in Transylvania, Moldavia, was at the same afflicted,
and brought low by the Tyranny of Stephano their Vayvod, who the better to
secure him in his Estate, had caused most of the Nobility to be cruelly and
shamefully murdered, upon which the Moldavians disdaining the Tyrants rule,
who was wont to say, that he valued not his Subjects love, so they feared him,
rose in Arms against him, choosing for their Prince Alexander son to Jeremy
their former Vayvod, who with a great power entering the Country, had many
strong places put into his possession, which the Tyrant understanding, and
finding the hatred of his Subjects generally bent against him, he fled, till
strengthened by a supply of Turks and Tartars, he again returned, and gave the
Prince Battle, but was therein overthrown; after which Alexander was proclaimed
with the consent of all the Nobility Vayvod of Moldavia, whereupon he sent
Ambassadors to the Grand Seigniour, to inform him that he would do nothing
prejudicial to his Imperial Majesty, but that what he had done was at the
instance of the Nobility, to free the Country from a Tyrant, but ever these
Ambassadors could arrive at Constantinople they were imprisoned, at the
commandment of the Bassa of Buda, and being afterward put into the power of
Stephano, he caused their heads to be cut off and their bodies to be cast into
the Danube, and then having recruited his Forces, returned again into Moldavia,
where in a second battle he was overthrown, and most of his Army slain, himself
hardly escaping to Michna Prince of Valachia; but soon after Alexander, having
notice that the said Michna and Hebraim a Turkish Bassa were raising great
Forces to assist Stephano, he sent Boyartsk ye his Ambassador to Michna to make
him his friend, or at least to persuade him to desist from taking part with the
Tyrant, but the proud Bassa, contrary to the will of the Vayvod Michna, caused
the Ambassador to be clapped in Irons, and sent prisoner to Constantinople,
where upon his arrival, contrary to the Law of Nations he was condemned to the
Galleys, to excuse which, the Vayvod sent an Ambassador to Prince Alexander,
promising him that unless it were by the absolute command of the Grand
Siegniour, which he durst not disobey, he would not assist his Competitor, and
at the same time it being rumoured that Bethlem Gaber was likewise raising
Forces to invade Moldavia, the Prince sent an other Ambassador to him, who to
the Ambassador protested his innocence therein, and that he intended no harm to
Alexander his master, but on the contrary greatly desired his friendship, and
for his fathers sake would assist him in what lay in his power, but that which
caused a great trouble in Moldavia was the death of Prince Visnouviskie, who
was poisoned by a Greek Priest in receiving the Sacrament, for which the
impious actor was fried to death in a wire chair, having first confessed that
he was induced to commit that hellish exploite, at the instance of the Princes
enemy, who upon the Priests detection were fled.

Anno 161.. at the incessant entreaty of Stephano the Sultan sent Skinder Bassa
with a powerful Army to to restore him to the Vayvod-ship of Moldavia,
whereupon Prince Alexander sent to his friends as well in Polonia as in other
parts of Christendom, to Aid him against the Common Enemy, and thereupon
received great Aid, especially out of Polonia, under the leading of Prince
Coreski, who shortly after Married the Princess Alexandrina, Sister to Prince
Alexander, and having refreshed the Army, the two Princes as joint Commanders,
marched against the Bassa, and in a set battle overthrew him near unto Cochona,
together with the Forces of Stephano, and pursuing their Victory entered
Valachia, where entering Bonza without resistance, he was by the Estates of
that Province, entreated to take upon him the Vayvodship; for that they being
weary of the Turkish thraldom, from which Michna their Vayvod had absolutely
refused to free them, they resolved for that reason to choose an other, but the
Prince refused the charge, he would not deprive his friend of his possession,
yet consented that Prince Cherbanne son to the late Vayvod should take the
charge upon him, but whilst these things were in agitation Shindar Bassa had
gathered a great power; and proclaimed Michna Vayvod of Moldavia, Stephano by
reason of his frequent overthrows, being now fallen into disgrace with the
Sultan, and on a sudden the said Bassa with his multitude environed the Princes
Camp, where he together with his mother, Prince Coreskie, and his fair Princess
Alexandrina were taken prisoners, as were all the Camp, except five hundred
Polonians, who under the leading of the Lord Tischevish cut their way through
the Army of the Turks, yet for a long time the Princes remained disguised
amongst the common prisoners, in hopes of being admitted to their ransoms, but
at length all except the Princess Alexandrina were carried to Constantinople;
but she falling into the hands of a Tartarian Captain, was carried into
Tartary, where she was hardly dealt with, till at length she was ransomed for
3000 Chequins, having during her Captivity been delivered of a fair son.

The year following the Turks spoiled the Seacoast Towns of Italy, taking many
rich prizes, and had the like repayed them by the Christian Galleys in the
Mediterranean, and greater mischiefs had insued had not Achmet the Turkish
Sultan died, having lived thirty years, and reigned fifteen, appointed by
reason of his sons minority, his brother Mustapha whom he had a long time kept
prisoner, to succeed him in the Ottoman Empire.

CHAP. XIX. Mustapha the first of that Name Ninth Emperor of the Turks his
Life and Actions.
AChmat being dead Mustapha his Brother, (the First that had been saved alive
since the foundation of the Ottoman Empire) succeeded him by his appointment,
his Children of which Osman was the Eldest being too weak to sway the Scepter
of so mighty an Empire. So that this Mustapha, brought from a straight Prison
every day expecting Death, now advanced to a Throne to rule the East, forgeting
his former devout Life, began to Tyrannize over his Subjects more then his
Predecessors; which caused him to be hated of many, especially for that he
imprisoned the French Ambassador and his servants, breaking thereby the Law of
Nations; upon pretense that they had been instrumental in the escape of Prince
Coreskie out of the Black Tower, who by the assistance of a Greek Priest
descended from the top thereof, on a rople Ladder drawn up by a bottom of
Packthred brought in a Pie to the said Prince by the Ambassadors Secretary,
though contrary to his knowledge, with the Prince likewise escaped one Rigaut a
French Captain, who by the assistance of the said Priest, disguised in Priestly
Vestments for that purpose prepared, got passage into Italy, notwithstanding
all the Ports were beset with their pursuers. Nor was the Ambassador only
imprisoned but his servants and himself evilly entreated, especially the
former, two of which were put to the torture according to the Turkish manner,
which is to Iay them upon their Belly on a Table, and to beat their Buttocks,
the Calves of their Legs, and Soles of their Feet, with a flat staff, giving
them ere they cease 100 or 200 blows, yet the Servants confessed nothing,
whereupon they caught a Weaver being a Turk, whose Shop was near the
Ambassadors house: whom they tortured in the like manner, but he as the others
had done could reveal nothing against the Ambassador, who for all that was
obliged to pay 30000 Sultanies for his own release and his Servants. These and
such like insolences, together with the Imprisonment of young Osman and his
Brethren, made the Grand Vizar, who was then on the Confines of Persia to haste
to Constantinople with his Army, at whose approach Osman was taken out of
Prison and Proclaimed Emperor (so sudden are the changes of fortune in great
as well as little affairs) and the proud Sultan Mustapha enforced for fear of
the enraged Soldiers to betake himself again to his Cell, or rather Prison,
where for a while I shall leave him, and relate what happened during the Reign
of Osman.

CHAP. XX. The Life and Actions of Osman the First of that Name, Tenth Emperor
of the Turks.
THE Uncle after he had proudly Tyrannized for the space of two Months, being
deposed, the Nephew was advanced to his Fathers Throne, being not full Thirteen
years of Age, wherefore he was wholly governed by the Vizar Bassa, as was also
the whole Ottoman Empire, when the first thing of moment that happened was the
complaint of the French King, by two Gentlemen sent for that purpose, by whom
he demanded reparation of the new Emperor for the indignity he had sustained
by the Imprisonment of his Ambassador, and the evil treating of his Servants,
letting him understand that he could not send any other Ambassador to his Court
to condole the Death of Sultan Achmat his Father, nor congratulate his coming
to the Empire till he had received satisfaction from him becoming his dignity.
and the wrongs he had received in his Ambassador.

The Grand Vizar and Mufti hearing this Embassy, and considering what had
passed, advertised the young Emperor to send an Ambassador to the most
Christian King, to Confirm the League, and to testify both by Words and
Letters, how much he was dissatisfied for his discontent; whereupon Vri Chiaus
was sent with ample instructins, and so great an acknowledgment of the wrong
done to the Baron of Mole, that the French King rested satisfied, and calling
the said Ambassador home, he sent the Earl of Sezi to succeed him as Ambassador
at Constantinople.

The War continuing between the Turks and Persians, about this time a great
Battle was fought between them, wherein the Turks prevailing put the Persians
to flight with the lost of Ten Thousand of them, and thereupon the Bassa
General of the Turkish Army, prosecuting his victory entered into the heart of
Persia, wasting with Fire and Sword all that stood in his way, but at length
having through daily skirmishes with the Enemy, and Diseases arising from want
and evil Diet, lost a third part of his Army, he accepted of the Sophies
proposals of Peace, which were that he would yearly pay the Tribute of Silks,
and at present relieve his Army with all things necessary. This Peace concluded
by the Bassa was allowed on by the Emperor and Ratified at Constantinople,
whereupon Two Hundred Cammels laden with Silks were for many years after sent
to the Emperor according to Agreement.

Anno 1618. A fearful Comet was seen over the City of Constantinople, in form
like a Turkish Scimiter, placed near unto the Zenith under the Horizon, of a
fiery color, appearing very terrible for the space of eight nights which made
many conjecture it the forerunner of great bloodshed.

Vri Chiaus returning out of France after he had dispatched his affairs at that
Court, came into England, where he was received and conducted to the Court, and
had Audience of King James his Speech being as follows.

The Most True Incomprehensible and Most High God, increase and multiply your
Majesty's years, in all happiness, Amen, O Thou Lord of the World.
THE most invincible, most mighty, and most happy Sultan Osman Chan of the
Othoman Empire Monarch, sends to your excellent Majesty a hundred thousand
Salutations and Greetings, evermore praying the most High God, for your
Majesty's happyness, sends to your Highness with all possible Honor and
Renown, this his Imperial and most Noble Letter, and with all hops that the
Sacred bond of Peace, which has been hitherto inviolably on your Majesty's
part kept and observed, your Majesty will be pleased still on your part, with
daily increases of more and more Friendship earnestly to continue therein. And
his Imperial Majesty on his behalf is also resolved in like manner evermore
punctually to keep and continue the same.

Also the most Mighty Emperors Tutor, and his chief Vizier Bassa, has
addressed to the dust of your Noble Feet, this his most Honorable Letter, with
a Thousand commendations, praying everlastingly the Mighty God, for Your
Majesty's long Lise and Happyness.

Also Your Majesty's Ambassador at Constantinople, your slave Paul Pindar
bowing his forehead to the dust of your Majesty's Feet, and most humbly kissing
your Highnesses blessed Feet, has directed unto your Majesty this his
submissive Letter.


This Speech ended, and the Emperors Letter delivered with such other as the
Chiaus brought, he was by the Kings command in great splendour conducted to his
Lodging, where after five or six days stay, he came again to Whitchall and made
his conjue of leave upon his departure in these words, as near as they can be
Translated out of the Turkish Language.

Most happy Emperor, as I have with my own hands howing my self to the dust of
your Princely feet, presented unto your Excellent Majesty, the most mighty and
high Sultan Osman my Lord and Master his Imperial Letter, so likewise I beseech
your Majesty, that you will be pleased in conformity thereof, to vouchsafe your
Princely answer by your noble Letter, and to deliver the same into the hands of
me your slave, and be ever partaker of all blessedness and happiness.


After he had made this Oration and received the Kings Letters, he was
conducted to Dover by several of the Nobility, where imbarking in one of His
Majesty's Ships he sailed to Constantinople.

Anno 1619 great trouble arose in Bohemia upon the Emperors sending an Army
into that Country to suppress the Protestant Religion there flourishing, so
that the Protestants tired with the cruelties of the popish Soldiers sent to
Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, to acquaint him with the state of their
affairs, who after he had obtained leave of the Grand Signeour, came with an
Army of Eighteen Thousand men into Hungary, and took many Towns, spoiling the
Country as he went, nor so contented but he entered Austria, Stiria, and
Carinthia, subdued all before him without opposition, but fearing if the
Bohemians should be subdued, the storm would sall upon him, he would not make a
League with the Bohemians tell he was assured of the Grand Signeours assistance
in case his affairs required in whereupon he sent his Ambassador to
Constantinople, who so dealt with the great Bassa's of the Court that by their
advice Osman swore to protect him, and because the Oath for the strange wording
of it will not be amiss to be recited I shall here insert it verbatim.

Sultan Osman,
BY the Grace of God unconquerable Turkish Emperor Swears, by the highest
Almighties, and Almighty Gods Holiness, by his Kingdom, by the substance of the
Heavens, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, by the Earth, and all under the
Earth, by the Brains and all the hairy scalp of my Mother, by my Head, and all
the strength of my Soul and Body, by the Holy and great Mahomer, and by my
Circumcision, That I thee my Brother and Son Bechlem Gabor succeeding King of
Hangaria in no manner of way in thy great and weighty affairs will leave,
though it be to the overthrow of my Kingdom to be brought to nothing, until
there shall be no more left but my self, or four or five Turks at the most, yet
will I be still obliged to desend thee, and all those that do any ways
appertain unto thee, and if thou shall have need of me, I shall be always ready
to go with thee, and in case this my promise shall in any wise be frustrated,
then let Gods Justice fall upon my Head and destroy me and my posterity, and
wipe away whatsoever belongs unto me, and gather it together into a Rock of
stone or substance of Earth, and that the Earth may cleave insunder and swallow
me Body and Soul.

Dated at Constantinople the 5th. of Jan. 1619.

The Transilvanian by this Oath assured of the Grand Signeours favor sent his
Ambassadors to Prague, where meeting with the Commissioners sent thither for
that purpose by the States of Bobemia, a perpetual League was concluded, and in
June following the Prince assembled the Estates of Hungary at Newhausell, where
he proposed to them the necessity of raising an Army, to defend the Provinces,
against the Forces of the Imperialists, who by their great preparations made it
visible that they would no peace till they had destroyed all the Protestants,
to this motion the Estates consented, when at the same time came their
Ambassadors from the Grand Signeour, the Venetians and Polonians, all which
made in the names of the respective principals a League with Gabor, which so
much pleased the Estates of Hungary, willing to shake off the Imperial yoke
that by the advice of their Palatine, the Transilvanian was proclaimed King of
Hungary, upon which raising an Army of Fifty Thousand Horse and Foot, he
subdued almost all Austria, Carinthia, and Stiria, before the Emperors Forces
could take the Field in any fit number to make head against him, at what time
such a fear was brought upon the great City of Vienna, that with the Emperors
consent the Protestants remaining therein, sent their Deputies humbly to
beseech him that he would spare the City and Country for theirs their Wives
and Childrens sakes.

About this time a strange apparition was seen in the Air over Medina Taluabi
in Arabia, where Mabomet the Impostor lies buried, which terrified all the
Country thereabouts, and was as follows, about the 20th. of September at
midnight there happened a terrible Tempest, accompanied with such prodigious
Thunder and Lightning, that many thinking the dissolution of all things was at
hand^ leaped out of their Beds to gaze on the Element, at first seeming all on
Fire, and then covered with thick darkness, after which all was serene and
calm, when in Arabian Characters these words appeared in the Firmament, viz. O
why will you believe in lies, and soon after a Woman beautiful to behold,
arrayed in white and encompassed with rays of Light appeared, holding in her
hand a book, coming from the North, and opposite against her were seen Armies
of Turks, Persians, and other Mahometans, being so conjectured by their garbs
ranged in Battalia, ready to charge her, but she keeping her standing no sooner
opened the book but they all fled, upon which a sudden murmur as of a
Whirlwind troubled the Air, and immediately the lamps that were placed about
Mahomets Tomb went out, and in this manner the Prodigy appeared for several
nights together, whereupon a Dervice or Religious Turk undertaking to expound
the meaning of that unusual sight, and declaring that it foreshewed the
overthrow of the Mohammedan superstition, he was therefore miserably put to
death, calling to the last upon the Woman with the Book to save him, and he had
no sooner given up the ghost but a fearful Tempest insued.

Anno 1620 Gasparo the expulsed Vayvod of Moldavia assisted by the Polish
Cossacks, and such other Troops as he could raise invaded Moldavia, in which
the Suitan had placed another Vayvod, and in revenge of a design the Turks had
to strangle him during his Vayvodship, made great spoil putting all the Turks
he found to the Sword, and reducing great part of that Province to his
obedience, which caused the Sultan to raise a great power, drawing all his
choice Forces out of both the Asia's to the number of Two hundred thousand and
caused a great Fleet of Galleys to put to Sea, which spoiled the Coast of
Sicilia and Landing Five Thousand Turks in the Kingdom of Naples, surprised the
strong Town of Manfredonia, carry 1500 Christians into miserable Captivity, and
then joining with the Pirates of Argier they made a descent upon the Island of
Janisa near Majorca, possessed by the Spaniards, which Island they took making
great spoil, putting to the Sword and carrying into Captivity all the
Inhabitants.

The Turks thus successful at Sea made them the less doubt their success by
Land, therefore having found an occasion of quarrel with the Polonian King, for
that the Cossacks in revenge of the injury they sustained by the Tartars, had
manned out many small vessels and spoiled the Turks Seacoast Towns upon the
Bosphorus, giving an overthrow to their Galleys, and brought away great
spoils) Osman in person at the head of 300000 men, passing through Moldavia
which he again reduced to the obedience of the new Vayvod, he entered Podalia
Anno Dom. 1621. where he found the great Chancelour of Poland, and the Prince
Son to the Polonian King strongly entrenched with an Army of 50000 resolute
Soldiers, and because he could not draw them out of their strengths he with
his multitude enclosed their Camp. So that by the frequent attacks and sallies
that were made, a great number were slain on both side, but especially of the
Turks; during which the Tartarian Prince then assisting Osman with 30000 light
Horsemon marched into the heart of Poland burning and destroying all before him
in a most terrible manner, and upon his return to the Camp besides other spoils
brought with him 25000 Prisoners of the poor Country people which his ravenous
crew had scraped together, but after two months besieging the Polish Camp, want
growing great in the Sultans Army, and by reason of the advancement of the
Season such terrible Rains fell, that Tents, Horses, Men, and Carriages were
frequently carried away by the impetuosity of the Torrents thereby occasioned.
The Turks desirous to depart sent to the Chancellor to treat of Peace, which at
the earnest instance of Radulae Prince of Valachia was hearkened to, and soon
after accorded the principal points being these.

First, That the Emperor should raise his Army, and retire from the Confines
of Poland, and that the Tartars the occasion of this War, should send an Emirze
(that is one of their Princes) to reside as a pledge to secure them from
ensuing incursions. The Chancellor in the Name of his Master promising to send
another Pledge to reside in the Court of Tartary, with condition to pay yearly
Forty Thousand Florins as a donative from the King of Poland, promising
moreover for the better maintenance of the Peace to maintain a Resident in the
Ottoman Court, and by every such Ambassador to send a rich Present, and as the
Grand Signours Ambassador that was to reside in the Court of Poland, should
undertake to secure the incursions of the Tartars, so the Polish Ambassador
should undertake the same for the Cossacks, and that the Merchants of Poland
should have free Trade with the Subjects of the Grand Signeour making their
usual Presents, and this Peace not to be binding till such time as the Achiaus
should arrive in the Polish Court with the overtures, and in the mean time a
Parliament to be assembled for the Ratification of these Articles.

Affairs being brought to this pass Osman raised his Camp, and returned to
Adrinople, having lost in this Expedition eighty thousand of his men, and of
the Poles by reason of the unseasonableness of the weather, and their often
skirmishes, no less then twenty thousand perished. Now upon notice of the Turks
approach, at the request of the Polonian King, the Emperor of Germany, had sent
to his assistance eight thousand high Dutch Soldiers, upon notice of which
Osman in a great rage proclaimed war against the Emperor, charging him with the
manifest breach of the League between them, though himself had been the first
aggressor, by aiding the Transilvanian, but the King of Poland understanding,
that what had happened was upon his account, (and that Osman kept his Army on
foot about Adrinople, intending to invade the Emperors Country early in the
spring, for that purpose having caused twenty thousand Tartars to stay upon the
frontiers) he called the Turkish Chiaus before him, and declared that unless
the Grand Seigneour his master changed his purpose, he could not conclude with
him any peace, for as much as he was bound to assist the Emperor his
confederate, if his Countries were invaded, which resolve of the Kings being
made known to Osman by his Chiaus, he called a Council of his Bassa's wherein
it was concluded that he should leave Adrinople, and instantly set forward for
Constantinople, which was accordingly put in execution, and the Tartars on the
Frontiers dismissed, so that the war intended against the Emperor being laid
aside, news came that the Emir of Syria was risen in Rebellion, and had
possessed himself of the City and Castle of Tripolis; whereupon 60 thousand
Chequins were delivered out of the Treasury, to repair the Grand Seigniors
Pavillions and Carriages, himself with a powerful Army intending to make an
Expedition against the Rebel, though contrary to the advice of most of his
Bassa's, and the Mufti, who alleged that it was altogether needless, for his
Majesty to expose himself to the ill conveniences of such a war, as by the
meanest of his Bassa's might be expiated, it being certain, that the Emir would
not stand his Forces, but upon their approach fly into some part of
Christendom, and therefore if he set out his fleet of Galleys, he would either
by Sea or Land fall into his hands, nor was it safe to leave Greece to the
attempts of the Christians, who in his absence might spoil it at their
pleasure, these and such like reasons caused him to decline going in person,
yet he sent forth his Fleet and Army after the best manner sending for Aid to
Argire and Tunis, to awe the Spaniards likewise, who had sixty Galleys and six
Gallions at Messina, prepared as was then conjectured to revenge the taking of
Manfredo, and the spoil the Turks had made upon the Coasts of Italy the year
before, another Fleet of lesser consequence he ordered to keep the black sea,
there to hinder the Cossacks from spoiling his Sea-Towns; after which, contrary
to the Advice of his Council, he married the Grandchild of a Sultan a wife to
Pertan Bassa, only for her beauty, being indeed the Paragon of her sex, which
wedding was performed without any solemnity, and truly this marriage was
greatly disliked, for that his Ancestors for many years past, had not married
at all in respect of kindred, nor taken any women to their Concubines of the
Turkish race, in respect of kindred, and that which rendered this young Prince
more contemptible, was his walking up and down the City in disguise, with a
Page or two at the most, and prying into Taverns, and other places like a petty
Officer.

Things being at this pass, news came from the Bassa of Buda, that Bethlehem
Gabor had concluded a peace with the Roman Emperor, which greatly displeased
the Sultan and his Council, especially for that the peace between himself and
the Polack was not yet ratified, but the Polish Ambassador daily expected, in
order thereto, when in the midst of his perturbations, Sir Thomas Row
Ambassador from his Majesty of Great Britain, arrived at the Port, and had his
Audience, delivering his Majesty's Letter, wherein he demanded redress of the
injuries his subjects had sustained by the Pirates of Algire and Tunes, then in
subjection to the Sultan, as likewise the delivery of several of the Polish
Nobility, and one Scotch Gentleman, which had been taken prisoners in the late
expedition into Poland, and amongst them the Prince Coreskie, who had formerly
made his escape, out of the black Tower, with several other things that might
create a good understanding and a continuation of the League between them, some
of which were granted, and the other denied, as the Grand Vizier (to whom the
management of that affair was committed) thought fit, little to the
satisfaction of his Majesty's Ambassador, but soon after the Grand Siegneor
sent his Letter to his Majesty, containing a satisfactory reply to all that was
demanded, except the release of the Polish prisoners.

Anno 1622, The Grand Seigneur, not hearing of the Duke Sbaraskie, chosen
Extraordinary Ambassador for the King of Poland, to consummate the Peace, he
gave it out that he would go to Mecha, and from thence to Medina in Arabia to
visit Mahomets Tomb, contrary to the Council of Visiers, who knew not the
design, and even to the hazard of a General Revolt, for they were jealous that
under color of that Voyage he had some other project, and that the Polish Duke
arriving in his absence, would not follow him at a venture, nor treat with his
deputies left at the Port. So that thereby all hopes of Peace would vanish,
which did not a little trouble the Turks, whose Trade was greatly impaired by
the roving Cossacks, which the Emperor understanding, and resolving not to
delay his journey, (or indeed his design to cut off the whole order of the
Janissaries, for the insolences frequently offered him, by those Masterful
slaves) he sent to hasten Sbaraskie, upon whose arrival a peace was concluded,
though much to the prejudice of his Territories in Hungaria, and now that
obstacle being removed, he sent his Carriages over into Asia, with all his
Treasure, not sparing the Plate and Ornaments of his Palace, which made the
Janissaries mistrust some design more then ordinary, whereupon they resolved to
stop his proceedings, and therefore the day before he intended to depart, they
with great clamor run to the Seraglio, though unarmed, and demanded Delavir
the Vizier Bassa, Hoja the Emperors confessor, the Caslariago Governor of the
women, the Deflardar or Treasurer, the Cadelescher or chief Judge, with some
other prime officers, whom they said had Counseled their Emperor to undertake
this dangerous Voyage, for which they resolved to punish them with death,
charging the Emperor strictly that he should neither go to Mecca, nor pass over
into Asia.

To calm this Tempest the Emperor came forth in person, and used many arguments
to persuade them to their duty and Allegiance, promising he should lay aside
his purpose, but now nothing would serve these miscreants, but they must have
the aforesaid Officers delivered to them, To which the Emperor replied, that
his honor would greatly suffer if he should permit his friends to be torn from
him, but if they had offended in ought, and it was proved against them, in the
Divano, whether they should be brought to answer any accusation that should be
objected against them, they should be punished by Law, but this did not pacify
them, for they clamoured yet louder, saying they knew them guilty, and that
should be sufficient; whereupon they run to the house of the Hoja, and not
finding him there, plundered it, and from thence passing to the Grand Viziers
house, they thought to have done the like there, but finding it fortifyed, they
set Guards in several parts of the City all night, and the next morning came
before the Palace with their Arms, making their demands as before; whereupon
the Hosa Cadeleschar and Tefterdar fled, and were not for a time found, as
likewise did the Grand Vizier, with the consent of the Emperor, who promised
himself to weather this storm, though in the end he proved too weak, yet was
the Vizier brought back by a Hermit, a reputed Saint, after he was got into
Asia, who trusting to his innocence, resolved to face the Tempest, but the rude
multitude without respect to his Reverend Age, and great Merits, having gotten
him into their power, cut him to pieces in the sight of the Emperor, which he
perceiving would, though too late, have fled over into Asia, for now all means
were cut off, for the Janissaries had stopped the Port, and in a great rage
demanded Mustapha the Emperors uncle, who was kept a prisoner in the Seraglio,
and the first day of the Tumult by the Emperors command, put into a secret
vault, with two Negro women, where after much search, and the racking of
several servants to make them discover him, he was found and born in Triumph
through the streets, to the old Seraglio, having not yet been able to lay hands
on Osman, by reason he kept himself within his strengths, but hearing they
intended to proclaim his uncle Emperor, he at the persuasion of the Mufti,
putting himself in mourning, went with a few of his followers, and amongst them
the Aga of the Janissaries, to the old Seraglio, and presented himself to the
enraged Soldiers with tears, beseeching them to return to their former
obedience, and Loyalty, offering to make them any satisfaction, repenting him
of his error, and finally invoked them by the merits of his Father and all his
Aneestors, to have some pity upon him their true master, This submission a
little calmed their fierce natures, so that they began to relent, and had again
acknowledged their Lord, had not the Aga, supposing to Curry favor with the
Emperor, sharply reproved them of ingratitude and disloyalty, which again
raised the not extinguished fire, into such a flame, that it was no more to be
subdued; but first having slain the Aga, and Huzein Bassa, with several of the
Emperors followers of lesser note, they seized on his person, and carried him
before Mustapha, demanding sentence against him, when as the forsaken Prince,
pleading for his life (and the new Emperor, not knowing how to condemn, only
nodding in token that they might do what they pleased) They after a consult
amongst themselves, determined only to imprison him whereupon they set him on
horseback, an insolent Spahy changing Turbants with him, and carried him to
the seven Towers, denying by the way a draught of water, and then returning
placed Mustapha in the Throne proclaiming him Emperor, and went to Sack the
Houses of those they had murdered.

Mustapha having once again mounted the Throne and of a miserable Captive made
the second time Emperor, was persuaded by Darut Bassa, a villain raised to
that dignity by the new Emperor, that if Osman lived he would sit uneasy in
his throne, and that the Janissaries cooling on the matter, would again advance
him the rightful Heir of the Ottoman Empire, whereupon it was concluded he
should be made away, the charge of which was committed to this wicked
Counselor, who knowing his dignity would expire with Mustaphas, strangled
young Osman in prison, after he had reigned three years and some odd days, not
exceeding sixteen years of Age, and so an end was put to the design he had to
subdue the German Empire, and afterward all Europe, with such success he
flattered himself, little remembering that when man proposes, God disposes.

One thing is worthy of note, a little before this Tumult happened, Osman
dreamed that he rid a Camel, and being mounted he could not force him to go by
fair means nor stripes, and that then descending in a rage to revenge it with
his sword, the body of the beast vanished, leaving in his hand only the head
and bridle, at which dream being exceedingly troubled, he the next day sends
for one of his Wizards to interpret it, but he refused, persuading him to apply
himself to the Mufty, which he did, and had this Interpretation, viz. That the
Camel signified his Empire, his Riding his abuse in Government, his descension
or alighting, his deposing, the vanishing of the body of the Beast, the revolt
of his Subjects, the head and bridle remaining in his hand only a bare Title,
and that he should shortly dye and lose his Empire, the empty name only of
Emperor accompanying him to his grave. And thus much for Osman Tenth Emperor of
the Turks.

CHAP. XXI. Mustapha Reinthronized, with an Account of his proceedings till his
second Deposing.
MVstapha having as has been related, caused his nephew young Osman to be
strangled in prison, he made several new Bassas, displacing such as had been
made by his Predecessor, least getting power they should revenge the death of
Osman, nor were there some wanting that both desired and attempted it,
especially Mechmet Bassa Governor of Erzirum, in ^^sia.

During the consternation of the Asian Turks, at the death of their Emperor,
putting them in fear the Empire would be dissolved, the Persian King was not
idle, but with a powerful Army recovered most places taken from him, by the
Turkish Sultans, and the like might have been effected by the Christians, had
they not been at discord amongst themselves, so that, that much dreaded Empire,
would have been reduced into a small circumference, which many afterward
though too late repented.

The new Sultan altogether governed by his Imperious Officer not yet supposing
himself fast in the Throne, consented to the making away the brethren of Osman,
and children to Achmat the late Emperor, in order to Execute which bloody
purpose, the Capi-Aga or Major Domo of the Seraglio, went to their Lodgings,
with a purpose to strangle them, but the children crying out, several of the
Pages run to their rescue, and falling upon the messengers of death, slew the
Capi-Aga, and evilly entreated the others that attended him, and thereupon sent
word to the Janissaries and Spahis, who approved of their proceedings,
commanding the body of the Aga to be hanged up in the Hippodrome, as a terror
to those that should attempt the like for the future, and in a rage went to the
Palace demanding Justice on them that had Councilled so wicked a purpose, but
the new Emperor, who differed not much from an idiot, solemnly protested he was
altogether ignorant of the matter, and if such command were procured, it was
gotten by sabreption, which Protestation was easily believed, yet Darut Bassa,
and the Emperors mother were vehemenly suspected, when to appease the angry
soldiers, the Bassa was displaced from the Viziership, Hazein Bassa placed in
his stead, and the Emperors mother hid in the Palace till the Tempest was
over, which could be no otherwise allayed then by a shower of Gold Chequins.

After which, the new Vizier protesting either to reform the affairs of the
Empire, or fall a Sacrifice, did a little restore the face of Justice, by
making examples of some, and terrifying others with threats, insomuch that he
was looked upon as a man fit for those boisterous times, nor was that his only
aim, but he resolved when once settled in his place, to remove Mustapha, and
place Morat brother to Osman in the Imperial seat, not thinking himself safe,
under a man that was altogether governed by an imperious woman, desirous of
Rule, and was no further capable of the passions of love and hate then they
were infused into him.

During these troubles of the Ottoman Empire, the Duke Sbaraskie lay upon the
Frontiers, and would not advance to ratify the peace between the King his
master and the new Sultan, till such time as Sir Thomas Row his Majesty of
Great Britains Ambassador, then resident at the Port had given him his faith
for his security, which done, the Duke advanced, and upon his arrival at the
Port, was magnificently entertained by the new Vizier, yet ever any thing was
absolutely concluded, a matter happened which had like to have turned all into
nothing; for on the 17 of June 1622 Prince Coreskie, who had been taken in the
late war between Osman and Sigismund King of Poland, was strangled in prison at
Constantinople, which put all into murmur and deep consideration, to what
intent it was done, when so great a ransom might have been had for his release,
but most believed it was done out of a Politic end, for that the Prince being
a mortal enemy to the Turks, if he should have been set at liberty, his
restless nature would not have suffered the peace to have continued long
inviolable, yet the urgent affairs of Poland so requiring, the Peace was
concluded in nineteen Articles, much to the advantage of the Polonian King, the
Turks greatly fearing at that juncture, the Christians uniting against them,
might dismember their Empire.

The new Vizier by this time having won the affections of the Soldiers,
resolved upon his former purpose of Deposing Mustapba, and setting up Morat
Brother to Osman, then a child, and the better to forward his purpose, he
caused the Aga of the Janissaries, and several Officers of the Court to be
seized, as contrivers of the death of Coreskie, whom himself had commanded to
be strangled, which raised another Tumult; for the Janissaries running furiously
to the Court, demanded their Captain, whom the Bassa had ordered to be put to
death, and had done great mischief had he not been delivered, nor were they so
contented, but peremptorily demanded the head of the Vizier, solemnly
protesting to facrifice him for the affront done to their order; upon which
escaping through the Emperors Garden, he took boat and passed over into Asia,
whereupon they sacked his house, and found therein great store of Treasure,
they likewise demanded the heads of several others, but in the end all was
hushed, yet they proceeded to the Election of a new Vizier, making choice of
one Mustapha, a man of a soft nature and easily ruled, who scarcely durst do
Justice for fear of offending any man, which proceeding of the insolent
Janissaries nevertheless, caused the wiser sort of men to retire from office and
employment, and to the insufficient daily change and ruin; for the Emperor
durst not move but by the directions of the Soldiers whose creature he was, so
many insolences were frequently committed, and all Asia greatly endangered to
be lost, for at Bagdat anciently Babylon, the Captain of the Janissaries killed
the Bassa, burnt the Mufti, and gave his daughter in Marriage to one Assan Beg,
pretender to an Ancient Inheritance of a bordering Province, to cantonize that
part nor Asia only stood in suspense what to do, but the Dominions of the
Turkish Sultan in Africa, greatly wavered, as doubting whom to obey.

On the 22 of August, an Extraordinary Ambassador from Bethlehem Gabor Prince
of Transylvania arrived at the Port, who amongst other instructions had order
to excuse his master, and to declare the reasons, why he had made peace with
the Emperor, without the knowledge of the Sultan, which were, that the war had
continued three years in the Kingdom of Hungary and had so wasted the Country,
that it was impossible for him to stay longer in the field unless he would have
exposed his Army to those wants, that would have reduced him to have accepted
of an inglorious peace, or to have suffered a great part of his Soldiers to
perish for want, and that if he had stood out upon the peace concluded between
the Sultan and the Polonian, the whole stress of War would have rested on him
and therefore he desired to be excused, adding that he meant not long to
conserve the peace, therefore desired that he and the Bassa of Buda might have
it in joint Commission to raise such Forces as they thought convenient to
invade the Empire, when opportunity offered, but this request not agreeing with
the interest of the Sultan it was rejected.

About this time the Janissaries in a tumultuary way came to the Court and
demanded all the Offices of gain, and to be Stewards of the Revenues of the
Churches which are great as likewise to take the Farms of Customs wherein they
committed many outrages, the Visiers not daring to deny them any thing they
demanded. They drunk Wine in the streets without prohibition contrary to their
Law, and exacted money of the Christians to purchase it, and if denied took it
by force, and murdered without being punished, and when at any time complaint
was made the Magistrates answered they durst not meddle with them, that had
murdered their King, and the Bassa's themselves desired the complainants
patience, telling them that they would bear a part with the general sufferance.

About the same time the Janissaries in the Galleys which rid before Smirna
commanded by Halil Bassa, aslaulted against his will the houses of the
Christian Consuls, insomuch that the English Consul with all those of that
Nation, were forced to run naked from their Lodgings, and save their lives by
swimming to the Admirals Gally, upon which the masterless Turks ransacked the
lower part of the house there, making spoil to the value of Two Thousand
Dollars. The French sustained more loss, and the Venetians at least ten
Thousand Dollars, the Consul having likewise one of his men cut in pieces, nor
could the Admiral either by threats or entreaties restrain these outrages, but
was forced for the prevention of further mischief to put to Sea.

In Asia there were three Rebellions, one at Babylon, another at Arzirum upon
the borders of Persia, and a third at Mesopotamia, which threatened the ruin of
all Asia; yet to prevent the worst several new officers were made, and an Army
raised in Grecia, in order to pass the Hellespont, but in the end nothing was
done more then assembling to little purpose, all the Turkish Forces on Europe
side, which so impoverished the Treasury that the like had not formerly been
known, nor were any Exactions and Extortions omitted to raise money for
defraying the necessary charges.

About this time came to the Court of Poland, an Ambassador from the great Duke
of Muscovy to entreat a peace, which was hardly granted by reason several
Letters of the said Ambassadors being intercepted, plainly demonstrated that at
his first setting out his designs were otherwise, upon notice that a Peace was
concluded with the Sultan, he feigning himself sick upon the Frontiers, had
sent for new instructions.

Darut Bassa who had married Sultan Mustapha's Sister falling into the
displeasure of the Vizier, he so dealt with the Spahi, that coming to the Court
they demanded his Head for the murdering the late Emperor, and having gotten
him into their hands were about to behead him, but whilst he was upon his
knees, every woman expecting the fatal blow, the Janissaries at the instance of
the Sultans Mother rescued him and carried him to their College, promising him
their protection, for which he bestowed amongst them Forty Thousand Chequins.
But that availed not, for soon after he was taken thence and carried to the
prison where he had murdered young Osman and there strangled, now the better
to please the Polonians and obstruct the cause of War for the future, the
Ambassador was not only dispatched with several Noblemen of Poland, who had
since the late War remained Prisoners, but it was likewise concluded that Jehan
Begh, the Tartarian Prince, Author of the War should be deposed, and Michmet
Geheray his Cosen, and first of the Blood, late Prisoner at the Rhodes, should
succeed him in that large Kingdom.

Asia was still in doubt to be lost for that Abassa Bassa Governor of Arzirum,
with an Army of one hundred thousand Horse and Foot had siezed upon most of the
Provinces, though without doing any harm to the inhabitants, but wheresoever he
found any of the Janissaries he sacrificed them to the Ghost of the dead
Emperor, he as he said being by God appointed the revenger of his Death, and
for that cause he had taken up arms declaring that he would come to the Port
and demand Justice upon the Murderers, and that if he was found a Traitor or
guilty, he would lay down his head willingly; but if those he accused were
found guilty, he would see execution done, nor did the Nobility of
Constantinople much disapprove of his march, rather esteeming him a friend then
an Enemy, who came to deliver them from the Tyranny of the Janissaries, whose
insolences were insufferable. Yet to prevent the worst it was resolved that
Mustapha should be deposed, the Janissaries not gainsaying it, for that they
well knew they alone should be exposed to the fury of the Bassa, at the rooting
out of whose order he chiefly aimed, though he had likewise other designs
which were to wrest the Grand Visiership from him that held it, and make
himself Governor of the young Prince Brother to Osman, whom he intended to
advance to the Empire; yet rather for show then otherwise the Soldiers were
ordered to pass the Hellespont in great numbers, but the Janissaries would not
stir for two reasons, first for that the time of receiving their pay was at
hand, and secondly fearing alone to be exposed to the fury of the Asian Army,
greatly doubting that if it came to a Battle their Fellows would revolt, and by
that means easily bring them to destruction.

CHAP. XXII. The Life and Reign of Morat or Amurath the 4th. the 11th. Emperor
of the Turks.
IN this distraction of the Ottoman Empire, the better to calm the tempest ere
it turned all into confusion by Shipwracking the State, the Grand Vizier going
with the Janissaries and Spahi to the Seraglio, demanded to speak with Mustapha,
and that he would answer them a few questions, which he being no ways able to
do, and refusing to appear they entered the Palace, and took thence Morat or
Amurath Brother to Osman, and Son to Achmat then about 14 years of Age, and
carrying him through the streets in triumph, caused him every where to be
proclaimed Emperor to the great content of the Constantinopolitans, who by
this mutation hope for peaceful times, and the face of Justice restored which
for many months had abandoned the City, every man doing in a manner what he
pleased.

Thed ay after this innovation the young Emperor made his public entry, from
whose lively countenance and apparent activity, every one promised great things
during his Reign; but at that time such had been the policy of the covetous
Soldiers whom Mustapha had continually supplied with the Imperial Treasure, to
support his bad Title to the Turkish Diadem, that Money was wanting to supply
necessary occasions. Insomuch that the Janissaries were obliged to remit the
Largess usually bestowed upon with an Augmentation of their pay at the
Coronation of every Emperor, and that money which was found was for the most
part adulterated, insomuch that the Vizier sent to the Ambassadors of the
Christian Princes residing there to borrow Thirty Thousand Dollars, and narrow
search was made after the Treasure that had been conveyed away by the Bassa's
that bore sway during the distraction in which search Eight Hundred Thousand
Dollars were found that had been imbezled by the Vizier Darut.

During these Transactions Abassa Bassa had possessed himself of all most all
Asia, whereupon it was thought necessary by fair means to persuade him to lay
down his Arms, and the rather to induce him so to do, the Emperor sent unto
the Capigi Bassa with a Vest, Sword and Letters of Credence giving him thanks
for the love he had showed to his Brother and his Blood, but now the revenge
belonged to himself of which he would take care, and therefore desired him if
he were a true subject as he professed himself to be to return to his
Government of Arzirum, after having dissolved his Army, and there to rest till
further occasion required his service. Upon this order from the Emperor he
excused himself, that the far advancement of the season would not permit him to
retire, but promised to live in peace until the spring and then to return in
obedience to his Government. Nor was this all for the Bassa or Emir of Sidon
was up in Arms, and with an Army of Thirty Thousand men had seized the strong
City and Castle of Damascus, and was supposed to hold confederacy with the
Christian Princes being himself no favourer of the Mohammedan superstition, and
besides he was a Prince by descent and claimed a right to those Countries, as
the ancient inheritance of his Predecessors nor was the Emperor in a condition
to repress him by force, therefore entreaties were used as to the former with
many large promises, nor was the Transilvanian Prince quiet though in a
different nature, for contrary to his League with the Emperor in a hostile
manner he entered Hungary, and possessed himself of several Towns: To oppose
whom the Imperialists raised a considerable Army and encamped in the way he was
to pass, yet was his coming so sudden that he cut off seven hundred straglers
of the Imperialists, and had surprised the Camp had not the alarm been given
by some that fled, yet with his whole Army he so pressed them, that they were
forced to betake themselves to a small Town Ghoding upon the River of Moran,
where they Fortified under a Castle that defended it; but in the end oppressed
with cold and hunger they sent to the Prince to make truce which with the
consent of Sultan Morat was accorded on these considerations. First, That the
Emperor should disclaim all right to Hungary, and should leave the people free
under the Government of the Prince of Transylvania. Secondly, That the Prince
and all the Provinces that had sent their Ambassadors to the Port, and had made
league with him, and had taken the Imperial protection should be restored to
their ancient Liberty and Estates. Thirdly, That the Emperor should pay an
annual Tribute of forty thousand Dollars, pretended to be granted in the days
of Solomon for Austria, and that the Prince, and the Bassa of Buda, should have
full power, if they found it convenient at any time to conclude a Peace on the
part of the Ottoman Emperor, and that all Cities, Towns, and Castles should
remain in the hands of those that possessed them, a free intercourse of Trade
being allowed between the Subjects of the one and the other Empire.

This done the Prince of Transylvania made show as if he would redeem all the
poor Captives taken by the Turks at his own charge, with some small assistance
from the Imperialists, upon whom he laid the fault, that it was not done, for
as much as they failing to send their Commissioners to treat about the matter,
the Turks in the night time decamped, and carried away with them contrary to
his pleasure twenty thousand Christians into miserable Captivity. He likewise
warned the Turks to keep in order and not to straggle in their retreat, nor to
commit any insolency or spoil, for that the Country was all in Arms, and
already enraged, but they not following his Council two thousand Hungarian
Horse fell upon their Rear, and cut off six hundred of them; whereupon they
turned head and destroyed many Villages, killing and taking Prisoners all that
came to hand, and amongst the rest one of the Hungarian Lords.

By this time the Persian desirous to dismember the Ottoman Empire, with a
powerful Army entered the Turkish Dominions in the Province of Babylon, and
greatly Alarumed that City, whereupon a war was proclaimed against him at the
Port, and all Soldiers in the Emperors pay commanded to repair to the
rendezvous upon pain of Confiscation, and their wives and children being sold
for slaves, it was likewise propounded that a reconciliation should be made
between the Emperor and Abassa Bassa at any rate, least he should join with
the Persian, and that being so gained he might be employed as General of
Turkish Army, but the Janissaries would not hear of the advancement of their
mortal enemy, but rather ^esired to be led against him and fight it out to the
utmost, but the Spahi were of another mind, as rather inclinable to the Bassa,
yet the Janissaries displaced their Aga, for dissuading them therefrom, and set
up in his stead a page of the Court.

Thus whilst it was unresolved how to proceed, the Persian King omitted no
opportunity, but Conquered the Province and City of Babylon, put to flight
Hafis Bassa, General of that defensive war, and took prisoner Chur Hassen Bassa
a renowned old Soldier, and cutting in pieces all that opposed him, found
means to seize upon Mosul (anciently called Ninivie) and Laska, on the Persian
Sea, and dividing his Army, sent part toward Van and Diarbeck, and the other
toward Mecha, incompassing by that means all that part of the Turks Dominions.

About this time his Majesty of Great Britain, by his Ambassador residing at
Constantinople, complained of the injuries his Subjects Trading in those Seas,
had sustained by the Pirates of Argier and Tunis, who in two years space, had
taken about one hundred English Vessels, most of them richly laden, wherefore
the Ambassador demanded that they might be punished for violating the League,
and be forced to restore such Vessels with their lading, as were found not to
be imbezled, or that they might be left to his Majesty to punish without any
offense to the Grand Seigneour, but many of the Bassas being interested in
those Piracies, nothing more could be procured then a Letter to the Bassas of
those two Cities, to send their Commissioners to to the Port, to answer to what
was objected against them, and at length to promise not any more to molest the
English, in order to the confirmation of which, several Articles were drawn,
and delivered to Sir Thomas Row, then residing at the Port, with the Grand
Seigneours Letter of command to the Dage Bassa and Divan of Argier and Tunis to
forbear assaulting or in the least injuring any English ships, or the Subjects
of the King of England, in what part of the Ottoman Empire soever they resided,
insomuch that the fear of punishment, did for the space of five years deter
those Pirates from molesting the English, either by Sea or Land, and the better
to ingratiate themselves, they delivered six hundred English Mariners (which
they had taken at diverse times) without Ransom, but upon the Expiration of the
years aforesaid they again robbed and spoiled the Merchants ships Trading in
those parts, but were frequently met withal by the English men of war that
were sent into those Seas to secure the Traffic.

Anno 1624 on the 24 of March Ali Bassa the great Vizier, by whose means Morat
was advanced to the Crown, was sent for into the Seraglio, where being
questioned by the young Emperor about the affairs of the Persian Invasion, and
not answering to the satisfaction of those present, he was then and there at
the commandment of the Emperor beheaded, and his body cast out into the street
(which caused much murmuring amongst his friends) and one Creques Mechemet
advanced to the Dignity of Grand Vizier, but he was not settled in his place
before news came that the Roman Emperor had entered Hungary with an Army of
Fifty Thousand Horse and Foot, resolving to recover the Towns a little before
take by Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, and that the Cossack with four
hundred Boats were abroad in the Black Sea, and had taken many vessels laden
with Provision, as likewise made great spoil upon the Coast. To prevent which
the Bassas of Buda, Temeswar, Bosna, Canisa, and Agria, received Orders to join
with the Transilvanian, and several Galleys dispatched into the black Sea, nor
were the preparations against the Persians slackned, who still marched on
conquering, for by this time Abassa Bassa upon the receipt of the Grand
Signeours pardon had submitted himself, and with the forces under his command
marched toward the frontires, to join with Hafis Achmet Bassa who made head on
that side, by which the suspicion of the Janissaries being removed they to the
number of Thirty Thousand were mustered for the Wars, and Forty thousand Spahi,
their rendezvous being appointed about Brussia, and at the same time Biram
Bassa was dispatched General of the frontires of Poland and Bugdania with Four
thousand Soldiers, and Orders to command all the Begs and Sanzacks, to raise
such forces as they could and join him to prevent the incursions of the
Cossacks, and more Galleys sent into the black Sea, to transport Jean Gheray
Han Prince of Tartary the year before deposed by Mechmet, and to re-establish
him in his Kingdom, but Mechmet having notice of his arrival, raised an Army of
Sixty thousand Horse, and drove him from the Land with the slaughter of many
Turks, which so enraged the Grand Signeour that as he said, his honor being
engaged he resolved to re-inthrone him, for Mechmet was suspected of holding
correspondence with the Persian, to whose proceeding the Turks and Arabians had
by this time put a stop, but failed therein, for the Captain Bassa with a great
Army Landing the second time was routed, two Bassas and about Five thousand
Turks slain, as many taken Prisoners, and Twenty pieces of Cannon, with much
rich Furniture left to the Tartars, who by that means found that they were able
to deal with the Turks.

Things falling out thus in Tartary, the Cossacks taking the advantage of the
Turkish Fleets absence, with Eighty Boats or small Barks entered the straights
of Bosphorus, where lying before Constantinople, they brought a general fear
upon that great City, and after having plundered and razed several Towns upon
the Sea Ceast, they returned in Triumph unopposed, which good success
imboldened them with a greater number of Vessels to adventure a second time,
when as before they returned with a great booty, the Turks not being able to
prevent it. About the same time the Pirates of Tunis and Argiers revolted from
the Grand Signeours obedience, and robbed many of his Ports in the
Mediterranean, taking such Ships as they found therein, and setting fire to a
great number of Storehouses, so that the loss the Christian Merchants sustained
by them in one Expedition amounted to 4 Millions of Ducates, nor did they less
harm by Land to such as bordered on their Country, neither regarding Friends or
Foes any longer then stood with their convenience and profit, being indeed
Enemies to all men; which intestine troubles obliged Morat to conclude a Peace
with Mechmet, the Tartar Prince dissembling the intentions he had to depose
him, laying all the fault of what had happened upon the Captain Bassa, whose
head had like to have gone off to have rendered his Masters story plausible,
such danger are those in that live under a Tyrant, whose will is his Law, not
weighing Justice nor good deserts further then may serve his purpose. Yet blood
was not wanting for Huzein Bassa who sometime before fled, being taken and
brought to Constantinople, where (after in hopes to save his Life, he had
confessed his Treasure) he was strangled. Abassa Bassa notwithstanding the
specious shows he made to march against the Persians, lingered greatly, which
gave the Janissaries a suspicion that he had contrived the matter only to draw
them into his danger, and then to destroy them as he had formerly purposed,
which opinion of theirs had turned all again into confusion, had he not at that
instance reconciled himself to the Grand Vizier, and protested that he would
not hurt the Janissaries, but use his Arms in defense of the Empire. So that by
swearing three times on the Alcoran, that no violence should be done on either
side, all animosities vanished, the Government of Arzirum being confirmed to
him, and he allowed a competent number of Soldiers to guard the frontires, as
likewise places of trust bestowed upon most of his chief Officers, but upon the
Janissaries putting many of his Friends to the Sword who had yielded themselves
to the Grand Vizier, he in a rage fell into their quarter, making slaughter of
three or four thousand of them, though not without the loss of as many of his
own men, but finding that the Vizier had drawn up his Army in Battalia, he
sounded the retreat and marched to his Government, and the Vizier kept on his
way toward Diarbecher to seek the Persian, when in the mean time the Persian
General treated with Abassa to deliver up the City of Arzirum, to the King his
Master promising in lieu thereof great rewards, but he knowing upon such terms
he could at any time make his peace who ever was Conqueror, seemingly hearkened
to that motion; so that gaining credit eight thousand Persians was sent to take
possession thereof, who he no sooner got within his danger, but he set upon
them, put one thousand to the Sword, and took most of the remainder Prisoners,
which caused the Turk to have a better opinion of him then formerly, insomuch
that they nominated him for Grand Vizier the ensuing year.

Anno 1625. a new Rebellion broke out in Asia, headed by an ordinary Spahi, who
drew down ten thousand men before the City of Smirna, the which after some
resistance he entered, and pretending to reform abuses cut off the heads of two
Cadees, punished diverse others, place and displaced the Magistrates as he
pleased, and then departed without suffering any spoil to be made, pretending
the Grand Signeours order for what he had done, and indeed the Court connived
at his proceedings, for awing corrupt Officers, he restored the face of Justice
in those parts, but not long after, he with a greater power marched toward
Brussia in Natolia, using the Name of Morat to color his purpose, pretending
to work a Reformation in the State, but in the ending of great preparations
were making to oppose him, he disbanded his Army and retired himself. And now
the mortality raged at Constantinople in such sort, that Fifty thousand died in
a short space, so that the City was left almost desolate; which known to the
Cossacks, they came again in their Boats, and sailing through the Bosphorus
made great spoil on Europe side, attempting to burn the Arsenal, to prevent
which all the Galleys and small Vessels in the Port were manned out, so that
between them there happened a fierce engagement; but the Cossacks Boats being
small though many in number, thirty of them by the shot of the Galleys were
sunk and overturned, insomuch that five hundred Cossacks were drowned and taken
Prisoners, and double the number of Turks slain, for the Boats being in all
three hundred, and each Boat manned with thirty or forty Musketeers, they
showered their Bullets so thick upon the Decks of the Galleys, that scarce a
Turk peeped out but he was cut off; twice they boarded the Admirals Gally, and
had taken it had not the Sea of a sudden gone high, and the Wind stood against
them.

Upon the approach of great Vizier toward the Province of Babylon, the King of
Persia sent to desire a Treaty of Peace, which was only to protract time, it in
the end coming to nothing, yet the Princes of Georgia sent their Ambassadors,
as willing to be freed from the Persian yoke, which Ambassadors were kindly
entertained by the Vizier, their demands granted, and the Bishop of Calcedon
their Country man sent back with them to see the Peace Ratified; upon which
they raised a great Army, and invaded the Territories of Persia, to oppose whom
the King sent part of his Army under the leading of his great Leiutenant, who
joining Battle was overthrown, with the loss of seven thousand of his men,
which greatly encouraged the Vizier, so that he resolved the next year to
besiege Babylon, in which was a Garrison of eight thousand Persians, besides
the Citizens who were five times the number, yet early in the Spring.

Anno 1626. having refreshed his Army, he pitched his Camp before that great
City, but as they were making their approaches Twenty Thousand Persian Horse,
who attended the motion of the Turks, fell into the Visiers quarter doing great
excution, and by that means troubled the whole Army, but in fine the Persians
were obliged to retire, yet not before they had slain about Six Thousand Turks,
upon which a muster was taken of the Army, which was found much less then was
expected for that a number of the Spahi and Janissaries that were inroled, had
forborne to undertake that dangerous, and so often fatal Expedition, and seven
Princes of the Arabs Tributaries to the Grand Signeour having raised their
power, refused to advance any further then the Borders of their Principalities,
alleging that they durst not displease the possessors of Babylon, but were
ready to obey if the City fell into the hands of the Turks, which weakness
known to the Persian King he drew thither the strength of his whole Kingdom,
and running Trenches round about the Turks Camp, besieged it in such manner
that all Provisions and Succors was cut off, and instead of hoping to win the
City, they were solicitous of nothing more then how to retreat. This danger of
the Army was made known to the Emperor and Divano at Constantinople, but
nothing was done till it was too late, for through want and diseases the Army
was so wasted, that they were no ways able to make head against their Enemies;
besides a great number of them were slain in the frequent fallies the besieged
made out of the City, and the Persians Incursions, who seldom failed to beat up
one quarter or other of the Camp, and hearing of no supplies durst advance, or
were in a probability to relieve the half starved Soldiers, who had left no
unclean thing uneaten, it was resolved that under the favor of the night the
Camp should rise and force a way through the Persian Squadron, rather choosing
to die like men then pine with hunger; Whereupon they brake their great
Artilery, and cast into the Euphrates all such things as they could not convey
away, to prevent their falling into the hands of the Enemy, and then with as
little noise as possible, broke through one quarter of the Persian Camp, yet
not so suddenly but that the Persians taking the Alarm, overtook them ere
they reached Ninive, and had the execution of the Army for the space of ten
days, in which time seventy thousand Turks and Tartars fell by the Sword, when
to cast the odium upon the Bassa's, and to save his credit at the Port the
Vizier caused three of their heads to be stricken off. This great blow caused
the revolt of many Cities, upon the Frontires of Persia, and endangered the
revolt of all Asia. The Turks not having received the like blow, since the
overthrow of Bajazet the first by Tamerlane the great, which caused a general
heavyness throughout the City of Constantinople, few therein but lost one
Friend or other in this unfortunate War, of which the Emperor of Germanies
Ambassador taking advantage pressed for a speedy conclusion of Peace, and
labored to cross the purpose of the Transylvanian Prince, but in the interim
the Imperial and Transylvanian Armies being abroad, on the 16th. of October
near to the River Gran a mortal Battle was fought between them, wherein the
latter was put to the rout, and in passing confusedly the River over two
Bridges laid for that purpose, Six thousand were slain drowned and taken
Prisoners, yet Winter coming on the Prince retired with his Troops, and without
the consent of the Turks made a Truce with the Imperialists for three months,
sending to the Port to excuse himself for so doing, by showing the necessity
that induced him so to do. But ere a Peace could be concluded as was intended
Count Mansfelt and Duke Ernestus, who were the greatest inciters thereto died,
so that nothing for a time was done therein, but it was left in the power of
the Prince, and Bassa of Buda to War upon the Emperor, as they found it
convenient or most advantageous, insomuch that they raised great forces
intending to make Austria the seat of War, but upon further negotiation that
design was laid aside, all Parties being more desirous of Peace then War, and
so matters were left doubtful.

About this time an Ambassador from the King of Persia, with overtures of Peace
arrived at Aleppo, but could get no Audience of the Vizier, who remained there
with his broken Army till an other Ambassador with presents arrived at
Constantinople, where he made such overtures that they were approved by many,
but the non-delivery of Babylon a little before taken by the Persians, put a
stop to the negotiation, the Turks not being willing upon any other Terms to
hearken to Peace, for that their Army in Asia was by this time recruited and
again entered into Persia, to avert which the Persians besieged Achiska a
strong City near Arzirum, being encouraged thereto by Abassa Bassa, to whom the
Vizier sent to draw out his forces, and in conjunction with the Georgians, to
join with such forces as he should send him which were three thousand
Janissaries under the leading of twelve Captains, with whom he sent Provision
and other necessaries, but for the hatred the Bassa had to that order he
commanded them to be set upon in the night, and almost all cut in pieces,
those that remained and were taken Prisoners he sent to the Persian King, and
then with such forces as he had Fortified himself in Arzirum. The news of this
disgrace coming to the ear of the Vizier, he drew down with all his forces
toward the Rebel, resolving to punish him if he could by any means get him into
his hands.

Now the treaty between the Imperial Ministers, those of the Grand Signeours
and Transylvanian Princes growing ripe, a Peace was concluded though severally,
for the Prince having understood that the King of Denmark who was coming to his
aid had been overthrown by Walstain the Emperors General, and that the Bassa
of Buda bought with German Gold, had crossed all his purposes at
Constantinople, and discovered his inmost Councils, he grew jealous of his own
state, and therefore thought it best to make Peace whilst he was in a capacity
to obtain honorable condition, which Treaty comprised in ten Articles were
Ratified at Presburg. The chief points of which were, That either side should
cease from Hostilities, and forbear directly or indirectly to assist each
others Rebels, and that all the City and Towns taken in the late War, should
be redelivered. Nor were the Turks slow in finishing their Treaty, as being no
ways able to maintain an Army in Europe by reason of their troubles in Asia, so
that much to the same purpose as the former contained in eleven Articles, the
Peace was concluded at the Port, to the great joy of all parties especially of
the Turks, who were now at leisure to recover their Towns, and quell the
Rebellions in Asia.

Anno 1627. Halil Bassa the great Vizier and General of the Turkish Army, in
having for sometime besieged Abassa Bassa in Arzirum, and finding his attempts
to win the City vain, by reason of the many inconveniences in his Camp, he was
forced to rise, which the Rebel perceiving sallied out and with all his forces
followed hard after for seven days, cutting off all his Rear, and took his
Treasure, Cannon and Baggage, which so discouraged the Soldiers, that they
mutined against their General and sought to stone him, and long was it ere they
could be appeased, whereupon he wrote to the Grand Signeour informing him that
there was no hopes of obedience unless the reverence of his person did revive
it, yet he rested at Tocat and for the better quieting disorders disbanded a
part of his Army, who almost naked to the great disgrace of the Vizier came to
Constantinople, which gave Abassa Bassa opportunity to hold correspondence with
the Poles, Tartars, and Cossacks, whereupon Husseruph Bassa a Vizier of the
Bench, and late Aga of the Janissaries, was chosen conductor of the Militia, and
passed over into Asia with such forces as could be instantly raised, and many
great Ordinance cast for the service, Galleys were likewise fitted out, and all
preparations made as far as the Treasure would extend, and it was further
concluded that Husseruph should march directly to Diarbecher to oppose the
Persian, and there remain as Bassa of the Province, and that on his way to
prevent charge, the Seal should be sent him and he constituted great Vizier in
the room of Halil Bassa, whose credit therein was had in regard for that he was
not sent for home as in disgrace, but in the head of the Army delivered up his
charge and so retired to the Port, there to continue one of the Council Visiers.

Anno 1628, about the 5th. of April Hasseruph was declared Grand Vizier, and
took upon him the charge of the Army with orders to march directly toward
Babylon, for of Abassa Bassa they had had enough the year before. Yet he wrote
to the Grand Signeour, terming himself his slave, promising him that he would
hold the Province of Arzirum for him, but if he sought to expe^^ him by force
he would put it into the hands of the Persian, but if he might possess it he
would defend it against him, and still hold him as the capital Enemy of the
Turkish Empire, nor should his forces be wanting to assist the new General in
his Expedition for the recovery of Babylon, and this was accepted as a plenary
submission.

Whilst the Grand Signeour was thus busied to settle affairs of Asia, and to
reduce Abassa Bassa to obedience, the Tartar Han was openly declared a Rebel
and Enemy to the Turkish Empire, and his Brother Schachin Geheray sent out of
Persia, to raise troubles on that side, having exacted a Tribute of the Princes
of Bugdania and Valachia, he was overthrown by Count Emire a Tartar Captain,
who undertook to reduce him to the obedience of the Grand Signeour, whereupon
it was suddenly resolved that it should be once again attempted to restore
Ghian Geray to that Kingdom, and to expel Mechmet Han, in order to which the
Captain Bassa once more prepared the Fleet of Galleys, so that for a year the
Mediterranean was like to be encumbered, and the Turkish Empire engaged in so
many troubles, that every thing seemed to work toward its subversion, but
great bodies have strong Luctations and die not with one fit, and such was the
blindness and misery of the times that whilst the Christian Princes contended
in ambitious and envious rather then just quarrels, none of them had leisure to
push down that Enemy who stood totterring on the brink of ruin, nor to
vindicate the Christian honor, nor the Holy Land oppressed and possessed by a
Tyrant, that only subsisted by their dissentions.

About this time great differences arose between the Greek and Romish Churches,
about superiority and forms of Worship, which was strongly maintained by either
party, insomuch that for a long time (to the scandal of the Christian Religion)
the controversy was debated before the Turkish Commissioners at
Constantinople, who being Enemies to both alike, nay, even to the very name of
Christ, moving no otherwise then they were bribed, laughing to see the
simplicity of the Christians, to make them Arbitrators of that which they
nothing more desired then to destroy, but in the end after infinite Treasure
spent, the Pope proved the richer, and therefore prevailed to have such of his
Clergy as had been dispossessed of their Colleges, Monasteries, and the like in
the Turkish Empire restored, especially the Jesuits who had been thrust out of
St. Bennets Church and Monastery in Galatia, concerning the restitution of whom
the Grand Signeour, at the instance of the French Ambassador sent his Letters
mandatory to Assan Bassa Captain of the Sea, and to the Cadee of Galatia.

About this time Sir Thomas Row, Ambassador at the Port for His Majesty of
Great Britain, procured leave to depart, by whom the Grand Signeour sent this
following Letter.

The Grand Signeours Letter to his Majesty of Great Britain.
TO the most glorious amongst the greatest Majesty's of the Princes of Jesus,
most reverenced amongst the People of the Messiah, sole Director of the
important affairs of the Nazarean Nation, Lord of the limits of Honor and
Power, Patron of Grace and Authority Charles King of Great Britain and
Ireland, to whose last days we wish all complete and true happiness.

Be it known unto your Majesty at the sight of this Letter, That your
Ambaffador Sir Thomas Row, respected and beloved amongst the Christians, to
whom we wish a happy end, being heretofore sent to reside as your Ambassador at
our happy Port, to be watchful over all offices of good correspondence between
us, and that all requisite terms of honor should be fulfilled, and to renew
the mantle of our affections, has from his first arrival here until this
present, most perfectly attended upon the charge imposer in him, and in all his
actions proceeded with extraordinary diligence and industry, for the high
honor and great fame of your Majesty His Sovereign, and now your Majesty
having sent in his place one of the chief of your most esteemed Sir Peter
Wyche, to reside at our Imperial Port, and that the said Sir Thomas Row has
taken resolution to return to your Majesty, with our Imperial consent we send
him unto you, with these our Imperial Letters, hoping in the most High God,
that when as he is most safely arrived with you, out of your abundant and
innate clemency, and your singular and sincere goodness, in respect of his good
and faithful service, that you will set him honored and rewarded, and to see
that the great affection and love which we nourish toward your Majesty, may be
daily increased we desire you readily employ your benign care in the keeping
and observing our Imperial Capitulation with every Article therein contained,
as we on our part will likewise do in all things that are meet to be done,
concerning their perfect observation, whereof you shall find a good and clear
Testimony by our future effects.

Given at Constantinople, Anno 1628.

With this Letter and several presents, Sir Thomas Row imbarqued on the
Sampson Frigate, in order to sail for England, but coming before Malta, and
being there becalmed, four Galleys came out of the Haven and set upon the
English Vessel, but after seven hours hot dispute were forced to retire with
the loss of thirty six Knights of the Order, and two hundred sixty four common
Soldiers and Rowers, when in the Sampson only one Jew a Passenger was killed,
and about six men wounded, yet the Ship was grievously rent with Culverin shot,
and had been lost had the Sea been outrageous.

Sir Peter Wyche His Majesty of great Britains new Ambassador at
Constantinople, had not long continued there before some disturbance happened,
occasioned by one William-Bundock an English Captains taking a Ship belonging
to the Port, as she was sailing to Messina, which caused the owners to demand
with much clamor reparation, insomuch that the Chimacham or Chief Officer of
the Port, caused an Imbargo to be laid upon two English Vessels then riding at
Anchor in the Haven of Constantinople, nor could the Ambassador procure their
release without a promise of reparation for the damages sustained, and that
the Actor should be punished, nor would the insolent Soldiers though no way
interessed therein till five hundred Dollars were bestowed amongst them.

Anno 1629. The Grand Signeour after much debate in counsel, made Provision to
renew the War in Persia, as the only design of Honor and Consequence, for
though the Turkish Empire engaged in many troubles required a judicious and
more then common providence to support it, beset with dangers on every side,
and bearing more apparent signs of its declination then ever. Yet the disgrace
of Halil Bassas retiring from Babylon, and from before Aczirum, and the loss of
the Treasure and Munition, so inspired Husseruph the new General with revenge,
that he desired nothing more then to blot out those stains that Eclipsed the
Turkish Diadem, whereupon having recruited his Army, he came before Babylon,
but after some bravadoes retired to Aleppo, without performing any thing worthy
mention, and there to satisfy his mutinous Soldiers, exacted money of all the
Merchants strangers and native inhabitants, encouraging every base fellow to
accuse Rich persons of one crime or other, and then himself sitting as Judge
would lay great fines on them, which they must pay or be imprisoned, upon the
the like pretense he imprisoned the English Consul residing there, and hanged
his Bruggerman or Interpreter, which insolences made known to His Majesty's
Ambassador at Constantinople, he complained to the Grand Signeour but had no
redress. Yet within a while after his ill conduct being made known he was
displaced, and Haffis Achmat Bassa made great Vizier in his stead, though not
without much difficulty, could he be induced to render his charge, for having
by large Bribes won the Soldiers, he fortified himself in Mosul or Ninive
biding defiance to his Master, yet at length he was reduced to obedience, but
would not trust himself in the City of Constantinople, but at a distance
plotted innovation, and therein proceeded so far that he cansed the Janissaries
and Spahi to mutiny, and force the Grand Signeour to deliver into their hands
the new Vizier, whom they instantly tore in pieces, and not so contented they
made a further demand of the Mufti and Teftarder put into their power, but at
the earnest entreaty of Morat they were appeased, though not before he promised
to made Husseruph a second time Vizier, and that Regeb Bassa should officiate
till his arrival.

The storm allayed the Grand Signeour began to consider that Husseruph had
raised it by the Influence he had upon the Soldiers, and therefore least he
should attempt any thing further, secret order was given to the Bassa of Buda
in whose Government he resided to send his head to Court, which was done
accordingly, but not so privately but that the Soldiers getting notice thereof,
suddenly made up their many headed monster, and in a great rage came to the
Seraglio demanding the heads of those that had been any way councelling or
consenting to the death of Husseruph, otherwise they threatened all with ruin,
but having no answer suitable to their minds they ran to the house of Regeb,
demanding of him who it was that had councelled so great a wickedness.
Whereupon to save his Life (which was then in no small danger) he protested he
knew not, and that himself was innocent of the matter, yet they forced him with
them to the Palace, and made him their Orator to demand what they desired, upon
which the Aga Mufti and Teftardar with a private Servant of the Grand Signeours
fled, but the latter being the next day taken and sent back, he was delivered
up as a sacrifice to the insolent Soldiers, who after their usual manner in
such like cases tore him in pieces. Yet they were not so contented, but upon a
rumor that the Grand Signeour had put his three Brethren to death, they broke
into the Palace and could hardly be quieted, although the young Princes were
produced, and that several officers swore upon the Alcoran, that they see the
grand Signeour lay his hand upon the book and swore they should have their
demands satisfied.

In these Tumults the goods of Merchants strangers went to wrack, and diverse
affronts and indignities were offered the several Ambassadors residing at the
Port, nor was this all, for about the same time Eleas Bassa Rebelled against
the Grand Signeour, and siezed upon the City of Amasia about a League from
Smirna, infesting all the Country with diverse outrages, his Soldiers living
altogether upon spoil, insomuch that the Merchants and Consuls at Smirna were
forced to remove with their goods to Scio, but an Army being sent against him,
he was in a pitched Battle discomfited and had most of his followers slain,
himself hardly escaping, and now the Grand Signeour supposing Regeb Bassa
(though indeed he was not) the Author of the late tumults, sent for him into
the Seraglio and there caused him to be strangled.

About this time a fight for the space of four hours was maintained by two
English Merchantmen, against thirty of the Turks Galleys, till at last the
English finding themselves too weak for such odds fired their Vessels and cast
themselves over board, where many of them perished, and those that were taken
up put to the Oars; in this fight a thousand Turks were slain, and amongst
them several Begs and men of note, of this apparent injury done by the Turks,
His Majesty of Great Britain by his Letter complained to the Grand Signeour,
requiring that those that were taken Captives might be restored to their
Liberty, that so a right understanding might continue, but the Turks alleging
that the Voyage of the two Ships were unlawful, by reason they Traded in the
Levant for Corn, the Ambassador could little prevail, and had much ado to save
the lives of the Captives. Yet in the end to hinder the dissolution of the
Turkish Trade, and to please the Grand Signeour, a Decree passed in the Star
Chamber prohibiting the Corn Trade in the Levant, upon which several of the
Captives were set at Liberty.

Three days after this action, a Fire happened in Constantinople which
consumed Seventy Thousand Houses.

The Persian War yet continuing, that King with a great Army besieged Van, a
strong City upon the Confines of Diarbecher, the news whereof arriving at the
Port, great preparations were made to prevent that important place from falling
into the hands of the Persians, it being Decreed that all the Beghs of Asia,
should repair thither with such forces as they could leavy, and endeavor its
releif, and to join them the Grand Vizier passed over with all European
Soldiers, but ere any thing could be done the City was taken, whereupon the
Vizier marched toward Aleppo, exacting great sums of money, and the better to
furnish himself, sent the Cadee a slave to Cyprus, and siezed upon all his
Treasure.

Soon after the Turks under pretense of the Christians rising, siezed all their
Arms, making it death to those in whose houses any were found after a time
prefixed, nor content with this they hanged a Venetian Merchant only for his
Money, and Imprisoned all the Christian Merchants in Constantinople, setting a
ransom of two thousand Dollars upon each, and that if the money was not paid
in four days they should be executed. The four Ambassadors of England, France,
Holland, and Venice were likewise convented before the Bassas in the Arsenal,
and charged for building a House and Chapel without leave from the Grand
Signeour, to have done it in contempt of his Imperial Majesty, and much ado
they had to escape being imprisoned, but in the end upon the Chapels being
demolished, and all the Arms they had in their Houses delivered to an officer
appointed to receive them, the Grand Signeour was pacified, though indeed this
was used only as a trick to extort money from them.

This being the present state of things in the Imperial Port, the English
Ambassador in the behalf of his King and Nation, made known the just
resentments of his Master, for the affront offered in the person of him his
Ambassador, as likewise did the rest exclaiming of injustice, insomuch that the
Captain Bassa told them that indeed the proceedings were too rigid, and that
for the future care should be taken to prevent the like, as for their Arms
taken away he said they had been seen by the Grand Signeour, and therefore
could not be restored, but that they had liberty to buy more, and the money
exacted of the Merchants could not at that time be restored by reason of the
urgent occasion of the state, and therefore entreated them to be pacified, but
the French Ambassador was so far fallen into the Grand Signeours displeasure
that his Death was determined, the execution whereof was with much danger to
the disswaders deferred, and upon second thoughts changed into an Imprisonment,
the cause of which was for that he had siezed upon sixty thousand Dollars sent
by the Town of Marseilles, to pay his Predecessors Debts contracted in
Constantinople, which money he converted to his own use, thereby defrauding the
Creditor and obliging them to clamor for Turkish Justice, which in it self is
cruelty and oppression.

These intestine troubles gave the Persians Liberty to make themselves Masters
of many strong places, which greatly alarumed the Ottoman Empire, insomuch that
great preparations were every where made, the Grand Signeour in person
intending to take the Field. But ere the Army could be raised and all things
gotten in a readiness, the Persians were far advanced, and taken many places of
importance, and amongst the rest Reivan a strong place, Garrisoned by the
Turks, taken from the Persians the year before, putting all they found therein
to the Sword and Ransom.

The report of these losses arriving, ere the Grand Signeour had put himself in
a readiness to accompany his Army, he laid aside his purpose of going in
person, and full of discontents remained at home to consult his own safety,
which was now threatened with such a storm, that to shun it was not imagined a
possibility in humane Providence, for the Soldiers that were abroad began to
express their discontents, refusing to receive their pay or to be commanded by
the Grand Vizier, for the Turks War with the Persians unwillingly, there being
no other cause for their invading each other then the emulation of greatness,
which has successively fired the Lords of those two mighty Empires. Besides the
Turks seldom meet in Persia with any plentiful spoils, so that they are neither
incited by their own freeness, nor allured by the hopes of any large reward.
But on the contrary to the Wars of Hungary and Poland, they have as to some
delightful spectacle, induced thereto by a superstitious zeal, as making
religion a ground for their attempts, and an assurance of large spoils, where
the Countries abound in all manner of Plenty.

This danger of the Soldiers mutiny abroad reached not presently the ears of
the Grand Signeour to terrify him with the apprehensions of a double storm,
for he had enough to do with the Janissaries, who now began to suspect another
design on foot for the extirpation of their order which made them cast off all
obedience, and set the great City of Constantinople in an uproar, which obliged
the Citizens every where to provide for their safeties, for the unruly
Soldiers having gotten the knack of making and unmaking Emperors at their
pleasure, were grown to that height of insolency that they supposed the center
of Government to rest in themselves, and each individual man of them thought
himself superior to any Officer in the Empire, insomuch that they accounted the
Grand Signeour but as their Steward entrusted by them with the Government, and
that his Life and safety wholly depended on their pleasure, which he well
perceiving knew no better means to render them tractable, then by distributing
large sums of money amongst them, which nevertheless at this time much availed
not, for being bent on mischief they plundered the houses of several Merchants
and rich Burghers killing and wounding such as resisted them, and in a fury ran
to the Palace demanding such Favorites as they named which being denied, they
presently fell into a consultation about deposing their Emperor. Nay, so far
proceeded that many persuaded to take away his Life as they had done his
Brother Osmans, but so divided were they in their Councils, that they could
come to no result at that time, but soon after assembling it was proposed, that
if the Grand Signeour would make amends by some acknowledgment of his ill
intents toward them, and confirm their Order and Privileges, his Government
(he being one that was not insensible of their power) might prove advantageous
to them, but that if his disposition rested yet undiscovered, it might render
the course of their Lives obnoxious to incertainties, for the Grand Signeour in
the beginning of his Reign, not exceeding fifteen years of age expressed a
natural inclination to action, which wits his years increased, and this had
settled some good opinion of him in the unruly Soldiers, whose desire is War
that by plunder they may enrich themselves. Though of late many of the
Janissaries (contrary to their first institution, and the long continued course
that former Emperors had obliged them to) had married Wives settled themselves
to Merchandise and were become both rich and effeminate.

In these and the like mischievous consultations many days were wasted, nor
could the Janissaries wanting their usual Confederates the Spahi, who were then
under the leading of the Grand Vizier at Arzirum effect their purpose as they
were wont which made them more cautious in their proceedings and to keep
together in one strong and entire body as fearing to be destroyed by a general
Massacre if they separated, such a rumor (whether spread by themselves to
countenance them in their unlawful purposes or really intended) being spread
about the City, and that in the room of them a new Militia should be
established, less chargeable and more tractable, after the same method as
Delavire Bassa had formerly purposed, and that many were for that purpose
enrolled on the Frontires, especially European Horsemen that were continually
in action to prevent the incursions of the Cossacks and free Heyducks, who
living mostly upon spoil greatly endammaged the Turks, but in the end a right
understanding being created between the Emperor and the Janissaries by the
mediation of the great Officers of the Court a Reconciliation was made, though
not without a wonderful mass of money distributed amongst the latter, who
frequently mutiny for no other purpose then by such means to enrich themselves,
well knowing that the Grand Signeour has no other way to appease them, then by
distributing large sums of money amongst them; nor were the Soldiers abroad
satisfied till they had sacrificed to their revenge the chief Treasurer of the
Army, the two Aga's of the Spahi's and the Chiaus Bassa of the Janissaries, nor
till a new Vizier was sent to discharge the Old one, and to lead them to the
Persian War.

During these troubles an Ambassador from the King of Persia arrived at
Constantinople, with many Rich presents, which caused him to have the speedier
Audience, and promise of an honorable Peace, bur whilst the Treaty held, the
Cossacks driven out of Poland by King Uladislaus, had siezed upon Asac a strong
City of the Grand Signeours, situate upon the mouth of the River Tanais, upon
the declining of a Hill, which they pillaged and afterward Fortified, keeping
possession thereof for the space of four years, at what time the Turk again
recovered it, as also great troubles arose in Tartary, upon the Tartar Hans
putting to death the Bassa Musti, and Cadi of Caffa, for reproving him of
Coward^^^, for thereupon the Grand Signeour secretly maintained Cautimeri and
his faction against him, who with Fire and Sword wasted his Country, and at
length passing the Niester siezed on the Country of Budziack near to
Beliegrode and Kilea bordering on the Country of Moldavia, on which he
likewise incroached drawing a World of People after him, which raised a
jealousy in Vladislaus the Polonian King, who doubting they would prove
troublesome neighbors, resolved to expel them by force of Arms, but whilst he
delayed the Tartar Han executed his purpose, for setting upon Cautimeri with a
great Army overthrew him, and followed the execution over the large Plains of
Dobruc, so that dispairing to appear any more formidable in the Field he fled
to Constantinople, where the Grand Signeour contrary to his Faith given, to
curry favor with Tartar Han caused him to be strangled, together with his Son,
when not long after a Nephew of this Cautimeri killed Tartar Han as he was
Hunting, and by a misguiding path separated from his followers, for which
Treachery he was applauded at Constantinople, as a man of admirable courage,
and upon news of Hans death caused Becher Gherey his brother to be Proclaimed
King of Tartary.

Notwithstanding the fair Promises of Morat, the Persian Ambassador was
dismissed without any agreement of Articles in relation to a Peace, and order
given to prosecute that War with all imaginable rigor, intending to go himself
in person and knock at the Gates of Babylon, whereupon he hung out the Horse
tail, a certain sign of his or the Grand Visiers taking the Field, and
increased the number of his Janissaries, revoking a Decree he had made to the
contrary, commanding his Bassas upon the Christian Frontiers to give no
occasion of complaint in his absence that might oblige him to retire ere he had
accomplished his purpose, and so with an Army of five hundred thousand Horse
and Foot, whereof three hundred thousand were fighting men, he entered Persia
about the end of May 1638. having joined the Grand Vizier with such forces as
he had at Iconium; and in his way overthrew a Shegh who had drawn a great
number of people into Rebellion under pretense of Religion, out of the
Mountains of Anatolia, but the Impostor escaping Morat to prevent his further
attempts, caused to be proclaimed that if he was not put into his hands he
would destroy all the Country with Fire and Sword, for fear of which he was
discovered by those that he trusted with the knowledge of his abode, and by the
Grand Signeours command flead alive, and with his skin off carried to the
wheel, and there broken without expressing the least sense of pain.

This let removed Morat passed on, to oppose whose passage the Persian King
took the Field with one hundred twenty thousand Horse, and put 30 thousand men
into Babylon, with what was necessary for their subsistence, but at the same
time his Country on the other side being invaded by the great Mogul o^ India,
who in favor of Morat had raised a powerful Army, he did not think it
convenient to give the Turks Battle but permitted them to pass the Euphrates
over a Brige, though not without gr^^t loss, for the Bridge giving way under so
great a weight, many Men, Horses, and Camels perished in the Water, but it
being repaired the remainder of the Army attained the further Bank, and in a
short time came to Mosul, anciently called Ninive, where all the petty Princes
whose Countries were near came to the Camp and tendered their Homage to the
Grand Signeour, bringing many rich presents and promising to become his
Tributaries.

The Army rising from before Mosul, Morat marched directly to Babylon,
(otherwise Bagdat accounted the ancientest City in the World, reported to be
built by Nimrod on the Bank of the River Euphrates) which he straightly besieged,
ordering his Batteries in three places to be raised, and each Battalion to be
appointed his quarter, himself being attired like a private Soldier to be the
less exposed to danger, protesting he would never change his Clothes unless he
might do it within the Walls of Babylon, and with words and gifts so encouraged
the Officers and Soldiers that within three days the Trenches were opened,
himself giving Fire to the first Cannon, and after that with fifty great pieces
he thundered against the Walls incessantly, being answered in the same Language
by the Defendants, who were eighty thousand fighting men, four or 5 thousand of
which frequently sallyed as they saw advantage making great slaughter of the
Turks for the Persian had put into this important place his Soldiers of
greatest courage, thinking by that means to prevent its falling into the Grand
Signeors hands, either by their valor or protracting the time till he could be
better at leisure to relieve it, but notwithstanding the continual skirmishes,
the Turks numerous Army advanced the Trenches to the brink of the Ditches,
railing several redoubts to secure themselves, and hinder the besieged from
sallying, and so effectually they wrought, hat within one months space they
filled up the first and second Ditches with Woolsacks, Fagots, and the like;
and then in great numbers assaulted the breaches the Cannon had made, but were
strenuously repulsed by the Persians, who showred on them all manner of warlike
instruments of death. The great Vizier signalizing himself above all by his
undaunted courage, commanding with his hand and voice was slain by a Musket
shot. This fight within the breach continued for the space of five days, where
both parties fighting like men in despair, the dead bodies lay in heaps, and
blood flowed like a Torrent. But at length the number of Turks prevailing they
under the leading of Mustapha Bassa, on the 22th. of December, Anno Dom. 1638.
entered the City, and set up the Royal standard, against whom notwithstanding
four and twenty thousand Persians made head, but quarter being offered them
they readily accepted it, throwing down their Arms and submitting upon the
public Faith of the Grand Signeour for their safety, who contrary to his
promise caused them when disarmed most barbarously to be Massacred, not sparing
either Man, Woman or Child.

The taking of Babylon caused great rejoicing at Constantinople, a twenty days
Feast being thereupon proclaimed, and many Ceremonies used according to the
Turkish manner, and the Grand Signeour having left a Garrison of thirty
thousand Men in his new conquered City returned to the Port, having in this
Expedition lost by the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence one hundred thousand of
his best men, and himself very much afflicted with sickness.

Soon after his return and triumphant entrance, an Ambassador arrived from
Persia with proposals of Peace, who being admitted to Audience, and the matter
afterward referred to the Chimacam a Peace was concluded, the chief Article
being that Reven should remain to the Sophy, and Babylon to the Grand Signeour.

During the Persian War the Venetians having sustained great damage by the
Pirates of Algier and Tunis, set forth a Fleet of Galleys and destroyed many of
those Rovers and amongst the rest seven in the Grand Signeours Port of Valona,
which he highly resented, but in the end was by several rich Presents pacified,
and the Peace renewed: and soon after an Envoy extraordinary from the Emperor
of Germany arrived at the Port, to congratulate the Grand Signeours success in
his late Persian War, but not bringing such Presents as were expected, he was
not received with the honor due to his Character; and there happening a
dispute between the English Ambassador and this Envoy about precedence, the
Turks granted it the former, being made to understand the difference Christian
Princes make between an Ambassador and an Envoy. And now Morat studying on whom
to turn his Arms, at length concluded to invade Germany, and in order thereto
called him the new Grand Vizier Mustapha, whom he had left with a part of the
Army in Persia, but death frustrated his project, for drinking excessively with
several of his Favorites and pot Companions he fell into a Fevour, whereupon
his Physicians being called were fearful to administer remedies, least proving
unsuccessful their lives should be endangered, yet at length they concluded to
let him blood which ha^^^^ed his end, ^he dying the 8th. of February, Anno Dom
1640. of his Reign the seventeen, and of his Age thirty one, having ruled in
the height of all excess and irregular disorders his youthful years enabled him
to support having murdered Orchan and Bajazet, two of his Brethren and leaving
himself no Issue, so that Ibrahim Son of Achmat, and his younger Brother,
preserved by strange Providence from his fury succeeded him in the Empire.

CHAP. XXIII. The Life and Reign of Sultan Ibrahim, the Twefth Emperor of the
Turks.
MOrat being dead as is before recited, Ibrahim the only Male surviver of the
Ottoman Race, was taken from the Prison in which his Brother had confined him
and proclaimed Emperor, though Morat in his Life time had by his will
bequeathed his Empire to the Tartar. This new Emperor being of a soft nature
suffered himself to be wholly governed by his Mother, and such Ministers as
were about him, himself being altogether weak in his understanding. So that the
War intended against the Germans was by the Council of the great Vizier
reverted on the Cossacks, yet for some reason for a while suspended, the great
Vizier in the mean while studying to take such out of the way that might
Eclipse his grandeur, and amongst the rest he caused the Captain Bassa, the
deceased Emperors Chief Favorite to be beheaded in Selistra, whither he had
sent him Governor for that purpose.

The news of Sultan Ibrahims advancement to the Throne, being known to the
Christian Princes, few of them deferred to send Ambassadors to congratulate him
on that occasion, each making him large Presents as the manner is, for as it is
often said in this History none may have Audience of the Turkish Emperor that
comes empty handed.

The Grand Signeour about this time greatly addicting himself to the use of
Women, fell into an Apoplexy which put many in doubt of his recovery, and
raised the greater confusion by reason he had no Children, and that it was
given out by his Women with whom he had to do, that he was not capable of
generation, therefore the Counselors consulted amongst themselves, that in
case he died without Issue the Son of a Sister or Niece should ascend the
Throne, and that in no wise the Succession should devolve to the Tartar, whose
right it is upon the failure of the Ottoman Male-line, but he soon after
recovering of his indisposition put them in some hopes, though that joy was
damped by the advice that came to Court of the ruin of several Important
Cities on the Frontires of Persia by a terrible Earthquake. Yet the Grand
Signeour to show the World that he intended something, gave Order to the Grand
Vizier to besiege Asac, possessed by the Cossacks in the Reign of Morat, as is
aforesaid which he did both by Sea and Land, and not without great loss of his
best men, reduced it to the Turkish obedience, Anno Dom. 1641. at what time it
was abandoned by the Garrison of Cossacks, who despairing to hold it long
departed with all their substance.

About the beginning of the following year the doubt of the Grand Signeours
improcreation vanished for one of his Sultanesses brought forth a Son, who was
named Mahomet, which replenished the Turkish Empire with joy, which Prince now
sways the Ottoman Scepter, during the Triumphs for the birth of the young
Prince, the Persian King by his Ambassador renewed his League with the Sultan,
which was performed upon an additional Article, that the Sophy would demolish
the Fortress of Fortrina, which he had built contrary to Articles on the
Frontires, not far from the Caspian Sea, which that it might assuredly be
performed a Capugibathee was dispatched to see it effected, after which a
considerable body of Turks gathering together in Hungary, endeavored to
surprise ^ab a strong Garrison on the frontires in this manner, viz. one
hundred men being trussed up in Carts, and covered with Hay and Straw in the
habit of Peasants, who getting entrance, were to leap out and surprise the
Sentinels that guarded the Gate, at what time four thousand Turks for that
purpose laid in Ambush were to enter and possess themselves of the place, but
this Treachery succeeded not, the Ambuscado being discovered by an Officer of
the Garrison that was abroad, he made it known to the Guards, who
notwithstanding permitted the Carts to enter and then drew up the Bridge and
unloaded the Carts, which rendered it apparent the intended Treachery in time of
Peace, of which the Emperor sent and Ambassador to Constantinople, but the
Turks being ashamed of what had happened, especially of their evil success
would not admit the Ambassador to his Audience unless the Emperor would first
agree to pay a yearly charge of one hundred thousand Rix-Dollars to the Port,
not by way of Tribute but of Present, in which unreasonable demand they took
more confidence for that they well perceived the Emperor was entangled in his
Wars with Sweden, the Christians dissension being ever advantageous to the
Turks. To these dishonorable demands the Emperor would in no wise condescend,
supposing it less perilous to venture a War in Hungary then to comply with
propositions so derogatory to the Majesty of his C^sa^ean greatness.

Ibrahim addicting himself to the Company of Women then in which he seemed in
nothing more to delight, spent more Treasure in the sift Wars of Venus, than
his Predecessor had done in his Persian Expedition, and so labored he therein
that Anno Dom. 1643. he had two other Sons born, which absolutely took away the
reproach of his frigidity and impotency, proving afterward the most Lascivious
and devoted Sultan that ever aspired to the Mohammedan paradise, where the
Company of fair Women is the chiefest felicity promised. Yet that he might not
be forgot abroad, he sent out his Fleet of Galleys, under the command of his
Captain Bassa, who after much Treasure spent without effecting any thing,
except strangling the Bassa of Cyprus for his store of Wealth he returned.

About this time a great Plague raging at Alexandria, about six thousand slaves
found means to escape and carry with them several Vessels that rode at Anchor
in the road, in which they conveyed themselves to Candia and Malta, and from
thence many of them found means to depart to their respective Countries, of
which the Grand Signeour having notice, sent to the Signory of Venice to
command their redelivery, which not being performed afterward occasioned the
loss of Candia, as shall in the Reign of Mahomet the fourth be discoursed of
more at large.

Now the year 1644. beginning Rogotskie Prince of Transylvania, who succeeded
Gabor in that Principality being of a turbulent nature, he so wrought with the
discontented Hungarians and Austrians that he caused them to Rebel, to whom he
joining his Forces, drew after him fifty thousand Horse and Foot, with which he
took Solnock, besieged Filek and Cassovia, for suppressing of whom the Emperor
caused his Troops to advance, who in diverse skirmishes worsted the Rebels, and
overthrew six thousand Turks, who were coming to the assistance of Rogotski,
but at length both parties tired with the toiles of War, on the 14th. of August
in the following year a Peace was concluded, and soon after the Grand Signeors
Mother ruling all in effect caused the Grand Vizier to be put to death, thereby
to render her Authority more dreadful to the rest, and caused her Son to
appoint Mahomet Bassa of Damascus Grand Vizier in his stead, who was altogether
at her devotion as being first promoted to the Bassa-ship of Damascus, at her
instant suit to her Son Morat Predecessor to this Emperor.

Whilst these matters were in agitation the Tartars forgetful of their late
Peace, made an incursion with thirty thousand men into Russia, against whom
Konispolski having made head with twenty thousand Horse and Foot defeated them,
killing twelve thousand, and taking three thousand Prisoners pursuing the
remainder to the Borders of Valachia, in like manner Wisnowick. a noble
Polander happily encountering another party of Tartars, as they were returning
from the spoil of a part of Moscovia, killed ten thousand of them, and
recovered a great booty, sending the rest naked into their own Country. The
Polonians thus prevailing the Grand Signeour to curry favor with the Polonian
King, deposed the Tartar Han from his sovereignty, which caused various
discourses, but upon the birth of the Grand Signeours fourth Son that wonder
ceased, nor was that all which changed the scene of admiration, for about this
time six Galleys of the Turks passing from Constantinople to Alexandria were
taken by the Knights of Malta, which greatly incensed the Grand Signeour
against the Venetians who had it in charge according to the League concluded
between that Signory and the Port, to guard those Seas, insomuch that under
Pretense of destroying the Island of Malta, this and former grievances induced
the Grand Signeour to make great preparation for the Invasion of Candia
formerly called Great, yet the Venetian Balio or Ambassador was caressed at
such a rate as he suspected no such Treachery, but the state growing jealous
upon notice of the great Naval preparation, provided cautiously for the safety
of their Island.

During these preparations the Grand Signeor followed his Lascivious courses
keeping his female Court in such splendour, that his greatest Treasure was spent
therein, nor was all the Silks of Italy sufficient to suffice his Women, but
upon the false rumor that the design was against the Maltesians, they were not
idle but in the best manner Fortified their chief places of strength, yet in
the end the storm fell not there but upon Candia, for the Fleet of a hundred
Galleys, and fifty great Ships with three hundred Saicks, most of the latter
being pressed for the transportation of Soldiers being arrived at Scio after
refreshment of the Army consisting of seven thousand Janissaries, fourteen
thousand Spahies, fifty thousand Timariots, three thousand Pioners, besides
Cooks, Bakers and other necessary followers set sail for Napoli Di Romagnia,
and having stayed there some time weighed Anchor and touching at diverse
Islands, some belonging to the Venetians, and others not, they at length came
to Candia (having taken a Venetian Vessel laden with Ammunition, and bound for
Retimo by the way) where no longer being able to hide their intentions they
unmasked themselves, by publishing the War both there and at Constantinople,
the latter of which was attended with the imprisonment of the Balio or Venetian
Ambassador, and giving order through all the Archipelago for the enslaving and
destroying all the subjects of that Republic, and here the Turk practiced his
usual beginning of War with more then ordinary caution, for though with other
Princes whose Territories border on him by Land, he usually endeavors to
strike at the same time when he gives the salutation of Peace. Yet here being
to contend at Sea where he was conscious his forces were inferior to those of
Venice, he practiced by a different method, making many vows and protestations
that no such thing was intended till he had safely Landed his Forces, yet were
not the Venetians so easy of belief, but that they likewise Armed thirty
Galleys, seventeen English and Dutch Ships, two Galliasses, and several other
Vessels of force, raising a great power by Land to transport into that
important Island, imploring the assistance of diverse Christian Princes, who
were not backward to their said, sending their Fleet to Sea under the Command
of Antonio Capello. Francisco Molino being made Proveditor General, whose good
conduct in affairs caused him to be made Proveditor General, and afterward
Duke of Venice, and an express sent to Andree Cornaro Inquisitor in Candia, to
Arm out twenty Galleys from the Arsenal of Canea, and to promote this design
the better, two English, an one Dutch Ship then in the Port of Mallomocco were
hired to carry Timber, fitted and already squared for the completing the said
number of Galleys, and Francisco Erizzo was appointed General of all the Naval
Forces, but he being stricken in years, whilst he intended to crown the
remainder of his days with glory was taken off by death, leaving sufficiently
graced with the memory of his past actions; yet the Fleet was no ways
obstructed, but with a prosperous gale sailed to Corfu, and from thence to
Candia, where the Turks were arrived before them and had landed without
opposition, occasioned by the difference (that ancient Remora) amongst the
Christian Princes Confederates, with the Venetians about bearing the flag,
which was vigorously contended for by the Genoways and Florentines, nor could
it be reconciled though the Pope earnestly labored therein, advising them for
the deciding the controversy at a time when the urgency admitted of no delay
to wave Ceremonies, yet ere they could come to the assistance of the Venetians,
the Turks had spoiled a great part of the Island, and after diverse skirmishes
with much blood and slaughter took Canea, the second City of importance, and
after that Retimo, in defense of which Andrea Cornaro lost his Life by a
Musket shot.

Anno 1646. The opportunity was fair for destroying the Turks Fleet as it
carelessly rod at Anchor near the Isle of Theodoro opposite to Canea, where had
the advantage been improved it might easily have been burnt, but such was the
contention amongst the Christian Commanders, that nothing was attempted worthy
of mention, whereupon Molino General of the Venetian Land Forces was revoked by
the Senate, and dismissed of his high charge, Capello being appointed to
succeed him, who being strengthened with an additional supply of Galleys,
Galliasses and Ships of War he wasted the Island, whilst Morosini with two and
twenty Ships faced the Towers of the Dordanellis in the Hellespont, and braved
the Ottoman power incountering such Galleys as in a dead calm were sent out
against him, which after a sharp dispute he obliged to retire, and then sailed
to join his Admiral persuading him to give the Turks Battle, but whilst he
delayed they landed an additional strength of forty thousand men on the Island,
and kept their Galleys so close within the Harbor that they could not be
indammaged without great disadvantage to the Christians, nor did the Fireships
too late prepared to burn them succeed, by reason they took Fire too soon; yet
the succeeding year Morosini having notice that the Turks were Landed at Scio,
and that they carelessly romed up and down, came thither with diverse Ships of
War took several of their Galleys, and in them many prisoners of note, but soon
afterward being serated from his Squadron in a storm, he was set upon by
fifteen Galleys of Rhodes and boarded, where fighting valiantly he was slain by
a Musket Bullet, yet his Ship upon the coming in of two Galliasses was
rescued. The funeral solemnity of this renowned Captain was celebrated with all
Pomp at Venice.

Not by Sea only but at Land the Turks invaded the Venetian Territories, for
pouring a multitude of men into Dalmatia, yet were not greatly successful for
Leonardo Foscolo the Venetian General, on that side overthrew their Forces in
diverse conflicts.

In one of which he took the Sanzack Licca, and slew his Son, recovered
Saccovar, Polissano, Islan, and Novogrode, the latter of which by order of the
Senate he demolished, and pursuing his good success took all the Cities and
Towns the Turks held on that side, utterly driving them out of Dalmatia, but
this joy was palliated by the unwelcome news of the Fleets being wrecked in the
Archipelago, and a great number of Ships and Galleys broken to pieces, which so
raised the drooping courage of the Turks that they advanced to the Walls of
Candia, and straightly besieged it but were so valiantly repulsed by the
Christians that had put themselves into it that after the loss of thirty
thousand men they were obliged to retire as not being capable of gaining it,
though Foscolo about this time proved successful in taking Clissa, a strong
Fort situate in the confines of Dalmatia, and overthrew Feckeli Bassa killing
and taking Prisoners the greatest part of his Army, which caused Morlaches to
revolt, and several of the principal inhabitants of Scutary to treat with the
Venetian General about putting that City into his hands, to take possession of
which seven thousand men were sent who seized some several small places, but ere
they could arrive at Scutari, their design was discovered and they obliged for
the preservation of their lives, to betake themselves to the Mountains for as
many as were taken the Turks impailed them alive.

The Grand Vizier enraged for the loss of Clissa dispatched Dervis Bassa into
part of Bosna with a powerful Army to assault Spelatro, against whom the
Venetian General marched together with Serich Capt. of Morlaches, but by reason
of the Christians disorderly march, in gathering the spoil of the Country, the
Turks set upon a part of the Army and put it to the rout, though Serich and
other Dalmatian Captains did all that men could perform In this conflict 400
Christians were slain and as many taken Prisoners, amongst the latter of which
was the Captain of Moriaches whom the Turks flayed alive, and afterward
impailed, yet though they subdued his body they could not conquer his
invincible mind, he bearing the same Constancy and Resolution in his torments
as he had done in Battle.

During these transactions Ibrahim indulged himself in all manner of pleasures
leaving the management of all his affairs to his Bassa, himself being wholly
directed by a wench, who in the nature of a Baud or procurer went from bath to
bath to take a view of the Ladies, and those she perceived fairest, she
inquired out the places of their abode and recommended them to her Lord, who
upon hearing her praise their beauty would instantly be enamoured of them and
send to fetch them either by fair means or force to his Bed. This course taken
for a while without coutroul, she at length filled his ears with the
commendation of a Sultaness, Widow to his brother Morat deceased, but this
Woman could by no entreaty be won to his Lust, nor obliged with presents to
comply alleging she had vowed perpetual Widowhood, and that her former Lord to
was living in conceit, which denial the more enraged Ibrahim now grown
impatient of delay, wherefore he intended to snatch that by force that entreaty
could not gain, wherefore watching her one day as she came out of the Bath, he
siezed her in his arms, which she perceiving resolved upon the defense of her
Chastity, and therefore drew her Dagger (a weapon which the Sultaness and Chief
Lady wear at their sides) and offered to wound him in her own defense, which
observing let go his hold, at what time the bustle causing a loud clamor his
Mother came from her apartment, who understanding what had happened began to
reprove her son of his lascivious behavior, during which the Sultaness found
means to escape, which so incensed Ibrahim that he confined his Mother to the
old Seraglio, interdicting her his presence till with submission and many
entreaties she had obtained pardon.

After the loss of this Sultaness his procurer called by him Shecher Para,
casting her eyes upon the Daughter of the Mufti a young Lady of excellent
beauty, so warmed the heart of Ibrahim with the relation of her rare
perfections, that he resolved to have her at any rate, and therefore at first
resolved to send for her by force, but considering the power of the Mufti, he
upon second thoughts suppoled it not convenient to incense him by such a rash
action, but rather to send for him and to treat with him about taking his
daughter to be one of his Sultana's, which he did, and reasoned with him about
that affair, but the old man who entirely loved his daughter and well
considering the wandering loves of Ibrahim, and that he having already sons her
off spring would be either poisoned, strangled or become sad recluses after his
death, inwardly resolved not to consent to his request, yet dissembled the
matter in excusing so great an honor to one that was unworthy of it, but
withal concluded to deal with his Daughter in the best mannen to the Sultans
advantage, but by their Law could oblige her therein no further then her free
consent allowed.

Pleased with this answer Ibrahim dismissed the Mufti with several rich
presents, thinking his wishes should now be satisfied, but the old man having
hardened his Daughter not to accept this offer returned with the unexpected
news next morning, that notwithstanding his persuasion and paternal commands,
his Daughter proved averse contrary to his expectation, but the reason he knew
not how to conjecture, since Women are commonly irregular and unreasonable in
their affections, Ibrahim in this manner disappointed of what he most desired,
dismissed the Mufti with neglect and disdaign, as one who had deceived his
trust soon after banished him the Court and his presence, growing unsatisfied
at all his administrations of Justice, and resolved another course for
obtaining the young Lady, the management of which he committed to her who had
recommended her to him, who assaulted her with promises of greatness, rich
gifts, and many fair words, but finding the Virgin to be deaf to her Sirens
song, she at last taking pity of such innocence and virtue at her request and
for a great reward, promised so to deal with the Sultan that he should put her
out of his thoughts which she attempted but in vain, for Ibrahim who by this
time had viewed her rare perfections was so inamoured of her, that sleeping or
waking he fancyed her Ides before him, whereupon finding fair means ineffectual
he resolved to use those he had often done, wherefore he commanded the Grand
Vizier, that next time she came to the bath he set a Guard upon her, and by
force bring her to his Bed, which was accordingly done, and Ibrahim for some
days enjoyed her, but sullenness, tears and reluctance much abated the
pleasure he expected for she would by no means be comforted, wherefore with
scorn and contempt he returned her to her father, who at first dissembled the
injury and disgrace, but in the end making his resentments known to Mahomet
Bassa a Principal member of the Divano, one of great Wisdom and practice in the
conduct of affairs, as also to the Aga of the Janissaries, both Enemies to the
Grand Vizier. It was concluded the Queen Mother should be drawn into the
Conspiracy, but how to do it against her Son they knew not well, therefore
resolved first the destruction of the Grand Vizier by laying to his charge the
contrivance of the Rape, as well as the forceable seizing of the Virgin, though
they aimed at deposing the Grand Signeour.

The Plot thus laid the Mufti begged an Audience of the Queen as if the would
entreat her to become an humble Intercessor for him to her Son, and being
admitted to her presence, after some conference he plainly perceived her
inveterate hatred against Ibrahim which made him break his mind more boldly to
her and in the end to propose the Imprisonment of the Grand Signeor yet
palliated his discourse with this allay, that he should not be absolutely laid
aside but only corrected a while, and thereby put in remembrance of his former
state, that so for the future he might be instructed what moderation and
Justice meant, and so insinuated that the Queen in hopes of Governing all
consented to what he proposed, whereupon strengthening their party they so
wrought that they caused the Janissaries to mutiny, and went at the heard of
them to the Grand Signeour, as seemingly forced to do by the rude Soldiers, and
being admitted they boldly demanded that the Grand Vizier should be deprived of
his office, and that (as it had been before agreed amongst the Conspirators)
Mahomet Bassa should succeed him in his office, which the Grand Signeour at
first refused, but being persuaded by his Mother that it was at that time
necessary so to do for appeasing the Tumultuary Soldiers he consented. Achmet
the deposed Vizier trembling at the consequences hereof, resolved to commit
himself to the protection of his merciless Enemy the Mufti, and therefore
hastened to his house to attend his return, hoping to find him his protector,
but the Mufti returning with the Aga of the Janissaries, and finding the deposed
Vizier in his house, the latter by the advice of the former delivered him up to
the fury of the Soldiers who having strangled him threw his dead body before
the gate of the new Mosch.

The next day the Janissaries arising in like tumult as before, demanded of the
Mufti whether according to their Law Ibrahim as a Fool, Tyrant, and one unfit
to wield the Ottoman Scepter, ought not to be deposed. To which the Mufti gave
answer in the affirmative, and caused Ibrahim to be summoned the next day to
appear in the Divano to administer Justice to his Subjects, and Soldiers who
expected it from him. But the Sultan supposing he had sufficiently satisfied
the Soldiers by putting the Grand Vizier out of office, laughed at the summons
the Mufti had made him which being seconded by a Fetfa (which is a point of Law
resolved by the Mufti, who is the mouth and Oracle of the Law, viz. that the
Grand Signeour called to account is obliged to appear before the Justice.) The
Sultan in high disdaign tore the paper, threatening the head of the Mufti, but
it was now too late he having surely fortified himself with the power and
strength of his rebellious companions. This Fetfa was immediately seconded by a
summons of a higher nature which declared that whosoever disobeyed the Law of
God was not a true Mussulman or believer, and though the Person of the Emperor
himself, yet being become by his actions a Rafir or Infidel was ipso facto
fallen from his Throne, and no further capable of Authority or Government. This
Fetfa being seen by Ibrahim he likewise tore it, commanding the Grand Vizier
instantly to put the Mufti to death as guilty of Treason against his Emperor,
but having by this time lost his Authority, his commands were not obeyed, nor
his person reverenced, for the Janissaries being assembled about five in the
afternoon came with their usual tumults to the gates of the Seraglio, at whose
approach Ibrahim losing all courage fled to his Mother for protection, begging
her assistance who being a bold and subtle Woman used all her Rhetoric and
Eloquence to persuade the Soldiers not to offer any violence to the person of
their Lord, promising that he should relinquish the Government, and retire
himself with a guard into the Lodging out of which he was advanced to the
Empire. Ibrahim comforted a little that his Life was spared willingly submitted
himself a Prisoner, when in the mean time the Soldiers taking forth his Eldest
Son Sultan Mahomet placed him on the Throne, every where proclaiming him
Emperor with loud Acclamations of which Ibrahim having notice grew impatient,
and often with sad laments beat his head against the Wall, till at length to
put a stop to his fury four Mutes were sent to strangle him, who on the 17th.
of August, Anno Dom. 1648. performed that barbarous exploit, so that according
to the saying of King Charles the first of Blessed Memory. There is but little
distance between the Prisons and Graves of Princes.

Sultan Ibrahim being thus made away Anno Dom. 1648. in the 8th. year of his
Reign, and 39 of his Age, the Government was committed into the hands of the
Grand Vizier, and the Queen Mother called by the Turks Riosem, and of 12
Bassa's, who were to manage all affairs with supreme power during the Minority
of Sultan Mahomet, whose Reign I shall pursue in the following chapter.

CHAP. XXII. The Reign of Mehmet or Mahomet the fourth of that Name, and
Thirteenth Emperor of the Turks, who now Reigns.
IBrahim deposed and murdered as in the foregoing Chapter is related, Mehmet
or rather Mahomet his Eldest Son of the Age of seven years supplied the empty
Throne, during whose minority which was to continue ten years longer, His Grand
Mother, the Grand Vizier and twelve Bassa's took into their hands the Reins of
Government, and after many debates resolved to continue the War with the
Venetians which Ibrahim designed to conclude the treaty of Peace in order
thereto being far advanced and the Ambassador of that Signiory, then at the
Port impatiently expecting an end of his negotiation, but whilst these affairs
were in hand the unruly Spahi's not having received the Largess usually
bestowed amongst them at the Installment of a new Emperor, making it their
pretense the better to color their discontents, that they were resolved to
revenge the death of the murdered Emperor whose fall the Janissaries had
occasioned, insomuch that a great difference arose between those two orders,
the former being the best Horsemen, and the latter the best Footmen, and
although many labored to appease that Tempest which threatened the dismembering
the Empire. Yet many skirmishes happened between these contrary Factions in the
streets of Constantinople, in which some hundreds were slain, but the Spahies
being for the most part worsted at length abandoned the City.

These animosities and divisions amongst the Turkish Soldiers, gave the
Venetians opportunity to provide for their defense, as expecting nothing less
then a War, for that their Ambassador had been clapped up on Prison for
demanding Audience, and chains put upon him, but at the entreaty of the other
Christian Ambassadors there residing he was set at Liberty. Yet to affront him
the Grand Vizier caused his Dugerman or Interpreter to be executed, and his
body thrown out at the Castle Window, which barbarous act is frequent amongst
the Turks, either to put a disgrace upon the Ambassador, or to terrify those
Interpreters that they shall not dare to speak any thing after an Ambassador
though upon his Audience, that should be ungrateful to the Grand Signeour,
which causes them many times to mince their words and not render a true
interpretation.

These matters widening differences between the Venetians and the Turks, great
preparations were made on either side, the former with all diligence
reinforcing Candia, and the latter to hinder it; so that many skirmished
happened by Land and Sea, till at length the Bassa Governor notwithstanding
the Venetian Fleet blocked up the Dardaneles, having received a recruit of 1500
men laid siege to the strong City Candia, and battered it with many pieces of
Ordinance, till at length having taken a small Fort that flanked it, he lodged
his men therein just as 6 Galleys of Malta arrived with 600 Volunteers, and 60
Knights of the Order, who beat out the Turks with great slaughter, yet they
retook it again and planted the Ottoman colors upon the highest Bullwark which
so enraged the Christians that sallying with all their force they drove the
Turks from the Walls with great slaughter, regained the piece, and caused the
Bassa with shame and loss to raise the siege.

The Wars growing hot in Candia, the discontents between the Spahi and
Janissaries that was before supposed to be appeased grew hot again, and much
slaughter happened between those inveterate factions, when to pacify the
latter the great Vizier was deposed and executed. Yet that little availed nor
was that all for several of the Bassa's denied to return the Tribute of their
Provinces, alleging they would reserve it till the Grand Signeour was of age,
and then be to him accountable both for principal and interest, nor were the
Wars in Bosna, Dalmatia, Foscolo, and other places on the Venetian Frontires
neglected, but continued with doubtful success, and great slaughter, yet part
of the Ottoman Forces on that side were diverted by the Cossacks, who at the
instigation of the Tartar Han covered the Black Sea, with their Boats and
committed many outrages insomuch that Constantinople trembled at their approach
as fearing a sack by the hands of those resolute people, but in the end having
gotten a rich booty they returned to their station.

The Venetians finding the Turks resolute bent to make themselves absolute
Lords of Candia in which Island they had got strong footing labored as
earnestly to expel them, so that huge Fleets on either side were prepared that
of the Turks consisting of 1100 Ships, Galleys, Galleasses, Saiques,
Brigantines and lesser Vessels furnished with Bombes, Mortar-pieces, and
Fireworks, producing strange effects, and in that order set forward from the
Port of Constantinople, with a strict command to give Battle of which Mocenigo
the Venetian Admiral having notice with the same willingness bore up with them,
so that there began a bloody, and for a long time doubtful Fight, but the
Venetians being better appointed than the Turks, broke and disordered their
huge Armado, sinking and taking several Galleys, and putting the rest to
flight, killing in one of them flying, the Bassa of Anatolia, who was sent to
succeed Chusadin Bassa, who had been made Grand Vizier in the General Ship of
Candia, yet the Turks having put into the Islands, and conceiving it a shame
for so great a Fleet to fly from one much inferior in number, resolved to
hazard another Battle, and therefore coming out of the several Harbors, and
ranging in the form of a Crescent, the Captain Bassa fired two Guns a Stern, in
token he was ready to Engage, which Mocenigo perceiving, bore up with him, and
began a second fight more dreadful than the former, playing with his Canon so
furiously, that he broke off her Poop, and killed 100 so her Men, sinking two
Galleys by her side, and greatly disablihng several others; nor were the Turks
idle, but used their utmost endeavor to blot out the disgrace they had
sustained by their late flight, but it availed not; for by the Thundering shot
and Fireworks, the Venetians plied them with, they were evey where put to the
worst; so that flying in all parts, the Venetian General following the
advantage, took 39 Galleys, 23 Ships, 3 Galliasses, and 3000 Soldiers, 40
Galleys, Ships, and other Vessels were burnt, or sunk; and in them, and by the
great and small shot, 9000 Turks perished in both Engagements, the rest hardly
escaping to Naxos.

This great loss made the Turks out of heart with marine Affairs, and so far
discouraged them, that ever since they have laid aside building Vessels of
Force as useless, say that God has given the Sea to Christians, and the Land
to Turks.

About this time came news to Constantinople that the people of Grand Cario and
Damascus taking the advantage of the intestine broils, had rebelled, and
shaken off the Turkish yoke; and assembling to the number of forty thousand,
had seized upon several strong places, many of the Ottoman Governors in those
parts, conniving at their proceedings, which greatly perplexed the Bassas of
the Divan, and obliged them to use their utmost Council to contrive a way to
extinguish this Combustion, during which, the Ca^di^ts had rest, and Fortified
their City in such a manner, that it became afterward the wonder of the World,
of which the Grand Vizier having notice, and fuming that his neglect had turned
so much to the advantage of the Christians, he resolved to try if he could gain
it by fair means, and in order thereto sent a Letter written in Letters of Gold
to the Venetian Senate, requiring them to deliver Candia up to the behoof of
the Grand Seignior, which was the only obstacle that hindered the conclusion of
Peace, desiring that an Ambassador might be sent to treat about it; but the
Venetians remembering that the Turks never made any peace, but when necessity
drove them to it, nor kept it longer than they found it advantageous, and
withal called to mind how evilly they had entreated their Ambassador,
generously refused to hearken to any Peace upon those terms commanding their
Admiral with his Fleet to block up the Dardanellis, which he so strictly
observed, that for want of succor the Turks in the Island of Candia were
greatly distressed, and began to mutiny, being hardly with great rewards
retained in due obedience, upon which, the Divan sent strict orders with many
Menaces upon refusal to the Captain Bassa then in the Bay of Rhodes to force
his way through the Venetian Fleet, and put men and Provision on shore at
Candia, thereby to cease the loud complaints of the Soldiers, yet could not be
induced thereto, but having plundered certain Islands he returned to
Constantinople with the Galleys, in hopes with his ill gotten booty to appease
the Divan, b^t contrary wise he was seized on and the goods sealed up with the
Grand Siegniours Signet, which none may on pain of death unloose without
command, yet such was the presumption of his Sons that they broke it open, and
putting the richest of the spoil, into a Galley, fled to distant Lands, thereby
exposing their fathers life to the fury of this enemies, who having dispatched
him constituted the Bassa of Buda Captain General in his stead, using all
diligence to rig out a new Navy, which once done, the new Captain desirous to
perform some exploit that might render him worthy of his place, taking his
advantage, broke through the Venetian Fleet, but therein sustained such damage
that he had little cause to boast, for the Venetians following him even to the
harbors mouth, plied him so with thundering shot, that seventeen of his
Galleys were sunk and taken, and four thousand of his men killed, yet he put
twelve thousand men on shore, and what provision he could spare, receiving
order to return when he had repaired his damage, though at the hazard of
battle, the which he did, though with more loss then went, for that the
Venetians having notice of what was intended, stood continually on their guard,
nevertheless he so extolled his own exploits and demeaned the Courage of the
Turkish Bassa, then General of the Forces in Candia, that he wrought the
destruction of the latter, for none being present to plead his Cause, and
Officer was instantly sent to fetch his head, whose place the foul detracter
afterward enjoyed, as likewise that of Great Vizier, which he soon after
resigned to the Bassa of Aleppo, a stirring active man, who after he had placed
and displaced such Officers of the Court as he thought convenient, sent to all
the Maritim Ports, Commanding those that were appointed to over-see them, with
Expedition to hasten thence such Ships and Galleys as were sit for Service,
determining to set forth a Fleet greater then what had for many Years before
been seen in the L^vant, which was accordingly done, but fared no better then
those that had been formerly Equiped; For Mustapha the New Captain Bassa
joining Battle with the Venetians was overthrown, and most of his chief Galleys
and Ships of War so rent by the Cannon, that for the future they were rendered
unserviceable, and many fell into the hands of the Venetians, the terror of
whose Prowess was such, that those Turks that could, abandoned their Ship and
fled to the shore, leaving their Ships to the Christians, in which conflict the
Venetians lost only one Vessel, which overpowered by a number of the Turks
Galleys, was fired by her own men.

These unfortunate Losses much discouraged the Turkish Merchants, and
Inhabitants of Constantinople, whose Trade was not only obstructed by reason of
the Seas being shut up, but they were likewise oppressed with heavy Taxes for
the maintenance of the War, which made them so desirous of Peace, that mutining
in great Number, they ran to the Gates of the Palace, Exclaiming against the
Ministers of State for protracting the War, and hindering the procurement of a
Peace, nor would be appeased till the Grand Vizier was made a Sacrifice to
their Revenge, the Muphti hardly escaping with Life.

For the better quieting these Tumults, the Bassas of the Divan were obliged to
enter into a further treaty with the Venetians, offering for Ten Millions to
withdraw their Forces out of the Island of Candia, and grant them an entire
peace, but this unreasonable demand was not accepted, the Senate knowing that
the City of Candia was so well Fortified that the Turks despaired of winning
it, and thereupon that they might seem the less to regard the Ottoman power,
they revoaked their Ambassador Seignior Capello, but he through Melancholy and
discontent occasioned by his hard usage at the Port, soon after dyed, leaving
his Commission with his Secretary, but that Expiring, nothing more was done at
that time, in relation to peace, which caused another Insurrection in the City,
which had like to have turned all into ruin and desolation, for the Spahi's
and Janissaries joining together, and pretending to reform abuses of State,
deposed the Grand Vizier, discharged the Principal Officers of the Court, and
obliged the Muphti to fly for his Life to Jerusalem, nor scarcely did the
Queen Mother remain secure in the old Seraglio, and to so great a height their
Rebellion proceeded, that they proposed the deposing the Grand Seignior, and
having thus cast off all duty and respect to their Prince, they entered the
Palace in a tumultuous manner, where forcing the Guards, they broke up the
Treasury, and conveyed thence Two Millions of Sultanies.

Nor in this General combustion which continued many days, did the Shops and
Warehouses of the Merchants escape pillaging, none daring oppose the fury of
the Licentious Soldiery, who had advanced a base fellow of their Faction to
the Grand Vizier-ship, though afterward the storm alayed, he was decently laid
aside, and one Kuperlee a Grave Turk placed in his stead, who caused several of
the Mutiniers to be Apprehended, and publicly Executed.

Notwithstanding these troubles, the Turks desisted not to carry on the War
against the Venetian, so resolutely were they bent to have Candia; In their
possession therefore Equiping another Great Fleet, they put to Sea in order to
relieve their men in the Island, but being again fought with by Mo^errigo the
Venetian Admiral, all the Fleet was either taken, sunk or stranded, upon which
the Venetians landed on the Island of Tenedos, and in four days became Masters
of it, as also they did of Stalimene anciently called Lemnos, which losses so
incensed the Grand Seignor (by this time grown to understanding, that he
resolved to carry the War into Dalmatia part of the Venetians Seignory, but
upon second thoughts resolved the recovery of the Islands, and in order thereto
put another Fleet to Sea, who after a great damage sustained by the Venetian
shot, thrust their men on shore in great numbers, and by that means the evil
Fortified Islands so lately taken by the Venetians, were by the Turks
recovered, in attempting the relief of which, Mocenigo the Venetian Admiral had
his Ship blown up by his powder, accidentally taking fire, by which Accident
himself, together with all that were on board perished.

These important places regained, the treaty of peace was offered to be
renewed, and some overtures were made by the Venetians, but now the Turks would
hearken to nothing unless Candia might be entirely put into their hands, with
the Fortress of Clissia in Dalmatia, and payment made of three Millions of
Gold, for the Damages sustained by the War, which unreasonable proposals, so
perjudicial to the honor of their Seignoury, the Senators Generously rejected,
rather resolving to maintain the War, and defend themselves more vigorously
then ever, which intention known, the Grand Seigniour gave second orders for
his Army to spoil Dalmatia, but in their March the Grand Vizier who headed
them, having caused the Bassa of Aleppos brother, who had a command in the Army
to be put to death for coming later to the Randesvous than was appointed, which
so ^nraged the Bassa, that raising 40000 men, he advanced even to the Walls of
Constantinople, burning up the Country before him, and there pitching his
Tents, sent to demand the head of the great Vizier, in reprisal for that of his
Murdered brothers, but not finding his expectations answered, he sent a second
Messenger to demand the heads of 4 other Bassas of the Council, whom he said
had been consenting thereto, and upon refusals threatened the destruction of
the City, but the Plague raging there at that time, after he had burnt up all
the Country about it, he retired into Asia, and there seting up a Youth of
Twenty Years of Age, whom he gave out to be the Lawful Son of Sultan Morat,
till that time hidden by his Mother from his Uncles fury; His Army was
wonderfully increased, insomuch that he would hearken to no Proposals of an
accommodation, though the Government of diverse Provinces were offered, but
Exhibited a Proclamation, wherein he declared Mahomet the unrightful Heir to
the Ottoman Empire, upon which he was pronounced a Rebel, and all men commanded
to rise up against him, and destroy him, but instead thereof most of the Asian
Forces revolted to him, which made the Divan suppose it high time to give a
check to the Progress of his Arms, and thereupon shipped over the Great Vizier
with a puissant Army, composed of the Flower of the Ottoman Chavalarie in
Europe, who joining with the Bassa, was in a great and mortal battle
overthrown: and with his broken Forces obliged to retire, which made the Grand
Seigniour with such Forces as he could raise, pass the Bosphorus, and joining
with the Viziers rallied Soldiers Composed an Army of Thirty Thousand Horse,
and Seventy Thousand Foot, with which he Marched against the Bassa, whose heart
at the approach of so great a power began to fail him, and make him more
pliable to hearken to Terms of Agreement, which he proposing to his Council of
War, and they approving his Resolution, a place was Assigned for Treaty, and
Mortaza Bassa made the Grand Seigniours Plenipotentiary, the Grand Seigniour
promising to stand to what ever he should Act, as indeed he did, for the Bassa
under pretense of a Treaty, being unadvised, drawn from his Army, was together
with Seventeen of his Attendants strangled by the said Mortaza, and such as he
had laid in ambush for that purpose, upon notice of which his Army that then
consisted of Eighty Thousand Horse and Foot dispersed, every Man shifting for
himself.

For this Exploit Mortaza was greatly applauded by the Grand Seigniour and
Grand Vizier, and had a considerable command conferred on him in the War,
against Rogotski the Transilvanian Prince, whose Country about this time the
Tartars had entered, at the instance of the Sultan with a great power, yet was
not the Asia Rebellion thus extinguished, for a Nephew of the dead Bassas
raising great Forces in the Territories of Aleppo, advanced with a Resolution
to revenge his Uncles death, to whom joined the two sons of Chusaein Bassa,
whom the Great Vizier had caused to be put to death, as also the Bey of Torgne,
and many others, which rendered this Army as formidable as the precedent, gave
new subject of fear at Constantinople, but the great Vizier so managed the
matter by sowing dissension among the chiefs, and bestowing large sums of Money
on the Soldiers that the Army daily diminished, till at length it came to
nothing; leaving many of the Commanders to the mercy of the Vizier, who never
spared any man that was guilty of a crime, or suspected to be so.

Asia being again reduced to Obedience, the Grand Seignior had leisure to think
of his Wars with the Venetians, and therefore gave strict command for part of
his Army to march into Daimatia, and the other part to be imbarqued for Candia;
he resolving to besiege the Me^ropolitan City of that Name; nor were the
Venetians slack for having received a reinforcement of Four Thousand French
Foot, and diverse other Aids sent them by the Christian Princes, their
Confederates; They took the Forts of Calamo, Calegro, and Epicarno, hardly
distressing the Bassa of Canea in the principal City of his Province; insomuch
that he was obliged to write to Constantinople for speedy succor, le^t that
City should be lost; for the Venetians daily battered it, and pressed it hard
with continual Assaults; but a supply of Three Thousand fresh men being by
Night thrust into it, the Venetians raised the siege, and marched to New
Candia, (built near to Old Canoia) in hopes to beat the Turks out of it, but
prevailed not according to their expectation.

About this time, the Vizier with a Great Army arrived at Belgrade, but there
falling sick, he returned to Adrinople, to recover his Health; swearing, that
if he found Death approach, he would ca^^e all his Physicians to be put to
(...) which (...) servation rendered them double-diligent. These were the
principal revolutions in the Ottoman Empire from the time Mahomet ascended the
Throne, till the year 1^60.

Anno Dom. 1661. About the beginning of this year, His Majesty of Great Britain
sent the Earl of Winchelsea, his Ambassador, to Constantinople; who upon his
arrival at the Port, was received, as became his Character, with all the
Grandeur that the Turks allow to any Ambassador; and after his Audience,
conveyed with due Ceremony to the prepared for his reception; and now the Turks
being at leisure, invaded Transylvania, in order to depose Prince Rogotski, who
after having deposed himself and made his submission, in hopes to be restored,
but finding his hopes frustrated, and another advanced in his stead: Again he
assumed his Government, and raising a powerful Army, made diverse Inroads into
the Turkish Dominions, till at last joining Battle with the Bassas of Buda and
Temeswar near Julia A^ba; where being overthrown and wounded, he fled to
Varadia, and there within Fifteen days, dyed of the Hurts received in Battle,
yet was it no ways satisfactory to the proud Bassas, unless they might reduce
that City, which as they alleged, had taken part with their Masters Rebels;
whereupon drawing down their Army, they laid close siege, which so terrified
the Citizens, that they sent their Deputies to the Caesarean Emperor, to
require aid, desiring him to take them into his protection; but whilst the
Imperialists delayed, and made many scruples of breaking the League with the
Turks after many furious Assaults, and great Slaughter on either side the City
was surrendered. In consideration that the Garrison should march out with Drums
beating, Color flying, etc. and to go whither they pleased, which conditions
being performed, the Turks took possession of that strong Frontire City.

Varadin thus taken, the Citizens of Vienna were not a little alarmed thereat,
though none used any endeavors either to relieve it when besieged, or to
recover it when taken; nor in the least to annoy the Turks, unless Count John
Serini, a Prince, who had a fair Sovereign Inheritance in those parts, and was
under the Emperor made Governor, of Croatia, who raising a power laid siege
to the strong City of Canisia, which at that time was almost destroyed by an
accidental Fire; but upon notice thereof, the Emperor not only denied to
assist him in his enterprise, but sent an express Command to him to raise his
siege; at which in a rage he cast his Scimiter on the Ground, and for a while
stood mute, yet not thinking it convenient to disobey his Sovereigns Commands,
though he might easily have taken the City, he raised his siege.

The Transylvanian blocked up as it were on every side by the Turks, about this
time implored a second time the Emperors Assistance, resolving to shake off the
Turkish yoke; and in order thereunto, they banished Acatius Barklay, who since
the Death of Ragotski had governed in chief, greatly favoring the Turks, and
in his stead constituted one Kemenus, sometimes General of Ragotski's Army;
which plainly manifesting their hatred to the Turks the German or Caesarean
Emperor resolved to assist them; they consenting to admit Garrisons of German
Soldiers into diverse of their Cities, using them with all respect, and
plentifully providing them with all convenient necessaries.

Yet the Germans made small show of taking the Field to assist or protect the
Transylvanians; but on the contrary wrote to the Bassa of Buda, to certifi^ him
that the peace should be kept inviolable; ye^ the Turk not contented, entered
Hungary, and laye^ waste a great part of it that was subject to the Emperor;
whereupon Count Serini built a Fortress i^ the Turks Dominions, near Canisia,
e're the Turks were aware, at which the Grand Vizier was so enraged, that he
sent an express to strangle the Bass^ of Buda, for permitting it; so that the
League being apparently broken, or infringed on either sid^ the German Army,
under the Command of Coun^ Montecuculi, and joined with the Transylvanians
under the Leading of Kemenius, their General; which Conjunction rendered them
so formidable to the Ottoman Empire, that Ali Bassa durst not oppose their
progress, till he had divided the Transylvanians amongst themselves, by
advancing one Apafi to the principality, who being well beloved, caused by
sundry means the Army of Kemenus for the most part t^ revolt; of which the
crafty Bassa taking the advantage, set upon him, and in a bloody Battle over
threw his people with great slaughter, obliging him for his safety to fly into
Hungary, from whence returning after he had recruited his broken Army, onc^
more to try the fortune of a Field; he was in a second Battle put to the rout;
and as he retired beaten from off his Horse by one of his own Soldiers where
none relieving him, he was trodden to Death under the Horses Feet, and left the
greatest part o^ his people a sacrifice to the enraged Turks.

Kemenius thus dead. Apafi's Party was greatly in couraged, insomuch that
joining with a Body o^ Turks, they besieged Claudiopolis, of which David
R^tani, a right Valiant Soldier was Governor, having under his Command a
Garrison of German Horse and Foot; yet the Turks and Transylvanians battered
(...) for a while, but upon the arrival of General Schenidan, who in spite of
them put a reinforcement into the Town, and made great slaughter of their
outguards.

About this time the Plague raged in Constantinople, in the Camp at such a
rate, that Fifty Thousand persons of all Ages and Sexes dyed, which leaving the
City almost desolate, the Grand Signior retired to Adrinople, and there made
his solemn entrance; which place so delighted him, that he had since for the
most part resided there, where Rupe^ee the Old Vizier so dealt with him, that
he procured a promise that his Son Ahmet whom he had made Chineacam of
Constantinople, should be assisting to him in his Visier-ship, and after his
Death succeed him in that place of trust, the which though contrary to the
Ottoman Custom, who hold it dangerous to, that any Office should go by
Inheritance; accordingly came to pass, to the great grief of the Court Bassas,
who are ever emulous of that place, etc. For old Kuperle (after he had been
five years Vizier, and in that time had caused Thirty Thousand Persons to fall
by the hands of diverse Executioners, being the bloodiest that ever officiated
that place) dying, his Son Ahmet had the Grand Signiors Patent, and the Seal of
the Empire delivered to him, taking upon him the Office of Great Vizier at the
Age of Thirty two years, a thing not usual, and not to be behind hand with his
Father, established himself upon the destruction of such as he suspected to
envy at his advancement; amongst whom, the Bassa of Magnesia fell a Sacrifice;
he likewise procured the Banishment of Solomon, Bassa of Damascus, and that of
the Muphti, and indeed caused to be made away, or displaced all that he
suspected averse to his interest.

During the transaction of these miscalled statepolicies: the Venetians had
rendered themselves formidable at Sea, by taking and destroying many of the
Turks Galleys, few escaping them in the Archipelago, which greatly discouraged
the Turks in Canaea, and put them out of all hopes of procuring an^ entire
possession of the Island of Candia.

Anno Dom. 1662. About the beginning of this year, the Government of Argiers
sent Deputies with presents to the Ottoman Court, to exhibit a complaint
against the English; for that the Earl of Sandwich, with a Squadron of his
Majesty's Frigates, had destroyed several of their Ships, and beaten down, or
dismantled their Castles; but the cause being rightly stated by the Earl of
Winchelsea, they were so far from prejudicing the English by their complaint,
that they were fain to sneak away for the preservation of their own heads. The
Plague being now abated at Constantinople, the Grand Signior returned thither,
and gave himself wholly to hunting, which above all other exercises he admired,
having in the Chase of Wild Beasts many times Twenty Thousand Men attending
him, who forelayed the Woods and Forests to procure his Game ^ but whilst he
thus gave himself up to Recreation the Vizier was as studious to remove all
those that might Eclipse his Greatness, or any ways endanger him; so that in
despite to the Queen Mother whom he knew was no savourer of his proceedings he
displaced the Teftarder, or Chief Treasurer, and banished him the City; which
so far incensed he^ that ^he joining with Ruzlir Aga, chief Eunuch ^^ the
Women, procured the removal of his Chief Favorite or Counselor; by whose
advice he was only supported in the management of his Affairs, and greatly
inveighed against the Vizier, exhibiting many complaints against him to the
Grand Signior, and pressed them to that point, that the Grand Signior began to
have him in suspicion, and to make him more narrowly, which he perceiving, and
knowing from what Fountain it sprung, endeavored to reconcile himself to the
Queen Mother, but in vain; for her Spirit would not permit her to make any
Accommodation; wherefore he fearing one day to fall by her means, was about to
resign his Visiership; but upon second thoughts, concluded it safer to face the
Tempest, come what would come, and fall with Honor, rather than tamely expose
himself to the mercy of his Enemies; wherefore he began a new to practice the
Death of such as stood in opposition to his greatness; and especially of
Mortaza, Bassa of Babylon, whom he obliged to relinquish his trust, but could
not get him within his power: for having married one of the Daughters of the
Prince of Gordean, he retired to his Country in the Mountain of Amanus, where
he had a strong City assigned him, and there kept out of the Visiers reach,
refusing all the feigned proffers of kindness which were made to decoy him into
danger; but such was the restless endeavor of the Grand Vizier, that he
desisted not, till he was put into his hands, who immediately caused his Head
to be stricken off, and sent to Constantinople, which was looked upon by many
as a just Judgment of God, for his treacherously murdering the Bassa of
Aleppo, contrary to the Faith given for his security.

These things happening, the Turks after breath taken, purposed to turn their
Arms upon the Germans, but after many Consultations the matter was deferred to
a fitter opportunity, by reason the Affairs of Transylvania were not to the
mind of the Grand Signior, though the progress of his Arms had put all that
Principality into a fear of utter subversion, having seized most of the strong
places nor durst Apafi: Prince only in name, interpose his Authority, or so
much as intercede for the preservation of his bleeding Country; yet the German
Commanders seeing all on the point of ruin, resolved to lay hold of the
opportunity, and secure s^^^ places as were most commodious to the Empire when
pushed forward by the renowned Captain^ Count Serini, they seized on
Claudiopolis, Somosw^^ Sc^hil^^d, Clewa^, alias Coleswar, and Betlem, with some
other Towns and Fortresses of lesser note.

The outrages committed by the Turks in this Province were so great, that the
oppressed Nobility were obliged to send their humble Petitions to diverse
Christian Princes, to take pity of their sufferings, and deliver them out of
the hands of their barbarous Enemies, and to the minister of the Christian
Princes, residing at the Port to intercede with the like supplication, to
intercede for them to the Grand Signior, or Grand Vizier, but all proved
ineffectual, for the Turks had resolved a total subjection of that
Principality, and to reduce it under the obedience of a Bassa.

Affairs standing thus in Transylvania, the Wa^ with the Venetians went on
slowly; for the Venetian being Masters at Sea, intercepted all such Vessel^ and
Ammunition as were sent to any of the Islands and amongst the rest, the Fleet
bound for Alexandri^ in Egypt, consisting of Sixty Sail, most of which we^^
taken, sunk, and burnt; a number of Slaves rescued, and prize made of a rich
booty: Soon after which, Signior Capello, through grief and hardship endured in
his Imprisonment, dyed; whose Bod^ imbalmed was with much difficulty sent to
Venice, by the Earl of Winchelsea, His Majesty of Great Britains Ambassador,
and there honorably Interrest with his Ances^^^s.

The (...) being informed that the Christians had rebuilt several Churches,
consumed by the Fires that had happened in Constantinople, and Gala^ia, by some
malicious Pharisees, caused them to be demolished, and that the Authors of
those Buildings should be Imprisoned; for as much as the Mahome^an Law
tolerates the rebuilding of no Christian Churches, nor Erecting new ones where
none stood before; but allows those to stand, that were found standing, when
the Mahometans took possession of the City, Town, or Village wherein they are
situate; and so far proceeded he therein, that procuring the Laborers of the
Maimarbashed, or Master Builder, to accuse him of encouraging the building of
those Churches; which done, he caused his Head to be stricken off, and his
Wealth to be seized, which according to report, amounted to Two Thousand Purses
of Money, every Purse containing Five Hundred Dollars.

About this time, The Sieur De la Hay, the French Ambassador having received
diverse affronts at the Port, was imprisoned, which had like utterly to have
dissolved the Communication between the two Nations; but at the entreaty of the
Merchants of Marseles and Lions, whose interest would greatly have suffered, if
by that means their Trading into the Grand Signiors Dominions had been
obstructed, the French King was prevailed with to send another Ambassador with
Letters to the Grand Signior, and Grand Vizier, to require in some manner a
reparation of the dishonor he sustained in the person of his Ambassador,
greatly dissembling his resentments, but in the end was obliged to rest
satisfied with a Complement or two, instead of other reparation, and himself to
make his own Ambassador amends the better to blind the Eyes of the Christian
Ministers residing at the Port, and salve up the wounds his honor received by
the disgrace.

The Emperor of Germany resolving on a War with the Turks after great
preparation was obstructed, and obliged to come to a dishonorable treaty by
reason of an accident that happened at Rome occasioning a wide breach between
the Pope and the French King to the indangering of Christendom, which was thus,
the French Ambassadors Coach passing the streets of Rome, was assaulted by the
Corsi Natives of the Island of Corsica, which are retained as the Popes guard,
the page killed in the boot, and the Ambassadors Lady wounded, but upon what
instigation remains doubtful, yet the King took it so heinously that he
resolved to War upon the Popes Territories in Italy, which discord did not a
little rejoice the Turks, who imputed it the merit of ^^eir Prayers as indeed
they do all other divisions amongst the Christians.

The Treaty of Peace by reason of the divisions aforesaid having continued
between the two Empires, without coming to any result, about the beginning of
the year 1663 great forces were levied on either side, and all hopes of peace
vanished, insomuch that the Turks squaring out the platform of the War on their
part, resolved to recover the places they sometimes held in Hungary, but more
especially Rab and Komora, and thereupon with a great Army passed the Danube
over a Bridge of Boats, upon whom the Governor of Newheusel sallied with eight
thousand men, though contrary to the advice of his Council, with which in the
night he entered their Camp and made a great slaughter, but the gross of the
Army having passed the River, and taken the alarm, Cressent-wise closing the
horns at the back of the Christians made of them a miserable slaughter, who
notwithstanding sold their lives at a dear rate, falling upon heaps of the
Enemy till at last tired with slaughter, those that remained alive yielded
themselves Prisoners, and were notwithstanding contrary to the Law of Arms by
the Visiers command barbarously murdered. In this disaster the Governor
hardly escaped, and in his return was but coldly received, for that he by his
rashness had exposed the lives of so many brave Soldiers, to the cruel Swords
of their barbarous Enemies, but this cruelty was soon after revenged upon the
Turks in like manner by Count Serini.

This fatal loss sounded harsh in the Emperors ears, and obliged Forcatz
Governor of Newheusel to send to Monticuculi Governor of Rab, to advise him
of his evil success, and that if a re-inforcement was not speedily sent the
place must of necessity fall into the hands of the Enemy, whereupon one
thousand select Soldiers were drawn out of Rab and sent thither, but scarcely
were they entered before the Turk set down before it, and summoned the
Governor to surrender, but upon his refusing on the 14th. of August they
prepared for a General storm. In order to which about break of day Faggots and
Rubbish were brought to fill up the ditch, and scaling Ladders to ascend the
Walls, but although they were many in number, and the assault made with all
imaginable vigor, yet they were received by the defendants with that courage
and gallantry, that the Trenches were filled with their Carcasses, and at
length obliged to retreat with the loss of six thousand of their men.

The siege still continuing the Turks angry and inflamed with the disgrace of
their late foil, endeavored to redeem their honor by a second attempt filling
up the Ditches as before, and furiously attacked the outworks, but was so
miserably rent with the Flankers that they were forced to fall of with more
loss and confusion then before, which so incensed the Vizier, that drawing and
part of his Army to which he joined some Companies of Tartars, he sent them
over the River Waag to Forage the Countries of Austria and Moravia, which they
did (after having defeated the German for that (few in number) were appointed
to guard the frontires) in such a manner as the like desolation had never
happened in those parts, running even to the Walls of Vienna with Fire and
Sword, which put that City into a great consternation, and caused the Emperor
to remove to Lintz, yet for all this imminent danger the Diet brought nothing
to perfection, in order to the inabling the Emperor to raise more Forces, but
rather spent the time in cavilling at little niceties, during which Newheusel
upon their Magazine of Powder accidentally taking Fire surrendered, upon
Articles honorable to the besieged.

The Turks heightened with their success laid siege to Levents, which after
many threats and fair promises was put into their possession by the
Inhabitants, which so overjoyed the Turks that feasted they for several days,
and then marched to Schinta the Magazine of the Emperors Arms, and Artillery,
which they assaulted, but with great loss were beaten off, and forced to raise
their siege, yet passing on they took Novigrode, a strong Castle situate upon
a Rock, and Garrisoned with six hundred Soldiers, provided with all
necessaries that might have encouraged them to a resolute defense, and not upon
such easy terms have surrendered a place of such strength.

Winter approaching the Grand Vizier with part of his Army marched back to
Belgrade there to q^arter till the Spring, ordering a flying Army of (...)
thousand Turks and Tartars under the leading of the Bassa of Temeswar to pass
into Stira and Crotia, the Countries of Count Serini, who was about that time
returned out of Hungary, and there to sill all places with desolation of which
the heroic Count having notice resolved they should not want a welcome and
therefore raising such Forces which were not above six hundred, and with this
handful betook himself to the banks of the River Muer, to give a stop if
possible to the passage of the Enemy placing Sentinels in all places where the
River was fordable, yet two thousand Turks, passed undiscerned upon whom he set
with such undaunted courage that he soon put them to flight, who in seeking to
repass the River and missing the place they passed at and pressed by the Count
they threw themselves headlong into the depths and there mostly perished, which
the Turks on the further bank perceiving were so amazed at the stupendous
valor of Serini, that their courage failing them they desisted from any
further attempt upon his Countries. Yet the Count not satisfied raised against
the Spring, viz. 1664. a considerable power and marched into the Turks
Territories, destroying all before him taking many important places, and
burning a bridge made over the Fenns six or seven miles in length, which cost
the Turks six hundred thousand Dollars in building, and six years labor, he
likewise took Quinque Ecclesiae, and following the course of his victory taking
in many small Towns and Castles in his way, he came before Sigeth a Fortress of
the Turks, consisting of the new and old Town joined by a bridge cross a famous
marsh, and fell into the hands of the Turks in the Reign of Solomon the
Magnificent, Anno 1565. he then besieging it with an Army of six hundred
thousand Men, in defense of which Nicholas Serini great grand father to this
Count, immortalized his same and memory with the loss of his Life. This place
the Count resolved to take and sacrifice such barbarous Turks as would not by a
timely surrender submit to his mercy, to the Ghost of his Ancestors, but when
he had a long time battered it, and it at a point to yield, news was brought
that a great number of Turks and Tartars were on their way to relieve it,
whereupon calling a Council of War it was therein concluded that it was not
safe to hazard a Battle, and thereby endanger what was already acquired, but
rather give place to necessity and return with such spoils as they had which
indeed were very great.

Whilst this renowned Champion in the Christian cause so bravely behaved
himself on the one side, the affairs in Transylvania succeeded not so well for
the Garrison of Clovinopolis wanting pay mutined and delivered up that
important place to Apafi, which rouzed the Germans out of their Lethargy, and
made them begin to bestir themselves, and the grand Signeour mad at the loss he
had sustained by the Arms of Serini, sent sharply to reprove the Vizier of
negligence charging under severe penalties to be more vigilant for the future,
but in spite of all he could do, the Count on whose plumes fledged victory sat
perching, having a while taken breath plucked other plumes from the Turkish
Empire; when to exasperate him the Vizier sent several Troops to take his new
Fort of Serniswar, yet not so covertly but that he had notice thereof, and
immediately dispatched a messenger to his brother Peter Serini, (whom he had
left to guard the frontires himself at that time prosecuting his good success
in Hungary) to be in a readiness to receive them which young Prince no less
courageous then his brother, setting upon the Turks as they were passing the
straits of Morlac he killed two thousand of them, took fifteen hundred
Prisoners and put the rest to a disorderly flight.

Upon news of this success the Count resolved to besiege Canisia, and in order
thereunto went disguised, only accompanied with fourteen of his officers to
take a view of its strength and situation but was not so private therein, but
that the Turks had secret intelligence of his purpose, and laid an Ambush of
five hundred Horse some distance without the Walls to entrap him, but
providence so ordered it, that by the swiftness of his Horse he broke through
them, when at the noise 300 of his Crotian Horse coming up he faced about and
valiantly at the head of his Troop, charged the Enemy and made of them such
slaughter that few of them escaped death, or bondage. Amongst the slain one was
found completely armed, with a silk twisted Cord of diverse colors about his
wast, who by the Captives was reported to have taken a solemn Oath to bring the
Count bound in that Cord, and to have laid him at the Visiers feet, but in
this as in most humain affairs it was observed that when man proposes God
disposes.

After this success the Count made known his intention of War against the
Turks, desiring his approbation who by the advice of the Diet at Ratisbon
approved of his proceedings, and sent him supplies of Men and Money, to persist
in his enterprises, whereupon he sat down before Canisia, and battered it
furiously, but for want of the supply promised he at the approach of the
Turkish Army which was very numerous raised the siege.

The Diet was not idle in studying and contriving the preservation of the
Empire, but finding themselves too weak, advised the Emperor to send his
Ambassadors to his Majesty of Great Britain, His Majesty of Poland, and the
Princes of Italy, to contribute toward the defense of Christendom, who all
freely, either with Men or Money, engaging in the common cause an Army of Four
Thousand Thirty Seven Horse and Sixteen Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety One Foot
was Imbodied, and were promised success the rather by reason of the Rebellion
in Egypt, where several of the Begs had taken up Arms, and driven out the
Bassas, yet the difference amongst the Christian Commanders retarded their
success, and especially some affronts put upon the renowned Count Serini, which
not being taken notice of by the Emperor, he supposed he connived at them, and
therefore retired from the Army, which put a great stop to their proceedings,
upon which the Turks encouraged besieged many places, but with small success,
for in the end Husaein Bassa, General of the Turks Army being incountered by
Count Soise chief Commander of the Imperials, he was overthrown with great
slaughter of his men, when flying to Strigonium he was denied entrance, and
obliged to March to Newhusel, where he was received, the Garrison there being
thin, and the tempest of War at that time threatening that place.

Soise animated by this success besieged Barcan a strong Garrison of the Turks,
on the other side Danubius near to Strigonium, the which after a terrible
assault he took, and after having plundered it, set it on Fire, and so marched
back to Romora, the News of which made the Turks pass the River Rab with part
of their Army, for Providence so ordered it, that in the night time abundance
of Rain fell, and the River swelling kept the other part from passing, so that
being divided, that part which had passed being set upon by the Christians was
routed with great slaughter, most of them perishing by the Sword or the Water,
the slain of note on both sides being these, on the Turks Ismale Bassa of Buda,
the General of the Spahies, the Aga of the Janissaries, the youngest Son of the
Tartar Han, Three other Bassas, Ali Beg General of Bosna, Thirty Capugibashes,
Thirty Five of the Visiers Pages, and Three Hundred of his Guard, Fifty
Janissaries, Three Thousand Spahes, Fifteen Hundred Bosnacks, Eight Hundred
Albanians. Six Hundred Crotians and Hungarians subject to the Turks, Two
Hundred and Fifty Valachians and Moldavians, Six Hundred Tartars, Fifteen
Hundred Anatolians, and Four Thousand other Asiaticks, in all Seventeen
Thousand; Of the Christians were slain about Three Thousand, the chief of which
were the Count of Nassan, Charles Count Bracondorf, Count Fulchire General of
the Artillery, and Colonel Pleiter with his Leiutenant Colonel, and Sergeant
Major.

This great overthrow caused the Turkish Forces to Mutinye, declaring the War
to be undertaken upon an unjust quarrel, alleging that the Total Eclipse of
the Moon had before presaged their evil success, nor could the Vizier appease
them, or secure his own Life without a promise to use his utmost interest for
an accommodation of Peace between the Empires, yet kept not his word, but
immediately sent his Commands to the Princes of Moldavia and Valachia, who had
retired to return to the War, whereupon though very unwillingly they returned,
after which the Turks Turk Serniswar, the Imperials not so much as vouchsafing
to relieve it, which so afflicted the Noble Mind of the Count Serini, that
growing Melancholy, to divert himself he often used Hunting, when one day
Chasing a Bore, whom he wounded in several places, the furious Beast turned
upon him, and with his Tusk struck him on the Knee, which made him fall to the
ground, when before he could recover himself with a second stroke, he was
mortally wounded in the head, and soon after dyed in the Arms of one of his
Pages; This was the end of this valiant Captain, whom his Enemies could never
subdue, to the great grief of all worthy Christians, and the joy of the Turks,
whose Mortal Enemy he was, a man in dangers most courageous, in War valiant,
and patient in labor, in peace courteous, and moderate in his pleasure, and in
fine he was accomplished with all those virtues that renders a man complete.

After the death of this Count, the Peace between the Empires was concluded,
when as the Grand Seigniour being at leisure, plotted the destruction of his
Brothers, but at the persuasion of the Muphti altered his Resolution.

About this time the Grand Vizier endeavored to depose the Tartar Han, and
place his Son in his stead, but the young Tartar though barbarous would not
consent thereto, but sent his Father secret notice what was intended against
him, which so enraged the Tartar, that he used his utmost endeavor at the
Ottoman Court to overthrow the Vizier, and promote another to that Office, in
order to which he dealt with the Bassa of Buda, promising him his utmost
interest at the Port to make him great Vizier, by which, though contrary to his
wish, he destroyed him for the Vizier, having notice of what had passed,
obtained a private Commission from the Grand Seigniour, by which he Summoned
the Bassa to appear before him, when immediately without any process, proof or
accusation, caused his Head to be stricken off.

Anno Dom. 1665. The Genoese sent the Marquess Durazzo as their Envoy
Extraordinary to the Ottoman Court, where by gifts and other means, he so
effectually wrote with the Grand Vizier, that a peace insued between the Grand
Seigniour and that Republic, the which was the rather accorded to that the War
against Candia might be the better carried on, on which the Turks seemed
absolutely bent in order to the Equiping of Galleys and other things necessary,
the Grand Seigniour came from Adrinople to Constantinople, but before his
arrival great part of the Seraglio was burnt to the ground, fired by some of
the women, to prevent the discovery of their stealing diverse Jewels that
garnished the Royal Cradle, and upon his arrival he desired of the Earl of
Winchelsea Fifteen Sail of English Men of War, with the consent of His Majesty
of Great Britain, but the Earl excused it, saying, that though his Majesty of
England did always entertain a good affection and zealous disposition toward
the affairs of the Ottoman Port, yet at present the Wars with Holland, and ill
understanding with France, made his occasions for his own Shipping more urgent
then usual, and the time most unseasonable to press his Majesty in that
particular, whereupon the Grand Vizier gave order for the building Sixty
Galleys against the Spring, at what time a great Fleet was in a readyness,
several English, French and Dutch Merchant Men, who were at that time found in
the prots of Aleppo, Smyrna, and Alexandria, being pressed for the service.

These proceedings greatly alarumed the Venetians, insomuch that they delayed
nothing that was requisite for the defense of their important City of Candia,
the which who ever holds, commands the rest of the Island, whereupon the
Marquess Ghiron Franciseo Villa a brave Soldier, was entertained as General of
Foot, and a Sallary of twelve thousand Crowns per Annum allowed him, with a
large Commission not to be subject to any command, but that of the Captain
Generals, who with a great train arriving at Venice made an Oration to the
people, wherein he encouraged them to the utmost to fight against the enemies
of their Country and Religion with wearyness, and cheerfully to provide all
necessaries for so honorable a War, whereupon they fitted their Fleet with all
things necessary, and strengthened their Forts both with Horse and Foot drawn
out of their Garrisons on the Terra Firma, being assisted with Men and Money
from other Princes and States; The Pope gave them permissions to levy four
thousand men out of his Countries, the Emperor likewise notwithstanding the
peace furnished them with considerable Forces, to which were additions made
from other parts of Germany, and indeed from many of the Christian Princes, who
were grieved to see an Infidel incroach yet farther into Europe, but above all
the French King contributed largely, though at the same time he sent Mounsier
d' Vently his Ambassador to the Port, who as the former received many affronts
during his residence there; The Captain of the Ship that brought him thither
likewise was ordered by the Grand Seignior to be Executed, for too rudely
pressing into his presence, which Sentence had been put in Execution had not
the Bostangi Bassa interceeded for him, yet he nevertheless was imprisoned and
put in chains, nor could the Ambassador without a great Sum procure his
Liberty, nor at his Audiences had of the Grand Seignior and Grand Visi^r was he
received with such respect as became his Character, yet he made the best on it,
boasting to the other Christians, Ministers of the ample satisfaction he had
received both for his own affronts, and the affronts put upon his Predecessors.

Whilst these things passed, the Marquess d' Villa passed into Dalmatia to take
a view of the Forts and strong places on that side, as fearing whilst the Turks
gave out for Candia, they might suddenly turn their Forces upon that Frontier
Territory of the Venetians, but having given such necessary orders as he
thought requisite, and being certified from Count Lisle the Emperors Ambassador
at Constantinople, that the Grand Vizier early in the Spring would with a
puissant Army land on the Island he set over, with such Forces as he had, to
join those already there.

About the beginning of the Year 1666. great troubles had like to have risen in
the Ottoman Empire, occasioned by one Sabatai Seni a Jew, born at Smyrna, who
impiously pretending himself to be the Messia drew after him a multitude of
that unhappy nation, declaring that he came to restore them to their temporal
Kingdom, and to gather the scattered tribes filling their heads with
prophesies, dreams and false delusions, that they every where credited him, and
laying aside all business, prepared for their march to Jerusalem, once more to
possess the Land of Promise, and raise a Glorious Monarchy above what ever
their Ancestors could pretend too, and to that purpose made themselves Garments
according to the Levitical Ordinance, several of them affirming that they had
seen Elias, and that he had expressly commanded it, writing to each other many
Blasphemous Letters in commendation of their Impostor, whom they style King of
Kings, and Lord of all Lords, attributing to him many other vain Titles, nor
was it long ever he became Hydra headed, for other despicable Jews finding the
cheat take so effectually took up the deceiving Trade which caused the Turkish
Ministers to nip them, e're they grew too popular, by confining the
Ringleaders to diverse Prisons; and amongst other things, the Jews being
ashamed that so many Missias should at once appear, procured the Imprisonment
of some of them, themselves, by accusing them of Adultery, and other heinous
Crimes, as for Sabati, he finding his fraud too apparent, renounced the
Judaism, and turned Mohammedan, and drew many of his Nation to follow his
Example, being for that purpose set at Liberty, and allowed a pension for his
Maintenance in the Turks Seraglio.

About this time the Ambassadors of either Empire exchanged, that is, the Turks
Ambassador returned from Vienna to Constantinople; and the German Ambassador
from Constantinople, to Vienna; during which, the skirmishes between the
Venetians and the Turks grew hot, Hostilities being on both sides maintained
with great fury, both by Land and Sea, though with various success; sometimes
on side prevailing, and sometimes another; till at last in was resolved by the
Marquess D' Villa, and the Admiral of the Galleys, that by reason of the great
Inundations occasioned by the incessant rains, that the offensive War should be
laid aside, and the Forces for better security, incamp near the Walls of
Candia, as being the Metropolis of the Island, whilst the Galleys divided into
two Squadrons scowred the Seas, and hindered any new succors from Landing; but
e're they were encamped, Two Thousand Turks sallying from their Trenches, set
upon the out Guards, beating them from their Post, and pursuing even to the
entrance of the Camp, but being reinforced, the Turk were obliged in disorder
to retire; yet the Turks not contented, made another attempt, but with no
better success than the former; though the Loss was considerable on either
side; yet the Turks Camp was greatly annoyed by the shot, from which played
furiously upon their ^renches; but the Marquess D' Villa having notice of the
approach of greater Forces, thought it wisdom to remove his Camp to a place of
more advantage, till new aids came to his assistance; the which after ^illing
up the Trenches, and blowing up the Forts that they might not profit, the Enemy
was performed.

During this Action, the Great Vizier, with a numerous Army Imbarqued on the
Galleys at Constantinople, and after touching at Thebes, arrived at Candia,
though by the way, Twelve of his Galleys fell into the hands of the Venetians,
mostly laden with Provision and Ammunition, taken near the Gulf of ^olo by the
Cavalier, Grimani, Captain of the Galleys; the Vizier upon his arrival went to
take a view of the City of Candia, that Bulwark then of Christendom, and
finding the taking of it would require much time and labor, he returned to
Canea, to consult the measures used in carrying on the siege; when in the mean
time the Princes of Christendom being at discord amongst themselves, were not
so ready in sending the promised succors as was expected, only the Pope and
Great Duke of Tuscany kept their promise, and some few private men out of their
proper Treasury, sent a supply of Money and Provision, insomuch, that the
juncture did no ways promised success to the Venetians.

Anno 1667. The Tartars in the depth of Winter entering Poland, laid a great
part of it desolate, carrying away One Hundred Thousand Christians into
miserable Bondage, which made the Polonian King exhibit a grievous complaint to
the Grand Signior; but with all desirous to renew the League between them: In
order to which, he sent his Ambassador with many rich Presents to the Port, but
he being too peremptory in his demands upon his Audidience, and receiving no
answer agreeable to his expectation, uttered such Speeches as caused the Grand
Signior to confine him to his own House, and a Guard to be set upon him, which
so increased his fury, that growing high, it casted him into a Fevour, of which
he dyed; when as his Secretary took upon him the character of an Ambassador,
expecting a reply to what had been proposed, and within a while after, had an
Audience of the Chimacam, but in the end could obtain no other answer, then
that no compensation or pretense should ever after be demanded for the damage
sustained by the Tartars in Poland, nor that the Polanders should make War upon
the Cossacks now revolted from the Obedience of that Crown; but that they
should immediately make War upon the Muscovite, and permit the Turkish
Merchants to Trade in their Country; with this answer the Secretary was
obliged to depart, though it proved nothing grateful to the Poles, who did not
vouchsafe to return thanks for this unesteemed favor, yet by reason of the
differences amongst themselves, warred not on Tartary, though some of the
bordering people with any Authentic Commission, joining with a considerable
party of Muscovians, entered Tartary, and running with Fire and Sword even to
the Walls of Coffa their chief City, burnt Three Hundred Villages, and brought
away a great booty of Prisoners, Cattle, and the like.

About this time the Bassa of Basora revolted from the Grand Signior, and with
displayed Insigns marched with an Army of Forty Thousand Horse and to the great
terror of those Countries, which he pretended were of right, his Legal
Inheritance descended to him by his Ancestors; but the Bassas of Erzirum,
Aleppo, and Damascus going against him, routed his Forces, and for the
preservation of his Life, obliged his to fly to the King of Persia.

The Venetian Galleys coasting the Island of Candia, to hinder what in them lay
the Landing of Forces on that Island, encountered with Twenty Ships of the
Turks, laden with Men and Provision; most of which they burnt, sunk, or took,
and a while after had one of the Turkish Galleys brought to them by the Slaves,
who had by stratagem taken it from their Masters, but these proceedings seemed
small to what afterward happened; for by this time the Vizier having laid his
siege to one of the strongest City in the World, fortified by the most
industrious of men, as far as Humane possibility could render it impregnable,
dismal things insued.

The Town was fortified with seven great Bastions, viz. the Sabionera, Vetturi,
Jesus, Martinengo, Betlem, Panigra, and St. Andrea, all encompassed with a
large and deep Ditch, of which were the Revelin of Spiritto, the Revelin of
Panigra flanked to the right, with the Half Moon of Mecenigo, next thereunto,
was the Revelin of Batlem bordering on the work of St. Mary's, which to the
left had the Revelin of St. Nicholas, and this joined to the Fortification of
de Palma, next whereunto was the Revelin of Priuli, with the redoubt of Crepa
Cuore, and over all was the Royal Fort of St. Demetrio, which Commanded the
work of Molino, and Sabionera, even to the very Sea.

Before this formidable place, the Vizier pitched his Tents, raised his
Battery, and provided all things necessary to approach the work, running his
Trenches with great celerity to the border of the outworks, but there met with
such blasts of Aetnean Fires from the Mines and Farnellos, that they hindered
the Turks Traverses, and greatly disincouraged them, considering that if the
Ground was unsecure at that distance, what Abysses and Chasmas must there be
prepared to make them Graves under the Walls or entrance of the City, when not
to let them breathe, the Christians sallyed twice on them, making great
slaughter of such as were far advanced in the works; when retiring in
confusion, the Colonel of St. Demetrio fell upon them, cutting Two Thousand of
them in pieces, e're they could recover their main strength; about which time,
Captain General Morosini arrived in the Haven with his Galleys, and put One
Thousand fresh men into the City, which so exasperated the Turks, that they
resolutely advanced to hinder it, but being within danger by the springing of
Mines, some hundreds of them were sent to cut capers in the Air; yet the Turks
forced by their Commanders like Moles, continued there working under ground,
where many of them dug their own Graves, never more appearing above ground; for
being countermined, they were overwhelmed with the blasts of Powder and
dreadful Wild-Fires prepared by Castellan (the most expert Enginere in the
World) for that purpose, yet the Turks with their stink pots, which flaming,
they threw into the works, so infected the Air with noisome vapors, that long
it was e're it could be purged with the burning of Juniper-wood, and Aquavitae.

During these daily rancounters, arrived the Auxilarie Galleys from the Pope,
and Maltesians commanded by Prior Bichi, and Bali Del Been, as likewise the
Galleys of Naples and Sicily, Commanded by Gianettino Doria, and the Duke of
Ferandina, but such was the Cowardice of these Commanders which they imputed
to, the straitness of their Commission, that they durst not come on shore, nor
at the instance of the Marquess D' Villa, send him so much as a man, except
such renowned French Volunteers as would enter the City, not being under their
Command, amongst whom was the Cavalier D' Harcourt, of the House of Lorrain,
who did singular service by his Valor and Conduct; nor did these Galleys ought
at Sea, but after some time, coasting the Island, ingloriously returned home to
theirs, and their Masters Infamy.

These things happening, the Signior Giavarina surrendered his charge of Captain
of the Galleys to Signeor Pasquelino, and by the order of the Senate, went
again to Constantinople, and from thence passed over to treat with the Great
Vizier about a truce, but nothing would be consented to, unless Candia was
delivered, whereupon he generously scorned to treat further, though the Vizier
desired it, and appointed a place for that purpose, which so enraged him, that
he commanded the Mines about Panigra to be sprung, and a furious Assault to be
given, but it proved unsuccessful by the great slaughter of the Turks, whose
bodies filled up the ruins of the Mine.

At the end of July arrived Six Hundred Foot, under the Leading of Ottanio
Alba, a Noble Venetian bringing with him likewise Twenty Thousand Ducats, who
entering the City, was joyfully received, during which spaces, the Fights
between the Miners under Ground, were as bloody as those in the open Field, so
that the Men seemed to make war in the Grave; nor were the Turks slow in
placing their Mines to advantage, especially one, which taking Fire, blew up
part of the Half Moon, leaving thereby a passage Twelve Foot wide, at which the
Turks pressing to enter, were miserably overwhelmed by the storms of shot that
flew like Hail from the Flankers, whereupon the better to make their
approaches, the Turks filled sacks of Earth, and planted them near the Walls,
which the Christians with long Iron hooks drew away, and left them open to the
fury of Musquitiers, who were the more encouraged by another supply of Five
Hundred Venetians, under the Command of Signeour D' Riva, when on the Fifteenth
of September, the Christians sallyed, and after a hot skirmish, trained the
Turk into the danger of a Mine, which being sprung, sent Three Hundred of them
into the Air, yet they continued the Fight very bloody and doubtful, till at
length the Christians retired under the Bastion of Betlem, and the Turks with
the shot from thence were beaten off.

On the Eighteenth they made another salley, and trained the Turks into the
danger of another Mine, though not without some loss of their own; their
Captain being wounded, and Ten or Twelve of them slain, yet they again sallyed,
and sprung several Mines to the destroying of Six Thousand Turks, whilst the
Enginere framed an Engine to rid the Ditch of the Earth that the Mines had
thrown into it, but the Turks undermining where it stood, blew it into the Air,
yet the Laborers with Baskets and Sacks supplied its place; and on the
Twentieth of October, a Mine of Forty Barrels of Powder was fired by the
Christians to destroy the Enemies redoubts, but on the contrary, it burst
through an old Gallery with such force, as made the City tremble, as if an
Earthquake had happened, and with the confused smoke stifled about Sixty Men.

About this time, the Grand Signior sent an Express to the Vizier, to send him
an exact account how the siege was carried on, and what hopes there was of
winning the piece, sending him a Sword, and a vest of Sables as a token of his
favor; to merit which, and that the Grand Signiors Inquisitor might be a
Spectator of the difficulty in winning the place, he commanded a General
assault the next day should be made upon Panigra, which was carried on with
such desperateness, that the Turks entered the Ditches, but were soon dislodged
by the Springing Mines, which made them spraul by Hundreds in the Air, and
overthrew many of the Enemies redoubts, yet the Vizier not satisfied with
threats and promises, obliged them to renew the Assault, which they did with
such eagerness, in hopes of great rewards, that notwithstanding the undaunted
courage of the Defendants, Panigra had been taken, had not the General given
order for the blowing it up, which was done with such a Thunder-crack from the
breath of Seventy Barrels of Powder under a huge pile of stones, that the Turks
Camp trembled, and in it perished Three Thousand Turks, amongst whom were Three
Bassas, and many other of note. This for the present astonished the Turks, and
gave a stop to the further proceedings of this Assault. This proof gave evident
Conviction to the Grand Signiors Inquisitor of the strength of the place, and
difficulty of the work; and having been an Eyewitness of what had passed,
returned with dismal stories of a cruel War, reporting (perhaps) and it was
related in most parts of Christendom, that this was the place where blood was
spilt day and night, where Gallant Men had forgot to sleep, living in perpetual
labors, innur'd to intolerable sufferings, and hourly dangers, there being
none secure in Church, House, or Street; for Grenades spouted f^^e, Cannons
thundered out their Iron Globes, Arrows and Stones fell like Hail, so that there
were none in that place but who quartered on the brink of the Grave.

Winter coming on Hostilities ceased not though their heat was somewhat abated,
and to the wonder of all men the Vizier could not be persuaded to forsake his
Trenches, but proving when necessary he could to secure his Soldiers from the
raging cold and prodigeous Rains he immediately dispatched Letters to the Grand
Signeour and Divano, to send him new supplies for that his Army was so wasted
that of one hundred and fifty thousand with which he at first encamped not a
third part of them remained adding that he was resolved to take the City or dye
under its Walls, which resolution was highly approved by the Grand Signeour,
and a speedy dispatch of Men, Provision, and Ammunition was made when to the
Vizier supposing to render the Officers of the City more negligent of their
trusts sent to propose certain Articles of Peace and a flag of Truce, but his
design being perceived he drew in his horns, about which time arrived the new
Prove^itor Bernardo Navi (the other having been killed with a Musket shot on
the Fort of Panigara) bringing with him five hundred Soldiers, and Matteo
Mattheus Sergeant General with recruits from the Pope, as likewise three
hundred Meddals, to bestow upon such Worthies as should best deserve them.

Anno Dom. 1668. in the month of March a sharp engagement happened between
sixteen Venetian, and twelve Turkish Galleys, the latter not expecting such a
number in those, tho indeed they had been sent to surprise yet entering into a
sharp dispute six of the Turks Galleys were sunk or taken, and the rest much
shattered escaped under the shelter of the night, having lost most of their
Soldiers and Commanders, and soon after the Captain General of the Venetians,
lighting accidentally of six other Turkish Galleys took and sunk them all save
one that run her self on shore.

Spring being now come the Turks began to creep out of their Trenches, having
raised a Fort on the side of the Lazaretto, which so offended the Port that
there was no harbor or access for Vessels, and the like they had erected on
the other side near unto the Fort of St. Andrea, which greatly offended Tramata
another harbor on the left hand, and in the night passing undiscovered of the
Sentinels they fixed a strong Cable to the Pallisado of St. Andrea, and
strained it so hard with an Engine erected for that purpose, that they tore
away several of the main beams, heightened with which success they continued to
advance their Lines on that side, to prevent which the General commanded two
hundred under the leading of Major Motta, to sally out upon them, which they
effected with such expedition and secrecy, that they slew a great number of
them and put the rest that were running the Line to flight, overthrowing their
redoubts and filling up Lines for which good service the General bestowed
amongst them fifty Zechins, and commanded the platform to be finished from
whence with his Cannon he greatly annoyed the Enemy, and having destroyed
several Redoubts by springing of Mines, sallyed about eight hundred strong, and
made great slaughter of the Turks driving them out of their Trenches. Howsoever
the Turks with admirable patience crept forward under the shelter of their
Bastion, running their Traverses cross the Lines till Maupassau an Engineer by
springing several Mines put a stop to their proceedings. But now what was the
greatest loss to this famous City the Duke of Savoy (whose subject the Marquess
D' Villa was, recalled him home, his urgent affairs so requiring,
notwithstanding many overtures were made for his continuance, but in obedience
to his Prince he embarked and left his charge to the Marquess St. Andrea
Montbrun a Noble man of France, with whom the Venetian Ambassador at Paris by
order of the Republic, had prevailed to take upon him the defense and
protection of that deplorable reduced now almost to its ultimate crisis.

The new General established in his place of trust took a diligent survey of
the Forts and Walls of the City, giving such necessary orders as he conceived
most convenient, nor was his diligence without reason for the Turks daily
pressed nearer to the Walls of the City, raising many redoubts with such
expedition, that they could not be destroyed so fast as they were raised,
though the Miners ceased not to use their utmost diligence, and from them
playing with their Cannon many brave men were killed on the Walls, and amongst
the rest Providetor General Nani, and Francisco Bataglia, Brother to the Duke
of Candia were slain with Musket shots.

The long continuance of this siege drew thither many Worthies, and amongst
others Monsier La Fuillade Duke of Roanez. The Count of St. Paul's. The Duke De
Carderousse. The Count D' Villa Maur, and the Duke De Chateau Tiery, who came
accompanied with six hundred Men most of them Gentlemen of note, to try their
valor in the field of Mars, who like so many enraged Lions by their frequent
sallies killed a great number of the Turks, beating them through their
Trenches, and terrifying them at that rate that they scarcely durst make their
approach, but these men came not to stay but only to see the Wars and so
depart, which after good service done, such as escaped did; when in their
places several valiant Soldiers sent by the Dukes of Lunenburgh and Brunswick
arrived under there leading of several valiant Chiefs, of which Count Waldeck
was principle, who in a sally venturing into the Enemies Trenches too far,
received several wounds of which he soon after died.

Between St. Andrew and the Ravelin of Spirito, where the Turks had planted a
Battery of three pieces of Cannon, and raised several Doubts, a Mine of one
hundred sacks of Powder was sprung, which not only overthrew the Battery and
Redoubts, but vast quantities of Stones and Timber it carried into the Air,
destroyed a great number of Turks in their Trenches, and thereupon the
Christians sallying put them into a great confusion, dismounting and spiking up
their Cannon, but by the loss of the Duke of Candia who was slain by a Musket
shot, much of the joy for this success was abated, yet three thousand Turks
were slain, and amongst them the Bassa of Canea, and Major General of the
Janissaries.

This slaughter for a while greatly discouraged the Turks, but in the end
recovering breath, they made a strong assault upon one of the Forts of St.
Andrea, and gained it, pressing on to the Bastion of Sabionera to the West with
a force of ten thousand men having the advantage of three batteries, each
consisting of then pieces of Ordinance, and the next night gave a general
assault with all their Forces to the Bastions of Panigra, Sabionera, and St.
Andrea, together with the great Fort of St. Demetrius, but the besieged were
armed with all caution and vigilence against surprise, and with that conduct
and valor that they gave the Enemy three gallant repulses with much slaughter
and confusion, but yet this success was diminished by the loss of the Count de
Maur an experienced Venetian Captain, who after proofs of an invincible courage
lost his Life in defense of the Christian cause, but not long after the
Marquess Cornaro and the Barron Spar arriving with a recruit of three thousand
men, as if they intended to requite the Turks last assault, made so resolute
and successful a sally, that they killed about two thousand Turks, amongst whom
were diverse Commanders of note.

About this time whilst the Grand Signeour was at Larissa, news came of the
near approach of the Excelle^^ssimo Abuisse de Molino Ambassador from the
Venetian Republique with Propositions of Peace, but the haughty Turks before
they would admit him to a nearer approach then a days journey, would first be
resolved whether or no he brought with him the Keys of Candia, to which it was
replied by the Interpreter, that he was not capable of giving them satisfaction
in that particular being but a menial Servant, to whom the secrets of State and
resolutions of great men were not committed, his office being only to render
faithfully the words and sense of his Master, and not to enter into the private
thoughts, and Cabinet of their Councils. To which the Chimacam proudly and
barbarously replied, That he should go tell his Master that unless he brought
the Keys of Candia his head should pay for it, and that he presumed not in
person to approach nearer unto the Court. So the Ambassador remained at a
distance till he received orders to pass over into Candia, there to treat with
the Vizier, who weary of the tedious siege willingly gave him Audience hoping
that he came to treat about a surrender of the City, which in any case he
desired as fearing notwithstanding his bravadoes he should be forced to raise
his siege without success, but he only offered Suda and a considerable sum of
money, which not redounding to the glory of the Vizier, by reason that might
have been had ere the War began, he would come to no agreement, for the
Ambassador insisted that Candia being maintained by the Arms of Foreign
Princes it could not without their consent be surrendered, but that all the
rest of the Island should be the reward of their blood and labor, and although
the Vizier afterward proposed in lieu thereof, the Venetians should have free
License to rebuild Paleo Castro, yet the final answer of the Ambassador was,
that Candia was capable of no conditions but what were imposed on it by force
of Arms.

About this time the French King by reason of the many indignities put on him
in the person of his Ambassador, recalled him without daigning to send another
to negotiate his affairs at the Port, which greatly amused the Turks, as
judging he intended to revenge the affronts received at Constantinople upon the
Ottoman Forces before Candia, as indeed in some measure he did, and might have
been the preserver of that important Bulwark of Christenaom to this day, had
not the Caprice of such as commanded his Forces sent there obstructed it; About
this time likewise the Earl of ^inchelsea Ambassdor for his Majesty of Great
Britain, having had his Audience of the Grand Seignior at Salonica returned
into England, and was succeeded by Sir Daniel Harvy.

Anno 1669 The Turks finding a great cheat through their Empire by light and
false Moneys introduced by the French, Dutch and Italians (for in Turkey the
Money of all Nations in current to a certain value) they complained to the
Cadies or chief Judges, who with the consent of the Grand Seignior, called it
into the Mint, allowing no more for it than it was in true value, to the
infinite loss both of Turks and Strangers, and soon after the Grand Seignior
being greatly fearful that the people growing weary of his Government, might
place one of his Brothers in the Throne, to secure any danger that way, sent an
Officer to the Queen Mother, under whose Tuition they were, to demand their
heads, and bring them to him at Larissa, but she upon sight of his mandate
abhorring the Fact, secretly gave notice thereof to the Janissaries, to whom she
had sworn the protection of the Young Princes, which unexpected News blew up
such a flame as had like to have turned all into confusion, and wrote worse
effects than any the Grand Seignior had before causelessly imagined, but in the
end, with large promises and larger Donations, the Tempest was alayed.

Spring approaching, the Turkish Army which for the most part had layn immured
all Winter, twixt the Walls of earth, crept forth as Worms out of the ground,
and again began to run their Trenches toward the Walls of Candia, before which
Mountains and confused heaps of rubbish and Mold lay, which had been thrown up
by the Mines and Frencellos, which so loosned the nerves and pores of the
Earth, that all about it seemed hollow, insomuch that light appeared often out
of one Mine into another, which gave either side frequent opertunities of
stealing ponder out of each others Mines, the Turks like Moles working still
underground, so that the strongest City in the World was rather reduced to
extremity by such as knew no use of any thing, but of the Spade and Mattock,
rather than by force of Arms, for many were of opinion that all the Forces of
the Ottoman Empire could not otherwise have taken it, by this means being so
near advanced that their Grenades could easily be slung into the City, they
did great mischief, wounding and killing many of the Prime Commanders, and
beating down houses in abundance, when amongst the rest a Cannon shot fell into
a Magazine of Fireworks, and striking upon a Granado shell that was filled with
powder fired, that firing about a hundred more, containing thirty barrels of
powder, which beat down most of the adjacent houses, and did great hurt to the
Garrison, and on the 28th. of May the Turks sprung 5 Mines in the mouth of the
breach they had made on the Fort of St. Andrea, and pressed hard to carry it,
now weak and almost turned into a heap of rubbish, which caused the Captain
General the Marquess of Montburn, and all the chief Officers to take up their
quarters on that side.

The City of Candia thus in danger, the Princes of Christendom were not slow in
relieving it, but above the rest Pope Clement the 9th. Expressed his zeal for
the defense of this place, not only sending succors himself, but inciting and
stirring up others to do the like, and mostly the present French King, who was
best able to send a strong power, who was not wanting to comply for the defense
of the Christian cause, who in order thereto raised seven or eight thousand
foot under the command of the Duke of Beaufort, near Kinsman to the King, the
Duke of Navailles, the Maresca^s, Lambert and Colebert, with many others of
note, who were desirous to signalize their valor in the Field of Fame, who
imbarquing on the Ships for that purpose prepared at Toulon, arrived before the
City of Candia on the 19th. of July, where fourteen Venetian carnals laden with
horse attended their coming, on which they were mounted, and now began the
hopes of the besie^^^ to rise high, and the Turks although within the City in a
manner to despair, nor were the French slow in entering the City, for the night
of the same day they arrived, the Duke of Navailles with the Regiment of old
Soldiers Mounted the guard on the Fort of St. Andrea, the place of greatest
danger, and the next day a council of War was called, wherein it was concluded
that the Town was not Tenable, or to be long maintained without some
extraordinary Enterprise attempted on the Enemy, and by some furious sally
performed with resolution and stratagems of War, in order unto which it was
resolved, that the 27th. should be the day for sally both with Horse and Foot,
an the Fleet not to lose their part in this action, but should play their great
Guns on that side next St. Andrea, making as it were a Wing to the Army.

The Sally agreed on, the Army was drawn up in four Battalions, the first
called the Admirals, commanded by the Sieurs Martel Vander and Grauier, the
second was the Vice-Admirals, commanded by the Sieurs de^la-Mothe and Planta,
the third was the Rear-Admirals, under the command of the Chevaliers Bovillion
Gabaret and Dailly, the fourth was the Battalion of the Sieur d' Almeras,
commanded under him by the Si^urs Panetire de la-Rogne, Fontier Bitault, and
the Chevalier de Nemond; On the Left hand of these, ^^re the Guards of the Duke
of Beaufort himself, though thereto persuaded by all the Nobility, not
refra^ing to make one in the Enterprise, who after he had given order for the
Fleet to accoast the shore on the side of St. Andrea, as near as co^i^sted with
their security, and from thence with their great Guns to play upon their
Enemies Camp, he resolved to fight at the head of the Forlorn hope, consisting
of Four Hundred Men, preceded by Fifty Granadeers, flanked with Three Troops of
Horse, Commanded by Count Dampire, and the Regiment of Guards, with Four Troops
of Horse for their Wing flanked with Three Regiments of Foot: The reference
consisted of the Regiments of Harcourt, Conti, Lignie^es, Rosan, Mont-Pesat,
and Vendosme, flanked with Four Troops of Horse under the Command of Count
Choiseul, which placed themselves on a rising-ground, to hinder all
communications between the Vizier, whose Camp was before St. Andrea, and the
Janissaries Aga, who was Encamped before Sabi^^era* between the first and second
Line were placed Fifty of the Kings Musquentiers to be assistant on occasion,
and the other Troops of Horse were to take the left hand along the Trenches,
leading to the Sabionera. The Regiment of ^^o^peyr^^x was appointed to mount
the Guard of St. Demetrius, to second the retreat if occasion required it; in
like manner Five Hundred Pioneers were ordered to level the Trenches of the
Enemy on the quarter of St. Andrea, whilst the Body of the Turks Army was
employed in repulsing the violence of the Sally.

All things being in a readiness, the French about Two hours before day, in the
secretest manner imaginable, sallied at St. Georges Gate, the Signal to fall
on, being the springing of the Royal Mine, which through the Dampness of the
Powder, or the timerousness of the Enginiere, took not effect; the General
impatient of delay, not staying for the onset of the forlorn-hope, which lay
within half Musket shot of the Enemy, assaulted two redoubts, took them, and
put all he found in them to the Sword; with the like courage the other
Regiments entered the Line, and after much blood, and slaughter, made
themselves Masters of the Trenches, storming a Fort, on which was a Battery,
directed against St. Demetrio, possessed themselves of it, (...) up all the
Cannon found therein, at what time day appearing, discovered the bloody Scene,
which caused the Turks to hasten from the Hills near New Candia in great number
to regain their Trenches, whereupon the Duke D' Navailles perceiving his
forlorn hardly beset, came in with Two Troops of Horse, and two Regiments of
Foot; who with great slaughter beat the Turks out of their Trenches, following
the Execution even to the heart of their Camp, but whilst fortune seemed thus
to favor the Christians, an unhappy accident fell out, which quite turned the
scale of Victory; for a Magazine of Powder, containing One Hundred Thirty Four
Kintals being won from the Turks, and possessed by the Christians accidentally,
or as some suppose, by lighted Matches purposely dropped into it; upon its
surrender, blew up with such a terrible noise, that it not only destroyed most
of the Battalian of Guards, but terrified the rest of the Army, by making the
Earth, as with a violent Earthquake, tremble under them, that they verily
believing a great number of Mines were springing under them; opened in great
confusion to the right and left, and in the end, notwithstanding the endeavors
of the Commanders to restrain them, the Soldiers betook themselves to open and
shameful Flight, nor could they be persuaded to rallie, or once more face the
Enemy, but in great disorder, re-entered the City.

The Duke of Beaufort is said to have labored much in resisting the shameful
flight of his Men, and ventering his Person into danger, from whence he
resolved never ingloriously to retreat, was oppressed by Numbers, and fighting
courageously amongst the thickest of his Enemies, expired on the heaps; but by
reason his Body, though much sought after, could not be found; many conjectured
him to have perished by the fatal blow of Powder, which so frighted and
disordered the Christian Army, nor had the French Fleet much better success;
for being driven from shore by a strong Wind, they little or nothing indamaged
the Turks, but received considerable damage for a great Ship of Sixty Brass
Guns blew up, in which Two Hundred Ninety Two perished, and her shot passing
through the Admiral, killed several on board, and indamaged other Ships, by the
fall of her Timber and Splinters.

The Loss the Turks sustained is uncertain, but however, according to their own
report. Eight Thousand are said to fall in the Trenches, Forts, and Redoubts;
the loss amongst the French consisted mostly in their Nobility and Officers of
note, a fate incident to that Nation, the chief of which were the Duke of
Beaufort, Count Rosan, the Marquess D' Fabert, the Chevalier Villereceaux, and
the Chevalier D' Quelas, with about Twenty others, all Commanders, and a
Thousand common Soldiers, many of note were likewise wounded, the Prisoners
taken, exceeded not Seven or Eight, the chief of which were the Sieur D' Bois,
Dauphin Son to a Marshal of France, of that Name, and the Sieur D' Chateau Neuf
the first for his youth and beauty, and the second for his courage, being
afterward greatly esteemed by the Turks, and both entertained by the Vizier
with more generosity than ordinary.

These proceedings so amazed and discouraged the French, that the Duke D'
Navailles, now their Commander in chief, could not be persuaded to stay any
longer in defense of the City, but pretending the Kings express command for his
return at a time prefixed, and that time being almost come, notwithstanding the
earnest entreaty of the Captain General; he withdrew the greatest part of his
Forces, and although he met further orders that enjoined his stay, yet
imbarquing, he returned to France, where for his Cowardice he was forbid
approaching the presence of the King, or entering the per^ues of the Court for
a considerable time.

The French thus departed, the Turks took courage, and attacqued the quarter of
Sabionera, and St. Andrea, where putting the out-Guards to flight, they
advanced to the Palisado of the new retrenchment, but Vollies of Cannon, and
showers of Musket Shot, with quarries of stones thrown from the Engines
pouring on them, gave a check to their proceedings; but the Candiots
perceiving, they opposed the multitudes of the Enemy in vain, with one voice
implored the Captain General to surrender the City that was not Tenable, and
not to expose them to the fury of a Merciless Enemy, of whom the Marquess D'
Montbourn taking pity, and finding himself too weak to oppose such powerful
Forces as the Turks, by reason of new supplys had in their Camp, they as it
were already having possessed the main strengths of the City, he assembled a
Council of all the Chief Officers both in the City, and those that belonged to
the Fleet, who after a serious consideration, concluded that the City could not
by force nor policy be much longer held by reason of the small number of the
Defendants, and the incroachment of whose number was ten to one; whereupon the
General was of opinion, that having imbarqued all the unnecessary people, and
those that were wounded, they should by firing of Mines lay the City waste, and
so leave the Enemy a bloody and inglorious Victory, which Noble Resolution was
seconded by several other Chiefs, but in the end it was agreed that a treaty
should be had with the Turks about its surrender, the which after some debates
was concluded on these Articles.

First, that for obtaining a good and lasting peace, it is agreed that the City
of Candia with all its Cannon which were planted there before the time of the
War, be consigned into the hands of the Vizier.

Secondly, That the quiet possession be given to the Republique of Suda
Carabusa, Spina Longa, and the Territories thereunto belonging, together with
the Fortress of Calissa and Dalmatia.

Thirdly, That the Venetians may carry away all the Cannon which have been
brought into the Town, since the beginning of the War.

Fourthly, That for Imbarquing the Soldiers, Pioneers, and Inhabitants of all
Qualities and Conditions, with their Arms, Provisions, and Baggage Twelve days
shall be allowed.

Fifthly, That what shall remain unshipped, at the end of Twelve days, the
Vizier shall with his own Boats assist the Lading thereof.

Sixthly, That during this time of Truce, no Person whatsoever shall transgress
his Limits, and he that does, shall be treated as an Enemy.

Seventhly, That so soon as those Articles shall be subscribed under the White
Flag, all Acts of Hostility shall cease under the one side, and the other.

Eighthly, That for security of performance of these Articles, Three Hostages
be mutually given on the one side, and the other.

Ninthly, That for better assurance, that the Venetians will use all their
endeavors to imbarque their Men; The Turks may employ two Officers for
Eyewitnesses of the same.

Tenthly, That for Effecting hereof all Ships, Galleys, and other Vessels may
freely approach unto the shore, and enter the Port, either day or night.

Eleventhly, That the Venetian Fleet may remain at S^andia, or at any other
Island in the Archipelago, until such times as they are dispatched, or that
things are duly prepared for their departure

Twelfthly, That all Commissions given by the one side or the other be revoked,
and that whosoever within the space of Forty days shall commit any Hostility
against the Tenor of these Articles, shall be punished with capital punishment.

Thirteenthly, That so soon as an Ambassador from Venice shall arrive at the
Port, all Slaves and Prisoners taken under the Venetian Colors shall be freed
and released.

Fourteenthly, That what Depredations shall be made at Sea or Land after these
Articles, shall be subscribed, and before the publication thereof, shall be
faithfully made good and restored.

Fifteenthly, That a General pardon be given to the subjects on both sides, who
have acted contrary to their Faith and Allegiance during this War.

Sixteenthly, that in virtue of these capitulations, the former Articles be
confirmed, which were made in the year 1571, and that no Tribute or Present be
demanded by the Port, unless such as has formerly been paid for, such Islands
as the Venetians hold in the Archipelago.

Seventeenthly, That two Copies of them be made, one in the Turkish Language
subscribed by the Vizier, Sealed with the Grand Signiours Signet, and another
in the Italian Language, under-wrote by the Captain General, and Sealed with
the Seal of the Republique of Venice.

These Articles being signed, the Hostages were given on both sides, those for
the Venetians were Faustino da Riva, Lieutenant General, Giovanni, Commissary,
and Zacar a Mocenigo, who had been Duke of Ca^^^a. Those on the part of the
Grand Signiour were these, viz. Belir Assan, Bassa, Mahomet Aga of the
Janissaries, and Gurgi, Bei, Te^terder, or Treasurer.

During this siege Three Thousand Eight Hundred Ninety Five Christians were
killed and wounded, and of the Turks a Hundred and Eighteen Thousand, Seven
Hundred Fifty Four.

The Batteries which the Turks raised against the Sabionera, and St. Andrea
consisted of Fifty Nine pieces of whole Cannon, carrying most of them Bullets
of a Hundred and Twenty Pound weight.

The Storms which the Turks made upon the City, were Sixty Five.

The Sallys made by the Venetians Ninety Six.

The Mines and F^rneli sprang by the Venetians Eleven Hundred Seventy Three.

The Combats under ground Forty Five.

The Mines sprung by the Turks Four Hundred Seventy Two.

In this siege the Venetians spent Fifty Thousand Three Hundred and Seventeen
Barrels of Powder, and Bombies of all sorts, from Fifty, to Five Hundred
weight, Forty Eight Thousand One Hundred and Nineteen.

Grenades of Brass and Iron One Hundred Thousand, Nine Hundred Sixty Eight,
Grenades of Glass Four Thousand Eight Hundred Seventy Four Cannon-shot of all
sorts, Two Hundred Seventy Six Thousand Seven Hundred Forty Three Pounds of
Lead, Eighteen Millions, Forty Four Thousand Nine Hundred Fifty Seven Pounds
weight, and of Match Thirteen Millions twelve thousand five hundred weight.

What quantities the Turks might consume of Ammunition is uncertain, but it was
observable that the Brass taken up in the streets, which came from their
Grenades and Bombes filled a Warehouse employed for that purpose, and was
afterward sold for a hundred thousand Crowns.

Upon these Articles Candia was surrended the news of which coming to the ears
of the Grand Signiour he could not for a while believe it, till he had a
further confirmation. Yet the City upon its delivery was so ruined, that it
seemed rather a heap of confusion, then a place to dwell in, nor did any more
then five able persons, and some that were so aged and decrepit as were not fit
to travel, stay in it, so that the Turks gained this sixteen Acres of ground,
for no more was that famous City in compass, with inestimable expense of blood
and Treasure; yet the glory and fame which attended it being the consummation
of five and twenty years, of which the last siege lasted two years, nine
months, and seven and twenty days, was of greater value to the Turks, then any
other consideration, and may with time prove a place of advantage to the
further increase of their Western Empire, unless the Almighty give a stop to
the progress of their Arms.

The News of Candia's surrender being published greatly rejoiced the Turk, who
groaned under the Taxations levied for the maintenance of that War, as likewise
ridded the Grand Signeour of a great part of his care insomuch that he gave
himself only to Hunting and dalliance with his Sultana, who had born him the
first Son, of whom he became so inamoured that he slighted all his other Women,
contrary to the custom of other Sultans. Yet having notice that Sir Daniel
Harvy, His Majesty of Great Britains Ambassador expected his Audience, he
caused him to be introduced, acknowledging the reverence and respect for his
Majesty, and the esteem he had of the English Nation, ordering the
Capitulations to be renewed, commanding the Chimacam that if any one should
break or enfringe them that he should cut him off without further argument. But
as to the renewing the Capitulations the Chimacam salling at the Grand
Signeours feet, implored, That that particular might be deferred until the
arrival of the great Vi^er, whose proper power and act it was to make War and
Peace, and therefore for him to meddle about capitulations, was to invade the
Visiers Authority, which he durst not do without putting his Life in danger, or
at least rendering his person obnoxious to his irreconcilable displeasure;
with which the Grand Signeour being satisfied, ordered that tha^ particular
should be referred to the Grand Visiers the renewing of which was reserved for
the (...) and (...) of Sir John Finch, who succeeded in the Embassy after the
death of Sir Daniel Harvy.

Anno 1670. the Grand Vizier having disposed the affairs of Candia, embarked
for S^io, where having stayed some days revelling in all excess and
drunkenness he (...) into a surfeit, which put such an enmity between Wine and
him that by some other motives exasperated, he interdicted the drinking of it
upon severe penalties throughout the Ottoman Empire. The Turks generally being
given to take Opium, which sort of drous^e intoxication they for the most part
hold beyond the charms of Wine, but this prohibition continued not long.

The Vizier passing from Scio sailed to Rodesto, and from thence to Adrinople,
where he was received in a manner of Triumph by the Grand Signeour, who
expressed the more then ordinary satisfaction he conceived not only in the
conduct of his affairs, but that he was safely returned from a tedious and
bloody War.

About the beginning of the following year the Venetian Ambassador arrived at
the Port, to settle and confirm the Treaty, as to the establishing the
Frontiers in Dalmatia, Albania, and other parts of the Venetian Territories, in
which there arose such disputes between the borderers on either side, that some
skirmishes happened after the Articles of Candia were subscribed; The
Ambassador being introduced with all due ceremonies, complained of several
outrages done to the Subjects of the Venetians, whereupon commissioners on
either part were appointed to meet between Climno and Clissa, to adjust matters
as they saw convenient, but such was the fury of the people that without regard
to the honor of the Grand Signeour or the Senate, they seized upon several
places which they alleged to be their peculiar Patrimonies, swearing that no
peace made to the advantage of their Superiors should exclude them their
right, but in the end the Turks who were the chief Aggressors were put to
flight by a power of Venetians sent for that purpose, and Vsuph Bey their
Commander and chief perswader to the infringement of the Peace was slain, after
which the Commissions were granted and made more ample then formerly, for
determining the right of the Signory and Empire on the confines of Dalmatia,
and other Countries adjoining, and on the 27th. of July, conferring in a Tent
set up for that purpose, after much debate many boundards were affixed, but
that which was most insisted on, was Verpogly a small Fortress on the top of a
Hill once belonging to the Venetians, which at the beginning of the War they
abandoned, as costing more to maintain or defend, then the value or
consideration of it, which the Turks possessing averred it to be theirs by the
Law of Arms, arguing strongly, that any other Nation might have seized on it to
the prejudice both of the Venetians, and the Subjects of the Grand Signeour.
These debates had like to have created new Hostilities, but Mamut Bassa dying
in the middle of the Treaty, and Chusaien Bassa commissioned in his stead, who
was of a milder and more flexible temper, difficulties that obstructed a
conclusion were removed, and on the 24th. of October, 1671. in open Divan held
in the Campaigne of Salona all things were concluded, and Coppies of the
Agreement subscribed and interchangeably given. And in this manner the
difference about the confines were concluded, and the long War between the
Venetians and the Turks ended.

About this time a Turkish Envoy sent to the French Court returned, bringing
with him an Ambassador from the King called Monsieur de Nointel, who with three
Men of War and a Fireship sailing through the Hellespont, and coasting along
the Propontis refusing to salute the Seraglio unless he was first saluted, a
nicety not required by any Ambassador before him, which not being granted lay
off at Sea, as being refused by the Officers of the City as Ambassador, but in
the end the Vizier prudently considering that for a mere punctilio it was not
covenient nor safe to exasperate the French Nation, nor thereon to ground a
War, whereupon he gave order he should be received with the usual Ceremony, and
conducted to his Audience, nor was the insolency of the French Soldiers and
Sailors who committed many ourages on the Coast taken notice of, or if they
were it was so that they were dissembled, and although whilst the Ships lay
before the City a hundred slaves from on board the Turks Galleys, and out of
the City escaped by getting on board and amongst them Monsieur de Peau-jeu a
Knight of Malta, yet that was likewise dissembled, and not thought a sufficient
ground for War with a Nation whose valor the Turks by fatal experience had
tried, but in the end the French became more moderate, and new instructions
being brought the Ambassador by a man of War, he passed to Adrinople where the
Grand Signeour was gone, and having his second Audience granted, his first
being had of the Vizier, he desired that the League so long continued between
his Master and the Ottoman Princes might continue, and that the capitulation
might be renewed only with the Alteration of the customs, imposed upon his
Masters Subjects from five to three in the hundred according to that privilege
which the English and other Christian Merchants, whose league and Friendship
was subsequent to theirs, but after many delays the Vizier would not accord,
but referred him to his return from the Wars of Poland, on which he was intent,
which disappointment greatly perplexed the Ambassador.

The Grand Signeour having before missed his design in making away his Brethren
for fear of the Janissaries, now in their absence most of them being busied in
the Wars, renewed his resolution and under pretense of Friendship poisoned
Orcham the Eldest with a bowl of Wine, though some affirm he was strangled with
a Bow string, and that ere he fell he killed one of the Executioners, but
howsoever it happened he was made away, whose death once known greatly incensed
the people against the Grand Signior, and prevented the like effects on the
other Brother. All other matters now laid aside about the beginning of the
year 1672. preparations were made for the Polish War though with such
deliberation as expressed an unwillingness thereto on the part of the Ottomans,
who having experienced the force of that warlike Nation moved thereto with
caution. Yet their motives were not inconsiderable, but such as thereon a War
might be grounded not only for the continual Piracy of the Cossacks on the
Black Sea, and their assisting the bordering Princes in their opposing the
Turkish Arms, and the little regard the Polish Ambassador had of the Port
treating there with equal grandeur, and assuming a Liberty above the Ministers
of other Christian Princes, and now they lay more open to be assaulted by
reason of the divisions amongst themselves, whereby an opportunity offered to
the Grand Signeour to oblige the Polonians to a compliance of his demands, yet
whilst preparatians were making on all hands an Ambassador was sent to the
Vizier, he advancing with his Army toward the frontires named Wisozski, a
Noble man of Poland presuming upon his Power and Authority argued after such a
lofty manner, and in terms so contrary to the methods of an Ambassador, that
the Vizier much incensed dispatched a Chiaus into Poland with Letters, desiring
that this Ambassador might be recalled as being a person unable to manage
matters of the least concernment, insinuating that if they supplied his place
with another he should be received with due respect, and a plain way laid
opento conclude his Negotiations to the satisfaction of both parties. Upon
notice of which the Ambassador was so sensibly touched that he in a rage sent
Letters to the assembly of the Polish Nobility to certify them that he was not
only debarred of the allowance usual to Ambassadors but also was imprisoned,
both of which (though untrue, for the former he refused as too little for one
o0f his Character, and the latter being only his confinement to the City of
Constantinople, by reason of some outrages his servants committed at his house
at Pera) being believed kindled such a flame that the Poles imprisoned the
Turkish Chiaus, and ordered that all the Country should be put in Arms
rendering the Vizier no other answer then that when their Ambassador was set at
Liberty and had License to depart, the like should be done to theirs. Of these
proceedings the Grand Signeour having notice was highly offended immediately
ordering that Wisoski should depart, and at the same time commanded his whole
Militia to rise and follow him to the Wars, fending a Sword and Vest to the
Tartar Han with orders to unite his Forces with the Cossacks that had revolted
from the Poles, and speedily to invade Polonia, which accordingly he did and
incountering near Batowa with a Body of Polish Horse, under the command of
Luzecki Governor of Podolia he overthrew them, which was the first bad Omen of
the ill success of this unhappy War.

The Grand Signeour having raised an Army of one hundred fifty thousand men
marched toward Poland already sick and languishing with its own intestine
distempers, and unable to contend with a body united within it self. The first
enterprise he made was upon impregnable Fortress of the Caminieck which had so
often baffled the Ottoman Force, but now being weakly manned unprovided of all
necessaries, and despairing of Relief, after fourteen days siege surrendered,
the Garrison in it submitting to the will of the Conqueror, which opened a
passage through all Podolia and Volhinia to the very Walls of Leopolis, which
they passed over rather like Travelers then Enemies, not one man in arms
appearing to oppose them delighting and sporting themselves in those the most
fruitful and delicious Countries of Europe, permitted so to do by the
animosities and intestine broiles amongst the Nobility, who being divided into
factions, reguarding more their private quarrels then the safety of their
Country, now ready to be devoured by the Infidels, and indeed it has been
always seen that the divisions of the Christians have laid the foundation of
the Turkish greatness, which they impute to the merit of their prayers. Yet
such was the command of the Grand Signeour, that no Soldier spoiled or
outraged any person, which so far won upon the affections of the Polonians that
they in all places where he passed submitted, and put themselves under his
protection, which so awakened the Nobility, that a Council being called it was
resolved that to buy their Peace, and be shut of these new come guests.

That the King of Poland should quit all claim to the Vkrain, Pedoli, and Russe
land.

That Leopolis and the Country thereabouts should pay a Tribute of seventy
thousand Dollars a year, and all other Capitulations formerly made to stand in
full force and virtue.

These Articles being signed the Grand Signeour committed the Government of
Veravia, and Podolia to Dorosensko General of the Cossacks, and the defense of
Cominieck and Chusaein Bassa, with a Garrison of twelve thousand Janissaries,
and so returned to Constantinople dismissing the greatest part of his Army,
poor and almost naked by reason of their being restrained from plundering.

About this time Tripol^es matined against Osman Bassa their Governor, for
refusing to divide amongst them such booties as were taken by Pyracy who
thereupon with his Friends and slaves betook himself to the strong Castle, but
in the end was strangled by his own slaves, and the gates opened to the
Mutiniers who committed all manner of disorders, and resolved to take upon them
the same form of Government with that of Argire, and to be Governed by a Dey,
but at length to prevent the effects of the Grand Signeours just displeasure,
it was resolved to send their Deputies with great presents to the Port there to
excuse the matter, and to crave a new Bassa, aggravating the iniquities of the
old, all which with some difficulty was obtained, and fair weather was made
between them and their Lord though the Bassa's of Tripoly, have ever since been
rather in name then power, those unruly Pirates doing what they list, to the
great hinderance of Trade, and blemish to the Ottoman Empire, who living by
Theft and Rapine keep peace with none longer then stands winh their advantage.

In August died the worthy Sir Daniel Harvy His Majesty of great Britains
Ambassador at the Port, and soon after in his room succeeded Sir John Finch.

The League the Poles made with the Turk was not long observed, for after they
had recollected themselves being ashamed of such inglorious conditions, dealt
with the Cossacks to revolt from Dorosensko, who had engaged them in the Grand
Signeours interest, which put all again into hazard and confusion, so that the
Grand Signeour was obliged to give over his pastimes, and betake himself to
Arms, nor was the unexpected news of the loss of the Alexandian Fleet, taken
by the Galleys of Malta and Corisaries of Legorn less unwelcome news.

The Poles encouraged by the motion of the Cossacks notwithstanding the
Articles, refused to pay the Tribute agreed on, which by their Ambassador they
certified the Grand Signeours Ministers, desiring to have it waved, but the
Turk surprised thereat more earnestly demanded it, though at first many fair
words were used but they not prevailing the Grand Signeour gave order for all
his Forces to be in a readiness, hanging out the Tough or Horses tail, and
ordering his Tents to be pitched in the Field, and the more to frighten them
sent a Letter filled with dreadful menaces agreeable to the Turkish style,
which threatened them with confusion, Sword, Famine, Fire, destruction and a
thousand other direful punishments. Yet was not so forward, for though his Army
was imbodied yet that Summer they only passed the Danubius, and the ensuing
Winter quartered about Silistria, that they may terrify the Poles the more
with their approach, and for the diverting the French Kings Arms from being
serviceable to the Poles, his Ambassador received satisfaction in what he
demanded as to the lessening the customs and allowance of Jesuits and Religious
Houses in Jurusalem, Galatia and other parts of the Turkish Dominions, and that
in all respects the subjects of his most Christian Majesty should be every
where well entreated, throughout the Ottoman Empire, after which the Ambassador
obtained a license to travel and take a view of the Country, when in the mean
while the Polish Army to the number of 20000 horse and foot were advancing from
the Walls of Leopolis under the command of General Sobieski, and Zircha made
General of the Cossacks in the room of Dorisensko, joining with a party of
Mascovites and Calmuck Tartars, made incursions into the parts about Osac, the
news of which so amazed the Grand Signiour that he put off his intended march
to Kemenitiz, and again endeavored to oblige the Poles by fair means to an
observation of the Articles, and satisfy the contents therein concluded, but
finding them averse, he resolved if possible to compel them thereto by the
power of the sword.

The Grand Seigniors forwardness was not so great, but that the Poles were as
earnest as he, and little regarding his Menaces resolved to be the first
Agressors; For General Sobieskie having increased his Army to the number of
Fifty Thousand, boldly passed the Niester, to whom soon after revolted the
Prince, or Vayvod of Moldavia with certain Troops of Horse and Foot, for that
the Bassa Chusaein had reproached him, and at the head of his Troops struck him
with his Battle Axe, and the Prince of Valachia was forced into the Polish Camp
by his Soldiers, but he soon after made his escape, and was by the Grand
Seignior received into favor.

The Armies now approaching, and the Poles having had exact Intelligence of
what had passed in the Turks Camp; The Battle was begun at what time the Prince
of Moldavia inspired with revenge charged furiously upon Chuseain Bassa and
wounded him, requiting thereby the wound he had received of him. The heat of
the fight continued for the space of fifteen hours, in which none behaved
himself more valiantly then did Solomon Bassa the Beglerbeg of Bosna, yet
having that day six horses killed under him, and finding himself overpowred,
fled the Field, as did Chusaein Bassa, the Bassa of Sinas and Chidd-Ogla, but
he in flight was slain, and the other three Bassa's wounded; The Generals of
the Green and Yellow Sangiacks of the Spahies were taken Prisoners, and two
other Principal Commanders of that Order killed. The Zagergeebassa who
commanded Eighteen Chambers of the Janissaries was likewise taken Prisoner
together with the Standard of that Order, and of them Eight Thousand Five
Hundred slain, all the Troops and Attendants of the Bassa's, with four Sanzacks
were slain, so that together were computed to be slain on the part of the Turks
in that Battle Twenty Five Thousand Two Hundred Men; The booty taken was very
considerable, for besides the ordinary baggage they took Two Thousand Purses of
Money, newly brought for the payment of the Soldiers, and Twenty Five Thousand
Wagons of Provision and Ammunition.

This victory thus happily obtained, the strong Fortress of Chotin was
surrendered to the Poles, and many other places of less importance, for the
loss of which, and the overthrow of his Army, the Grand Seignior was so highly
displeased with Chusaein Bassa, that he caused him to be imprisoned, deprived
him of all his Estate and Honors, and caused him to be laid in chains,
denying him the use of Physicians, or any others, unless such attendants as
brought him necessaries, and thus was this proud Bassa, who but a while before
Lorded it over Princes, plunged into the depth of misery.

The joy of this great victory that had so elevated the Poles, was soon damped
upon the death of their King, who departing at a juncture, when the Enemy who
by this time had recruited, was at hand with a powerful Army, and the Nation
not well settled caused diverse fears in the people, yet the Army not to be idle
divided into diverse parties, and in the depth of Winter, a time wherein they
well knew the Turks would not travel, entered Moldavia, blocked up Keminitz,
and brought away great booties, spoiling all in their way, till such time as
the Spring coming on, the Turks with multitudes came against them, and obliged
them to retire, at whiat time the Tartars committed diverse outrages upon their
Frontiers, carrying away much People and Cattle, burning and destroying all
before them, the which though it incensed the Tartar Han, yet feigning himself
sick upon some displeasure received, he refused to take the field in person,
though the Grand Seignior had commanded it, yet that that might not obstruct
the progress of the Ottoman Arms, the Great Vizier sent him his own Physician,
an Italian of great experience, who found him overwhelmed with deep
Melancholy, but with Cordials and Medicaments soon raised him to his former
vivacity.

Keminitz all this while blocked up, was by the approach of the Turkish Army
relieved, which the Vizier perceiving, caused his Troops to March to Chuozim a
strong Fortress taken by the Christians upon the defeat of Chusaein Bassa,
which was retaken, and the Garrison contrary to Articles put to the Sword, nor
durst the Muscovites who were far advanced oppose his Forces, but retired
before them, leaving Asac dismantled and plundered, which the Turks rebuilt and
fortified.

About this time Mahomet Bassa being made at the instance of his Favorites
Captain of a Squadron of Galleys, plundered and harassed most of the Islands in
the Archipelago, which raised such hatred against him, and the loud complaints
of the people being arrived at Constantinople before him, he at his return had
his head stricken off, and all his ill gotten gains confiscated; So that like
an Indian Cormorant, which being made tame, and taught to fish for the benefit
of his Master, he was prevented from swallowing the prey.

Hungary being torn with civil dissentions, the Malcontents desirous to throw
off the German yoke sent to the Port, desiring to be taken into the Grand
Seigniors protection, and to become his Tributaries, which made the Turks
hasten to settle their affairs, that they might be the better at leisure to
take the advantage of those intestine troubles, for the reducing the rest of
that spacious Kingdom to the Ottoman obedience, and the better to secure his
new conquests, he removed a part of the Cossacks with all their substance to
the banks of the Black Sea, there assigning them Lands, and as for the
Armenians and Jews that dwelt in Reminitz, he transplanted them to Philopolis,
Adrinople and Constantinople, giving the youngest and lustiest of either Sex as
a prey to his Soldiers, who sold them for slaves throughout the Turkish
Empire, and then returning with his Army to Adrinople, there to watch all
advantages, he soon after disbandoned part of his Asian horse as chargable and
troublesome, but whilst these projects in State were broaching, great
differences arose between the Latin and Greek Church about the possession of
the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, which had been so possessed by those of the
Roman Catholic Religion for many years, but now at the instance of Panajoti
the Visiers Interpreter a zealous Greek, the latter were preferred, and after a
long controversy and much Money spent, the Greek obliged the Romanists
dwelling in those parts to pay them tribute for such places relating to
Religion they there held, every Friar paying a dram of Silver yearly to the
Patriarch; So that now the Romanists have possession neither of the Chapel of
Bethlehem, nor of the Sepulcher; The former of which had of a long time held,
and the latter as earnestly contended for.

The Grand Seignior not unmindful of the affairs of Hungary, gave order to the
Bassas on the Frontires, secretly to encourage the Division till such time as
he should be at leisure to employ his Arms on that side, hoping that an
accommodation with Poland would ensue, but found not the Poles so forward
therein as he expected, for the Wars still continued though not with such
violence as before, which gave the Grand Seignior leave to Solemnize the
Marriage of his Daughter with Rul-ogli, (which in the Turkish Language
signifies the Son of a slave) who was his great Favorite and Bassa of
Magnesia, as also to Circumcise his Son, the former being 17 years of Age, and
the latter 12, to solemnize which, the Festivals were appointed on the 16th. of
May, Anno 1675. when in the Morning the Grand Seignior with the young Prince
his Son went to their Tents, which were pitched in a Plain before the City
exceeding rich, round which all the great men of the Court had their Pavilions
placed, amongst which was raised a stately Throne covered with a Canopy of
Cloth of Gold, placed beneath the umbrage of two Elmes, which shining with
many Lamps in the night made a glorious show, and in this Seat of State the
Sultan placed himself in the Morning, being accompanied thither by all the
Bassa's then residing at Constantinople, and by the representatives of those
that were absent, who according to their degrees kissed his Robe, and in silken
Purses deliver a note of what Presents they had brought, which were put into
the hands of the Treasurer to see them duly received, opposite to the Tents
were several Poles fixed, on which by night many Lamps were hung, giving a
glorious Light, by which were exercised several tricks of activity, as
Wrestling, Dancing, Singing and Comedies, Fireworks there were in abundance,
but not effectually made; The Night being passed, in the Morning the several
Trades passed before the Tents one after another, every one making their
Presents, and bearing Pageants, Music all the while sounding, after whom came
a Cavilcade of all the chief Officers, and amongst them the young Prince
flaming with Diamonds, Rubies, and other precious Stones, and before them
passed Twenty Four small Nachils or Pageants, and two large, one higher than
any Ship-Mast, supported by a Hundred Slaves, and were afterward set before the
Seraglio. On the 27th. being Mahomet their Impostor Prophets birthday, the
Grand Signior went publicly to the Mosch of Sultan Selim, with no other
Attendance than those of his own Court, his Pages richly clad in Cloth of
Gold, carried each a Feather studded with Jewels of great value; after the
Grand Signior rode the young Prince, who that night was circumcised: During
this Festival, a great number of people had their Provision at the expense of
the Grand Signior, and about Two Thousand being at that time circumcised, every
one of them had a Quilt given him with a Pension of three Aspers a day for Life.

The Solemnity of the Circumcision ended, the Festival for the Marriage of
Rul-Ogli with the young Princess, which Ceremony in form and manner according
to the Turkish fashion was thus, The Kuzlier Aga or Black Eunuch of the Women
was Bridegroom or Compere to the Princess, and the Lord Treasurer to Rul-Ogli,
both which in the Name of the Bridegroom and Bride went before the Kedelescher
or Chief Judge, who wrote the Articles of Marriage, and passed them into an
Act, which done, the Presents were sent, and first those from the Bridegroom to
the Bride, which were a great number of Beasts and Birds made in Sugar, Thirty
Mules laden with two Chests of Sweetmeats a piece, and about each of their
necks a Satin Vest for the Muliter; after them went several men, carrying Pots
of Sherbet, or Water and Sugar boiled, which the Turks for the most part drink;
next, a Hundred men carrying Vests of Silk, Satin, Velvit, and Cloth of Gold,
then five Horses laden with rich Furniture, followed by men, bearing Cloth of
Gold Vests, with sable Loops richer than the former, for the Loops and Buttons
were imbroidered with rich Pearl, and on the top of each were a Rubie Diamond,
or Saphier: These likewise carried Shoos, Boots, and Pattens for the Bagneo,
all covered with Pearl, as likewise two dressing Boxes with Crystal Glasses,
and a Cap in form of a Crown, a little Cabinet imbroidered all over with Pearl,
Eight Girdles set with Emraulds, Rubies, and Diamonds, a large Diamond Ring, a
pair of Pendants of two great Emraulds, with many other things of value.

These Presents sent by the Bridegroom, the Grand Signiour, as his Daughters
Dowry, according to the custom of the Eastern Countries, ushered with a
Caval-Cade of all the Grandees sent to the Bridegrooms-house, two Gardens made
of Sugar, Forty little Nachils, Eighty Six Mules laden with rich Furniture for
a House, Ten Men with dressings, as Boots, Shoes, etc. Imbroidered with Pearl
and precious Stones, after them were carried the Jewels set on Girdles,
Bracelets, and the like; then came Twelve Coaches laden with Slaves, and Thirty
Six Black Eunuchs, these were succeeded by a Cavalcade, in which was the Bride
riding in a Coach covered with Plates of Silver, and drawn by six Horses, the
sides adorned with Golden streams; before which, went the chief Eunuch of the
Women, after followed four Coaches with six Horses a piece, each carrying two
Eunuchs; some distance from them, came the Brides Mother in a Coach covered
with Plates of Silver, attended by Ten other Coaches; the night following, the
Bride was conducted to the Nuptial Chamber, in Ceremony only as not being yet
ripe for consummation of Marriage, though in England of late, the Virgins think
themselves wronged to stay to her Age unmarried.

The Ceremony thus performed, great was the rejoicing demonstrated by
Fireworks, Shows, and sounding of Musical Instruments; After which, the Grand
Signiour on some private considerations, though to the wonder of the whole
Court, removed the great Treasurer to the Bassa-ship of Grand Cairo, and
appointed the Efendi, or Judge-Advocate of the Janissaries to succeed him in the
Office of Treasurer; and now the public Treasury by the late Wars, and costly
Ceremonies being almost emptied, diverse ways were used to recrute it with
Money, some was procured by the Sale of great places, from which those that
would not largely contribute, were thrust, and some again extorted from the
poorer sort, whilst to save charges the Sedentary Millitia was abridged in
their pensions, and some utterly cast off, so that in a while, a great mass of
Money was heaped together, and Forces sent to the Frontires of Poland.

About this time the Republique of Genoa's resident at Constantinople, for want
of that due Income that was expected to accrue by Trade, contracting large
Debts, and having several debts contracted by his Predecessors deceased,
contracted likewise with the Turks of Constantinople, a great Man of War that
brought him thither, upon the Republique refusing to pay, was seized, and laid
up in the Arsenal, nor could a release be procured, till Thirty Three Thousand
Dollars, part of the contracted Debt was paid and secured, which so
discouraged the Genoways, that it has ever since damped their Trade in the
Ottoman Dominions, and now the Grand Signeour moved by chief Customer resident
at Smyrna, casting his Eye upon that Scale of Trade, brought him in great
Revenues by way of Custom; the better to beautify it, and restore its ancient
Luster, built a Basasteen or Exchange, as likewise a Custom-House Erected on
Piles in the Sea, sending his absolute Decree, that all Merchants Ships should
there unlade, and make due enteries, which greatly perplexed the Merchants, who
before were wont to land their Goods on their own Keys, but in vain was their
complaints, for the Grand Signiour would not admit of any reversal, but by his
Ralya declared that rather than he would be disobeyed in his own Dominions, he
would blow up the Port and Town, upon which answer the Merchants despairing of
success, were content to unlade their Ships at the Custom-House, or there to
make a true Entery of the Goods in their Boats; for the Customer being sensible
that there was not water enough for the Ships to ride at the Key, was content
to dispense with diverse matters that the Innovation might sit more easy on the
Merchants.

Things being at this pass, the Grand Signior after sixteen years absence from
Constantinople, which had rendered that City almost dispeopled, returned
thither to the great Joy of the Constantinopolitans, and frequently took his
pleasure on the River in his Barge, or on the Bosphorus in his Galley, strictly
commanding that no Christian Minister should be suffered to dwell upon the
Banks of the latter, a prohibition never before made by any of his
Predecessors, when soon after his arrival, the Captain Bassa dyed, and Zayd
Ahmet Bassa Ogli succeeded him, and soon after Ibrahim, Bassa General of the
Forees on the Borders of Poland dyed, nor was the great Vizier far from the
Brink of the Grave, by reason of his immoderate drinking of Wine and
Strong Water, which made him incident to the Dropsy and Jaundice.

The new Bassa of Cairo by this time having entered on his Office, used great
diligence to settle the Revenues of that Kingdom, hoping thereby to please the
Grand Signior, of whose favor since his removal from Treasurer, he stood
doubtful, but so severe he was in his Exaction, that the Egyptians not
accustomed to be so used, complained of his rigor to the Begs or great Lords
of Egypt, who though they receive the Turkish Bassas, pay Tribute, and own them
their chief Governors, yet are They in themselves Absolute Lords in their
respective Provinces; for that Kingdom is rather an Aristocracy, than a
Monarchy. These great Men much displeased at the proceeding of the Bassa, which
tended to Tyranny and Oppression, took up Arms, and drew after them a great
multitude, with which they assaulted the Bassa's palace, entered it, and
dragging him thence, cast him into Prison, which news flying with all haste to
the Ottoman Court, filled all with fear and confusion, upon apprehension that
Egypt was revolted; but a while after the truth of the matter being rightly
understood, the Grand Signior with all speed sent a new Bassa with gentle
Letters to pacify the Begs, and restore things to their former tranquillity;
promising that restitution should be made for all injuries sustained, which
message of Grace and Favor made all former discontents vanish, and restored a
right understanding, insomuch, that the imprisoned Bassa was set at Liberty,
and shipped to Candia, where the Grand Signiour had appointed him Governor;
the people without any further disturbance returning to their obedience.

About this time happened the unfortunate fall of Chesine Aga, a man of great
repute amongst the Turks, which was after this manner, a woman called Sultana
Sporche, with which Sultan Ibrahim had had to do with her in her youth; being
now turned Baud, bought many beautiful Female Slaves, which she brought up to
Singing, Dancing, and many other Exercises, and then for money, yielded them up
to the Lust of the Great Men of the Court; one amongst which for her Wit and
Beauty being greatly famed, the Grand Signior sent for her, but the Sultana
fearing to loose her, by whom she got daily gain, and doubting the Grand
Signiour would put her into his Seraglio, admonished her to a sullen coyness,
as likewise to declare that she was a freewoman, which by the Turkish Law
ought not to be defiled, nor carnally know any man, unless she be married;
which part she played so well, that the Grand Signior sent her back with
disdain and reproach to her Mistress, who was not a little glad of her escape;
but so it happened, that the aforesaid Aga soon after casting his Eyes on her,
and delighted with her quaint Discourse, fell enamored with her, and treated
of Marriage, which the Wench highly approved, but her Mistress would in no wise
consent to it, declaring that she was her Bondwoman, and not at her own
disposal, which for a time put a stop to the proceedings; but soon after the
Lover contrived away to bring their designs to pass, for the Aga having taken
her private Lodgings, she under the shelter of the night made her escape, but
upon her being missed, her Beldame charged him with conveying away, and
concealing her slave, which he for a while denied; but she setting many spies
over him, at length found them together, and charging an Officer with them,
caused them to be carried before the Great Vizier, who sent to the Grand
Signior to know his pleasure therein, of which the Aga having some mistrust,
told the Vizier that he expected no other sentence then that of Death from the
Grand Signior, only he desired that his beloved Mistress might be spared, for
he was sure he should live in her; nor were his fears in vain, for soon after
came a fatal Decree for his Execution, and sent the Woman to the Seraglio This
cruelty of the Sultans as most conjectured, proceeded from the disdain, he
conceived that the Wench should refuse his proffered kindness, and embrace the
love of his Slave, for such the Sultans account the greatest men in the Empire.

The Grand Signior having spent most part of the Winter at Constantinople,
early in the Spring returned to Adrinople, though the better to comfort the
Constantinopolitans, who by reason of the sensible decay of Trade that must
thereon ensue, mourned his absence; he presumed about Autumn to return again,
and for his reception caused a new Seraglio to be founded, and so setting
forward, accompanied with a great train of Nobility, and amongst the rest, the
great Vizier, he marched toward Constantinople, but by the way the Vizier
dyed, having destroyed himself by intemperate drinking Wine and Hot Spirits,
his Body accompanied with a slender Train, was brought back to Constantinople,
and there buried in the Sepulcher of Old Ruperlee his Father.

The Great Vizier dead, the Seal was given to Kara Mustapha, Bassa, who for
many years had exercised the Office of Chimacam, or Deputy to the Great Vizier,
being a Man of courteous behavior, wise and affable, not given to Covetousness
nor Cruelty, but as soon as he was promoted, he sent to the deceased Visiers
Servants to condole the Death of their Master, promising them to take them into
his care and protection; most of which he afterward promoted to Honorable
places, to such advantage, that by their dependency on him, they secured both
him and themselves from the malice of such as envyed the advancement: Long he
had not been settled in his place, e're he cut off the Chief Pay-Masters head
for bringing false Money into the Exchequer, and had given another the same
measure, had not his Life been redeemed at Forty Purses of Money, or Twenty
Thousand Dollars, though thereby his place was not regained, nor was diligence
less in looking after the corruption of Ministers of State, displacing and
deposing all such as he sound remiss in their duty, or that for lucre or
gainssake oppressed any of the Grand Signiours Subjects, or such strangers as
traded in any part of his Dominions.

But by the Example of this man it may be seen how Power and Greatness can
alter the disposition of Men, and make them swell with Pride almost to
bursting, for finding the Reins on his neck, without restraint, he took upon
him the Power and Office of the Sultan, it being more difficult to gain access
to him, than to the Sultan himself, and in imitation of their Master, the
sub-Officers grew proud and insolent; insomuch, that the face of things,
contrary to most men's expectations were changed; and this haughty behavior was
showed especially toward foreign Ministers, whose Interpreters were not
admitted as formerly to private Audiences or Conferences about their Affairs,
but only at the public Divan where their Arzes or Memorials were to be
preferred, which was always allowed to the Subjects of the Grand Signiour, and
those of Tributary Nations, when they Petition for Justice; which Judgment was
not only cast upon interpreters, but on the persons of the representatives
themselves; an instance of which was seen in the French Ambassador, who at the
time appointed coming to receive his Audience, was rudely crowded and jostled
by a company of unmannerly Chiauses, who regarded the representative of so
great a King at no other rate than they did one of the Grooms, or Laquies of
the Sultan. Being come to the Seat of Audience, he perceived the Stool set for
him, was set beneath the Soffra, and that of the Visiers upon it; whereupon he
commanded one of his Servants to place it equal with that of the Great Visiers,
which he had no sooner done, but it was brought down again by one of the
Visiers Pages, whereupon the Ambassador seizing the Stool, carried it up and
sat upon it. The report whereof coming to the Vizier, who was in his retiring
Chamber, he sent word that he would not come into the Chamber of Audience till
the Stool was set in the place appointed, whereunto the Ambassador replied that
he might dispose of his Chair as he pleased, but not of his Person, when in the
interim Chiaus Bashe came in bauling Calder, Calder, which is take it away,
take it away; at which unexpected noise the Ambassador standing up to see what
the matter was, had the stool taken from under him; whereupon he in a great
rage flung out of the Audience Chamber, causing the Presents which he brought
to be again returned with him, and so mounting his Horse, departed to his
Lodging.

Soon after it was by some of the Officers intimated to Sir John Finch, His
Majesty of Great Britains Ambassador, that he might if he pleased, receive
Audience of the Vizier; but upon notice what had happened to the French
Ambassador, he excused his going, on pretense of an indisposition of body: But
however Venetian, Dutch and Genoan Residents were content (the better to curry
favor with the Vizier) to be admitted to Audience on those terms which the
Vizier would vouchsafe to allow them; for though during the time, he was
Chimacam, as is aforesaid; he was meek and humble, yet being placed in the
highest dignity next the Sultan, the unexpected Exaltation made him so far
forget himself, that his pride knew no bounds.

These things happening, and no hopes of accommodation with Poles, who by this
time had Elected Sobieski for their King, great preparations were made for the
carrying on that War. The Tartar, Han, in order thereto receiving express
command to take the Field, which early in the Spring he did, and entering
Lithuania, committed many outrages, but being incountered by Sixteen Thousand
Poles, and Cossacks his Army was put to the rout, and in great confusion
obliged to repass the Neister, leaving behind him all the booty, which
consisted mostly of People and Cattle, during which, the Bassa of Kemenitz,
with a great Body of Horse made an Inroad even to the Walls of Leopolis, which
caused the King to send his Queen and Children to Cracow, resolving to give the
Turks Battle, and in order to strengthening his Forces, summoned all the Polish
Nobility to repair to his Standard, putting himself and such Troops as he had
between the City and the Enemy, the better to alienate the fears of the people,
who upon the approach of the Turks, who burnt up all before them, had fled, and
left the City desolate, had not the Gates been closed upon them.

The Turks perceiving the great preparations that were making against them,
thought fit with such booty as they had gotten to retire into Vckrania, but in
their retreat were charged by the King with such bravery, that Seven Thousand
of them were killed, and a great number of Captives rescued to their
unspeakable joy.

They finding the Turks were resolutely bent to carry on the War, and that the
Kingdom was greatly weakened by the Provinces they had already rent from it, the
better to strengthen himself by Alliance, by the Advice of the Senate, sent his
Ambassador to the Court of the Czar of Moscovy, to solicit Aid against the
common Enemy, who upon his arrival was received with great expression of Joy,
and due Ceremony being daily heightened with fair promises to expect great
matters, but in the end, nothing worth mention came on it, yet it so wrought
upon the Turks, that for the better preservation of what they had already
required the Vizier began to be intent on peace, but his propositions were so
unreasonable, that the Poles generously refused them, and early in the Spring
prepared to take the Field with a puissant Army, yet could not so soon draw
them together, but that the Tartars living on the Frontires, joining with some,
revolted Cossacks, committed diverse outrages, burning about Two Hundred
Villages, carrying away a great number of Christians into miserable captivity,
whilst Podolia groaned under the oppression of the Turks, who now turned their
clemency into rigor, killing and carrying away great numbers of these
distressed people, burning their Houses, and robbing them of the small matter
they had left in such a manner that that fruitful Country was laid almost
desolate; to oppose which Torrent, the King drew out his Forces and by fair
promises and large gifts procured Thre^ Thousand Cossacks to join him when
passing the Neister, and falling upon the Straglers as they at pleasure were
ravaging the Country, expecting no such matter, and killed Five Thousand,
amongst whom fell One Bassa and Two Sanziacks; but upon notice the Tartars in
great number was entered the heart of Poland, leaving some of his Troops under
the Command of Witnowitzki, his Lieutenant General, he posted to oppose them,
but upon notice they were Forty Thousand lead by Expert Turkish Commanders; he
drew near to Leopolis to encourage that City, which otherwise terrified at the
approach of so great an Army might have been deserted, when finding the Tartars
made diverse halts, having put a Garrison into the City, and given such
necessary orders as he thought convenient, he marched toward them, and having
notice by his Scouts that they approached, he commanded his Army to extend
large in Front, and the Wings of Horse to lie off, that they might seem more in
number than they were; he resolutely descended from a small Hill into the
Plain, and after having thrice proclaimed the Name of Jesus at the Head of his
Troop, fell like an unexpected Tempest upon the Infidels, insomuch that the
Front of their Army was overthrown, before the Rear could come up to their
assistance; which putting them into a great confusion, when perceiving the
reserves advance to charge them in the flank, and supposing the whole power of
the Kingdom at hand, by reason of great shout from the Hills made by the
Rustic, set there for that purpose; they first gave back, and in the end
betook themselves to plain flight, casting away many of their Arms and Baggage
to make the swifter retreat, upon whom the Polonian Horsemen followed hard,
making great slaughter of them for the space of Twelve Miles; but night coming
on, to prevent the pursuers from falling into any ambush that might for that
purpose be laid, the King caused the retreat to be sounded, and returning to
the City Victorious, he was received with all expressions of joy, and the next
day commanded a public Thanksgiving for the Victory so miraculously obtained.

In this Battle Ninety Thousand Tartars, Turks, Moldavians and Valachians were
slain, Seven Hundred taken Prisoners, and a great booty recovered; of the Poles
fell only Seven Hundred, their whole Force not exceeding Six Thousand. The
reasons were gathered from some of the Prisoners why the Tartars, etc. were so
suddenly discouraged, were two, first for that about ten in the Morning of the
same day making a Halt, abundance of Snow and Hail fell upon their Army, and
round about them none was seen to fall, which they took as a bad Omen.
Secondly, that when they perceived the large Front of the Polish Army which
extended near a Mile; they verily believed it to be the forerunner of the
Forces of the whole Kingdom, which they had heard were in Arms, and therefore
having so far advanced into the Country, and left many Enemies at their backs,
they feared to be enclosed, which occasioned their hasty and disorderly retreat.

These reiterated Losses, and the desire the Grand Signior had to possess
himself of the rest of Hungary, whose divisions gave him a prospect of reducing
it to his Obedience, made him more willingly hearken to the proposals of the
Polish Ambassador, so that in the end, upon much the same Articles as those
that had before been broke, the Tribute accepted, a peace was concluded, in
which the Moscovite would fain have been included, but he failing to help his
Neighbor Prince in his greatest Extremity, was thought unworthy both by the
Poles and Turks; insomuch, that soon after divisions arising amongst the
Bowyers, and great Men of that Dukedom; the Tartars taking the opportunity
thereof, overrun a great part of the Country, carrying away all that came to
hand; but another party soon after attempting the like, were fought with, and
most of them cut off, or drowned in repassing the Borysthenes.

About this time the differences between the Vizier and the French Ambassador
greatly increased, notwithstanding the mediation of diverse Christian Ministers
then residing at the Port. The one Insisting to take his place during his
Audience on the Saffora, and the other as obstinately refusing to permit
discontented that the Honor of his Master should be so much impaired, yet in
hopes of a better treatment, he once more resolved to attend his Audience,
being introduced, the Chair was brought and set at the Foot of the Saffora, the
which while he was with his own hands about to remove, the Visiers Servants
hindered him, wherefore in a rage he took up the Cushion and flung it over his
head, which happened to fall upon the Great Vizier, who grievously resenting
the Affront, caused him head and Shoulders to be thrust out of the
Audience-Chamber, whereupon the rude Officers (without respect to his
Character, or the Law of Nations, which renders the Person of an Ambassador
Sacred and Inviolable) so roughly handled him, that he kept his Chamber for
several days.

These are the most remarkable occurrences that have happened since the
beginning of this Emperors Reign over the Eastern Empire, till 1680, the
relation of which I have partly received from Authors of undoubted Credit and
Reputation, and partly asserted of my own knowledge, many of the Transactions of
this Emperors Reign happening during my abode in those Countries; But to
proceed.

Anno 1680. the Grand Seignior arriving at Adrinople about the middle of
December, and being recovered of an Ague that had sometime afflicted him, he
commanded his Vizier Bassa to draw his Forces together from all parts of his
Empire, causing the horses tail to be hung out, which is a certain sign that
the Grand Seignior or Grand Vizier intends to take the Field, and in order to
defray the charges, great sums of Money were every where exacted, the Grand
Vizier laboring more earnestly therein that he might again recover the Grand
Seigniors favor, from which he was fallen, with these Forces he intended to
invade Muscovy early in the Spring, and to prosecute that War till he had
compelled the Czar to submit to such terms of peace as he himself should
propose, and at the same time dispatched Achians to the Emperor of Germany, to
treat on the behalf of the Hungarian Malcontents, whom he declared he must
take into his protection, if their proposals for liberty of Conscience was by
the Imperial Diet then sitting at Ratisbon rejected, and soon after him
followed the Bishop of Sebestini, the Count D' Petrozi, and two or three others
of less note Deputed by the Hungarians, to treat about the same matter, but
their demands seeming unreasonable, they were dismissed without the
satisfaction they expected.

About this time Muley Hamet Nephew to Muley Ismale King of Morocco and Fess,
assisted by a number of Renegado Turks and Moors, mustered his Army near Suz,
and advanced to give his Uncle battle, but near Morocco many of his followers
deserting him, and his horsemen in which his chief strength consisted, being
overthrown near to Alarach he fled to Tunis, and was there received into
protection by the Governor, from whence he sent diverse of his Favorites and
followers to Constantinople to pray the Grand Seigniors aid against his Uncle,
who as he alleged unjustly detained those Kingdoms, but he being a Prince of
no Fortune, and less power, he nothing prevailed therein, yet his Rebellion
proved advantageous to the Garrison of Tangier, the Moors being thereby
diverted, whilst the English rebuilt many of their Forts ruined a few months
before, and were disincumbered of those troublesome neighbors, who had so long
beleagured them, nay more in the end, it occasioned a firm and lasting peace.

The French Merchants Trading in the Levant, having sustained great damage by
the Pirates of Tripoly, and amongst other Vessels the Sa^ta Sophia, laden at
Alicant with Sa^t and Spanish Wool o^^er way to Venice, a great brigantine
bound for Messina, and a Petach of Ragus, etc. to revenge that injury, and
reduce those Turkish Pirates to obedience, several Ships and Galleys were
fitted out at Marselles, under the command of the Barron of Quesne, who coming
before the Port of Trip^ly sent his Boat on shore, and in it several Officers,
in the Name of the most Christian King, to demand Restitution for the damages
sustained by the French Merchants, but receiving no other answer then that of
the Cannon from the Castles that guard the Port, he caused the boat to be haled
back, and with many broad sides fired upon the Town, but by reason of the
distance did no considerable damage, but whilst he was cruzing, he had notice
that seven Tripolean Men of War rid at Anchor in the Port of Scio, or Chios, an
Island belonging to the Grand Signior, whereupon he stood away from the Coast
of Barbary, and sailed thither upon whose approach the Turks slipped their
Anchors, and snugged close under the Castle, where notwithstanding they were
miserably torn by the shot from the French Galleys, which their Admiral
perceiving put out a Flag of Truce, and offered to deliver without ransom all
the French slaves that were on board, with two prizes he had lately taken, but
the Barron would not hearken to these offers, well knowing they could not
escape him, yet not thinking it safe to venture too near the shore, he blocked
them up; and sent to Tripoly to let the Governor understand what danger their
Ships were in, and that nothing could deliver them out of his hands, but
satisfaction for the wrongs sustained, and a delivery of all the French
Captives ransom free, and immediately to conclude a peace, but receiving no
satisfactory answer, he resolutely entered the Port with his Galleys, and after
having beaten down a great part of the Castle, and demolished many stately
Edifices, he sunk two of the Ships, took one, and fired the rest, in which
Action he lost but Thirty of his Men, but of the Turks there perished Eight
Hundred.

This News made known to the Grand Vizier, he instantly sent for the French
Ambassador residing at Constantinople, and after having rated him, and severely
threatened him with death, unless reparation was speedily made for the damage
sustained in the Grand Seigniors Port, he caused him to be confined,
imprisoning likewise many of his servants, nor could he obtain his Release till
he had purchased his peace at the price of Three Hundred Purses of Money, each
Purse being accounted Five Hundred Dollars, yet the loss of these Ships wrought
such effects, that the Tripoles soon after concluded a peace with the French.

Matters being at this pass, and the troubles increasing in Hungary, Count
Teckely still opposing himself against the Emperors Interest, and useing his
utmost endeavors at the Port to have himself proclaimed Prince of
Transylvania, the Emperor thought good to send an Ambassador to the Grand
Seignior to put him in mind of the league between the two Empires, desiring
that it might be kept inviolable, not any ways infringed by his giving
countenance to his Rebels in Hungary, which Ambassador upon his arrival had his
Audience of the Grand Vizier, and a promise made him, that a strict command
should be sent to all his Beglerbegs and Sanzacks on the frontiers, not upon
pain of losing their heads to aid or countenance the Malcontents, and being
afterward with the Grand Vizier, he assured him that the Grand Seigniors
resolution should be maintained, that thereby the peace and friendship
Established between the two Empires might continue, yet these specious
pretenses were to no other end intended then to protract time, to make their
own terms with the Rebels, for soon after without the least provocation the
Tables were turned, and not only assisted them with all manner of Warlike
provision, but with Men and Money, in consideration of several Towns to be put
into their hands when taken; They likewise made great preparations at Belgrade
and Buda under pretense of deposing Abafti Prince of Transylvania, and causing
diverse Janissaries to be attired like Hungarians, and to serve Count Teckely as
his guard.

The Turkish Pirates of Argiers having broke the peace sometime since made with
his Majesty of Great Britain, and taken several English Vessels (and amongst
others, these by name, viz. the Anne of London, the John of Exeter, the Thamar
of Colchester, the Post-horse of London, the Rosemary of Yarmouth, the William
of London, the amity of Plymouth, the Fortune of London, the Unity of
Barnstable, and the Mary Land Merchant, which last fought two Algerine Men of
War almost one whole day; but at last taking fire, she, together with most of
her men perished) To curb their insolency, the Vice Admiral Herbert with the
Squadron of his Majesty's Frigates under his command was appointed to cruze in
those straights, who with such success happened on those roving thieves, that
within the space of two years he took and destroyed forty of their Ships,
recovering a great number of Christian Captives, and brought those Pirates so
low, that not only they, but those of Tripole and Sally were obliged to
truckle, and receive such terms of peace as the Victor would allow; Amongst the
many engagements that happened, during the space aforesaid, this is remarkable,
on the 8th. of April 1681. Captain Booth in the Adventure Frigate, cruzing to
the Leward got sight of a great Turks Man of War, with a prize, which she towed
at her Stern, the which upon a more full discovery, proved to be the Golden
Horse of Argiers, mounted with upwards of Forty Guns, and Five Hundred and
Eight Men, commanded by one Morat Raiza a Dutch Renegado, with which about Ten
in the Morning near Cape de Gal, he began a sharp fight, which continued till
about Three in the Afternoon, when the Algerine having her Main Mast shot by
the Board, and her Captains Thigh broken with a Musket Bullet, the Turks were
about to yield, but seeing a fresh Ship with Turkish Colors (which afterward
proved to be his Majesty's Frigate, the nonesuch Captain Wheeler Commander)
they took new courage, and continued the fight with extraordinary Resolution
till night, at what time the Algerine had One Hundred and Twenty of her men
wounded, and near as many killed, all her Masts shot by the Board, and five or
six foot deep of water in the Hold, Captain Booth having likewise all his
rigging cut in pieces, and every thing out of order, and apprehensive of
engaging in that condition with the said fresh Ship, which he supposed to be an
Enemy, commanded the Calabash Fireship (then attending him least the prize
should escape) to burn which of them she could most conveniently grapple, which
had been put in Execution, had not the Fireships Boat been in the night time
accidentally staved, next Morning by break of day Captain Wheeler came up, and
being within half culvering shot, put out the English Colors, and bearing
directly upon the Algerine, siezed her without firing a Gun; By this action
thirty seven English Captives were redeemed, and of Dutch and Spaniards One
Hundred and Thirteen.

The Muscovite by this time beginning to dread the Tempest of War that was
ready to fall upon him, and not able of himself to resist such a power as the
Grand Seignior had raised by reason of intestine troubles, and despairing to be
aided by the Polonians, whom he had some years before deserted in their
greatest necessity, he thought it the safest to conclude a peace, which by
Presents, and many entreaties he procured to be ratified for the space of
twenty years; It being the rather consented to by the Grand Seignior, that he
might be at leisure to turn his Arms upon Hungary, in which so many of his
Predecessors have been foiled.

Leopold the Emperor finding by experience that he had given too much credit to
the Faithless Turks, and it was but too apparent that they aided his Rebels; He
thought it convenient to call a Diet at Odenburg, there to endeavor a
Reconciliation, and put an end to the intestine troubles, which the Hungarian
Nobility likewise urged, and requested him to be present in the like Royal
Robes as the Kings of Hungary were wont to apparel themselves in, but he not
consenting thereto, after some debate, and many particulars offered, the
Assembly broke up without concluding any thing, whereupon Count Tecke'y siezed
on several Garrisons on the Banks of the Waga, and sent to the Bassa of Buda to
hasten the Forces he had in a readiness, for that he would have no peace with
the Emperor unless his own proposals were granted, upon receipt of which
Letter, Seventeen Thousand Turks passed the Danubius, and made great spoil,
burning and destroying all the Villages for the space of Fourteen Miles, till
Teckely moved with the cries of the poor Country people, who fled like Sheep
before them, he sent an express to the Bassa that commanded them, to restrain
them from spoiling the Countries.

The news of these proceedings greatly troubled the Emperor, then infested with
the French who encamped upon the Rhine, and had seized upon Strasburg a free
City of the Empire, yet like a prudent Prince he used many persuasions to
reduce the Rebels to their former obedience, publishing his declaration,
wherein he promised them all convenient liberty for the exercise of their
Religion, and that they should have a Palatine, a native of Hungary offering
likewise a general pardon for all that had passed, but this availed not, for
Teckely aiming at the principality of Transylvania (which he must utterly
despair of obtaining if he displeased the Grand Seignior) rejected all these
reasonable concessions, alleging that he would not trust to promises which
were not likely to endure longer than he had power to right his Countrymen,
upon which the Emperor caused a detachment of Seven Thousand Horse and Foot to
be drawn out of his Army, then encamped along the Rhine, to have an eye upon
the motions of the French, to these Seven Thousand he added three new raised
Regiments, and sent them to join with Count Caprara his Lieutenant General in
Hungary, which reinforcement made the Rebels keep in a body, who before had
divided themselves in several parties, and took in many small Towns, possessing
themselves of two Silver Mines, and one of the strongest Berg Towns daily
expecting Six Thousand Tartars, who were on their way, under the leading of
Hames Emir Han their Captain.

About this time the Grand Seignior fearing the power of the Muscovite should
refund on part of his Dominions, used great diligence by his Agents to procure
a Reconciliation, the which was the easier hearkened to by reason of the
differences arising between the grandees, threatened an intestine War,
whereupon in May 1681. a Truce was concluded for the space of Twenty years,
though contrary to the opinion of the Polonians, who by a conjunction with the
numerous Forces of that Dukedom, were in hopes to gain more easy conditions at
the Port then in the Articles between them and the Grand Seignior were
included, in order to which that King had assembled a Diet at Warsaw, which
after Sixteen weeks consultation, by reason of the perverseness of a deputy of
Lythuania, broke up without resolving on any one point referred to their
consideration.

About the beginning of the year 1682. The Emperor dispatched a Minister to
Count Teckeley, who was fortifying diverse places against him, to treat of an
accommodation as himself had required, but he having received an Assurance from
the Port of the Grand Signiours protection declared that he had not full power
to treat of himself, but must be obliged to take the advice of the Bassa of
Offa in that affair, and move according to the directions he should receive
from the Port, having wholly thrown himself upon the Grand Signiors, and
therefore referred all to the success of Count Capraras Negotiation at
Constantinople.

Vice Admiral Herbert having obliged the Algerine Pirates to a compliance, the
treaty of peace was about the latter end of April brought by Captain Almyer for
his Majesty's Approbation and Ratification, both which being had, the Treaty
both Honorable and advantageous to the English Nation was returned, the
success against these Rovers having been such as has given reputation to his
Majesty's Arms in those parts, and will past doubt give them cause to value his
Majesty's Friendship for the future.

The season for Action advancing, the Emperor caused Six Regiments of Foot, and
two of Horse to march for Hungary, to enable Count Caprara to oppose the Turks
that had imbodied themselves near Offen, as likewise about Sonluck, between
great Waradin, and the River These, which parties upon their uniting were
further enforced by the Troops of Count Teckeley, and Abaftie Prince of
Transylvania, and for the better assurance of the former, the Grand Signiour
caused to be placed about him One Thousand Janissaries as a Guard to his person,
which many did at that time believe it was to no other end then to secure him
in the interest of the Port. These Forces of Turks, Hungarians, and
Transylvanians meeting, it was in the Bassa's Tent concluded that since the
German Forces were not considerable on that side, they should divide into two
Bodies, and act separate, one to be commanded by the Count, and the other by
the Bassa of Waradin, upon which the former immediately besieged Chascaw, a
strong City near the Waag, battering it for many days with twelve pieces of
Cannon, carrying the out-work by storm, but perceiving his Camp annoyed by the
shot from the City; into which Count Strasoldo had put Five Hundred Men he
removed his Battery to a small Hill which commanded it, and from thence playing
furiously, he beat down a great number of Houses, and laid open a great breach
in the Wall, which obliged the besieged after many Sallies, and a resolute
defense to capitulate for their Lives and Liberties which were granted, and
leave given for as many as would, to take service under his Ensigns, but whilst
the Soldiers hastily entered, whether of purpose, or by chance, a Mine near
the breach took Fire, and blew up several of the Teckeleyans, which so enraged
them, that they fell upon the Garrison, and put many of them to the Sword e're
their fury could be stayed; the Citizens to redeem themselves from being
plundered, paid Fifty Thousand Crowns, and two days after Espiers surrendered to
the Count.

During this Action, the Bassa besieged Zathmar, which after diverse attempts
they carried by force, putting many to the Sword, and carrying away a
considerable number of all Sex and Ages into miserable captivity.

Count Teckeley upon this success, sent Summons from his Camp near Lewentz, to
summon the Hungarian Nobility to appear in Arms, but by the Industry of the
Imperial Ministers, he failed for the most part in his expectation, few obeying
his Orders, yet many of the inferior rank came to increase the number of his
Forces; upon notice of which Count Caprara, and Count Strasoldo joined their
Forces, and marched to oppose the Torrent e're it swelled too high. The Emperor
sent likewise an Express to the Palatine of Hungary to raise the Ban and
Areirban of that Kingdom, and to march with all speed against the Turks who had
passed the Waag, and caused the Governor of Chascaw to be imprisoned, as being
accused of not having defended that City to Extremity, and now the Armies being
within view of each other, there was great expectations that the Issue would
have been a foughten Field, but it proved otherwise; for after some light
skirmishes had past, the Imperialists finding themselves too weak, quitted
their Camp at Atsol, and retired toward St. Croix, which so discouraged the
Garrison in Lewentz, that they abandoned it, and retired to places of greater
strength, so that it became a prey to the Enemy.

All this while the Turks having besieged Villecke, after diverse Assaults and
great slaughter of their Men, had it delivered into their hands on the
Sixteenth of September, the Garrison making articles of surrender without the
consent of the Governor, who upon his refusing to sign the capitulation, was
made a Prisoner of War, and the Turks unwilling to put this Fortress into the
hands of the Hungarians, as by Articles was agreed; and on the other side the
Hungarians being loath that the Turks should possess so strong a place in the
heart of the Kingdom; it for some time occasioned great contest, but in the end
both parties concluded to demolish it, which was accordingly done.

During these Transactions, his Imperial Majesty's Ambassador at the Port was
flattered with a promise of renewing the League between the two Empires, and
conducted to his Audience with the usual Ceremonies, which was only to protract
time till the Turks had possessed themselves of such strong places as might
render them formidable, and give them hopes of annexing all Hungary to the
Ottoman Empire; but the German Princes perceiving their drift, sent several of
their own Troops to reinforce the Imperial Army under the Command of Count
Caprara, with whom the Count Strosoldo refusing to join, in order to give the
Turks Battle near Lewentz, fell into the Emperors high displeasure being sent
for to Vienna, and for a while is suspended, but upon his submission was again
restored to favor.

Winter approaching, Count Teckely sent Four Hussars to Count Caprara, to
procure of him a pasport for the safe passage of such Deputies as he intended
to send to the Emperor to treat of a Truce which Hussars were by the Counts
express Command Imprisoned till such time his Imperial Majesty's pleasure was
known therein; but in the end they were released, and the Deputies permitted to
pass uncontrouled, when after many debates a Truce was concluded for two
Months, whereupon Count Teokley by reason of the Difference between him, and
the Prince of Transylvania retired with the greatest part of his Troop to a
strong place, which together with some others in dowry with the Princess
Ragotski, whom this year he had married. The Turks for the most part Wintered
in Temeswar, Buda, and New Hausel, and the Imperialists on the Frontires of
Austria, and so ended the Campaign for this year.

Anno 1683. Early in the Spring, the Imperialists and Turks taking the Field,
and several skirmishes happening between parties, with various success. The
Count Wallastain, his Imperial Majesty's Minister residing in the Polonian
Court, dealt so effectually with that King, that he resolving no longer to sit
still, and see the Infidels and Rebels insult over his Neighboring Countries,
on the second of April, pursuant to a treaty on foot signed an alliance with
the Emperor, by which he obliges himself to take the Field with between Thirty
and Forty Thousand Horse and Foot, to act offensively against the Turks, and
defensively against all other enemies to the German Empire, in consideration of
which, the Emperor binds himself to have an Army of Sixty Thousand Men in
readyness upon all occasions, immediately to pay Twelve Hundred Thousand
Florins, and that himself, and the Queen Dowager of Poland disclaim all
Pretensions to the Crown of Poland, and that neither Potentate enter into a
treaty with the Turks tending to Peace, but with a joint approbation; And that
both Armies act separate, unless Cracow or Vienna be besieged, and then with
United Forces to fall upon the Enemy, into which Alliance it is expected the
Czar of Muscovy will shortly enter to revenge the outrages done him by the
Turks and Tartars, who since the late Divisions have made diverse incursions
into his Countries. This Alliance made known to the Grand Seigniour greatly
perplexed him, insomuch that he sent orders to all the Bassa's, Begs or
Sanzacks of Europe, to raise what Forces they could to attend him in the Field,
himself resolving instantly to march to Belgrade, whither the Great Vizier with
an Army of 60000 Horse and Foot marched before to join with the Tartars, under
the leading of Tartar Han or Cham, and then to cover such places as Count
Teckely (who now seems jealous of the Turks) shall besiege.

The better to take measures for the carrying on the War, his Imperial Majesty
on the 8th. of April called a Council of War at Vienna, where it was concluded
that the Duke of Lorrain should be Generalissimus of all the Forces on that
side, and the measures concluded on were these, that the Imperial Army the
third of May should muster near Presburg, to the number of 40000 men; That
General Schutz shall with 7000 men, join with 6000 Polish Horse already on
their march, under the command of the Prince Lubomerski, and that the Hungarian
troops in conjunction with those, making a body of 25000 men act in the upper
Hungary, and another body of 6000 Incamp near Leopa^stadt on the Waag, and in
case they find the Turks have a design upon that place, to put themselves into
it, and besides these 10 or 12000 men to be posted on the confines of Moravia
and Silesia, to secure those Countries against the incursion of the Enemy.

This being the state of the Imperial Army designed against the Turks, and
Hungarian Rebels Count Teck^ey the better to secure himself and reinforce his
Army sent out summons to the Nobility once more to be in Arms and as occasion
served to oppose the Imperalists, but most of them seemed unwilling to comply
therein as abhorring to bear Arms against their Lawful Sovereign.

Whilst matters were thus carried on that side the King of Sweeden has obliged
himself to assist the Emperor with seven thousand Horse and Foot, four
thousand of which he intends to raise in Germany, and the rest in his own
Countries, nor will the Elector of Bavaria who is in all likelihood shortly to
marry the Emperors Daughter, be wanting to send his Forces against the common
Enemy.

The King of Poland the better to complete the Quota, he intends to summon the
Arrearban of that Kingdom, all the Nobility showing a ready compliance to
attend in the Wars, his Army to the number of thirty thousand mustering near
Leopol he advanced against the Turks, who made diverse incursions into his
Territories on the Vkrain, a party of whom advancing too far he cut off killing
three hundred and taking a like number of Prisoners, and following the success
of his Arms, he is preparing to besiege Caminieck, a strong Fortress taken from
the Poles by the Turks some years before, and sent an Express to Count Teckley
to inform him of the Alliance made with the Emperor, and to let him know that
unless he does immediately make Peace with his Imperial Majesty, he shall be
obliged to treat him as an Enemy.

These Menaces caused Teckley to draw up his Troops with great diligence, and
send immediately to the Vizier of Buda for such Forces as by the Grand
Signeours appointment were to join him, that he might the better be able to
defend himself till the gross of the Ottoman Army (reported to consist of one
hundred and fifty thousand men) could arrive, and immediately dispatched his
Secretary to the Emperors Court to crave a truce, but the proposals were so
insignificant that he nothing prevailed. For the Emperor in person having been
at the Randezvous near Presburg in Hungaria, was so well satisfied with the
order of his men that he altogether contemned the Forces of the Enemy. Yet to
appear like himself he caused a general Pardon a third time to be published
indemnifying all Hungarians and Germans, that have been actually in Arms
against him, and any ways concerned in the Hungarian Rebellion both in Person
and Estate, in consideration of their speedy submission and obedience for the
future, upon which many laid down their Arms and made an ingenuous
acknowledment of their disobedience to the Palatine whom the Emperor empowered
to receive their submissions.

About this time a Crotian having put himself into the service of the Turks at
Zigeth, a strong Garrison on that Frontiers, and insinuated himself into their
confidence he put what he had before designed in practice, which was to set
their Magazine on Fire, and having succeeded therein made his escape during the
general consternation thereby occasioned. This Magazine stored with all manner
of Provisions as well as warlike Furniture, was computed sufficient for the
maintenance and furnishing thirty thousand men for the space of two years,
which the Turks desirous to save, flocked about it to extinguish the flame but
to their fatal cost, for the powder consisting of two thousand Barrels taking
fire, destroyed five hundred of them, and beat down most of the houses in the
City, renting in sunder the walls in diverse places, the blow being heard 6
leagues distant from that place.

The Duke of Lorrain having been to take a view of Rab and Comorra, on the 6th
of May returned to the Army, at what time it was greatly augmented by voluntary
supplies, who not able to see their bleeding Country over run by barbarous
infidels, whilst they stood unconcerned for its defense, joined with their
Lawful Sovereign to oppose the coming tempest of destructive foes, willingly
joined in the defense of the Christian cause, which a few rash men, under
pretense of Conscience, though indeed out of an ambitious desire of
Sovereignty, have exposed them to all the calamities that attend on miserable
War.

The Grand Vizier arriving with part of the Ottoman Forces at Belgrade, the
place appointed for the General Rendezvous, the Grand Seignior on the 20th. of
April set forth from Adrinople, attended by a numerous train of his great
Officers, and 80000 Janissaries, Spahies, Timariots, Asaphies, and others inured
to the Turkish Wars, and by speedy marches came to the place appointed, though
by reason of the excessive rains and noysom vapors thereby occasioned, 6000 of
his men perished by the way, nor fared that part of the Army the great Vizier
lead much better, for passing the Dravas many of the Soldiers were drowned,
and much of the baggage lost.

The Polonian King desirous to bring Count Teckely over to the Emperors
interest, sent an Agent to treat with him about a Reconciliation, to hearken to
which at first he seemed inclinable, but upon pressing the matter more home, it
appeared he did it only to gain time, till he could join with the Tartars,
which the Vizier of Buda had assigned to act in conjunction with him in the
upper Hungary, but part of the imperial Troops not to give him that
opportunity, under the command of Major General Schutz, have posted themselves
between him and the Niester, which the Tartars who march in two bodies must
pass before they can enter that part of Hungary, who a little before their
taking, that post had defeated a party of Turks belonging to the Garrison of
Newheusel, killing 7000, and taking 200 Prisoners; The Polish Troops of
Volunteers on the Banks of Danubius, meeting with 5000 Tartars, the forerunners
of the Army overthrew them, killing 1000 of them, and forcing the rest to take
the River, in passing which most of them perished, which success so heightened
the Poles, that pursuing their good fortune they passed the River, at a place
fordable they fell in with a Turkish Convoy of 600 Mules, laden with Provision
and Ammunition, going to the Camp at Belgrade, which they took and converted to
their own use, killing and putting to flight such as had the charge of them,
upon notice of which the Polonian King, to appear more formidable to the Turks,
Tartars and Hungarian Rebels, commanded 2 new Regiments to be raised, one at
the charge of his Queen, and the other at the charge of Prince Alexander his
Eldest Son, himself allotting out of his Patrimonial Estate 100000 Crowns to be
distributed amongst his Army, and to raise 800 Hussars expert at handling
Lances.

On the 11th. of May the Imperial Army after having Randizvouzed at Presburg,
passing from Keiser marched toward, and encamped between that Fortress and
Comorra to observe the motions of the Turks, who were imbodyed near Newhausel
to the number of 15000, daily expecting a detachment of the Visiers Army upon
its march to join with them, the Vizier at the same time being encamped at
Greick Weiffenburg, expecting the arrival of the Grand Seignior, who was some
days marching behind.

During these proceedings Teckely suddenly collecting his Troops, laid siege
to the strong Castle of Donowitz, in which was the Barron Joannel with a
Garrison of 250 Imperialists and Hungarians, yet after a furious battery with 8
pieces of Cannon, he made himself master of that important place, making the
Governor and the Germans found therein Prisoners of War, when to prevent his
further proceedings on that side, the Pallatine of Hungaria received orders to
join Major General Schutz, who had passed the Waag to meet the Prince of
Lubomerski, who advanced with the 6000 Polonian Horse before mentioned,
whereupon the Vizier of Buda summoned Count Teekely to join the Turkish Troops
under his command, which he refused to do, making several pretenses to excuse
it of which the King of Poland taking notice sent a Letter to the Count to
advise him to quit the engagement he has with the Turks, (which in conclusion
will turn to his ruin) and make his peace with the Emperor, whilst his free
grace is offered him; the which had such an effectual operation that many were
of opinion he would have closed with the Imperial offered Grace, but after some
debate and new encouragement from the Grand Signior, he resolved to persist in
his rebellious purpose of opposing the Emperors interest, whereupon the Duke
of Lorrain who has absolute power to act as he sees convenient for the
advantage of the Empire, sent orders to the Palatine to draw down his Troops
and entrench himself on the banks of the Waag, to secure the passes where the
River is Fordable, as likewise to the Viceroy of Crotia to raise new Forces
for the increase of those already under his command, and to keep diligent watch
upon the Frontires of that Province to prevent any incursions.

About this time Zathmer was regained, and young Count Serini (true Heir to the
valor of his immortal Ancestors) appointed Governor thereof which has put the
Turks out of all hopes of recovering it.

The Duke of Lorrain having notice that the Turks were imbodying themselves
near Gran, raised his Camp on the 24th. of May and marched toward them,
resolving to give them Battle before the Grand Vizier (who together with the
Aga of the Janissaries, was on his march) could arrive in those parts, having
for that purpose stored his Army with all necessary Provision and Ammunition
sent up the Danubius in boats from Vienna, but during these preparations the
Turks had so strongly lodged themselves upon the Counterscarp to the number of
25000, that he thought it not convenient to attack them in their strength, but
having made a detachment of 13 men commanding them to pass the Danubius, and
invest Newhausel a strong place about a Leagues from Komora, whilst the rest of
the Army followed in good order, with a train of 80 pieces of Artillery, most
of which carry bullets of between 30 and 40 pounds weight, which made Count
Teckeley draw off toward Tokay, still declining to join the Turks under the
command of the Vizier of Buda, insomuch that the Bassa of Offen fearing to be
exposed to the Fury of the Imperialists sent a Messenger to the Duke of Lorrain
to propose a Cessation of Arms for 14 days, which the Duke would in no wise
hearken to, as well knowing it was but to protract the time till a greater
power arrived in Hungary, and when it was urged that the Grand Signeour
intended to observe the Peace with the Emperor, till the prefixed was expired,
but the Duke replied that the Turks by their unjust Hostilities and manifest
outrages had broken it long since, so that now they must expect no other favor
then the Sword would allow them, whereupon he dispatched orders to Count
Caprara to batter Newhausel resolving to carry it by storm, if it should fail
to be delivered by capitulation having already overthrown a party belonging to
that Garrison, who were returning from ravaging the Country laden with great
booties, upon which success 2 parties were sent out to burn the Bridges of
Gran, and Esseiniek which they successfully attempted burning the former, and
possessing themselves of the latter, guarded by 700 Turks, most of which were
killed or taken prisoners.

The Count Caprara His Imperial Majesty's Ambassador at the Port, is by order
of the Grand Signeour looked narrowly after, not differing much from a
confinement, least during these Hostilities he should withdraw himself, nor
could the intercession of the Lord Shandois His Majesty of Great Britains
Ambassador residing at the Port on his behalf remove the suspicion conceived,
etc. Thus far having related impartially the success of the Christian Arms
against the Turks, I shall leave them engaged in a bloody and doubtful War, and
conclude so much of this years Campaigne as to the 4th of June, 1683. has
occurred with an exact account of all the Imperial Forces. The List whereof
take as follows, viz. The Emperor has in pay 27 Regiments of Foot, making
together 55700 men, whereof 25296 follow the Duke of Lorrain, 4692 are
appointed to secure the upper Hungary, 2040 posted at Jabluncka on the
frontiers of Hungary, 2040 at Leopolstadt on the Waag, 3640 in Austria, 2040 at
Vienna, 13912 in the Empire, 2400 in Bohemia, 17 Regiments of Horse making
together 13600 men, 7 Regiments of Dragoons containing 5600 men, and 4
Regiments of Croats making 3200, whereof 15200 are at the Camp, 800 in the
Upper Hungary, 400 at Jabluncka, 2400 at Leopolstadt, 800 in Austria, and 2800
in the Empire. So that the general List of Horse and Foot stands thus, viz. at
the Camp 39696, in the Empire, 16712 in the upper Hungary, 7532 making in all
78540 men not accounting the Hungarian Troops under the command of the
Palatine, nor those in Crotia commanded by the Viceroy, nor the 6000 Polonian
Horse brought into the Emperors service, by the Prince of Lubornirski, which
in conjunction will render the Emperors total Forces no less then 100000
fighting men. The Turks Army together with the Tartars and Hungarians under the
command of Count Teckley, being accounted no less then 250000.

But thou, O Lord, on whom all things depend,
In gentle Peace let these dire discords end.
Or let firm Concord with the Christians dwell,
To turn their Swords on the proud Inf^^^^.
CHAP. XXV. A Description of the Power, Policy, Forces, Revenues, Religion, and
Greatness of the Ottoman Empire; and by what Means it subsists and maintains
its Grandeur, etc.
HAving in the succinct Series of this History related the Original of the
Ottoman Empire, and its Growth from time to time, till it arrived to the vast
Extent it at this Day is found; I shall now proceed to give the Reader a View
of the Grandeur of it, and by what means it is supported, in the Description of
the Grand Seignior's Port or Palace, Government, Officers, Riches, Forces,
Religion, and the like.

The Turks originally a People of Scythia, supposed to have sprung from the Ten
Tribes carried into Captivity, as is in the former Part of this History
related, began their Second Empire in Asia under Othoman, about 1300; and
spreading wide, entered Europe, seizing at length upon the pleasant City of
Constantinople, expelling the Greek Emperor, and making it the Imperial Seat
of the Othoman Sultans, now dignified by the Title of Grand Seigniors: A
Description of which City, and of the Seraglio, or Imperial Port or Palace,
take as follows.

Constantinople, built by Constantine the Great, is according to the Opinion of
many, sixteeen Miles in circuit, called by the Turks, Stambul or Stombolda; the
Sea bearing upon it on the North and South sides, and on the East it is divided
from Asia by a large Channel, which runs from the one Sea to the other,
being seven Miles in length, called the Straights of Bosphorus. The City is
built upon the declining of a Hill; for Buildings comparable to any in the
World: But above all, beautified with seven Mosques standing upon seven little
Hills, founded by seven of the Ottoman Emperors; of which, that of Sultan
Solomon is most famous: And the Seraglio, now made the Grand Seignior's Palace,
which is three Miles in circuit, stands on the North side, having on the one
side of it the Sea, and on the other the Haven; the other two Parts being
encompassed with the Building of the City. This Palace, Port, or Seraglio,
which you please, (for all these Names it bears) has within it many Gardens,
Orchards, Meadows, Woods, pleasant Groves, Fountains, and all things else that
can render it delightful. The Entrance is through a Gate of Iron into a large
Court, where on the left hand stands a Building like a Turkish Mosque, which is
used as a Storehouse for Arms and Provision; on the Right, are several fair
Gardens palazadoed in, from which they pass to another Court, with a Gate like
unto the former; upon which hang many Targets, Scymitars, and other Weapons of
War, many Porters attending; through which they pass into another large Court,
planted with Cyprus-Trees; where many Deer are kept: which Court is surrounded
with a Cloister, which is in length 680 Foot, and in breadth 500; paved with
Marble, leaded over, and supported by 140 Pillars of White and Gray Marble
curiously wrought, standing upon Basis of Copper, with Capitals of the like
Metal. On the North side stands the Divano, or Council-House, where the Grand
Vizier, and such others as are by the Grand Seignior appointed his Counselors,
four times a Week, or oftener of Occasion require it, sit to consult the
Important Affairs of the Empire; to hear and determine all Matters of
Controversy, and give Audience to Ambassadors, and other Foreign Ministers.

In this Seraglio the Grand Seignior has many Chambers hung with Cloth of Gold,
gilded Skins, and Tapestries made of Silk and Gold; wherein are lively
represented the Wars of the Ottoman Emperors. His Lodging-Chamber is garnished
with diverse Precious Stones of great value; and constantly attending him six
young Men, who do Service in his Chamber, and watch his Person all Night, two
and two by turns, with lighted Torches; the one sitting at the Head, and the
other at the Feet of his Bed: And when he attires himself, they put into his
Pockets a thousand Aspars, and twenty Ducats of Gold; the which, if he does not
distribute that Day, at Night is their Fee; for he seldom or never puts on one
Suit of Apparel twice; and whenever he goes to Hunting, or any the like
Exercise, (besides the Money in his Pockets) his Casnadar Bassa, or Chief
Treasurer, follows him with great store of Money to give away: Of these six
Young Men, who are changed at Pleasure, their Offices are distinct; for the
first carries his Shoes, the second his Bow and Arrows, the Third his Vest, the
fourth a Vessel with Water, the fifth his Seat, and the sixth, called Oda
Bassa, is Head of the Chamber.

He has daily a great number of Persons resident in his Palace, employed in
their several Charges; the chief of which are these:

First, The Capi Aga, by whom the Grand Seignior speaks to such as have any
Important Business; for no Ambassador can be admitted to his Presence, but at
his first Arrival, when he delivers his Letters of Credit and Presents: But if
afterward any matter arises, he must address himself to the Capi Aga, that is
the Grand Vizier, or his Substitute. Secondly, The Casnadar Bassa, or Chief
Treasurer of the Household. Thirdly, The Chilergi Bassa, or Chief Cup Bearer.
Fourthly, The Seragli Agasi, Steward or Master of the Household. Fifthly, The
Chiller Agasi, or Seraider Bassa, Overseer of the Seraglio of Concubines; who
is always an Eunuch. Sixthly and lastly, The Bostangi Bassa, or Chief Gardener;
who is Captain of the Jamoglans, and steers the Grand Seignior's Barge. When
ever he goes by Water, he has a Protogero or Lieutenant, and many Gardiners,
to attend him, which are called Bostangi; who are frequently listed in the
number of Janissaries, when fitted thereto by hard Labor, etc.
These Six Officers have no Authority out of the Seraglio; yet the greatest
Bassa's fear them, for that they being always near the Emperor, frequently
incense him against them to their Destruction.

Near unto the Grand Seignior's Person, are commonly six Mutes, Men born both
Deaf and Dumb, with whom he makes himself Pastime. There are found likewise
about thirty four more of the same Tribe, which he keeps as Executioners of his
Wrath; for upon the least Command, they will strangle the greatest Bassa of the
Court, or otherwise make him away, it being their frequent Practice.

Within the Seraglio are kept to the number of five hundred, such Youths as are
taken up for Tribute-Children in Graecia, and other Parts of the Empire; all
Sons of Christians, who taken young from their Parents, are instructed and
brought up in diverse Arts; and taught more especially to manage all sorts of
Weapons, and to be perfect in the Mohammedan Superstition; few of them being
above eight Years of Age at their first Entrance. Of these, some they make
Janissaries; others are preferred to Offices of Trust, and come to great
Preferment: But none of them may, on Pain of Death, stir out of the Seraglio,
till the Sultan thinks them of a fit Age, and sufficiently qualified for his
Service. He has in like manner eighty Mutaferache, or Lance Bearers, who carry
his Lance; and are subject to the Command of none but himself.

He has in continual pay a thousand Eunuchs, whom the Turks call Hundurni;
many of which are employed to attend his Virgins and Concubines in the
Seraglio. They are not only deprived of their Genitors, but in their Youth they
have their whole Privities smoothed off by their Bellies: And in their Turbants
they bear a Silver Quill or Crew, through which they evacuate their Urine. This
Inhuman Barbarity was first commanded by Solomon the Magnificent, who grew
jealous of them upon his observing a Gelding back a Mare; gathering from
thence, that his Eunuchs though they had lost their Genitor, might yet
dalliance with his Females.

The Seraglio of Women is within the Palace, in which are constantly five
hundred Virgins, the choicest Beauties that can be procured, being all
Daughters to Christians, taken from their Parents when they are about eight
Years of Age or under; none above are admitted, lest they should be debauched
e're they enter. These are brought up to curious Works: And when at any time
the Grand Seignior is desirous to have any of them brought to his Bed, he the
Day before gives notice to the Captain of the Eunuchs; who commands those
under him to put them in order, and array them in their best Attire. Which done
the Grand Seignior, attended by the said Captain, walking between them as they
stand demurely in rows on either Hand; and where he likes, drops his
Handkerchief, of which he has many hanging at his Girdle; which the Eunuchs
that follow, observing, put her (or as many as his Pleasure is to signify by
such Tokens) into a Coach, and carry them to his Lodgings; where they are
gorgeously attired, and used as he has occasion for them: After which they
return, not to the Seraglio of the Virgins, but have other Lodgings appointed
them. And when by reason of the Failure of Tribute-Virgins, the Seraglio grows
empty, they purchase the Fairest they can find in the Market of Constantinople,
whither they are brought to be sold as Slaves.

Another Seraglio there is, in which the Grand Seignior keeps his Sultana's or
Sultanesses, and their Children; as likewise, such other Concubines, of whom
for his delight he has chosen from amongst the Virgins. He never marries; but
when any one is brought to his Bed side, he gives her a Golden Head-tire, and
ten thousand Aspers; causing her to live apart, daily increasing her
Maintenance. The first that bears him a Child, is called the Sultana or
Sultaness, and is accounted Mistress of the rest of his Women; and by him, for
the most part, best beloved. The rest that has been brought to his Bed, and
with whom he has dallianced, are returned back to their several Apartments,
there to expect the Issue; and if they prove not with Child, then are they
given in Marriage to his Slaves; whom for their sakes he advances to great
Dignity, for the most part.

He has three hundred Sollacchi, who march continually about his Person, and
make (as it were) his Guard, being under the Command of the Aga of the
Janissaries; all of them attired in Linnen-Garments hanging down beneath their
Knees; and over them quilted Wast-Coats, with half Sleeves of Taffety, Damask,
or Satin; and on their Heads Caps and Feathers, carrying Bows and Arrows.
There are another sort of Footmen, called Pei^^i, wonderful swift of Foot;
whom he imploys in the nature of ^^^q^ies, or Foot-Posts; being attired in
Cloth of Cold, with (...) of the same tied fast about them; upon their Heads
wearing Caps like Butter-pots; with a Silver Pike standing out before, in the
nature of a Horn.

The Porters of the Court, that give Attendance there, are four thousand; and
are attired like the Janissaries, having over them three Capigi Bassa's.

The Grand Seignior's Power is so absolute, and his Government so tyrannical,
that his Subjects term themselves his Slaves; none of them being sure of his
Life or Goods beyond his Pleasure; for without any Trial or Process, he puts to
Death whom it pleases him, unless restrained by the Soldiers, who often
rescue their Minions out of his Hands, and oblige him to pardon them.

Their Suits are few, and those very short, they rarely being permitted the
Favor of Advocates to procrastinate Matters from coming to a speedy Result;
though commonly he who can bribe most, fares the best: For the Turks are of all
Nations the most Avaricious, doing no Man a Kindness unless they are fee'd;
though they have the least Certainty of any People, to keep what they have
gotten, all (as is aforesaid) being at the Disposal of the Prince. They punish
Crimes with great Severity, and so speedily, that it is observed that seldom
any Theft or Murder is committed by any private Turk; but what Outrages do
happen in the City, or elsewhere, are committed commonly by the Grecians, and
those that are not of the Progeny of the Turks.

The Grand Seignior's Chief Councellor is the Great Vizier; who wears his
Signet, and is styled his Lieutenant; every Divano-day giving him an exact
Account what is said and done: Nor dare he dissemble in ought; for that the
Grand Seignior has a Window, from whence he can see and hear, and yet not be
seen himself; which Window looks into the Divano. When this Vizier is abroad,
which never happens unless to be General of an Army, or upon some such like
important Occasion; at what time he appoints his Lieutenant to officiate in his
Absence, who is called the Chimacham.

Next unto the Bassa's, (of which there are many dispersed throughout the
Empire, to manage the Affairs thereof) are the Beglerbegs, or Lords of Lords:
They are Men of great Authority, and have the Command of great Kingdoms and
Armies; under whose Obedience are diverse Sanzacks, which are sent as Governors
into Provinces, during the Princes Pleasure; being Men of great Experience; for
the most part, commanding over the Spahi and Timariots, the Turks chief
Horsemen, whom they continually exercise to render them the more expert. The
Chief of these Beglerbegs, is the Beglerbeg of Romania or Grecia, under whose
Command are twenty one Sanzacks; next to him is the Beglerbeg of Buda, who has
under his Command thirteen Sanzacks: The Beglerbeg of Temeswar has under his
Command eight Sanzacks: The Beglerbeg of Bosna has under his Command nine
Sanzacks: The Beglerbegship of Coffe or Capha, who resideth in Taurica
Chersonesus, and commands over the Sanzacks near unto the great River Tanais,
and the Fenns of Maeotis, which was at first but a Sanzackship, and depended
upon the Beglerbegship of Grecia; and is indeed rather a Beglerbegship in Name,
than in Power. These Beglerbegs, or Lords of Lords, great Governors of the
Turkish Empire in Europe, besides the Sanzacks, have under their Command 257000
Timariots or Horsemen, who are bound for certain Lands allotted them by the
Grand Seignior, out of his Conquests, to serve in the Wars upon all Occasions.

The Beglerbegs, or Great Commanders of the Turk's Empire in Asia, are thirty
in number; under whom are a proportionable number of Sanzacks, and not less
than 400000 Timariots. The Beglerbegs commanding the Turk's Empire in Africa,
are four; and have under them fourteen Sanzacks, and sixty two thousand
Timariots. Besides these Timariot-Horsemen, there are the Spahi, who are for
the most part Europeans, being such as were brought up in their Infancy, or
taken Captive: As likewise, Spa^hoglanians, Silictarians, and Olofagians; who
have likewise Lands, or Annual Pensions assigned them; for which they are bound
to serve in the Wars: for no Man in the Ottoman Empire can have any Lands, or
Yearly Revenues that way, but must be ready, or send others in his stead; it
being held, that the whole Empire in Fee simple, is the Grand Seigniors: No Man
being permitted to buy or enjoy any Lands longer, than it pleases his Prince:
Nor can any one claim a Propriety to a Foot, unless by the Donation of the
Grand Seignior, or his Assignment; and that last, at longest, but during the
Natural Life of him, to whom it is so given or assigned. These Horsemen march
under a white Banner, being armed with strong Coats, Bows, and Arrows,
Culeverings, Scymitars, and Battle Axes.

Another sort of Horsemen there are, called Caripices, not exceeding eight
hundred; who still ride near the Grand Seignior, as his Lifeguard, in the
middle of the Battalion of the Janissaries; and are the best Horsemen accounted
of all others, being (for the most part) Sons of the Great Commanders.

As for his Foot Forces, the chief Strength consists of Janissaries, who are
Children taken from their Christian Parents, and inured in their Youth to all
manner of Hardship, taught all the Use of Arms, and trained up in all Warlike
Discipline, till they are adjudged fit to be enrolled for the War. These are
taken up in Europe, no Children born either in Asia or Africa being admitted
into their Seminary. These Men always enclose the Person of the Grand Seignior
at what time he marches with his Army; and are the last that fight, unless
urgent Necessity require it. They wear white Caps, carry Harquibusses, and
sharp Scymitars; who since their first Institution have been the chief
Supporters of the Turkish Empire; but of late they are much degenerated from
their former Discipline, giving themselves up wholly to Ease and Pleasure; yet
keep themselves in good order, for the most part. There remains twenty four
thousand of them in Constantinople, and a far greater number in diverse Places
of the Empire. They are commanded by their Aga, or Captain, to whom nothing is
so fatal as their Love for him; for then the Grand Seignior has him in
mistrust, and well is it if he be not made away. They sleep together in great
Halls, their Beds being placed on either side; and all those of a Squadron feed
at one Table; the Younger ever serve the Elder: And if any one of them be
absent from his Lodging in the Night, unless upon public occasion, then is he
the next day severely c^dgelled, and nevertheless obliged to kiss the Hand that
beat him. Their Imploys are different in time of Peace; for some wait upon
Ambassadors, others upon Merchants and Consuls, others again upon such as
travel through the Turkish Empire. They likewise arrest Malefactors, and see
good Order kept, being feared of all Men; insomuch that if they buy any thing,
they will have it at their own Price, the Vender not daring to refuse it. They
have great Power in their Princes Election; no Emperor thinking himself safe
in his Throne, till they approve of him: So that to gain their good Opinion,
every new Emperor at his entering upon the Government, distributes large Sums
of Money amongst them, and increases their Stipends.

Though the chief Strength of the Turkish Foot Forces rests in the Janissaries;
yet are there another sort of Footmen, called Acouices; which is a Forlorn
Hope. These receive no Pay, but have free liberty to plunder; so that they
deliver the fifth Part to the Grand Seigniour. Another kind there are, called
Asapi; who are but of small Account, and rather used as Pioneers, than to
encounter the Enemy; yet are they often thrust into the Front of the Battle,
with their Bodies to blunt the Enemies Swords, or to scale the Walls of Towns;
that by being slaughtered, their Dead Bodies may fill up the Ditches, and so
give the Janissaries opportunity on their Dead Carcasses to mount the Bullwarks.

The Grand Seignior keeps in continual Pay six thousand Gunners, whom the Turks
call Topegi; and for the Guard of the Powder and Shot, upon the March of the
Army, twelve thousand Men are kept in pay, called Jebegi.

The Grand Seignior has likewise certain Officers attending on him, to the
number of three thousand, whom they call Chiaus; which act in the Nature of
Sergeants at Arms. These Men are well esteemed, and are often employed in
Embassies to Foreign Princes: They also carry Letters or Commendations from
the Grand Seignior, or his Chief Vizier; and are empowered to apprehend
Malefactors: But never go to the Wars, unless the Grand Seignior be there in
Person. They are commanded by a Chiaus Bassa; who is of such Credit with all
Men, that when he is sent by the Grand Seignior to any Bassa, Sanzack, or
Caddi, to have any Man's Head cut off, though he have no Warrant in writing,
yet his Authority is not disputed.

Thus have I set down the Land Forces of the Turkish Empire; in number so
great, that in show they should breed Confusion, and ruin themselves; yet such
is the Order and Discipline, that in that point they give place to none. They
live (for the most part) on a little Bread baked in the Ashes, with Rice and
Powder of Flesh dried in the Sun. Wine is forbidden them by their Law, though
it is often drunk by them in private, especially the Great Commanders. No Women
are seen in their Armies. In their March they observe a wonderful Silence; and
all the Soldiers are governed by the Beck of the Hand, or Show of the
Countenance. Quarrels and Thefts are severely punished. When they March they
dare not enter any Corn-field or Vineyard. The Valiant are assured of
Preferment, and the Coward of Punishment.

As for the Grand Seignior's Naval Forces, they are great; he having of late,
for Gain-sake, allured many Christian Carpenters and Shipwrights to his
Arsenal, and has a great number of Men trained up in Marine Affairs, by being
continually employed aboard his Galleys at Rhodes, Cyprus, and Mitylene and
Alexandria. He has also at his Beck the Pirates of Tunis, Tripoley, Sally,
Argire, and other Places; from amongst whom he chooses his prime Commanders in
Marine Affairs.

To maintain these great Forces, it is requisite a wonderful Mass of Money
should be employed, which is the Sinews of War, and without which so great an
Empire could not be kept in frame, though many are of opinion, that the Grand
Seignior's Annual Revenues exceed not eight Millions; meaning thereby, that
which is collected of his Subjects, and upon the account of Customs: For which
they give these Reasons: First, That the Turks have no care but of Arms; the
which do rather ruin, than enrich a Country. Secondly, They consume so many Men
in their Enterprises, that they scarce leave a sufficient number to manure the
Land; insomuch that the Subjects despairing to enjoy their Wealth, and
necessary Commodities, which they might get by their Labor and Industry,
employ not themselves to work nor traffic, more than by necessity they are
constrained: For they argue, it is to no purpose to labor for another, their
Lives and Estates being daily exposed to the Mercy of their Prince: And for
this Reason, many spacious Countries in the Turkish Empire lie waste; which
neglect frequently causes a Dearth. A Third Reason that is given, why the Grand
Seignior's Revenues are no greater, is, for that when he Conquers any Country,
he assigns the Lands therein to his Timariots, who serve in the Wars, and are
no otherwise liable to accommodate their Prince.

But although his ordinary Revenues amount to no great Sum, in consideration of
the large Circuit of his Empire; yet his extraordinary Profits accruing by
Confiscations, Presents, (for no Stranger may approach his Presence empty
handed) and Money raised upon Places and Offices of Trust, amount to a far
greater Sum than what has been mentioned. Nor are the Sums small, which he
draws from the Princes their Tributaries, that are not absolutely under his
Jurisdiction; as Moldavia, Vallachia, and Transylvania, with many more. So that
in all, moderate Writers affirm, That his Coffers are yearly supplied with
twenty Millions: The Management of which is left to the Defterdari, or chief
Treasurer, who has many Sub-officers under him.

Thus much having been spoken of the Forces, Revenues, and great Officers; I
shall now proceed to give the Reader a View of their Religion, if it may
without offense be so termed; which they call the Law of their great Prophet.

As for their Religion, it began in the time of Heraclius the Emperor; at what
time the Heresy of Arius and Nestorius spread it self: to whose Infamous
Proselytes Mahomet the Impostor, born in Arabia, joined himself; impiously
denying the Divinity of Christ, and proclaiming himself a Prophet sent from
God, drawing a Multitude after him: Insomuch that such as would not receive his
impious Tenants by fair means, he compelled by force: And the better to
ingratiate himself with the lewd and licentious sort of People, he tolerated
all manner of Lust, and Worldly Delights. By the Law this Impostor left, and
that now has overspread two Parts of the World, a Distinction is made between
clean and unclean Meats, to content the Jews, who are the greatest Merchants in
the Ottoman Empire. They also maintain Circumcision, but not at the Expiration
of Eight Days, according to the Jewish Custom; but at the End of Eight Years,
when the Infant is able to make a Confession of his Belief; and lifting up his
Finger to speak these words in the Arabic Tongue, viz. There is but One God,
and Mahomet is his Prophet; one God, and equal Prophets. The Circumcision
ended, they feast three Days. As for the Female Children, they at eight Years
old speak the same words; but are not capable of Circumcision. If any Christian
turn Apostate, and deny his Redeemer, which (to the loss of their Souls) too
many do, only to avoid Taxations and Tribute, they are led through the Town or
City, where they dwell in great Triumph, many People presenting them with
Gifts, as they pass, to encourage them to persevere in what they have
undertaken. And for the Men, at what Age soever they are, they must be
Circumcised.

The Law of Mahomet is contained in his Alchoran; wherein he confesses One
God, and honors Jesus Christ as a great Prophet: But impiously denies him to
be the Son of God.

The Turks by their Law are forbid to worship Images, or to have any placed in
their Mosques: The whole Series of the Alcoran being full of Fables and
Fictions, much like to those the Poets feigned of the Elizium-Shades; indulging
Men in all Sensuality during this Life, and promising them a Paradise, where
they shall enjoy the like more perfectly after Death.

Their Sabbath is kept on our Friday. They keep Lent thirty Days; during which
space they eat nothing in the daytime, but take their Repast after Sunset,
abstaining from Wine and Women. This Lent is called by them Ramaden.

They likewise observe an Easter, called Bayran; which continues for the space
of the three Days, though not always prefixed by reason they begin it in the
New of the Moon.

They have no Bells in their Mosques; neither do they suffer the Christians to
have any that live amongst them. When they enter the said Mosques, they leave
their Shoes at the Door, and take them again when they return. Where soever
they sit or stand in their Religious Houses, they have Tapestry or Mats under
them, as not thinking their Feet holy enough to stand in that Place, during the
Reading their Law; and if they look back, or scratch their Head till the Orizon
is ended, they think they have lost the Benefit they were at that time to
receive by their coming thither. They are not much addicted to Learning; yet of
late they have brought up their Children to use the Arabic Tongue, in which
their Law is written.

By this Law they have leave to marry as many Wives as they can maintain; and
when once any of them proves with Child, her Husband may not carnally know her
till she is delivered. They have certain Marriages contracted during Pleasure,
which they call Kebin, mostly practiced by Strangers; who may, for a certain
Sum of Money, have the Use of a Woman during his Pleasure: Yet when he turns
her off, if she have any Children, he is bound to keep them. A Turk having had
to do with a Christian Woman, both of them upon Conviction are to suffer Death,
unless she add sin to sin, by renouncing her Faith. The like is to be observed
between a Christian, and a Turkish Woman; though either Offense, by bribing
the Caddi's or Judges, may be omitted.

They allow of Divorce in case of Barrenness or Incontinency.

The chief Interpreter of these Laws, is the Muphti, or Archpriest, who is
chosen by the Grand Seignior; and is greatly reverenced amongst the Turks,
being Head of their Church, and Decider of all Controversies arising in matter
of their Superstitious Religion. His Eminency is such, that all the Bassa's are
subject to his Direction. He abaseth himself not so much as to sit in the
Divano; only passing through it, when he is sent for by the Grand Seignior; who
at his approach rises from his Seat, (an Honor not allowed to any other) and
then they sit together, and familiarly discourse of their Affairs.

The next to him are the Cadilesquires, or Talismen: Two Doctors of the Law,
whose place it is to Examine the Caddi's or Judges, who are dispersed
throughout the Provinces of the Empire, and are always attendant upon the Grand
Seignior: The one of them having Jurisdiction over all the European Caddi's,
and the other on those residing in Asia; there being few Cities, or great
Towns, in which one of the Caddi's have not their Residence there, to hear and
determine Matters of Controversy arising between Man and Man. The
Cadilesquires are likewise Sovereign Judges within their own Jurisdiction, in
all Causes belonging to their Religion, as it were Patriarks. They are of great
Authority, and have places in the Divano, and in Council with the Bassa's,
consult the weighty Affairs of the Empire.

There is a third Degree of Churchmen, not belonging to their Law, called
Mulli; which they account their Bishops, and are directed in their Affairs by
the Muphti. Their Office is to place and displace Churchmen as they see it
convenient.

Another sort there are, called the Nuderisi, who act in the nature of
Suffragans, and have under them several young Doctors of the Law, who are their
Disciples, called Naipi; who are, in the Absence of the Caddi's, constituted to
hear and redress Grievances.

After these are the Hagi, who are employed to write their Books, they in no
wise allowing them to be Printed; and inferior unto these are the Cassi, who
read unto them what they write, etc.

These are their several Degrees of Lawyers, and Churchmen; for the Turks are
governed by a kind of Ecclesiastical Law, according to their Alchoran. Many
Colleges they have, which they call Medressae's, situate not only in
Constantinople, but in diverse other Cities.

And thus, Reader, have I related the Suceinct Series of This History, as near
as can be gathered from Authors of undoubted Credit, and my own Knowledge: And
now nothing more remains, but to make known the Vastness of the Ottoman Empire;
which is, for the most part, the Subject of This History.

Know then, that since the Reign of Ottoman, first Founder of the Turkish
Empire, it has proudly built it self upon the Four Monarchies of the World,
viz. the Assyrian, Grecian, Persian, and Roman Empires; for they enjoy Babylon,
and all Chaldea, with the Kingdom of Media, a great part of Persia, all Greece,
with the Kingdom of Egypt, and the greatest Part of Arabia; the Islands of
Cyprus, Rhodes, Mitylene, Negropont, Ch^o or Scio, Candia, and many others: The
Empire of Trepezond, the Kingdoms of Colchis, now called Mingrelia, Tunis, and
Argeirs, Dalmatia, Illyria, and Triballenia; the Countries of Transylvania,
Wallachia, Moldavia, and Bulgaria: A great part of Hungary, and many other
Countries, which hold of the Empire, and pay Tribute to the Grand Seignior; who
in Europe has all the Seacoast from the Confines of Epidaurus, the utmost
Boundard of his Empire in Europe, Westward, unto the Mouth of the River Tanais,
now called Don; with all that lies between the City of Buda, and
Constantinople: and Southward, all the Seacoast from Velex or Belis, the
Boundard of the Kingdom of Fez, unto the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea; and so
proportionably every way: The Greatness of which may be better conjectured by
the Greatness of some part thereof; for the Mere of Maetis, which is all at
the Grand Seignior's Command, is in Compass one thousand Miles; and the Euxine,
or Black Sea, in Circuit two thousand seven hundred Miles: The
Mediterranean-Coast, which is subject unto him, is in Compass upward of eight
thousand Miles. But to speak of his whole Territory together, he passes in his
own Dominion from Tauris to Buda three thousand two hundred Miles; and the like
Distance from Derbent to Adena: From Balsera, upon the Persian-Gulph, to
Tremisena in Barbary, is accounted little less than about four thousand.

Yet that this great Empire will not long consist, but like those that have
preceded it, be again brought to nothing, the Turks themselves have diverse
Prophesies: Nor is Sacred Writ silent in this Matter; many of the Prophets
plainly foretelling its Rise and Fall; which will undoubtedly be manifested,
when God (in whose deep Counsels the Great Revolutions of Empires and Kingdoms
are from Eternity shut up) shall in his Infinite Wisdom see fit time, to the
unspeakable Comfort of the poor afflicted Christians, that groan under the
Oppression and Tyranny of those proud Infidels, Enemies to the Name of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever-more, Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement of Books.
THe Works of Josephus, Translated out of French, new^^ Amended; Illustrated
with Copper Plates, and a New Map of the Holy Land; Folio. Printed for Tho.
Passenger, and Tho. Sawbridge.

Cosmography in four Books, containing the Chorography and History of the whole
World; by Peter Heylyn. Printed for Tho. Passenger, Tho. Sawbridge, and Benj.
Took.

The Third Part of the Present State of England, relating to its Trade and
Commerce within it self, and with all Countries, as it is found at this Day
established; giving a most exact Account of the Laws and Customs of Merchants,
relating to Bills of Exchange, Customs, Coyns, Weights, Measures, etc. To which
is added, England's Guide to Industry or Improvement of Trade. Printed for Tho.
Passenger, and Benj. Took.

Ecclesiastical History epitomiz^d, deduced to this Present Time. Printed for
Tho. Passenger, and W. Thackeray.

Physic Refined, or a Little Stream of Medicinal Marrow flowing from the Bones
of Nature, etc. Printed for Thomas Passenger.

A Continuation of the preceding History to this present time; Containing the
Remarkable Siege of Vienna for Sixty days, the raising of it by the Imperial
Forces, and the King of Poland: The Ruin of their Army before it, and a Second
Fight in Germany; together with a Table to the whole Book.
NEw-Hausel Besieged by 13000 Imperial Horse and Foot, they run their Trenches
within a hundred yards of the Wall, and with the Cannon on the Battery raised
on the East part continually for the space of two days, Thundered against it,
insomuch that diverse houses were beaten down, and a great number of the Enemy
slain, yet encouraged by a Party of Turks who had posted themselves upon an
Eminence near Gran, watching their opportunity to annoy the Christians, they
made diverse brisk sallies so that often coming to handy blows; the disputes
grew hot, many on either side being slain, but after several unsuccessful
attempts to take the place by Storm, and notice had that the Grand Vizier was
on his way from Belgrade with sixty or seventy thousand Horse and Foot,
resolving though at the hazard of a Battle to raise the Siege. The Duke drew
off the Besiegers having for that purpose received an express Command from the
Emperor and Council of War, assembled to debate the important (...) of the
Empire, and uniting them (...) Forces kept close in his Camp before (...),
immediately upon whose departure the (...) in the Town sired all their Cannonry
joy of their deliverance, being a little before in great distress for Provision
and other necessaries, having over and above lost five hundred of their most
resolute Soldiers.

(...) the Siege of New-Hausel the Palatine of (...) with a thousand Foot, and
five hundred Hor^e marching to Scarce a Fortress of the Turks, so (...)
Besieged it, that the Garrison being altogether unprovided, after a short
Battery sounded a ^^rly, and upon condition that they might march out with Bag
and Baggage, offered to surrender the place; but that not being granted, they
to save their lives were contented to become Prisoners of War, in all being but
sixty eight person, of which eight had been killed with the (...) of the
Culverines, upon which the Palatine having put a Garrison of Hungarian Soldiers
into it, and sufficiently stored it with Provision, (...) to have an eye upon
Teckeley, who was moving toward the Frontires of Silesia, daily expection
re-inforcement from the Bassa of Buda, and to join some Tartarian Troops who
were on their March.

These things passing the King of Poland used all diligence to draw his Forces
together near Cracow, giving great encouragement to his Soldiers, and such of
the nobility as sent any Forces to his assistance (...) the Grand Vizier slow
in his March, as (...) thereby to draw the Imperialists to a (...) that
conjunction, and so (...) was (...) Rivers by Bridging them over with Boats,
Floats, Cask, and plashing of Trees, that beyond expectation, he arrived at
Stat-Wessemberg, not above six Leagues from Commora, before the Imperialists
had notice of his passing the Gran, and there encamping received the
complements of diverse traitorous Hungarian Lords, who encouraged him to
undertake the siege of Vienna, and seize upon the Hereditary Countries of the
Emperor.

The sudden advancement of the Turks caused the Emperor to send an Express to
Count Chakay Commander in chief of the Garrisons upon the Banks of the River
Neytray, to demolish such as he supposed not tenable, which was accordingly
done. And now the two potent Armies approaching, great was the expectation of a
battle, but the Turks expecting a supply of twenty thousand Tartars, who were
on their march through Moldavia, protracted the time, as likewise did the
Imperialists, expecting something from the Transi^vanian Prince, who (secretly
envying Teckelies advancement, who had by this time proclaimed himself Prince
of Hungary, Coining money in his own name, and using the ancient Insigns of
Royalty) had underhand promised to put himself under the Emperors protection,
and take the field with eighteen or twenty thousand men. But on the second of
Ju^y 1683, the Duke receiving notice that a body of Turks and Tartars (...)
passed the Waag at Segith, and used all manner of (...), burning and
plundering, killing and taking prisoners all that fell into their hands (...)
thousand other outrages and insolences. (...) party to oppose their advancing
(...) into the Country and oblige them to (...), the which he effected, but
they (...) as it they intended to lay siege either to (...) or (...), to
prevent that purpose the Imperial horse posted near Altenberg and the foot in
the Isle of Scutz, to assist upon the first offered occasion, but it being soon
perceiving hat the Turks intention was no other then to get between the horse
and foot, and so render them unserviceable to each other.

The Duke sent away the Baggage under a convoy of six hundred horse toward
Altemberg, to seize upon which the Turks advanced with a party of three
thousand horse, so that a sharp dispute happened till the Turks by the courage
of the Imperialists were obliged to a disorderly retreat, but being reinforced
by eight hundred fresh horse, they rallyed, whereupon the Duke of Lorrain and
diverse great Commanders, with all convenient speed advanced, and the Forces on
either side increasing the fight grew hot, the Imperialists behaving themselves
very resolutely, but especially the Duke of Lorraine who with his Regiment of
Guards charged through the thickest of the enemies squadron, but the Turks
power still increasing, and the Imperialists not being so suddenly able to pass
the River as the Action required, after two hours resolute fighting, those that
convoyed the Baggage were most of them cut in pieces, and to the value of forty
thousand Guilders fell to the enemy, and in the whole action twelve hundred
Imperialists and seventeen hundred Turks were slain, amongst the former the
Prince of Savoy, General Rabatta, the Count d'Lamberg and Prince of Aremberg,
after which the Imperial horse having made good their retreat, passed the River
and joined their foot, who could not though they were speculators of the Action
come up, which gave the Turks this considerable advantage, and so exalted their
spirits, that upon receiving a new supply of eight thousand foot, they besieged
Raab, but received such welcome from the mouths of the murdering Cannon, that
they were glad to draw off, when having burnt some few Villages, with what
plunder they had got, they marched to the Grand Visiers Camp; upon which
reinforcement, he trussed up his Tents and marched directly toward Vienna the
Imperial chief City, situate in Austria, on the banks of the River Danubius,
burning and ruining all his way, insomuch that the Imperial Army being found
too weak to encounter him, the Duke retired with it under the walls of that
City, to expect the Forces of the Confederate Princes, whilst Count Staremberg
Governor thereof, who had been abroad with a party to observe the motion of
the enemy, was obliged to fight his way through the Vaunt-Corriers of the Turks
Army, to get into the City, through which likewise the Duke of Lorraine passed,
when he had given such necessary orders as were convenient for maintaining a
strenuous siege, leaving therein eighteen or twenty thousand soldiers under
the command of the aforesaid Count, who sallying out fired the Suburbs,
dislodging and killing a great number of Turks, that he found there plundering
the houses, and upon his return calling together the Chief Citizens, he
admonished them to behave themselves like men against the enemies or their
Country, and Religion, from whom notwithstanding the specious pretenses they
might make, they should receive little mercy at the hands of the Infidels if
they became victors; he likewise with speech and large promises of reward,
animated his Captains and soldiers, whom he found resolved to live and dye
with him in the defense of that City, which is the glory of the Empire,
protesting rather to suffer the worst extremity then hearken to any surrender.

The Duke of Lorraine having passed through the City with his Army, encamped
himself strongly near Kremps, resolving there to expect the King of Poland, and
the Troops of the Confederate Princess which were on their march, and as
opportunity offered both to encourage and succor the besieged, whom by this
time the Vizier had with his Army consisting of one hundred thousand men
blocked up, being the flower of the Ottoman Empire, running his Trenches with
great celerity, though to hinder it, the Cannons from the walls incessantly
played, and the besieged frequently sallyed, killing and repulsing the
Infidels, following the execution even to their Camp, yet the number of their
Pioniers increasing, they under the shelter of the night, and favor of their
Cannon, in two days lodged themselves, running their works to a great depth,
leaving the earth archwise, thinking so to reach the walls and blow them up, by
springing their Mines, but such diligence was used by the German Enginiers,
that a great number of the Infidels were buried in their works and several
poisoned by the stench of dead bodied they met with in their Subterranean
Progress, which had been buried in the last plague, which the (...) perceiving
commanded eight thousand (...) to lodge themselves in the ruins, and (...)
from six batteries containing thirty which Cannon, he caused the City to be
battered (...) without intermission, and having there^^ (...) breach near the
Carinthian Gate, com^^ (...) his men to enter, who in a desperate manner came
on, but were so warmly received by the besieged, that after three thousand were
slain upon the place, they were obliged to retire, which so enraged the Vizier
that he commanded them to make a second Attack, which was done but with
altogether as bad success as the former.

The City of Vienna thus straightened, the Bishop of Aichstadt the Imperial
Minister, represented the danger it was in, to the Diet for that purpose
assembled at Ratisbone, recommending it especially to the care of the Electoral
Princes, requiring them in the name of the Emperor to find out such effectual
and speedy ways to raise men and money for its relief, that it might not fall
into the hands of the Infidels, and thereby open a way for them to conquer all
the Cities of Austria. This matter being debated, it was resolved that a fund
of money should be speedily raised, and all other necessaries provided, for the
subsistence and relief of the besieged, and to stay the further progress of the
Turkish Arms. Upon notice of which the Elector of Bavaria drew his forces into
the field, and ordered them to the number of ten or eleven thousand,
immediately to march and join the Duke of of Loraine, whom they found encamped
near Kre^ps.

Whilst these things were doing, the Rebels under the command of Count Teckely
made great spoil upon the borders of Croatia and Silefia: bes^e^ing and taking
Budekim by storm, ravaging and destroying all the pleasant places about it,
which put the adjacent Garrisons into such consternation, that several whether
through fear or treachery i^ uncertain, put themselves under his protection,
whereby he was pussed up to that extravagance that he sent Summons to diverse of
the Nobility to attend him in Arms as their Prince, under the Penalties of
Confiscation, Imprisonment and death, which so afrighted diverse, that they came
in, but many there were whose Loyalty could not be shaken which so enraged the
Rebel that he destroyed their Country dwellings, and seized on whatsoever of
theirs he could find.

By this time the Turks had far advanced their Trenches, and began to throw
their Bombs into the City, whereupon the Citizens covered many of their houses
near the wall with earth, and with the shot of the Cannons from the Tower,
overthrew the mortars, sallying out at the same time, and making a terrible
slaughter of the enemy, who were advancing to the wall with a design to enter
the new breach, recovering from them a Bastion of which they had possessed
themselves, and cutting in pieces all they found therein.

This bad success making it apparent that the City was not so easy to be taken
as the Vizier had supposed, he commanded Arrows to be shot over the walls, with
Letters fastened to them, containing his admonition to the besieged, speedily
to surrender and receive liberty in their persons, a free exemption of their
goods, and such treatment as they should desire, but if they refused, and held
out obstinately, till the City should be taken by storm, or reduced by famine,
no mischief should be left unpractised that wit or horror could invent, but
this device not at all prevailed, but rather induced the besieged to contemn
the besiegers, whose weakness thereby they the better understood, as observing
from former acts of the like nature, they never capitulate underhand, till they
despair of obtaining their ends, or grow weary of the siege. All this while
the Duke of Loraine lay close in his Camp within sight of the City, the better
to encourage the besieged, daily increasing his number, and as earnestly
expecting the Polonian King, who had sent the Prince Lubomirskie before him
with six thousand horse, and daily Curriers passed between him and the Emperor,
who with the Court was retired to Pashaw, there to expect the great event, on
which the eyes of all Nations were fixed.

The increase of the Christian Camp did not a little trouble the Vizier, who
well knew that if he could not make himself master of the City before the King
of Poland arrived, he must be obliged to give battle, or raise his siege, and
that if he miscarried in the former, it would greatly redound to his disgrace,
if not hazard his life, by rendering him obnoxious to the Grand Signiours
displeasure, whom he had assured of taking the City; whereupon to hasten the
enterprise he spared not his men, but thrust them on even into the mouth of
slaughter, swearing by Mahomet that in whomsoever he found the least mark of
cowardice, or neglect of duty he should be put to death, and thereupon he
commanded the Cannon from all the Batteries to play without ceasing, but such
was the care and skill of the Christian Engineers, that they with their great
shot dismounted diverse of them, overthrowing their battery, and burying such as
were there posted in their ruins, yet having made two breaches in the wall, one
near the red Tower, and the other not far from the Imperial Palace, he
commanded five thousand Janissaries, and ten thousand other soldiers to enter
the Breach, but Count Staremberg having drawn his chief strength on that side
to oppose the Torrent, although as men desperate they came on, yet the besieged
sallying out and coming to hand strokes, by plain force drove them back,
killing about three thousand, and recovering the Raveling, and Counterscarp, of
which they had strongly possessed themselves, yet in this sally five hundred of
the Imperialists fell, and two hundred wounded.

This hot dispute over, and the Turks beaten out of diverse of their Trenches,
they lay still for two days, not attempting any thing, when on the third the
Vizier sent to the Count Staremberg for a Cessation, or a five days Truce to
bury the dead, whose noisome smells greatly afflicted his Camp with sickness,
but the Count returned for an answer, that he had no need of a Truce, nor would
he accord to any, upon which under the shelter of the night, the Turks in great
numbers approached the walls, but being discovered by lights thrown out for
that purpose, the shot from the Flankers and Battlements, gabled them so
desperately, that they were obliged to return two thousand less than they came
on, when upon their retreat three thousand of the Imperialists sallyed, and did
great execution; whereupon the Vizier storming, and finding the greatness of the
loss he had at diverse (...) sustained, (...) unsuccessful attempts, repaired
his Battery, and planted as near as he could his Mortars to the wall, with
which he threw diverse Grenades and Bombies into the Town, freeing some houses,
on fire, and killing (...) the inhabitants, the which he continued all the 21
and 22 of July, but by the extraordinary diligence of the besieged, who still
countermured the breaches, repaired what was shattered and earth behind to keep
the Bullworks from renting, and the wall from shaking by the force of the
furious shot, the Turks at that vast expense of powder and shot were little
advantaged.

The Duke of Loraine having received another supply of five thousand men, part
of the Troops of the Circle, and certain notice from the King of Poland, that
he was advancing with all diligence, he the better to encourage the besieged,
sent a Fisherman to assure them of speedy succor, commanding him to give him
notice of his safe arrival, by setting up a blew flag upon the battlements of
the Tower, and that the besieged if they were in danger should set up a red
flag, and that rather then the City should sall into the hands of the Infidels,
he would without the King of Poland endeavor to raise the siege, though at the
hazard of a Battle, nor was it long ever he safely arrived, by swimming over the
Danubius, and gave the first signal, but so far were the besieged from giving
the second, that they encouraged thereto by their renowned Governor the Count
d' Staremberg, sallyed early in the morning, and finding the Turks advancing
their Mines, fell upon them with such fury, that they overwhelmed the Miners,
and beat the Janissaries, who were appointed to guard them, insomuch that the
noise arose so great that the Grand Vizier not well assured, supposed the
Christian Army had at that time attempted the relief of the City, and for his
own safety caused him to draw up his Army in Battalia.

Things being at this pass, the Duke of Loraine in his Camp where he lay had
notice that a Convoy of provision and Ammunition was on its way to the Turkish
Camp, and arrived within three Leagues thereof; whereupon he commanded out a
party to intercept it, who accordingly performed his desire, killing and taking
prisoners, and putting to flight those Turks who guarded it, nor was the booty
less worth then forty thousand Dollars.

On the 24 of July the besieged made a vigorous sally with five thousand horse
and foot, and charging the Turks in their Trenches with much bravery and
resolution, drove them thence, thereby recovering, though not without
considerable slaughter on either part, diverse redoubts of which they had
possessed themselves, firing the bavins and planks with which they attempted to
fill up the Ditch, in order to a storm, which the next morning was intended,
but seven thousand Turks being sent to reinforce those that were routed, they
with fresh fury returned upon the Imperialists, to succor whom two thousand
issued out of the Town, at what time the fight was renewed, and for a long time
continued bloody and doubtful, and most of the works the Christians had
possessed themselves of were recovered, the Turks still pressing on to enter
the Town with the besieged, but being within danger, the Imperial Engeniers
sprung a mine, and thereby destroying about two hundred of the forwardest, put
a stop to the courage of the rest, and gave fresh vigor to the besieged,
insomuch that again charging the enemy with the former courage and bravery,
they overthrew them far and near, insomuch that five thousand were computed to
fall during the action, which carnage so infected the Turkish Camp, that the
soldiers dyed in great numbers, which obliged the Vizier to remove three or
four miles further with the gross of his Army, leaving only a competent number
to guard his former Camp, and cover the siege.

The Elector of Bavaria according to his promise, having raised an Army of
thirteen or fourteen thousand men, for the service of the Empire, after having
mustered them in the presence of the Emperor, caused them to march directly
toward Kremps, to join the Imperial Forces, resolving in person to follow them
with all convenient speed, when in the mean while General Dunwalt, having
notice that seven or eight thousand of the enemy were fallen into the upper
Austria, he strengthening himself with what Forces he could, marched with all
diligence to oppose their progress, in which they made such devastation that
the like had not been formerly known, and such was his good success, that
coming upon them at unawares, he put them to the rout, killing a great many of
them, and rescuing two thousand Captive Christians, whom they had taken in
their progress, as also recovered a great booty.

Upon notice of these and the like successes the Imperial Confederates hastened
their quotaes to join the Army, and for that purpose a Conference was held at
Hasford on the 27 of July between the deputies of the Elector of Brandenburg,
the Bishop of Bamberg and Wittenberg, the Princes of Hanspatch, Bereith, etc.
wherein it was resolved that the Troops of Franconia, designed for the
asistance of the Emperor should set forward on the second of August, and that
the Bishop and Chapter of Wirtzberg should for this service furnish out two
Regiments of foot, and that four Companies of the Guards of the Elector of
Brandenbxrg, over and above his Quota, as likewise a Regiment of new raised
horse should be employed against the Turks under the command of the Velt
Marshal Dorfling.

Fresh Troops daily arriving at the Imperial Camp, and the besieged receiving
new assurance of being suddenly relieved, would by no means admit of any Treaty
with the Turks, but generously scorned their pretended advantageous proposals,
which not a little enraged them, so that on the 30 of July they renewed their
Battery with great fury against the Red Tower and Scotenburg Gate, continually
thundering against them for twenty four hours, when having made two small
Breaches they came on with great resolution, but were by the sallyers as
strongly opposed, whilst the Cannon from the Tower, Battlements and Flankers,
made such destruction amongst them, that they retired in great disorder, but
whilst the Imperialists hotly pursued, their own Cannoniers not discerning them
from the enemy, by reason of a great mist that fell about that time, diverse of
them were killed by the great shot, and scarcely was the mistake rectifyed ever
the Turks, being seconded with six Regiments of Janissaries and Spahies returned
upon them, so that the fight on all sides was continued with great fury; each
being desirous of honor and victory, but at length the Turks not being able to
endure the Force of the Christians retired, yet being commanded to a third
assault, and receiving fresh supplies from the Camp, they again returned,
strongly possessing the works out of which they had been before beaten, (...)
Count Staremberg accompanied with diverse Commanders and one thousand foot
soldiers coming upon them, so encouraged his weary men, who had been in the
heat of the action, with little intermission for the space of ten hours, that a
greater slaughter then ever was made, and in sine the Turks put to flight.

During these three assaults not less then eight thousand of the Besiegers were
slain, not fewer then three thousand of the besieged. So that the Vizier
fearing the noisomness of the Carnage might oblige his men to forsake their
Trenches, again desired a Cessation to bury his dead, but it would not be
granted, but rather the slaughter Increased by another sally the besieged made,
whilst their Cannon on the wall being skillfully mounted, overthrew the Turks
Cannon, and ruined their new Battery against the Scotenburg Gate.

This great City; in the siege of which the Turks have been always
unfortunate, had not above sixteen hundred Garrison soldiers in it the morning
of the day wherein it was besieged, and but lightly stored with provision; but
so providence ordered it that in the sight of the Turkish Army, two great
Vessels laden with provision coming up the River Danubius, got into the Port
safe^^, and the Garrison augmented by sixteen thousand horse and foot, left
there by the Duke of Loraine as he marched through the City in his retreat, nor
were the Burgers and Religious Orders less diligent in the defense thereof then
the soldiers, being by the women animated thereto, but more especially by the
unwearied example of their Governor, who spared no pains nor labor, being
ever seen in places of greatest danger, sacrificing his rest and safety to the
Public good of Christendom, and preservation of his Country, of which that
great City is the only Bulwark; and since money was mostly wanting, he borrowed
it of the Monasteries and Religious foundations, promising to refund it with
great interest if the City escaped falling into the hands of the Infidels, or if
it did, so be it, his Life and Liberty remained to him they should lose nothing.

By this time the King of Poland having mustered his Army under the walls of
Cracovia, and furnished himself with all things necessary, divided it into two
parts, and by hasty Marches advanced to join the Imperial Camp, now swelled big
by the daily arrival of fresh Troops, and longing to be in action, which the
Grand Vizier well noting, used all diligence in running his Trenches chiefly
trusting to his Mines, many of which being successefully sprung, ruined a great
part of the outworks, but such was the indefatigable endeavors of the besieged
that they made them for the most part good ever the Turks could enter, and
frequently by digging deep sounds, laying pibbles upon drums, and setting
basins of water near the walls, discovered their Mines, which they
countermining frustrated, destroying the Miners in them for the most part, or
taking thence the powder

Teckely imagining that the Duke of Loraint durst not adventure out of his Camp
for fear of being attacked by the Ottoman Forces, he with twenty five thousand
Turks and Hungars advanced toward Presburg with a design to besiege it, of
which the Duke having notice, drew out a strong power, and came upon him so
suddenly, that in great disorder he retired, but the Imperialists falling in
with his rear, cut off six or seven hundred of his men, taking a like number
prisoners, together with a thousand Wagons laden with Ammunition Tents and
Provision, as likewise burnt a great number of Boats and Casks, brought to pass
a branch of the River Danube, sending after him the Prince Lubomirskie with the
Polish Horse under his command, to prevent his falling into Moravia, who still
cut off his rear, so that from the beginning to the end of the action fifteen
hundred of the Rebels and Turks were slain and taken prisoners, with the
remainder of which Army Teckely passed the Waag, where the Turks, separating
from him returned to the Garrisons, out of which they were drawn, yet the Duke
stayed upon the banks of the River Merck, two miles from Presburg, till he had
certain notice thereof, when increasing the Garrison of that City he returned to
his Camp near Kremps, where upon his arrival he had certain notice that the
King of Poland was within ten days March of Vienna, when to assure the
besieged thereof, he sept a person into the City, who safely arrived there, and
thereby gave them great encouragement, insomuch that sallying about twilight,
they m^^e a terrible slaughter of the Janissaries, that were lodged in the
Counterscarp, taking diverse or them Prisoners, who being strictly examined,
confessed the Turkish Camp was exceedingly weakened through sickness and want
of provision, but especially since the Convoy that was on it is way thither fell
into the hands of the Imperialists.

During these Transactions a body of Turks a^^ Tartars fell into Croatia,
burning and destroying all before them, leaving no manner of cruelty
unpractised; to oppose which Torrent, the Viceroy gathered the strength of the
Country, and coming upon them at unawares, put them to flight, following the
execution for ten or twelve miles; Nor was the success of Count Leshly less
against another party of the Infinels, who greatly infested the Frontiers (...)
Country of Moravia, from whom, after he had put them to flight, he took 78
Wagons laden with the spoils of those Countries, and became the deliverer of
diverse Christians, whom the Infidels were leading fast manacled into miserable
Bondage.

The Duke of Loraine fearing by this time that the besieged were in some strait
for that he had received frequent advice that the Turks pressed the siege with
great resolution, he to be the better satisfied sent another person into the
City, who in the habit of a Hungarian Rustic safely passed the Leaguers, and
under the shelter of the night swam over the Danube, giving upon his arrival
the signal agreed on, and the same night returned with advice that the besieged
were not as yet in any want either of men or provision, though the Turks almost
without intermission kept them in action, but that which anoyed them most, was
the bloody flux, of which thirty or forty died in a day.

The Turks having advice of the daily increase of the Imperial Forces now
encamped at Enzesdorf, nearer then before to the City of Vienna, to the great
encouragement of the besieged, the more eagerly pressed the siege, the Vizier
no way sparing his men, but rather as a man desperately resolved rather to lose
the whole Army than go whithout that City, whose Keys he had promised to say
at his Masters feet. He on the twelfth of August caused the Cannon from all the
Batteries to fire upon the Scottenburg Gate and Red Tower, commanding at the
same time sixteen thousand Grecians, Hungarians, and people of other Nations
subject to the Ottoman Scepter, to make the Attack, and enter the Breach by
plain force, promising a 1000 Sultanas to him that should plant the first
ensign upon the Wall, which so animated them that like men altogether careless
of their lives, they threw themselves into the Ditch, where many of them were
impailed upon stakes, and although a storm of small shot, and the loud mouths
of eighty pieces of Cannon, plied them with fearful slaughter, yet they pressed
on and lodged themselves in the ditch, but upon the besiegeds sallying and
springing a Mine, they were driven thence, and although great scarcity raged in
the Turkish Camp, insomuch that horseflesh was accounted dainty fare, and an
Ammunition loaf of bread sold at five Dollars, yet the proud Bassa sent again
to summon the Governor to surrender, but the Messenger not being admitted to
enter the City, or parley with such as kept the outworks.

That evening a Letter from the Governor to the Duke of Loraine which the
Turks had intercepted, was shot into the City, and another paper in it signed
by the Vizier, admonishing the Governor timely to provide for his own and the
peoples safety, and not by obstina^^ly resisting Irritate the Grand Signior,
but this so little availed that in stead of a (...) in the Morning the besieged
sallyed, and (...) part of the Counterscarp, of which the Turks had possessed
themselves, drove them (...), and seconding it by springing a Min^ which (...)
their Retreat, most of them were cut in pieces, yet in this action diverse of
the besieged fell.

The better to encourage the besieged a party of Imperial horse sent by the
Duke of Loraine, passing a branch of the Danube, landing upon a small Island,
fell upon three hundred Turks, put most of them to the sword, and with
inconsiderable loss on their own part, returned with two hundred Camels laden
with provision, and other necessaries which good success was seconded with
certain Intelligence to the King of Polands advancing with all speed, and that
for haste he with his horse was four days march before his foot, as fearing
the ill consequences that might happen by the least delay.

The Turks finding the time grow short in which they must of necessity win the
City or fight a Battle, they pressed the siege with more eagerness, especially
upon their receiving a supply of men and provision; So that on the fourteen,
fifteen, and sixteenth of August they advanced they works in the Ditch, and
lodged themselves upon the point of the Ravelin, form whence they had been
before beaten, gave two fierce assaults, in which they were repulsed, with
great loss on either side, and on the seventeen day, being about to make
another attack, the Governor and Count d' Souches sallyed, and having beaten
them back, ruined their works in the Ditch, making a terrible slaughter of such
of the Infidels as they found too sar advanced, and then returning into the
City with the Turkish Ensigns, the ensuing day they made another sally wherein
they beat the enemy from the point of the Ravelin, which they had again
possessed, killing about three thousand of them, in which Action Count
Staremberg was wounded in the head with a stone raised by a Cannon buller that
fell three yards short of him, and the Count de Souches received a hurt in his
leg by an arrow from one of the Trenches, yet like men devoting their lives to
the service of their Country, they pressed on courageously, animating the
soldiers to pursue the flying enemy, which they did, making great slaughter,
and recovering almost all the works they had possessed, till such time as eight
thousand Janissaries advancing, the Turks thereby encuraged, returned furiously,
insomuch that the besieged not being able to stand the charge, under the favor
of the Cannon, retreated into the Town, where during the fally the breaches had
been made good, yet in this action they lost two thousand men, and amongst them
diverse officers of note, yet as men not dismayed, finding still the Turks
incroach, they on the 22 sallyed again, and finding the enemy had made great
lodgments in the Ditch, beat them thence, and ruined their works, and the
better to hinder their approaches made several retrenchments within the
Bastion, which the Turks perceiving, threw that day a great many Bombies into
the Town, which killed twenty men, and fired six or seven houses, playing very
furiously from four Batteries, and by this time having possessee themselves of
diverse small Islands in the River Danube, as it were blocked up the City by
water, yet the Governor resolving to hold out the siege to the last extremity,
rather then to deliver the City, or come to any capitulation, he on the twenty
sixth made another resolute sally, in which coming to handy blows with the
enemy, and the fight continuing hot for the space of eight hours; the loss was
great on both sides, yet in the end the Turks were beaten out of all their
works, and three great Mines of theirs being discovered, the powder was taken
out, but so much Christian blood was shed in the action, that the Garrison was
greatly weakened, and great was the want of Officers, for since the beginning of
the siege were slain one Colonel, five Lieutenant Colonels, thirty Captains,
and thirty eight Lieutenants, besides diverse that dyed of the bloody flux, and
were at that time sick, insomuch that it was resolved not so frequently to
Sally, but use all endeavors to discover the enemies Mines, and Subterranean
Traverses, and thereby defeat them, and that it was convenient to give the Duke
of Loraine notice of the strait the City was in, whereupon the Count d'
Starenberg wrote a Letter, wherein he gave his Highness to understand as
follows.

The Copy of a Letter from the Count D' Staremberg Governor of Vienna, to the
Duke of Lorrain, bearing Date August 27th. 1683.
I Cast my self at your Highness feet, humbly to thank your Highness for the
good Opinion you were pleased top express toward me in your last Letter: Your
Highness knows I am perfectly devoted to you, and that I desire nothing more
passionately, than by my Humble Service to render my self worth thereof. Since
my last, the Enemy have sprung six Mines in the Ravelin, which after having
repulsed them, we presently repaired, and still we keep our Retrenchment. The
Enemy have hitherto gained no more than a Lodgment on the point of the Ravelin:
We search above and under ground, and have Countermined three of the Enemies
Mines and sprung two Mines, which had good Effect, and would have had better,
were our Miners braver, and more expert; but being people that we are fain to
get together any way, it is impossible to make them re-enter the Mine, if they
hear the Enemy at work. In the Counterscarp the Enemy have likewise sprung
three Mines near a Retrenchment: Palisadoes which we still maintain to cover
the Caponiers, we have in the Ditch, and though the Palisadoes were in some
places beaten down by the last Mine, yet our men maintained the Post with their
Swords in their hands, until such time they were made good again, and (...)
still keep it. The Enemy have (...) other descents in the Ditch, one toward
the Bastion Lebeland, and the other toward that of the Court; out of which our
men under the favor of the fire we gave, did in open day dislodge them, whilst
others commanded for that purpose filled up their works, and burnt their
Gabbons and Galleries, so that they must begin anew: But Sir, it is time to
succor us, we lose a great many Men, and many Officers, more by the Bloody
Flux, than by the fire of the Enemy; for there dies almost every day sixty of
this Distemper: We have no more Grenades, which were our best defense; our
Cannon are partly spoiled by the Enemies Battery, and partly burst e're they
had endured fifty shot, by reason of the ill Temperament of the Metal; and the
Enemy finding they cannot with small numbers lodge themselves in the Ditch,
make great Lodgments on the Counterscarp, and keep a great number of men there,
to make Extraordinary Efforts. For the rest it is certain the Enemy have lost,
and do daily lose a great many Janissaries, and that they have a great multitude
wounded, and no less number sick of the Bloody Flux, which rages amongst them.
They have several Camps far enough from each other, and may be easily beaten if
they stay for. Your Highness, which I do not believe they will do: They are not
at present 60000 fighting men, and one Camp may be beaten before it can be
assisted by the other. We expect your Highness with the greatest impatience,
but I not so much to be delivered of this Siege, as to have the Honor to
assure your Highness of the Respect which I am, etc.

Postcript.
AT this Instant my Miners Informed me, that they hear the Enemy working
beneath them, under the Bastion of the Court. they must have passed the Ditch
under ground, and there is no more time to be lost.




This advice greatly alarmed the Imperial Camp, not so much for fear as with a
desire immediately to march, and adventure the relief of the City, at the
hazard of a Battle, whereupon the Duke assembled the Great Commanders in his
own Tent, laying before them the Danger the City was in, and at the same time
informed them that he was resolved to attempt its relief, though at the hazard
of Battle, which resolve was liked by most, though some there were, who
alleged that seeing the King of Poland was near at hand, it was not safe to
attempt any thing till both Armies were joined, and that it was better to
hazard the City, than the Army, upon which the safety of the Empire depended.
Notwithstanding the Army had express orders to March, and had set forward the
next day, had not advice in the mean while arrived in the camp from the Count
d' Staremberg, informing his Highness that he had discovered and defeated the
great Mine under the Court Bastion, and dislodged the Turks in the
Counterscarp, by successfully springing two Mines, which had enabled him to
hold out much longer then he supposed, therefore he earnestly besought his
Higness not to hazard any thing rashly.

This advice altered the former resolves, especially upon notice of the near
approach of the Polonian Horse, yet the Scouts giving information that a great
body of Turks and Hungarians, were on their way to join with the Besiegers,
under the leading of the Bassa of Buda; Prince Lubomirskie, with the horse
under his command, and three Regiments of Imperial Dragoones, advanced to meet
them, upon whom coming unexpectedly, after a hot dispute he put them to flight,
with the slaughter of four or five thousand of them, taking many prisoners, and
a great Convoy of Provision and Ammunition, such as escaped flying to Gran,
New-haussel, and other adjacent Garrisons.

The Prince was no sooner returned with these spoils to the Camp, but an
Officer arrived from the King of Poland, assuring the Duke of Loraine, that the
King was with thirty Regiments of Horse within twelve or fourteen hours of the
Imperial Camp, whereupon his Higness dispatched the Margrave of Baden, to
complement him upon his arrival, and immediately drew up his Army in Battali^,
to receive him at the head thereof, resolving with all convenient speed to give
the Turks a Camisado, and withal sent an express to the Emperor lying at
Pashaw, to let him understand the Polonian Kings Aproach, and his resolves to
fight the Ottoman Army with the first advantage offered, as also in what danger
the City of Vienna had been, and was in, giving at the same time strait command
to every officer throughout the Army to be in readiness to March upon six hours
notice.

The Imperial Camp being put into good order, and a resolution taken to fight
the Infidels, the King of Poland on the 29 of August arrived with all his
Chivalry, and was immediately followed by the remaining Troops of horse, his
foot being at the same time advanced, ^ within 8 (...) German Miles of the
Imperial Camp; when upon his arrival, having been by the Margrave
congratulated. first in the name of his Imperial Majesty, and then in the name
of the Duke and all the great Commanders of the Army; he encamped about a mile
on the left of the Imperialists, and the next day a Tent Royal was pitched
between both Armies, where the King, the Duke of Loraine, the Electors of
Bavaria, Saxony, and diverse other Princes met, and after passing the usual
complements, fell to debate about the necessity of their attempting to raise
the siege, and that no time was to be lost in that affair, for that the
Garrison Soldiers from twenty thousand were by diverse distempers and the fire
of the enemy, reduced to five or six thousand, nor were they slow in coming to
a resolve upon the Method to be observed therein.

During these transactions the Turks incessantly Battered the City of Vienna,
laboring earnestly in their works, as being greatly desirous to take it by
storm, and more especially to save the Grand Visiers oath, who had sworn by the
head of Mahomet, to take it or dye under the walls, though afterward it
appeared he had not strength enough to acquire the former, nor courage
sufficient to keep his word in the latter, for such was the courage of the
besieged, that sallying they beat the enemy once more out of all their works,
but by the former sallies and sickness as before mentioned, they were
exceedingly weakened, insomuch that they despaired much longer to maintain the
City, against the assaults of such so numerous and restless enemies, so that on
the fourth of September Count Staremberg at the earnest entreaty of the
Burghers, caused it to be signified from St. Stephens Tower by setting up a
purple slag, the signal appointed that the City was in distress, which being
perceived by the Imperial Scouts, they acquainted the King and Duke, who
thereupon drew up in Batalia, and sent out four hundred horse, to observe
whether the enemy had possessed the Forest, and immediately set forward with
the whole Army, altogether full of courage and brave resolution, desiring
nothing more than to be in action with the Infidels, when in the mean time, the
City being pressed by two successive assaults, and a Mine sprung on the point
of the Bastion, the Besieged on the eight, made another sign from the Tower of
the great danger they were in, and sent out two Enginiers to inform the Duke of
Loraine thereof by word of mouth, the better to hasten relief before the enemy
had finished the new Batteries within Musket shot of the Scottenburg Gate, but
one of them was taken by the Turks Scouts, and the other supposed to be drowned
in passing the Danube.

But the General having received sufficient notice (and dreading of what evil
consequence the least delay might prove) in good order passed the Forest of
Vienna, which the Turks to their great disadvantage had no where Fortified. But
coming to the hill of Calemberg on the 11th. of October found it strongly
possessed; whereupon a squadron of horse, and eight Regiments of foot ascended
to Attack the enemy, and remove them from their post, who charged up with such
bravery, that after a hot dispute, the Turks gave ground, and retired in great
confusion to a strong retrenchment, made at the bottom of the hill toward
their Camp, where being reinforced, they made a stand, and again disputed it,
but being cut off in great numbers by the shot of the Imperial Cannon, from the
hill, on which by this time they were planted, and charged on the one hand by
the Polonian horse, and on the other by the Bavarian foot, they after an hours
dispute were driven thence, leaving an open field to the Imperial Army, which
under the Duke of Loraine, advanced in good order to charge the Bassa of
Sielistra, who as the forlorn, with ten or twelve thousand men, advanced,
though in some disorder, by reason his Ranks were broken by the shot from the
Hill, which played furiously, till the Dukes squadron of horse under the
leading of the Margrave of Baden, caused the Bassa, after a sharp dispute to
retire to the main Body, when the Duke of Loraine with fifteen thousand horse,
taking the advantage, fell into the left wing, with such fury, that the Turks
in spite of the resistance they made began to fall into disorder, when as the
King of Poland charging on the Right, where the Vizier sought in person, great
was the slaughter, till in the end, the Turks as men discouraged and dismayed,
began to shrink together, which the Margrave of Baden perceiving, drew off to
relieve the besieged, and by six in the evening posted himself before the Sotch
gate, yet did not the Turks in the Trenches desist from assaulting the City,
but like men desperately resolved to lose their lives, or win it, but the scale
of victory, by this time turning apparently on the Christians side they being
seconded by six thousand fresh horse made great slaughter, though the Bassas
labored to encourage their men, and restrain their flight in vain, for by this
time the King of Poland with his own Troops, and such Imperial Auxiliaries as
seconded him, having broken and quite disordered the left wing, pierced even to
the flank of the right, which the Vizier perceiving, and finding his Forces two
weak longer to maintain the field, fled with the foremost, whilst the
Confederate Princes followed, making great slaughter, having the execution of
the enemy even till night came on, at what time they prudently weighing that
the Turks, as their custom is, might Rally, returned to charge the Turkish
Camp, in which were left almost all the Janissaries, but the King of Poland
breaking in with great fury, after a hot encounter possessed himself of it,
putting such as he found there to the sword, whilst the like success had the
Margrave of Baden, who perceiving the Turks Army in rout, entered the Trenches
and Works, of which (assisted by the besieged, who at the same time sallyed) he
soon became Master, cutting in pieces the Turks, that were left to continue the
siege, and possessed himself of all the Cannon, Mortars, Powder, and Granado
shells, entering the same evening the almost ruined City, which was by sixty
days close siege brought to such distress that the most courageous doubted to
defend it against another assault, which the enemy was about to make, had they
not been prevented; for in it at the time it was delivered, no more then four
thousand five hundred fighting men were found, and all the works so ruined,
that it was left in a manner open to the approaches of the enemy; the Cannon
spoiled, the powder spent, and the store of Provision brought to its ultimate
Crisis.

This so great and memorable victory, obtained over the daring Infidels on the
eleventh of October, and the City Vienna entirely lest at liberty; all that
night the Christian Army stood in Battalia in the enemies Camp, to prevent any
surprise, and the next morning the King of Poland, to whom the greatest share
of plunder fell, found besides the Tent-Moveables and horse of Caera, Mustapha,
the Prime Vizier, the value of a Million of Crowns, the greatest part thereof
being in ready money, nor did any soldier want to furnish himself with
something; there were likewise found 80 pieces of Cannon, besides those on the
Batteries, three thousand Quintals of Powder, and Provision sufficient for the
subsistence of the Turkish Army for three months, and immediately thereupon
the Polish horse were sent out to pursue the flying enemy, who upon their
return brought into the Camp many prisoners, some Camels laden with Tents and
Provision, and two great pieces of Cannon, the one drawn by sixty, the other by
eighty yoke of Oxen, having likewise cut off a considerable number of such as
Marched in the Rear, and pursued them almost as far as Alba-Regalis; so that in
this Battle the Turks lost ten or eleven thousand of their best men, and by the
bloody flux and fire of the besieged thrice the number.

The City of Vienna. thus freed, with the loss of not above three hundred
Christians, on the twelfth of October his Imperial Majesty, who had resided at
Passaw, to give necessary Orders, in all great and weighty affairs, came to
Cuisier-Newburg, whither the Count Staremberg, and the chief Officers of the
Garrison went to pay their duty, and were received with great respect, when on
the fourteenth the Emperor came up the Danube in his Barge, and arriving at the
Port Royal, was received at his landing by the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony
(attended by their Guards) By the Count d' Staremberg most of the great
Commanders, Magistrates, etc. the Garrison Soldiers being posted on the
Bastion as they were during the Siege, the Burghers in Arms, and all the Cannon
round the Town thrice discharged, where his Imperial Majesty passing on took a
view of the Bastion and other works, ruined during the Siege, and the several
Retrenchments the besieged had made within the Town, and so went to St.
Stephens Church, where Te Deum was sung, after which he went to the Arch Dukes
Palace (his own being so much indamaged by the enemies Cannon, that it was not
capable of receiving him) where he gave Public Audience, and in the evening
the Duke of Loraine arrived, and was by the Emperor received in a most obliging
manner, and had a long Conference with him relating to the present war, at what
time the King of Poland sent his under Chancellor in his name to congratulate
his Arrival, and presented him with the Ottoman Imperial Standard, richly
Imbroidered and set with precious Stones, to a great value, the which together
with two horse-tailes the usual signals of war amongst the Turks, he found in
the Visiers Tent; as likewise the original Copy of a Letter signed by diverse
Hungarian Lords, wherein they congratulate the Vizier upon the successeful
progress of his Arms, and encouraged him to undertake the Siege of Vienna, and
withal the Vice-Chancelor had it in charge to invite his Imperial Majesty into
his masters Camp.

The day following the Emperor left the City and went to visit the Army, which
was encamped about 2 miles from thence, the two wings reaching toward
Ebersdorf and Laxemborough, when coming first to the Bavarian Troops, the
Elector at the head of them, saluted him with his sword, and having performed
his complements, accompanied him to the Polish Camp, where the King had drawn
up his Army in Battalia, at the head of which, attended by the Great Marshal,
and diverse Senators of Poland, he advanced to meet the Emperor, each approached
the other on horseback, expressing all possible demonstration of Reciprocal
love and friendship, and after a short interview, the Emperor took a view of
the Polish Army, and then returned to Vienna, whereupon the King of Poland
decamped, and marched to Wischa, and was followed by the Imperial Troops under
the Leading of the Duke of Loraine, accompanied with the Electors of Bavaria,
Saxony, etc. resolving to strip the Turk out of his Garrisons in Hungary, and
now the Emperor, as a signal of his love and respect to Count Staremberg, made
him great master d' Camp, and the Magistrates of Vienna attributing their
preservation next Heaven, to his courage and conduct, in recompense of so great
service, made him a present of two thousand Ducates, and by a Public act under
their seal, freed his house for ever of all Taxations or other duties, to the
payment of which it before was liable.

The Grand Vizier by this time, having considered and well weighed the
greatness of his loss, and the excessive expense his master had been at, in
Levying and maintaining so vast an Army, the conduct of which himself had
undertaken' promising at his setting out no less then the subversion of
Austria, Croatia, Silesia and Moravia, and now defeated without acquiring any
thing memorable, he greatly fearing his head must pay the price of his
presumption; the better to cast the blame upon another, and thereby frame a
plausible excuse, he in a great rage sent to strangle the Bassa of Buda, which
was performed in his Tent, the Vizier laying to his charge, that he had basely
and Cowardly suffered the overthrow of those Forces he was conducting to the
Camp, and had not afterward taken timely care to recrait his Forces, nor send
provision and other necessaries to the Camp. This Bassa thus made away, one
Hamet Chellif was made Bassa in his stead, but long enjoyed not his honor, for
at the fight at Barkan he with diverse other Bassas, was slain, as in the sequel
of this History will appear.

The Vizier having notice that the Christian Army had entered Hungary, with a
resolution to set down before some important place, and that the Generals had
eye upon Gran and New-Hassel, he collected his scattered Forces, to the number
of twenty five thousand, encamping near the walls of Stoel-Weissenburg, but not
thinking himself safe there, retired before the Christian Army, which marched
with all diligence to find him out, but the King and Duke having notice that
the lower Hungary was entirely ruined, and left desolate, they repassed the
Danube near Comora, with a resolution to possess themselves of Barkan, (...)
Garrison of the Turks covering the Bridge of (...) and Pest over against Buda,
the better to secure their winter Quarters in the upper Hungary, which the
Vizier mistrusting had posted there a body of ten or twelve thousand Janissaries
and Spahies or Timarii, whilst himself marched to Alba-Regalis, to be at hand
to join them in case they should be attacked, and caused another small body
drawn out of the Garrisons, to possess the banks of the River Gran, to hinder
the Christians passing over. But this let not the progress of their Arms,
for the King of Poland by swift marches advancing a German mile and a half
before the Imperial Army, coming near Barkan, the Turks came out in small
parties, to skirmish with whom, and to attack the Garrison, the King caused his
Dragoons to alight, who after some dispute caused the enemy to retire, but
their retreat proved only a design to draw the Poles into their Ambush, for
whilst the King furiously pursued, six thousand Janissaries passing undiscovered
behind a hill, charged the Kings Battle so strongly in the Flank, that piercing
the Array, they put it into some disorder, the horse notwithstanding the King
was present, breaking rank and giving ground, yet wheeling off he soon brought
them to recover their order, and continued the fight bloody and doubtful, when
being seconded by foot, the Turks were slain in great numbers, and about to
fly, had they not been reinforced by two thousand horse, brought on by the
Bassa of Buda, who in the first charge was himself flain, yet they obstinately
maintained the fight, which making the King doubt that the Vizier with a
greater power was at hand, as having no certain intelligence of his march, he
sent an express to the Duke of Loraine to let him know he was engaged, and to
desire him to advance with all convenient speed, which he did, but not with
such celerity as was expected, by reason he had a long defile to pass, but upon
the first approach of his Troops the Poles retired, to avoid the confusion they
were falling into, but being reinforced by six Regiments of Imperial Dragoons,
they again returned in good order, and every where put the Turks to the rout,
following the execution to the Bridge of Barkan, over which a few made their
escape, but the Bridge once broken, and all hope of flight cut off, they
resolutely threw themselves into the River, and their perished, so that of the
whole body a very small number escaped the sword and drowning, unless eight
hundred that were taken Prisoners, amongst whom was the Bassa of Silestria, and
the Bassas of Buda and Aleppo, fell amongst the slain, which were not computed
less then ten thousand, upon which defeat the Garrison surrendered upon
discretion, in which was found a rich booty, containing part of the spoils of
Austria, Croatia and Moravia; In this Battle fought on the 9 of October
thirteen hundred Poles, and one hundred Imperialists fell, the King himself was
much endangered by the enemies shot, and Prince Alexander his son had his horse
shot under him; none of note being killed on the part of the Christians but
Kirotski a Polish Palatine.

This second overthrow greatly discouraged the Vizier, who was advancing to
join this body, but upon the news of the defeat he in great perplexity retired
to Belgrade, there to expect new supplies, whilst the King and Duke after
thanks for this unexpected Victory returned to Almighty God, kept on their way
to Gran, beating the straggling parties appointed to let their passage, and on
the 18 of October coming near the City sent out a commanded party to burn the
Suburbs, the which after a hot dispute which such Turks as sallyed to prevent
it, in part they performed, and thereupon prepared formally to besiege that
important Garrison, which no doubt will fall into their hands.

And now Tekely finding the ottoman sword too feeble to maintain his usurped
Title, and support him in his Rebellion, sent his deputies to the King of
Poland, earnestly to implore his mediation with the Emperor to pardon his past
offenses, and accept of his future obedience, but that king not finding him
real in his intentions, refused to meddle in that affair.

And thus much Reader have I thought fit for your satisfaction impartially to
recount, and conclude with my hearty prayers to Almighty God, that as the
Christian Arms have been of late successful, so may they continue till the
haughty Infidels by sad experience know, that the crucified God, whom they
impiously contemn, blaspheme and revile, is not only able to deliver his people
from their merciless cruelties, but in his just displeasure to break in pieces
their aspiring Monarchy with a Rod of Iron.

FINIS.

