Christus Deus. THE DIVINITY OF Our Savior Asserted and Vindicated, from the
Exceptions of the Socinians and others.

In a SERMON preached at St. Peter's Hungate, in Norwich, upon the Festival of
St. Philip and St. James, in the Year 1673.

By BERNARD SKELETON, Sometime Vicar of Hinton,

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and Samuel Oliver Bookseller in Norwich. MDCXCII.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
THIS Discourse was long ago suppressed by the Author, after it had been sent
to the Press, and the Copy was lost. But a Gentleman who lived with the
Transcriber, retrieved a Copy, and has, at his own Charge and Trouble, exposed
it to the World; the Author neither correcting nor reviewing it: so that
whatever Errata's you meet with, all must not be laid upon him. This I remember
he told me, that if he had put it out himself, he would have cut off a great
many extravagant Enlargements, (so he termed them) which though they passed in
the Pulpit, could not but be irksom to an intelligent Reader, who expects not
Words, but Reason.

THE Divinity of our Savior Asserted and Vindicated, from the Exceptions of
the Socinians and others.
JOHN 14. part of the 9th Verse, He that has seen me, bath seen the Father.


ST. Peter himself was not more eminent in the Church of God, than he whose
Festivals we this day celebrate. If Cephas was a Pillar, so was James also: And
in that pure and primitive Council, mentioned, Acts 15. he is so far from
coming short of St. Peter in Place and Dignity, that the general Vogue will
here give him the Priority: For after he had heard the Opinion of the whole
Council, he, as chief of this Divine Convocation, briefly rehearses their
several Opinions, and lastly gives his definitive and determinative Sentence,
That we trouble not them, who from among the Gentiles are turned to God. And
though Rome has raised her proud Hills above the Clouds, and stretched forth
her Neck beyond her Sister-Churches; yet we know that Jerusalem was the Mother
of us all: There the Gospel was first planted; from thence it was dispersed
through the World: and St. James was the first Bishop thereof, if we may
believe Baronius. And why then may not St. James's Successors challenge
Supremacy, as well as St. Peter's, since Jerusalem was the Mother Church? But
if St. Peter's Confession gave him this Prerogative, St. Philip will step in
here, and say, he made it before him: for in John 1.45. he tells Nathanael, We
have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write: Which is
nothing else but a Periphrasis of the Messiah, and is so interpreted by
Nathanael also, ver. 49. Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.

But not to make the Apostles contend or justle for Superiority, since they had
learned of their Master, that he that would be greatest, must be their
Minister, and he that would be chiefest, must be Servant to all; it is most
certain that these our Apostles were in the number of those Stones which were
the Foundation of the New and Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of God. Neither in
their way were they inferior to any in the Work of the Ministry, and the
promoting the Interest of the Gospel: For St. James refiding at Jerasalem,
has, as well as St. Paul, the care of all the Churches, and by his Catholic
Epistle, confounds Heresy, confirms the Brethren, advance^h the miraculous
Tower of Prayer, particularly that by the Elders of the Church; confutes the
Solifidians; proves that Faith without Works, is no better than the Faith of
Devils, which believe and tremble; that without Works it is dead. And the
Doctrine thereof has been long since buried, till of late Years it revived,
and gained a Resurrection at Gentva.

St. Philip preached the Gospel in Stythiu, and found more Humanity among those
Barbarians, than with those that styled themselves Christians: For after awenty
Years Travel in that large and barbarous Country, where, contrary to
expectation, both himself and Doctrine found a most welcome Reception, (so
easily can the meek Temper of the Gospel triumph over salvage Natures, and
Giant-like Spirits) he returned to Hierapolis, a City of Syria, where he
encounters and confutes the Ebonites, those (...), who denied the Divinity of
our Savior; and there, say some, he found a Tomb, others a Mar^yrdom. So early
had Heretics learned, as well as Jews, to overwhelm with Stones, whom they
could not gainsay by Scripture. If we look into the Gospel, we shall find him,
as soon as he was made an Apostle, making others Disciples, bringing Nathanael,
the true Israelite, to the King of Israel; obliging the very Gentiles, making
Greeks do Homage to the King of the Jews; and here in this Gospel, whereof my
Text is a part, earnestly entreating to be instructed in that Doctrine, for
which he was content to die.

Show us, says he, the Father, and it suffices. And Jesus says unto him,
Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? He
that has seen me, has seen the Father.

I shall not trouble you with any subtle and accurate Division of the Words;
but from this great Truth here asserted by our Savior, I shall raise this one
Observation or Doctrine, which is the natural Consequence of the Words, That
Christ is one in Essence with the Father; he is the most High God, the God of
Israel. For if this be true which our Savior asserts, that whosoever sees
him, sees the Father; and who dare doubt it, since it is Truth it self that
speaks it; we must rationally conclude, either that he is the Father, which is
denied by all, or else that the Father and he have one and the same Divine
Essence. For whether we make use of rational, spiritual or corporal Optics;
whether this Vision be made by the Eye of the Understanding, and we interpret
the Words, He that knows me, knows the Father; or else by the Eye of Faith, and
so, He that believes in me, believes in the Father; or we take the Words
properly, and by seeing is meant the Action of our corporal and sensitive
Organ; the result will be the same, the Consequence not different. For if it be
true, that whosoever knows or believes Christ, knows the Father, the
Consequence will be, what our Savior asserts, John 10.30. That he and the
Father are one.

But to these object Socinus and the Racovian Catechism, first, That these
Words can by no means be applied to the Divine Essence, which, say we as well
as they, is invisible and inaccessible to the most piercing Eye of poor
Mortality, since the Angels themselves are forced to vail their Faces. But this
is so senseless a shift, that they must be blind indeed, who cannot see how to
answer it: For who ever was so quick-sighted yet, as to spy the Essences of
Things? Essentia rerum non incurrunt in sensus. Who ever looked upon a Man, and
spied his Soul, that Bird of Paradise, perking upon a little Glandule in the
midst of the Brain, and from thence giving its imperious Dictates to every
Member of the Body? Or else, what Tube or Spectacles did he use, to see the
Soul diffused through the whole, and be wholly in the whole, and yet wholly in
every part thereof? Now though when we look on a Man, we cannot see his
Essence, and yet by his Discourse and Reason, we see and know he has the
Essence of a Man: so whosoever looks on Christ, though the Divine Essence be
invisible; yet since he that sees him, sees the Father, must necessarily
acknowledge, that he has the Essence of the Father, he is one with the Father,
he is the most High God, the God of Israel.

But say the Objectors, If this be granted, yet the Consequence you make is
altogether illogical; for if it be true, that he who sees Christ, sees the
Father, it naturally follows, that Christ is the Father, and not, as you say,
that he is one in Essence with the Father. And so, contrary to your own
Principles, you confound the Persons, and make the Son the Father, and the
Father the Son, which is a Contradiction, and altogether impossible.

To this I answer, that the word Father in the Scripture is taken either
essentially and absolutely for God, or the Divine Nature; or else personally
and respectively in reference to the other Persons of the sacred Trinity. An
Example of the latter we have in the Commission of Baptism; Go, and disciple
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. And again, There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. And an Example of the former we have in those Words of the
Jews, We have one Father, even God: And of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 9.6. His
Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The Everlasting
Father. Now either the Prophet meant he should be called as he was to be, and
then the Everlasting Father must signify essentially the Eternal God; or else
he should not be what he foretold he should be called: And so there is here no
Prerogative of the Messiah foretold, but the Prophecy is a mere Scoff, and an
ironical Mock of him who was to be the Desire of all Nations. And the meaning
is, he should be called the wonderful Counselor, but he shall be only one of
no Parts, no Wit, Counsel or Advice: He shall be called The mighty God, but
shall be only (...), a poor, weak, silly Man: He shall be called, The
Everlasting Father, but shall be the most despicable amongst the Sons of Men.
Now since this Interpretation is contrary to the Scope of the Prophet, and the
Tenor of the whole Scripture, and it is a Contradiction that in one and the
same Respect the Father should be the Son, and the Son should be the Father; we
must conclude that the word Father in this Prophecy must be taken essentially
for God, or the Divine Nature. And if here and in several other Places of
Scripture, (which my time will not now give me leave to enumerate) the word
Father is so taken, why not in this Speech of our Savior's? which will make
the Sense clear and obvious to the meanest Understanding, He that sees me,
sees the Father, that is, sees God, him who has the Divine Nature; or else,
which amounts to the same, is one in Essence with the Father.

There is yet an Interpretation more, which is the learned Hammond's, in his
Paraphrase on the New Testament, where he says, The Son is said to be the
Image of his Father, and whosoever sees the Son, sees the Father, alluding to
the Expression of the Apostle, where Christ is said to be the Brightness of his
Father's Glory, the express Image of his Person. But this is so far from
helping our Adversaries, that indeed it does both confute and confound them:
For though, as they say truly, the Image, and that it represents, cannot be the
same; yet the Son cannot be said to be the Image of his Person, without he have
one and the same Divine Nature and Essence: For every Image either expresses
the outward Lineaments and Proportions of the thing it represents, as a
Picture, Statute and Impression; or else together with the out ward Lineaments,
the Gesture and Motion of the thing it represents, as a Mirror or
Looking-glass. Thus Man as he was created in Holiness, and had Power given him
over the Creatures, did represent, or was the Image of God in the Imitation of
the Divine Operations, or in the Exercise of his Power, Justice and Mercy: or
else it expresses the Nature, Genius, Person, and internal Form of that
whereof it is the Image. Thus the Son of Man cannot be the natural Image of his
Father, unless he has one and the same specifical Nature with his Father, and
is like him in the Qualities and Endowments of the Soul: Non progenerat Aquila
Columbam; it is a Man only that begets a Man; it is a Man, not a Horse or a
Lion, can be the express Image of the Person of a Man. Thus nothing can be the
express Image of Infinity, but what is infinite: And the Son of God, the
eternal Son of an eternal Father, God of God, Light of Light, is the express
Image of his Father's Person: As he has one and the same not specifical, for
the Divine Nature is indivisible, and can be but one (since it is impossible
there should be more than one infinite most perfect Essence) but individual
Divine Nature and Perfections. And so the Words, according to this
Interpretation, amount to thus much, that he that sees Christ who is the
express Image of his Father's Person, sees him who cannot but be of the same
Nature and Divine Essence: And so the Consequence is yet more clear and
evident, that Christ is one with the Father, that he is the most High God, the
God of Israel.

The Words being thus cleared, if there were no other Place of Scripture to
prove this great Truth, yet from this alone we have sufficient Ground to
believe it. But the Divinity of the Blessed Jesus is almost in every Paragraph,
writ in such large and evident Characters, that he that runs may read it: Would
you see it written by a Sunbeam? What can be more bright and illustrious, than
that Saying of St. Paul to Timothy? 1 Timothy 3.16. Without Controversy great is
the Mystery of Godliness: God was manifested in the Flesh, justified in the
Spirit, seen of Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the World,
received up into Glory. Here the word God is the Subject of six Propositions
together, and therefore according to the Rule laid down by the Socinians,
signifies the supreme Power and Majesty, excluding all others from that Deity.
Now that that Text is meant of our Savior, and not of the Will of God revealed
by frail mortal Man, and gloriously received on Earth, as they would interpret
the Place, is clear, without they make the Scripture speak Contradictions; and
so to be taken up into Glory, be to be received gloriously on Earth; and then
up is down; above, below; Earth, Heaven.

Besides, it is the same Word which is used by the Septuagint for the
Assumption of Enoch and Elijah, and in the New Testament for the Ascension of
our Savior; Mark 16.19. Acts 1.2. Acts 1.11, 22. Wherefore this being the
constant Notion of the Word, we must either learn a Language which the
Scriptures know not, and the Holy Ghost never use; or else according to their
own Rule, Jesus must be this most High God manifested in the Flesh. Would you
read this Doctrine engraven by the Point of a Diamond? Consult St. John's first
Epistle, chap. 5. ver. 20. We know that the Son of God is come, and has given
us an Understanding to know him that is true: and we are in him that is true,
even in his Son Jesus Christ: This is he true God, and eternal Life.

To this our Adversaries object only, That there is a Possibility the last
Words in Grammatical Construction may be referred to the Father. But because
the Son is the immediate Antecedent, to which the Relative can properly be
referred, 2. The Son is here chiefly treated on, which is the Rule they give
for interpreting such Places of Scripture. And, 3. since the Reason rendered,
why we are in the true God, is, because we are in the Son, viz. because the Son
is the true God. And, 4. in St. John, the constant Title of our Savior is
Eternal Life. Since, I say, all these Reasons are in the Text it self, why the
Title of the true God should be attributed to the Son, and not here referred to
the Father, who indeed is spoken of in the Text but at a distance, I cannot but
conclude that our Savior is the True God, and Eternal Life, the most High God,
the God of Israel.

If we look into the Old Testament, we shall find many Places which directly
speak of the God of Israel, which are interpreted by the Apostles in the New,
to be meant of none but Christ. If David say, The Israelites lusted in the
Wilderness, and tempted God in the Desert: and Moses describes the History
thereof, Numb. 21.5, 6. and tells us, God sent fiery Serpents to destroy them:
St. Paul will tell us, this God was Christ; 1 Cor. 10.9. Neither let us tempt
Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of fiery Serpents.
What indeed would these Men have, if we must not believe such Places and
palpable Truths as these are? Will they make both us and themselves Idolaters?
And yet they do no otherwise, who give the Honor and Worship to the Creature,
which is due only to the Creator: for (besides that God says, he will not give
his Honor to another) what I pray you is Religious Worship, but that Homage,
Faith and Obedience, which ought to be paid, and is really due from the
Creature to the great Creator? Now as it is impossible that God can be
otherwise than the first Cause and Creator of all things, and so cannot divest
himself of that Sovereignty which he has over the Creature; so it is equally
impossible that another should have the same Homage, Honor and Religious
Worship with the most High God, without Idolatry, (and yet we are bound to
honor the Son as we honor the Father) unless he be likewise the first Cause,
the great Creator; which for a Creature to be, implies a Contradiction. Since
then the Reason of the Law, viz. our Obligation to worship God upon the Account
of Creation, always continues; why not the Law it self, which commands, Thou
shall worship God alone, and him only shall thou serve? If they say their
Worship of Christ is subordinate, and directed through Christ to God the
Father; why then do they call the Romanists Idolaters? Why do they not shake
Hands with Bellarmine, and kiss the Pope's Toe, who allows no other Worship to
the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints, than they do to Christ, whom they
make altogether a Creature? Neither will their Simily of a King and his Son, or
a Favorite, do here; for a King may divest himself of his Royal Authority: but
it is otherwise with God, he cannot but be the first Cause of all things, and
therefore the Creature will be always bound to worship him as such. Now as it is
contrary to the Justice and Truth of God to command us to worship him for the
first Cause, for the Creator, who is but a mere Creature: So since we are
obliged by Scripture to pay the same Homage, Faith and Obedience to the Son as
to the Father, to honor the Son as we honor the Father; we must conclude that
the Son, as well as the Father, is the first Cause, the great Creator, the most
High God, the God of Israel.

But I will not stand any longer to prove the Sun gives Light. Our Savior
himself who is (...), the highest Reason, proves the Truth of this Doctrine in
this very Gospel appointed for this Day, in the Verses immediately following
the Text; from the In-dwelling of the Father and the Son: the Greeks call it
(...); the Latins, Circumincessio; but I know not well how to render it. Our
Savior says, Because I am in the Father, and the Father in me; which is fully
expressed by the Apostle; For in him, says he, dwells the Fullness of the
Godhead bodily.

The second Argument is drawn from his Words or Doctrine: The Words, says he,
that I speak, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in me. The
Prophets of old spoke as they were moved and directed by God; but here it is
God himself that speaks. God who at sundry times and in diverse Manners spoke in
time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last Days, says the
Divine Author to the Hebrews, spoken unto us by his Son, his natural Son: The
Word being here taken emphatically, as appears by the Opposition here made to
the Prophets, who are in Scripture Language styled the Children or Sons of God.
Never Man spoke as he spoke, by his Adversaries own Confession; Vox non hominem
sonat, est Deus certe: What was blasphemously ascribed to Herod, is most
certainly true; here it is the Voice of God, and not of Man.

The third Argument is taken from his Works and Miracles; He, the Father, says
Christ, does the Works, believe me; ver. 11. For the very Works sake they
declare my infinite Virtue, and demonstrate my Omnipotency. The ruffling and
roaring Winds, the boisterous Waves obey his Voice, and the Seas acknowledge the
Lord High Admiral of the Ocean, to be aboard: The Fish bring Silver in their
Mouths to do Homage, and pay their Quit-Rents to their supreme Lord and Maker:
The Loaves and Fishes multiply, as receiving another Nature from the God of
Nature, and the Author of all Fecundity: Diseases fly, and the Devils tremble
at his Command, and are forced to confess, what the Socinians deny, that Jesus
is the Holy One, the most High God, the God of Israel.

Neither will the Objection which they make from the 14th Verse of this
Chapter, where Christ says, He that believes on him, shall do greater Works
than he does, signify any thing; for the Words answer themselves: It is by his
Power and Authority they are done, by believing on him who is one in Essence
with the Father; for whosoever believes on him, believes on the Father. Jesus
says unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and have thou not known me,
Philip? He that has seen me, has seen the Father.

But, says carnal Reason, this is an hard Saying, who can bear it? What
Hocus-Pocus Tricks have we here to make two one, and one two? What Legerdemain
Divinity? What religious Nonsense is this? Can the Father be the Son, and the
Son the Father? If the Son have the same Essence with the Father, how then can
they differ? Can any thing differ from its own Essence? Can it differ from its
self? Sure these are the Dreams of some superstitious Zealots, whose Devotion
makes them with the Athenians, build Altars, (...), to the Unknown God.

The most High God, who is the highest Reason, will not oblige his Creature to
believe things contrary to Reason, and make us do Violence to our own natural
Faculties.

The old Jews thought not of such a Plurality of Persons in one Divine Essence;
the Old Testament no where mentions it: And if we consult the New, we shall
find Christ's Divinity to be by Donation, not by Eternal Generation; that God
highly exalted him, and gave him a Name above every Name: but this was the
Reward of an excellent Virtue, of an incomparable Submission to the Death of
the Cross, and an unerring Obedience; nothing here of an Existence and Divinity
before he was born of the Virgin. It Is true indeed, he might be called the Son
of God, because the Virgin was over-shadowed by the Power of the most High; but
who ever dreamed, the Ancient of Days was con-infantiated, and entered into the
Womb of a Woman? If this be true, how could the Father be greater than he? Can
any thing be greater than it self? Why does Christ acknowledge that all the
Power he has, was given him of the Father; that he can do nothing of himself;
that he came not of himself, nor to do his own Will, or to seek his own Glory?
If he be the most High God, how comes it to pass that he is not omniscient,
that he knows not the Day of Judgment, that he cannot dispose of Places in
Heaven, that he denies himself to be good, that he affirms the Father to be the
only true God? How is it, that he received Commands from God, to be sent into
the World? What makes him to pray? What, did he put up his Petitions to
himself? If he be God, how could he die, and be raised again by the Power of
his Father? And lastly, why does he give this as the only Reason why he is said
to be the Son of God, because he was sanctified by the Father, and sent into
the World? Thus you see these Zamzummims of Reason would despoil the (...), the
highest Reason of his Divinity. But as Elisha said to his Servant, There be
more with us than with them; and if that one, who is more than all, be for us;
if the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel be on our side, let Socinus and his
Followers do what they can, I doubt not but we shall prevail against them.

The time allotted for this Exercise, will not give me leave to answer
distinctly to every one of these Arguments. I will therefore reduce them
summarily into Heads and Classes; and by applying an Answer to each Head, let
you see easily how you may give a distinct Solution to every Argument in
particular.

First then, says the Objector, it is against Reason. To this I answer, That
it may be above Reason, as to the manner of explaining it; but that it is
contrary to right Reason, I deny; for Reason, that Divine Candle of the Lord,
has discovered the necessity of this Doctrine to her chiefest Adorers. To pass
by Trismegistus and others, whose Writings are suspected; what made Plato in
his fourth Book of Laws, say, that God should be the Rule and Measure of all
things, principally if any where he took upon him the Nature of a Man? Why did
Aristotle say, it was necessary the Gods immortal should vest themselves with
Humanity, to destroy the Errors were crept into the World? Tully says, The
time will come, when there shall be but one common Lord and Master, God
himself, who shall reign upon the Earth. Besides, the Platonists plainly assert
in their Writings, that there are three Hypostases or Persons in the Deity.
Either these Men found out this by the Light of Nature, and then how can it be
contrary to Reason? or else they had it by Tradition from the Jews, and then it
seems the old Jews understood it. And certainly it is the Doctrine of the Old
Testament as well as the New.

But Reason shows the necessity of this Doctrine from one of her first Maxims
or Principles: Every Good, says she, the more communicative it is, the better
it is: if God then be infinitely good, he must be infinitely communicable,
which can no otherwise be, but by Communication of the Divine Essence, which is
only infinitely good: since the Creatures neither separately nor conjunctly,
can any way be said to be so. Thus Reason speaks a necessity of this Doctrine.
Are not the Communicator and the Communicated distinct Persons? Yet there can
be but one individual, though communicable Divine Essence, since there can be
but one infinitely Good and Perfect, as Reason dictates, and we all confess.

But to this they object, That the Son, as infinitely Good, must also be
infinitely Communicable, and so in infinitum. To this I answer, That the Act of
Generation or Communication, is infinite and eternal, and the Essence
communicated is infinite; how then can there be more than one infinite and
eternal Act of Generation? Where shall ye next begin, since this can never be
at an end? But if you urge the Procession of the Holy Ghost; I answer, That
every thing which is begotten proceeds; but not every thing that proceeds
is begotten. Eve was produced and came forth of Adam, and yet was not generated
by him: So the Procession of the Holy Ghost cannot prejudice the eternal
Generation of the same. For though the Essence be the same which is
communicated from the Father to the Son, and from the Father and Son to the
Holy Ghost; yet there is a difference in the Communication, the Word being God
by Generation, the Holy Ghost by Procession. So that though there cannot be
more than one infinite and eternal Act in suo genere, in its kind, by way of
Understanding, which in spiritual Beings is Conception or Generation; so it is
no contradiction, that there be an infinite Act of the Will too, by way of
infinite Love or Volition, which is Procession.

But, says the Objector, if it be necessary that an infinite Good be
infinitely communicable, how can these two be one? as it is indeed the usual
Method of our Adversaries to pose us with the manner of the Existence of a
Plurality of Persons in one Divine Essence. But who knows not, that as to argue
from the Existence to the manner of existing, is no Consequence? so to argue we
know not the manner of it, therefore it is not, is very bad Logic. We know not
how the Loadstone drills and draws the Iron into its close Embraces, but we are
sure it is so. The Wind we know blows; but whence it comes, and whither it
goes, we are ignorant. In these, and a thousand things more, is Reason posed in
Naturals, much more in Supernaturals: So that it is a sufficient Answer to say,
Scripture and Reason tell us it is so; but how it is so, we know not: Neither
do we desire to know, left with the Bethlemites we smart for our peeping into
the Ark of the Lord. But we are not altogether in the dark as to this neither:
There is something in Nature, (which tho there be no proportion between finite
and infinite) may yet at the least shadow out something not altogether unlike
this Plurality of Persons in one Essence. If we lift up our Eyes toward
Heaven, and look upon the Sun, we cannot but perceive some Glimmerings of this
great Truth in that beautiful and glorious Body: Is it not the Fountain and
Cause of natural Light? Was it ever destitute of this pleasing Act of
Generation? Did it not, ever since it was a Sun, send forth these bright and
joyful Emanations? Thus the Son of God is the Brightness of his Father's Glory,
the eternal Son of an eternal Father. Are not the Sun and its darling Light
distinct Supposites? Do they not differ as Cause and Effect, Begetter and
Begotten? It is a poor shift here to say, that Light is a Quality; for Reason
in the best of Ancients, Democritus, Epicurus, and generally in all the modern
Philosophers, speaks the contrary. In short, the Sun naturally and necessarily
produces Light. Thus God, who is the most free Agent in this great Act of
Generation, acts ex necessitate Naturae, naturally, which is the highest
Perfection, as I said before; because being infinitely Good, he is infinitely
Communicable. Now that the Sun and Light, which, as Cause and Effect, Begetter
and Begotten, have one and the same individual Essence, appears from the tacit
Consent of all Men I ever met with: for if nothing interposeth between the Rays
of the Sun and them, they will say, they are in the Sun: And it is true, for
the Sun is Light, and Light is the Sun; they are one in Essence, tho distinct
as Cause and Effect. I could enlarge much upon this Similitude, and make it
clearer than the Sun it self. But Time calls me to answer their other way of
arguing, which is by Scripture, wherein I will be as concise as may be, for I
fear I have already tired your Patience.

First, say our Adversaries, his Divinity was by Donation, as appears from
Phil. 2.9. And again, the Father is called the Head, nay the God of Christ.

I answer; All this is in respect of his humane Nature, as we may see in the
Chapter cited, Phil. 2. for he that was in the Form of God, and thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God, took upon him the Form of a Servant, submitting
to the Death of the Cross, the Punishment of Slaves and Servants. The
Exaltation therefore of the Humane Nature, as a Reward of his Death and
Suffering, could be no prejudice to his Divinity, which the Apostle asserts
fully in the foregoing Verses.

But, says the Objector, how can the Son be the Father? To do nothing of
himself, not to come of himself, or seek his own Glory, are Imperfections not
suitable to the Divine Nature. I answer; What he calls Imperfections, are the
greatest Perfections: for since the Divine Nature can be but one Christ, if he
be the proper natural Son of God, as he is said to be in Scripture, must have
the same individual Essence with the Father, and so consequently, what the Jews
affirmed for Blasphemy, the most High God: and he does nothing of himself,
because the Father that dwells in him, works together with him. Opera Dei
ad extra sunt indivisa.

The third sort of Objections are from those Scriptures which deny some
Perfections to belong to Christ, in some certain Respect: But our Adversaries
deny them absolutely, as not to know the Day of Judgment, and the like.

The fourth Objection is, when they attribute some Imperfection to Christ
absolutely, which is spoken of him in Scripture only in some certain Respect,
as to be Man, to Die, to Pray, to be Raised again; that the Father is greater
than he, and the like; all which are said of him only in respect of his
Humanity.

Lastly, says the Objector, Christ gives this as the only Reason why he is
said to be God, because he was sanctified, and sent into the World. And here I
beg your leave to be more copious; and that I may not seem to derogate, or take
any thing from the strength of the Argument, I will repeat the very Words of
their Authors, as they are set down in the Racovian Catechism, page 19. Having
premised, that the word God is taken two ways in Scripture; first, for the most
High; secondly, for him who has some sublime Dominion under him; they add,
that in the latter Signification, the Word of God is in certain Places
dignified with the Title of God. And this we prove, says the Racovian
Catechism, from the very Words of the Son himself, John 10.35. If ye call them
Gods to whom the Word of God comes, and the Scripture cannot be broken: Say ye
of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the World, Thou
blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? By this Speech Christ does
clearly intimate both that the word God is sometimes attributed in Scripture to
them who are far inferior to that one God; as also that he called himself the
Son of God for no other reason, than because he had been sanctified by the
Father, and sent into the World.

To this I answer, 1st, That I admit the distinction; but that the word God is
applied to Christ only, in the latter Signification, is false, as I have before
proved: And to say only, as they do, that in certain Places of Scripture, the
Word, when attributed to Christ, is taken, in the latter Signification, for him
that has some derivative Power from the most High God, makes nothing against
us: for in certain other Places of Scripture it is attributed to Christ, in the
former Signification, for the God of Gods, or the most High God. If indeed they
had said, that in every Place of Scripture, where the word God is applied to
Christ, it is taken only for him who is inferior to the Supreme God, they had
spoke to the purpose. And if this be their Meaning, which I think it is, yet
what they offer for Proof, is altogether illogical and non-cogent: For who that
ever pretended to Reason, ever went about to prove an universal Affirmative by
one Particular? and yet they do no otherwise here, for thus they argue; Christ
calls himself the Son of God, and so consequently a God in one Place of
Scripture, viz. John 10.36. wherein the word God is used in the latter
Signification for him that has some derivative Power from the most High God,
and for no greater reason, than because he is fanctified, and sent into the
World; therefore in every Place of Scripture, where the word God is ascribed to
Christ, it must be so taken, and for the same reason. Now help me Logic, if
this be found Reasoning, and good Argumentation! The King of England is called
and acknowledged King of France by us here in England, therefore he is so in
France, Spain, Italy, and all the World over. Who is so dimsighted, as not to
perceive this egregious non-sequitur? But suppose, what cannot be granted, that
he called himself God for that reason, yet it is not expressed, that he calls
himself so for no greater; he might declare this, and conceal others at this
time, when the Jews were about to stone him, for ought our Adversaries can say
to the contrary. Nay, what if he does not at all alledg this Reason for his
calling of himself God? which indeed he does not, as will appear from the
consideration of the Context. The Jews, ver. 34. accuse him of Blasphemy, and
because, thou being a Man, make thy self a God. Our Savior answers to this
Accusation, The Scripture calls them Gods to whom the Word of God came;
therefore if I am sanctified or set apart by the Father, and sent into the
World to preach this Word, I am no Blasphemer, though I call my self God. It is
one thing to say, I call my self God, because the Father has sanctified me and
sent me into the World; and another to say, If I call my self God, for that
Reason I am no Blasphemer: for Christ does not here go about to show how he is
said to be God; but to answer their Accusation, and prove that he was no
Blasphemer, because he said he was the Son of God. So that the Sense of the
Words is clearly this, I am no Blasphemer by calling my self God, since being
sanctified by the Father, I spoke nothing contrary to Scripture, which calls
them Gods to whom the Word of God came.

And now I hope I have brought to the ground this high and mighty Objection,
having shown first, that the word God (which is supposed, not granted) be
attributed to Christ in the latter Signification, for him that has some
derivative Power from the most High God; yet in certain other Places of
Scripture (when attributed to him) it is taken for the God of Gods, or the most
High God.

2dly, If they mean (what is false) that in every Place of Scripture where the
word God is given to our Savior, it is taken only for him, who has some
derivative Power from the most High God; yet their Argument is not good,
because it concludes from one sole Particular, an universal Affirmative.

3dly, Because if he does give his Sanctification and Mission as a Reason of
his Deity; yet it cannot be said he called himself God for no greater Reason,
since it is not so expressed in the Text, and he might declare this, and
conceal others at this time, when the Jews were about to stone him, His Hour,
as he says elsewhere, being not then come.

4thly, and lastly; He does not say, he calls himself God for that Reason, but
says only that if he call himself God, for that Reason, he is no Blasphemer;
his Design being not to show how he was God, but to prove he was no Blasphemer.
So that I think now we may safely enough conclude, that he that sees the Son,
sees the Father; that Jesus is one in Essence with the Father, that he is the
most High God, the God of Israel.

There are yet two Difficulties, the Independency of Christ, and the Union of
the Divine and Humane Nature; both which I will briefly speak to, and so
conclude.

First then, say the Socinians, Christ is said in Scripture to be the Son of
God, and therefore (since the Divine Essence, which is infinite and most
perfect, cannot be multiplied without a Contradiction) Christ depends on the
Father as to his Essence, which is an Imperfection not suitable to the most
High God. In short, say they, Christ is dependent, therefore not the most High
God.

To this I answer, 1. That nothing can be said to depend upon another as to his
Essence, but what is in time after that which causes it; 2. That has an
Essence individually distinct from it; 3. Which is contingent as to its
Essence, or is in the Power of another to be, or not be. But nothing of this
can be said of Christ; for the Father and the Son are coeternal, nei-before or
after other; the Son has not an Essence distinct from the Father; neither is
the Son of God contingent as to his Essence: It is not in the Power of the
Father, that he be, or not be, since the Father naturally and necessarily
begets the Son. In a word, they have both the same Essence, and how the same
can be said to depend upon it self, is a manner of speaking I am not acquainted
with, and know not how to apprehend. Christ says, Rev. 1. I am the first and
the last; which Elogy the God of Israel, the most High God, appropriates to
himself, Isa. 48.12. Now I would fain know how the first Being can be said to
depend upon another for its Being. If our Adversaries say, as they do, that
these Words are not to be understood absolutely, but in reference to the Gospel
or Way of Salvation; then they contradict their own Principles, and take away
the Difference between the first and second Cause. They make the Son the first
Cause, and yet they say the Father is the first or prime Author of Salvation;
and so in reference to Salvation there is a first before a first, which implies
a Contradiction. I conclude therefore, that these words are to be understood of
Christ absolutely, viz. that he is the first, being the Cause of all things,
that he is Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and End, the first and the last;
which denotes not only his Eternity, but likewise his Independency; For how can
that which is before all things, be said to depend on any thing?

As to the Union of the Divine and Humane Nature into one Person, our
Adversaries thus argue; It Is impossible that two endued with opposite
Properties, should combine into one Person: Or, that two Natures, each whereof
is apt to constitute a several Person, should be united into one Person.

I answer, First, that is neither strange, impossible, nor, as our Adversaries
say, repugnant to sound Reason, that two Substances, endued with opposite
Properties, should combine into one Person: for the Soul is immortal, and the
Body mortal; yet these do so combine that they constitute one Person. Again,
the Soul is not only apt to constitute, but is really a Person, according to
the Platonist, (if a Person be a singular Substance endued with Reason) before
its Entrance into the Body; for if each Soul did subsist by it self many
thousand Years before its Body, it could not be said to be part of a Man before
it was united to the Body. And therefore a Nature which is not only apt, but
really constitutes a Person, may be united to another Nature, as that both
shall constitute one Person. There is no Necessity therefore in the
Hypostatical Union, that there should be two Persons, and so consequently two
Christ's; for as the reasonable Soul and Flesh is one Man, so God and Man is one
Christ.

And it is false, what our Adversaries say, that the Similitude holds not,
because according to us Christ is both God and Man; but Soul and Body are so
conjoined, that a Man is neither Soul nor Body, for he is both. Thus the
Scripture, speaking of Men and Women, says, So many Souls were added to the
Faith: And the common Speech is thus, is there any Body, or there is no Body,
meaning none of Mankind in such or such a Place. But if they will not, the
Platonists Pre-existence of Souls, which I, as Answerer, am not obliged to
prove, but they to disprove; yet according to the common Opinion, that two
Persons cannot combine, there is no Fear there should be two Persons in Christ;
for nothing can be said to be a Person, (as your own Definition of a Person
intimates by the word Individual) unless it actually exist: But the humane
Nature of Christ never existed, but in the second Person of the Trinity. It is
true if the humane Nature had been individuated, and subsisted of it self,
before it was united to the second Person of the Trinity, there might have been
some Show of an Objection; but this they know is not admitted. How then can
Christ be said to be more than one Person, since the Son of Man subsists only
in the Person of the Son of God? What hinders then that a Person may be so
united to another Person, which if it should subsist of it self, would be a
Person, that they both be one only Person, since the one subsists in the other,
and has no proper Subsistence of its own? But it will be sufficient in short
to say, Rem scimus, Modum nescimus; the thing we know, the manner we know not:
And it is no good Consequence, as I said before, to argue, you know not the
manner, you know not how the thing is, therefore it is not.

Let us therefore admire and adore that infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God,
which has revealed so much of that great Mystery to Mankind, which the
Prophets foretold, and the Angels themselves desired to peep into, viz. God
manifested in the Flesh; whereby he that sees Christ, sees the Father, sees
the invisible God, and approaches to that Light which is inaccessible. Would
you then see the Father? Is your Soul athirst for the living God? Do you breath
and pant after eternal Life? Why then do you any longer gaze and gape after
Vanity? Look upon Jefus, there is no seeing the Father, but by the Son: View
him in his Word, view him in his Works; in him dwells the Fullness of the
Godhead bodily: He only can show you the Father; He is the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; he only can give you the Ante-pasts of Eternity, and whilst you are
here upon Earth, make you touth Heaven with a Finger: And though now, as the
Apostle says, you can see him but as through a Glass, darkly; yet the time
will come when you shall see him as he is, Face to Face, encircled with all his
Rays of Glory. Again, would you see the Father? Does the Horror of your Sins
afright you, and the infinite Justice of an angry God terrify you? Have you
been bitten by the fiery Serpent, and would you see the Bowels of Mercy, and
the tender Compassions of a Father? Look upon Jesus, view him on the Cross; see
how he stretches forth his Arms to receive thee. How can thou now choose but
cry out with the Apostle, (...), O the Depth and Length and Breadth of the Love
of God in Christ Jesus! Behold him bleeding, there is Balsam in his Blood. The
Serpent upon the Pole of the Cross can cure all the venomous Stings of Satan,
that red Dragon, that fiery Serpent. Let not the infinite Justice of God any
longer terrify you: He that sees Jesus, sees also the Father of Mercies, the
God of Comfort and all Consolations. As there was infinite Punishment due, so
there is an infinite Satisfaction made; for he that sacrificed himself for us,
was both God and Man. By the Blood of God, says the Apostle, we are redeemed;
and Jesus is this God, for he is, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 9.5. over all,
God blessed for evermore. Amen.

To him therefore, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as most
due is, all Honor, Glory, Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, both now and
evermore. Amen.

Glory be to thee, O Lord.

FINIS.

