THE JUDGMENT OF THE FATHERS Concerning the Doctrine of the TRINITY; Opposed to
Dr. G. Bull's DEFENSE of the Nicene Faith. PART I. The Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, during the first 150 Years of Christianity; and the
Explication of the Unity of God (in a Trinity of Divine Persons) by some of the
following Fathers, considered.

London, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

The JVDGMENT of the Fathers concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity.
I. The Design of Dr. Bull's Book.
I Intend, in these Sheets, to examine Dr. Bull's Defense of the Nicene Faith:
I shall prescribe to my self, to be as brief as possible I can, and to deal
fairly and ingenuously.

What is the Pretense of his Book, he tells us at page 5 th and 6 th of his
Preface to it, in these Words; "To evince, that all the approved Doctors and
Fathers of the Church, from the very Age of the Apostles to the first Nicene
Council, agreed, in one common and self-same Faith, concerning the Divinity of
our Savior, with the said Nicene Council. A ridiculous Offer; for taking care,
as he does, to limit himself to the approved Doctors and Fathers; who is so
dull (does Mr. Bull think?) as not to understand, that no Father or Doctor
shall be allowed this (new and rare) Title of Doctor probatus, approved Doctor,
if Mr. Bull and he cannot accord about the Nicene Faith? What if an Arian or
Socinian should make the like (impertinent) Proposal, even to show that all the
approved Doctors and Fathers before the Nicene Council, did agree with Arius or
Socinus; would it not be laughed at? For would not the Reader reply immediately,
that this (insidious) word approved makes his Attempt to be of no use at all:
because he will be sure not to approve any Doctor or Father, who is not of the
Party of Socinus or Arius. Therefore if Dr. Bull would have spoke to the
purpose, he should have said simply; that all the Ante-nicene Fathers or
Doctors were of the same Mind with the Doctors and Fathers in the Nicene
Council, in the Question of our Savior's Divinity: this had come up to the
famous (...), or Rule of Orthodoxy and Truth, suggested first by Vincentius,
and approved by all Parties; quod ab omnibus, quod ubique, id demum Catholicum
est; i. e. that which all the Ancient Doctors have taught, and in all Places,
is Catholic and Fundamental. But Mr. Bull durst not pretend to all the Doctors
and Fathers before the Nicene Council; but only to certain approved. Fathers
and Writers among them, about 20 among upwards of 200. The Reason is evident;
he foresaw, that we should presently mind him of Theodotion, Symmachus, Paulus
Patriarch of Antioch, Theodorus of Byzantium, Apollonides, Hermophilus,
Lucianus; the Authors of the Apostolical Constitutions and of the Recognitions;
of Melito Bishop of Sardis, who published a Book with this Title, (...), of the
Creation and Birth of Christ: not to mention here the Nazarens or Ebionites,
who inhabited Judea, Galilee, Moab, the most part of Syria, and a great part of
Arabia; or the Mineans, who had their Synagogues or Churches (says St. Jerome,
Epist. ad August.) over all Asia; or the 15 first Bishops of Jerusalem.

As these were more in number, so they were vastly superior in Learning, to
Mr. Bull's approved Doctors and Fathers. For it was Theodotion and Symmachus,
who (distinctly) translated the Bible into Greek; so dexterously, that their
Translations, together with the Translations of the LXX and of Aquila, made the
(...) (or fourfold Translation) of Origin; which was the most useful, as well
as most celebrated (Theological) Work, of all Antiquity. It was Lucianus, who
restored the Bible of the LXX to its Purity. Of Theodorus or Theodotus, St.
Epiphanius (tho a great Opposer of the Unitarians) confesses, that he was
(...), very Learned. Paulus Patriarch and Archbishop of Antioch, was so elegant
a Preacher, that they always hummed, and clapped him: and tho two Councils of
the adverse Party, assembled at Antioch to deprive him, for the Truths he
maintained; the Antiochians despised these (seditious) Councils, who had
(riotously) combined against their Primate, and would by no means part with
Paulus. Of the whole Unitarian Party in general, it is noted in Eusebius, that
they were Learned in Logic, Natural Philosophy, Geometry, Physic, and the
other liberal Sciences: and it is there (ridiculously) impured to them as a
Fault, that they excelled in secular Learning; and (much more ridiculously)
that they were great Critics, and extremely curious in procuring correct
Copies of the Bible. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 28. They were perfectly qualified, to judge
of good Copies, and to correct faulty ones; by their accurate Knowledge of the
Hebrew Tongue: for St. Epiphanius (tho so much their back-Friend) assures us,
that they were Hebraicae Linguae scientissimi, great Masters in the Hebrew
Tongue. Epiph. Haeres. Naz. c. 7.

Furthermore, Dr. Bull appeals here to the approved Doctors and Fathers: but it
appears, that he would have it thought, that besides the 20 Fathers (or
thereabouts) whom he has cited; those Fathers also whose Works are (so
unhappily) lost, were no less Orthodox (as it is called) in this Question about
our Savior's Divinity. But the Critics, who have written sincerely and
impartially concerning the Fathers, are of opinion, that whereas there are now
lost about 200, for (some) 20 Ante-nicene Writers and Fathers who have been
preserved; we are to impute this Loss, to the Errors contained in their Books;
more plainly, to their too manifest Agreement with the Arian and Minean (now
called the Socinian) Heresies. The famous Critic H. Valesius, (whom Dr. Bull
sometimes commends, nay extols) in his first Note on Eusebius. l. 5. c. 11.
speaking of the Hypotyposes of St. Clemens; concerning which, Photius had
observed, that they are full of Arian Blasphemies, as that the Son is but a
Creature, and such like: I say, that by occasion of the said Hypotyposes,
Valesius makes this Note; Isti libri ob errores (quibus scatebant)
negligentius habiti, tandem perierunt; nec alia (meo judicio) causa est, cur
Papiae and Hegesippi (aliorumque veterum) libri interciderint. It Is undeniable,
that the Errors intended by Valesius, are the Seeds of Arianism and
Unitarianism, which so much abounded in the Hypotyposes of St. Clemens; and he
says thereupon, the because of these Errors, not only the Hypotyposes of
Clemens, but the Works of Hegesippus, Papias, and other Primitive (Ante-nicene)
Fathers, were first slighted, and then lost. Which is in effect to say, that
the visible Agreement of the ancient Fathers and Doctors with the Unitarians,
has been the Cause, that their Writings have miscarried, are either lost or
else destroyed; so that of above 200 Ante-nicene Writers, scarce 20 are left to
us, and those also very imperfect. Therefore, if it were indeed so, that Mr.
Bull's approved Doctors did really agree in their Faith about the Lord Christ,
with the Doctors or Fathers in the Nicene Council; as he undertakes to prove,
and thinks he has proved: yet his Performance amounts to no more but this; that
of the Writers or Fathers who preceded the Nicene Council, about 20 were for
the Divinity of our Savior, and more than 200 against it.

II. The Characters of the Fathers, and their Works; more particularly of St.
Barnabas, Hermas, and Ignatius.
WHEN a Man appeals to the Judgment and Authority of any sort of Writers; the
first thing to be considered, is, what is the Character of those Writers, and
their Writings: Were the Writers skilful in that sort of Learning, of which
they are called to be Judges? Are the Works or Writings that are imputed to
them, certainly genuine, really and undoubtedly theirs? If so; yet have they
not been corrupted, by (notorious) Additions, or Detractions; so that it is
questioned, by indifferent and impartial Persons, what was written by the
Author; and what by the Interpolator? Farther, whereas Dr. Bull's Book is
concerning the Faith of the Nicene Fathers, that it agreed perfectly with the
Faith of the Fathers who flourished and wrote before that Council; it will be
another necessary Question, what was the Faith of the Nicene Fathers, either
concerning the Divinity of our Savior, or concerning the (pretended) Trinity?
Lastly, Dr. Bull has indeed given us his Opinion concerning the Faith of the
Ante-nicene Fathers; but what say other (famous) Critics; who, tho they were
zealous Trinitarians, yet being more sincere and impartial, it may be, they
grant that the Doctrine of the Ante-nicene Writers of the Church, was no less
than diametrically contrary to the Nicene Faith, as well as to the Reform that
has been made of that Faith, by the Divines of the Schools. I shall resolve all
these Questions, in proper Places; at present, to the first Question.

What is the true Character of these Writers, to whom Dr. Bull has appealed? He
answers, concerning one, that he is doctissimus, most learned; of another, that
he is peritissimus, most able: and not to transcribe all his Flowers, on these
Fathers, he dubs them all, Doctores probati, approved Doctors; which is the
least he ever says of them. It is in some degree excusable, because it may be
imputed to his Zeal, or his Art; that he vends all his Geese for Swans: but
sure the very silliest Idolaters of his (weak) Book, will hardly approve of it;
that he divides even all the Divine Attributes too, among these his (supposed)
Friends. For one he calls sanctissimus, most holy; another is beatissimus, most
blessed; a third is optimus, most gracious; and a fourth, maximus, the most
high. There is hardly a Page of his Book, but you meet with one or more of
these Extravagancies: I suppose, he tarried longer at School than is ordinary;
and so being an old Declamer, he could never since speak but only in the
superlative Degree, no not when it borders on Blasphemy it self. But tho it is
true, that few (I believe, none but Dr. Bull) have spoke or thought of the
(remaining) Ante-nicene Fathers, at this wild rate: yet the Opinion that Men
generally have of these Authors, is, that they were certain most grave,
learned, sage, and experienced Divines; and called Fathers, not more for their
Antiquity, than for their profound Judgment, and perfect Knowledge, in all the
Parts of the Christian Religion. Because the Heads and Patrons of Sects, affect
to quote the Fathers; and, if possible, to fill their Margin with References to
Places in the Fathers: it is therefore almost universally supposed, that so
great Deference has not been paid to them, without most just Cause for it. It Is
in the Father, that the Papist finds the whole Doctrine of the Council of
Trent: in the Fathers, the Lutheran finds also his Articles; the Calvinist and
the Church of England, theirs. The very Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and
Antinomians, are now turned Father-mongers; and in the Fathers find their
Discipline and Doctrine, no less than their Opposers find also theirs. In
short, there is such a scuffling for the Fathers, by all Parties, that it is no
wonder, if Persons who have not themselves read 'em, have a very raised and
noble Idea of these Writers. But all the Glory of the Fathers (I speak of the
Ante-nicene Fathers, and except also Origin out of the Number) is wholly due to
the Vanity of modern learned Men; who quote these Books, not because indeed
they value them; but because being ancient Monuments, known to few, and
understood by fewer; he seems a great learned Man, who can drop Sentences out
of these antique Books. But let us begin, to see what indeed they were.

The first of the Fathers and their Writings, alleged by Dr. Bull, is an
Epistle (if it please Heaven) of St. Barnabas, the Apostle. I confess, that St.
Barnabas, the Evangelist and Coadjutor of St. Paul, is also honored with the
Title of an Apostle; Acts 14.4. but that he left behind him an Epistle, I shall
desire a better Proof than I have yet seen. What Dr. Bull says of him, is, "Our
most learned Hammond, and the most high Vossius believe, this Epistle was
written by St. Barnabas; chiefly for this Reason; because it is cited under the
Name of Barnabas, by Clemens Alexandrinue, Origin, and oath Ancients. Nor can
those of the adverse Party, alledg any thing to the contrary, but only this;
that the Author of this Epistle expounds too mystically some Passages of the
Old Testament.

No; no other Reason to be alleged, why this Epistle was not written by the
Evangelist Barnabas? Does he not know, that diverse Critics have observed, that
if the Ancients had really believed that St. Barnabas, the Companion,
Fellow-Evangelist, and Fellow-Apostle of St. Paul, had wrote this Epistle; they
would (undoubtedly) have reckoned it among the Canonical Books of Scripture, as
St. Paul's Epistles are. And has not Eusebius informed us, why this Epistle was
not counted Canonical; when he says: "Some Books are received as Holy
Scripture, by the common Consent of all; namely, the four Gospels, the Acts,
the Epistles of St. Paul, the first Epistle of St. John, the first of St.
Peter, and (if you will) the Revelation of St. John. some other Books are of
questioned and doubtful Authority, as the Epistles of James and Jude, the
second of St. Peter, the second and third of St. John: but these following are
counterfeit pieces, (...); the Acts of Paul, the Revelation of Peter, the
pretended Epistle of Barnabas, etc. these are Counterfeits. Dr. Bull may
consider at his leisure, of what Weight the Judgment of (his most learned)
Hammond and (the most high) Vossius may be, when put into the Scale against
Eusebius speaking (not his own, but) the Sense of the Primitive Church. And
when his Hand is in, let him tell us, what might be in the Mind of the
pretended Barnabas, as Eusebius calls him, to scandalize all the Apostles, by
saying; that before they were called to be Apostles, they were ((...)) the most
flagitious Men in the World. I am of opinion, we ought to answer, that it is not
to be wondered at, if a counterfeit Apostle belies the true ones. This
Crimination of the true Apostles is in the 5 th Chapter of the alleged Epistle.

The more learned and impartial Critics freely observe, concerning this
Epistle, that it is full of strained and dull Allegories, extravagant and
incongruous Explications of Scripture, and abundance of silly and notorious
Fables concerning Animals. And what all judicious Men think of the Epistle, is,
that it is indeed very ancient, being quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus and
Origin: but that it was forged about the beginning of the 2 d Century, or the 2
d Century being well advanced; when also the Gospels of St. Thomas, St. Peter,
St. Matthias, the Acts of St. Andrew, St. John, and other Apostles, were
devised and published, as Eusebiue witnesses, H. E. l. 3. c. 25. But lest this
Epistle should be thought to be of somewhat the more Credit, because it is
(barely) quoted by Clemens and Origin; the Reader may take notice, that Clemens
cites also other counterfeit Works of the Apostles, as particularly the
Revelation of St. Peter, as has been noted by Eusebius, H. E. l. 6. c. 14. And
nothing is more common with Origin, than to quote such supposititious Writings;
as (for Instance) the Book of Enoch, the Revelation of St. Paul, the Doctrine
of St. Peter, and many more; concerning which Citations the Reader may see what
Mr. du Pin has observed at large, Cent. 3. p. 113.

Dr. Bull's next approved Father is the great, either Prophet or Impostor,
Hermas; in his Book called the Pastor or Shepherd.

We grant, that St. Paul mentions one Hermas, Romans 16.14. and we doubt not,
that the Author of the Shepherd would be understood to be that Hormas, for he
makes himself contemporary with Clemens Romanus (mentioned also by St. Paul,
Phil. 4.3.) Vision 2 d. Chap. 4. The Shepherd of Hermas is distinguished into 3
Books; whereof the first contains 4 Visions, the second 12 Commands, the third
10 Similitudes: but both the Commands and Similitudes may be called Visions and
Prophecies; because they are Representations and Charges, made to him by
Angels. The Scene of these Visions is Arcadia; and that we may be assured, that
this Author would be taken for a Prophet, and would have his Book pass for a
Divine Revelation: he introduces the Angel (in his 2 d Vision, Chap. 4.) as
commanding him, that he should prepare 3 Copies of these Visions; one for
Clement then Bishop of Rome, to be sent by him to all the Churches; another for
Grapte, who should instruct out of it the Widows and their Children; the third
Hermas himself was to read to the Presbyters of the City of Rome. This is the
Book and Author, in which Dr. Bull finds (or thinks he finds) some Passages in
favor of our Savior's Divinity; as I said at first, we must carefully examine
what is the true Character of this Work and Writer.

By what has been said, it is evident to every one; that this (pretended)
Hermas either was a Prophet or an Impostor: there is no Middle between these
two, when the Person pretends to Visions, to Conferences with Angels, and such
like extraordinary things. That the (pretended) Hermas was not a Prophet, is
certain to me, by these Arguments. 1. He owns, in the third Command, that he
was a most egregious, and common Liar: he says expressly, that he scarce ever
spoke a true Word in his whole Life, but always lived in Dissimulation. and
that to all Men. He weeps hereupon; and doubts, whether he can be saved: but
his Angel assures him, that if for the time to come he will leave off his
Lying, he may attain to Blessedness. He that was so addicted to lying, it is no
wonder that he has counterfeited also Visions and Colloquies with Angels; or
that to gain Credit to his Chimeras and Follies, he fathered them on Hermas an
Apostolical Man and Friend of St. Paul, as others before him had laid their
spurious Offsprings to the Apostles themselves. But, 2. Some of his
(Celestial) Visions contain manifest Falsehoods; particularly, he makes his
Angel to tell him, that the whole World is made up of twelve Nations, Simil. 9.
Chap. 17. Being a Person altogether ignorant of secular Learning, as appears in
all his three Books, 'twas almost impossible, but that in his feigned
Conferences with Angels he should sometimes make them to speak diverse things
both false and absurd. 3. To add no more on this Trifler; he has been judged to
be no Prophet, by the whole Catholic Church, in that his Book is not reckoned
among the Canonical Books of Scripture: were it a real Revelation from God, by
the Ministry of Angels, as the Author pretends; and so esteemed by the
Catholic Church; it must have been put among the Canonical Books. It is true,
when it first appeared, it imposed on some Churches, by the Boldness of its
Pretense; and therefore was read in those Churches, as other genuine Parts of
Scripture were: but even then, very many of the more Judicious rejected it; and
as the Church began to fill with learned and able Persons, it was not only
every where laid aside, but censured as both false and foolish. Of so many of
the Ancients as condemned it, we need only take notice of Eusebius; who,
speaking of the Books used by Christians, whether privately or in public,
says; "Some Books are received by common Consent of all; others are of
questioned and doubtful Authority; and finally others are supposititious and
counterfeit, of which last kind (says he) are the Acts of Paul, the Revelation
of Peter, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the pretended Epistle of Barnabas. Eusebius.
H. E. l. 3. c. 25.

Dr. Bull's third Author is Ignatius: but neither is this Writer a whit better
or honester, than the pretended Barnabas, or the counterfeit Hermas. I do not
mean to deny, that we have still the Epistles that are quoted by the Ancients (
Origin and Eusebius) under the Name of Ignatius: but this I affirm, that they
were forged under Ignatius his Name, about the time that so many other
Impostures were published under the Names of Aposiles, and of Apostolical Men;
of which, the Learned know, there were almost an infinite Number.

Let us see, first, what the Critics of the contrary Persuasion, have to
alledg for the Epistles of Ignatius; we may hear Mr. Du Pin for them all,
because he has written last, and more largely than any other. He observes that
St. Polycarp, being thereto desired by the Philippians, sent them the Epistles
of Ignatius; to which he also prefixed an Epistle of his own, directed to the
same Philippians. Well, we acknowledge that Polycarp, writing to the
Philippians, tells them toward the Close of his Epistle, that he had sent them
(according to their Desire) the Epistles of Ignatius, that had by any means
come to his Knowledge or Hand. He adds, that in these Epistles, " Ignatius
treats of Faith and Patience, and all other things that tend to Edification in
Christ. But here, two Doubts arise. First, whether the Epistles that we now
have, were the same that are intended in the Epistle of Polycarp, or so much as
directed to the same Persons or Churches? The Reason of the doubt is, the
Epistles that we now have, treat of nothing less than Faith and Patience, nay
they treat not of Faith and Patience at all; much less (if it could be) are
they a Collection of all things that tend to Edification in Christ; they are
very far from being a kind of Summary of the Christian Doctrine, either in
Faith or Morals. They are Letters of Compliment and Respect, not of Instruction
or Exhortation. The other Doubt is, of what Authority and Credit is this
Epistle of Polycarp; on which the Credit of the Epistles of Ignatius wholly
depend? Mr. Du Pin answers; It is quoted by St. Ireneus. Supposing now, what
Mr. Du Pin has not proved, nor can prove; that the Epistle of Polycarp intended
by Ireneus, is (in part) that Epistle of Polycarp which we now have, because
both the one and the other are directed to the Philippians: I say, supposing
this; yet diverse learned Critics are of opinion, that the genuine Epistle
written by the true Polycarp, and which Ireneus intends, concludes with the 12
th Chapter; where he solemnly gives them his valedictory Blessing: so that the
following Chapters which speak of Ignatius his Epistles, and other Matters,
have (probably) been added by him (whoever he was) who contrived Epistles in
the Name of Ignatius. No, says Mr. du Pin, nor can that be; for Ireneus (who
praises that Epistle of Polycarp) quotes also certain Words, which are found in
the very Epistles of Ignatius. But I do not know that Ireneus quotes any
Epistle of Ignatius, or so much as names the Man; but only repeats a Saying of
a certain Christian Martyr, which Saying the Forger of the Epistles of Ignatius
thought fit to insert into those Epistles, which himself wrote in the Name and
Person of Ignatius. In short, I say, Eusebius, and before him Origin, owned the
present Epistles of Ignatius, because they considered the Matter but lightly;
as not being any way concerned to disprove them. And Ireneus (older than they)
quotes an Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians; as also (elsewhere) some
Words that are now found in an Epistle imputed to Ignatius: but supposing that
we now have that Epistle of Polycarp, yet it seems likely that the Epistle did
then conclude with the 12 th Chapter, without any mention of the Epistles of
Ignatius; and we cannot be assured that Ireneus quotes the Words of one of the
Epistles of Ignatius, rather than that the Forger of those Epistles borrowed
those Words from Ireneus.

If it be said; but why all this Suspiciousness? it will be hard to prove any
Matter of Fact, of remote Ages; if such close and strict Proofs be required. I
answer; there is too much Cause to start these Doubts and Suspicions. For we
have the Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians, as also the Epistles of
Ignatius, and the Martyrdoms of Ignatius and Polycarp, whereof the latter is
contained in an Epistle (pretended to be written) by the Church of Smyrna; with
this Advertisement at the end of them: "This Epistle (concerning the Martyrdom
of Polycarp) was transcribed by Cains, from the Copy of Ireneus, who was a
Disciple of Polycarp. And I Socrates transcribed it at Corinth, from the Copy
of Caius. -- After which, I Pionius wrote it from the Copy beforementioned,
having searched it out by the Revelation of Polycarp, who directed me to it;
having gathered these things together, now almost corrupted by Time, that Jesus
Christ may also gather me, together with his Elect ones.

Here then is an Epistle; namely, the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna,
concerning the Martyrdom of Polycarp; and as the Advertisement says, other
things that were almost corrupted through Process of Time; namely, a Relation of
the Martyrdom of Ignatius, and seven Epistles of Ignatius: all these
miraculously discovered to Pionius (the good) by Polycarp, after his Death. It
should seem, Polycarp could not rest, even in Rest; nor be blessed, in
Blessedness; till he had broke from the Abodes of Bliss, and appeared to
(honest) Pionius; to make known to him, where these Golden Remains were to be
found. If we should understand the Advertisement so, as saying that the Epistle
concerning Polycarp's Martyrdom came to Pionius by Revelation; and the other
Pieces and Epistles were collected by the proper Industry of Pionius: yet thus,
the whole Collection depends on the Credit of Pionius; who with most, I doubt,
has utterly ruined his Credit, as a Publisher of ancient Monuments, by his
Pretense that (at least) part of them are by Revelation. The Clowns will
certainly cry out, Away with Impostors: let Pionius take his Bandle to himself,
both his own Collection, and Polycarp's Revelation; for coming from him, we
must needs believe them to be true alike! Could not this Knave (will they say)
be content, to personate first the Church of Smyrna, in a most palpable
Fiction; then the Assistants at the Martyrdom of Ignatius, and finally Ignatius
himself; but he must seek too to confirm his counterfeit Wares by Revelations
from Heaven, by Visions and Apparitions of departed Saints? We demand
Authorities out of the Ancients concerning the (pretended) Divinity of our
Savior, from Writings and Monuments that are verified by some good humane
Testimony; our Opposers answer us out of Books, which some of their Fraternity
received by Apparitions, by Revelations from the Dead: but if once we allow of
such Proofs, what end will there be of Fictions? The departed Saints were first
called up, to bear witness to certain Epistles and Books: but in the next Age,
when the first Cheat had taken with many; they were made to witness to their
Bones and Relics, in order to their being inshrined and worshipped; this last
sort of Apparitions were every whit as true, as the first. They will prove,
they say, their (consubstantial coeternal) Trinity, not only from the
Antenicene Fathers; but from the Apostolical Fathers, that is the Fathers that
had Converse with the very Apostles, and flourished (some of them) to the Year
150: but when these Authors are produced, they are Barnabas the Apostle, the
Prophet Hermas, the Martyrdoms and Epistles of Polycarp and Ignatius; whereof
the two former (we have seen) are rejected as spurious by the Catholic Church,
the other are grounded on Visions and Apparitions to one Pionius. But let us
consider the Contents of these (precious) Pieces, the Pionian (...).

The Martyidom of Polycarp says, "That when the Fire began to blaze to a great
height; the Flame making an Arch, like the Sail of a Ship against a full Wind,
encompassed the Martyr's Body at a distance, without hurting it; while from his
Body proceeded a Smell, like to Frankincense, or some other rich Spices. The
first of these Miracles would make the Boys wonder, and shout; and was of no
farther Use: the other is yet more suspicious, for could not the Assistants
distinguish the Smell of Frankincense; no not from any other of the Oriental
Spices, tho both that and they were every day used (in those times) in their
Funeral Piles? But the Tale goes on; "When the Wicked saw, that the Martyr
could not be hurt by the Fire, they commanded the Executioner to stick his
Dagger into Polycarp, and so dispatch him: which the Hangman presently did; but
behold two other Miracles, and (believe me) as credible as either of the
former. For out of the Wound, which was in the Martyr's side, sprang a
Live-dove; and then, such a Torrent of Blood (out of the Body of an old Man,
upwards of 86 Years) as wholly extinguished all that great Fire. This Text
needs no Comment.

The Martyrdom of Ignatius affords another sort of Wonders, Apparitions and
Visions. For the Night in which he suffered, he appeared to the Christians, who
had assisted at his Martyrdom: to some, as one sweating after hard Labor; to
others, standing by the Lord, with much Assurance, and in unspeakable Glory;
but however, most courteously and lovingly embracing them all. It Is a Miracle,
to me, that he had not done sweating, now that he was arrived at Blessedness;
or do Souls (in their Etherial Vehicles) sweat? But it is a greater Miracle,
that appearing at Christ's right Hand in Heaven, he could at the same time
embrace (or seem to embrace) those upon Earth.

As to the Epistles of Ignatius, considering by whom they are said to be
written, and to whom; they are more mavelous than the Martyrdoms. Ignatius
was Bishop at Antioch, where he was condemned to Martyrdom by the Emperor
Trajan; but was sent to Rome, (guarded by ten Soldiers) to suffer there, in
the Amphitheater. In the Amphitheater the Condemned fought with Beasts, Lions,
Leopards, and such like, till one or the other were killed. And for this
Reason, they chose out of the Prisoners of War, and the Condemned, the most
robust young Men, that could make some Sport for the People, by the valiant
Resistance they made to the Beasts. Therefore here are two things very
incredible; that Ignatius, a decrepid old Man, for he had been a Bishop above
40 Years, should be condemned (contrary to Custom, and to the Intention of
those Sports) to fight the Lions. And next, that in order thereto, he should be
sent with ten Soldiers (lest he should master, and got away from four or five)
to guard him, above 1500 Miles. To what purpose should they be at so vasi a
Charge, especially when it had been more proper, and more effectual to their
purpose, to execute him in his own City of Antioch? The (pretended) Epistles
however suppose all this; they are written to diverse Churches, as the Old Man
passes from Antioch to Rome, to fight the Lions: and either these Epistles must
be granted to be forged, or we must admit these (extravagant incredible)
Suppositions. But the Epistles themselves more plainly discover the Imposture.

That to the Romans is chiefly, and almost wholly employed, in advising and
entreating the Christians of Rome, that they should not rescue him from the
Execution, but permit him to undergo his Sentence. The true Ignatius could
never write such an absurd thing. Was it ever heard of, that Christians
attempted to rescue their Martyrs; on the contrary, Martyrdom was reckoned (in
those days) the very highest Glory of a Christian: and it was the Endeavor of
Christians who assisted at Martyrdoms, to encourage the Martyrs, by all
possible ways, to suffer courageously; in short, they would as little have
rescued a Martyr, as they would have committed Sacrilege. Besides, were the
Number and Power of the Christians at Rome, in those early times, so
considerable, that they might reasonably attempt so bold an Action, as to
attack the Amphitheater, and the Imperial Guards, on behalf of a Prisoner?
Ignatius perfectly knew the contrary to all this; and therefore could not be
Author of an Epistle, which supposes these Follies.

The Epistle to the Ephesians is full of weak things. He tells them there, with
equal Silliness and Falsehood, that the Virginity of Mary, her Delivery, and the
Death of Christ, the three great Mysteries (says he) of the Gospel, were kept
concealed from the Devil; and done in secret by God. He adds, that the Star,
which appeared before our Savior's Nativity, did exceedingly outshine the Sun,
and all other Lights of Heaven. Pionius did not consider; that if so, it would
not have been called a Star, but another Sun: and that there would have been no
Night in Judea, till this Star disappeared.

But see, how they have made a dying Man, a Bishop and Saint of the first Age
of Christianity, complement with the Church of the Magnesians: "I have been
judged worthy to see you, by Damus, your most excellent Bishop; by your very
worthy Presbyters, Bassus and Apollonius; and by my Fellow Servants Socio, your
Deacon: In whom I rejoice, because he is subject to his Bishop as to the Grace
of God; and to the Presbytery, as to the Law of Christ. Who sees not, that this
is more like a Master of the Ceremonies, than an Apostolical Bishop, and a
primitive Martyr? In the same Epistle, he exhorts them not to observe the
Sabbaths: but it is certain that the Sabbaths were observed, together with the
Lord's Day, till after the Times of Great Constantine; it is not likely, the
true Ignatius would oppose the Custom and Practice of the Universal Church.

To the Trallians he says, that the Deacons are to be reverenced as Jesus
Christ; the Bishops, as God the Father; the Presbytery, as the College of
Apostles. A complicated Blasphemy! He tells them afterward, that their
particular Bishop is such, that his very Look is instructive. He that writes
thus of Bishops and Churchmen, must needs be an approved Doctor; but I dare
almost to give them my corporal Oath, he never was a Doctor of the first Age.

Writing to the Philippians, he forgets not (his usual and constant Custom) to
claw their Bishop. Your Bishop, says he, is able to do more by his Silence,
than others by their Speech. There are many Bishops still of this mind; but our
Savior's Motto was, My Sheep hear my Voice.

To the Smyrneans he says; "'It Is a good thing to be subject to God, and to the
Bishop. Then he salutes their very worthy Rishop; their venerable Presbytery;
your Deacons my Fellow Servants; the very excellent Daphnus and Eutychus.

The last Epistle is to Polycarp; and tho he writes to a Bishop, not to a
Church, he cannot forbear his (odious) Daubing. "He that thinks, says this
Pseudo-Martyr, that he knows more than his Bishop, is ruined: Hearken to the
Bishop, that God may hearken to you. In the Conclusion of this Epistle, as if
he were a Prophet, he says; my Grace be with Attalus, and with thee Polycarp. A
strain which, some will think, exceeds the Fullness of the Apostolical
Character; which this Impostor assumes in the Epistle to the Trallians: I
salute you, says he to the Trallians, in the Fullness of the Apostolical
Character. In short, no one can read these Epistles, with Judgment and
impartially, but he will see, what was the Aim of the Forger of them; namely,
under the venerable Authority and Name of Ignatius, to magnify the Reverence
and Respect belonging to Churchmen. This is the Beginning, Middle, and End of
all these Epistles; except only that to the Romans; where (to cover his Design,
and discover his Folly) he only advises the Christians, not to rescue him from
the Imperial Guards.

These are all the Apostolical Fathers and Writings, that our Opposers can
muster up, during the first 150 Years of Christianity; that is, to the Times,
when the Socinians (and all Protestants) confess, that the Faith began to be
actually corrupted. I have proved, that the Monuments they have to produce, are
unquestionably and incontestably counterfeit; and therefore I do not think my
self concerned, to examine the (few and impertinent) Passages, alleged out of
them by Dr. Bull: but before I proceed to his other approved Doctors, it is but
reasonable that I should have leave, to search what Authors and Books of these
times, of which we are speaking, favored the Unitarians; and particularly the
Socinians. The Question between Dr. Bull, and the Unitarians, is; what
(genuine) Monuments or Remains there are, of the Period which Church-Historians
have called the Apostolical Succession: that is, of the Time in which those
Doctors of the Church, who had conversed with the Apostles, and received the
pure Faith of the Gospel from their very Mouths, flourished? And whether those
Remains or Monuments do favor the Unitarians, or the Trinitarians; whether
they teach the Doctrine of one God, or of three? We have seen what Dr. Bull can
produce for their (pretended) Trinity; his Apostle Barnabas, the Prophet
Hermas; both of them rejected, as false and soolish, by the Catholic Church:
Next, the Revelations of Pionius; that is, the Martyrdoms of Polycarp and
Ignatius, and their Epistles, all which being almost perished and worn out by
Time, were revealed to Pionius by one from the Dead. It is true, our Opposers
having been so long Masters, have made use of their Power, to destroy and
abolish (as much as was possible) whatever Monuments of those first Times, that
(too notoriously) contradicted the Innovations in the Faith, that were made by
the Councils of Nice, Constantinople and Chalcedon: yet as there is no Battle
so bloody and cruel, but some (tho it may be a very few) have the good luck to
escape from the Massacre; so from this Persecution of Books and Writings, some
(illustrious) Testimonies and Witnesses to the Truth, are come down even to our
Times. These are, the Apostles Creed; an unquestioned Epistle, of St. Clemens
Romanus; the Accounts given (by unsuspected Historians) of the Nazarens or
Ebionites, the Mineans, and the Alogi, who all held as the Socinians now do,
concerning God and the Person of our Savior; the Recognitions of St. Clemens,
which tho (it may be) they are not rightly imputed to him, yet are a most
ancient Book, and serve to show what was the current Doctrine of those Times;
they are cited by Origin in diverse Places. by Eusebius, Aikanasins, and others.

Of the Apostles Creed.
COncerning the Apostles Creed, we must resolve two Questions: What it teaches;
and who were the Compilers of it? To the first, the Creed it self answers; "I
bel^eve in one God; so this Creed was anciently read both in the East and West;
"the Father, Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth. In these Words the Father is
charactered by these Names, Properties and Attributions; that he is God, the
one God, Almighty, and Maker of Heaven and Earth.

Concerning the Lord Christ, it says; "And in Jesus Christ, his only Son (Gr.
(...), only begotten Son) our Lord. So the Characters of our Savior, are; that
he is (not the one God, but) the only begotten Son of the only (or one) God,
and that he is our Lord. Our Lord he is, as he is our Savior, Teacher, and
Head of the Church both in Heaven and Earth. He is called the only begotten Son
of the only (or one) God, to distinguish him from all other Sons of God; from
Angels, who were (not begotten, but) created Sons; from Holy Men, who are
adopted Sons; and from Adam, who is called the Son of God, not because he was
generated or begotten, but made or formed by God himself immediately. Well, but
it may be this only-begotten Son of God, is an only-begotten Son in some higher
Sense; and namely, by eternal Generation, from the Substance or Essence of God;
whereby he is God, no less than the Father is God. But the Compilers of this
Creed knew nothing, or however have said nothing, of any such Generation: so
far from that, they describe his Generation, and his Person, by humane
Characters, and by such only. Every thing that they say here, either of his
Person or Generation, is not only humane; but inconsistent with Divinity. He
was conceived (say they) of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary; was
crucified, dead, and buried; he arose again from the Dead, ascended into
Heaven; sits on the right Hand of God, i. e. is next in Dignity to God. Our
very. Opposers confess, that every one of these is a Description of a mere
humane Person, and Generation: even they acknowledge, that God cannot be
conceived, be born, die, ascend; and least of all, be at God's right Hand, or
next to God: to be God and next to God, are wholly inconsistent.

There is no answering here; that the (beforementioned) are intended, only as
the Characters of our Savior's Humane Nature. For a Creed being an Institution
(or Instruction) what we are to believe in the main and sundamental Articles of
Religion; especially concerning the Persons of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit: if the first is described as the one (or only) God; and the Son, only
by Characters that speak him a mere Man, and are utterly incompatible with
Divinity; it remains, that the Compilers of the Creed, really intended, that we
should believe the Father is the one God; and the Son a mere Man, tho not a
common Man, because conceived (not of Man but) of the Holy Spirit, which is the
Power and Energy of God. If they had meant, or but known, that the Son and
Spirit are eternal and divine Persons, no less than the Father; they have done
to both of them the greatest (possible) Wrong: because in the same Creed in
which they declare, that they believe that the Father is the one God, Almighty,
and Maker of Heaven and Earth; they believe the Son was conceived, born, died,
descended into Hell, ascended into Heaven, is next to God, that is, they
believe he is a mere Man; and concerning the Spirit they believe no higher
thing, than of the Church, we believe in the Holy Spirit and in the Holy
Catholic Church. It is evident then, and incontestable by any fair and sincere
Considerer; that whoever made this Creed, either they did not know that any
other Person but the Father is God, or Almighty, or Maker of Heaven and Earth:
or they have negligently or wickedly concealed it. The Latter is a Supposition,
that none will make; therefore the other is the Truth of the Matter: and it
remains only, that we enquire, who were the Framers of this Creed?

The Creed that bears the Name of the Apostles Creed, was always reckoned both
by Fathers and Moderns, to be really composed by the Apostles; for a Rule of
Uniformity among themselves in their Preaching, and of Faith to all the
Converts: till about the middle of this present Age, G. J. Vossius published a
Book, wherein he denies, that either the Apostles, or the 120 Disciples (who
are mentioned Acts 1.15. and who assisted and voted with the Apostles in
public Matters) were Authors of this Creed. He thinks, it was only the Creed
of the particular Church of Rome; and that the Original of it was this. Because
it was the Custom to interrogate Persons that were to be baptized, whether they
believed in God the Father, in the Lord Christ the Son of God, and in the Holy
Ghost; in whose Names Baptism is administered: therefore in process of Time it
became a Form of Confession, for Persons who were admitted to Baptism, to say;
I believe in God the Father, in Jesus Christ his only-begotten Son, and in the
Holy Ghost. Afterward, some few more Words were added to these, as a fuller
Description both of the Father and Son: and as Heresies grew up, new Articles
were added to the Creed, in opposition to them; and to distinguish Catholics
from Heretics. Against all Heretics and Schismatics in general, this Article
was made; I believe in the Holy Catholic Church: against the Sects of the
Gnostics, this Article, I believe the Resurrection of the Body. This is the
Conjecture of Vossius.

Because it was so evident, that this Creed makes only the Father to be God;
and that it speaks of the Son, by only humane Characters, and says not the
least Word of the Divinity of the Holy Spirit: therefore this Book of Vossius
was received with a mighty Applause, among all the Denomiantions of
Trinitarians; Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, and all others. They saw
themselves delivered by this Book, from such an Allegation and Aughority
against the Doctrine of the Trinity; as was more than equivalent, to all their
(pretended) Proofs from the Fathers, or from the Holy Scriptures, For what are
all the Fathers, if indeed they were all of their side; when opposed by the
College of Apostles? And what are some incidental and very dubious Expressions,
of some particular Writer of Holy Scripture; against a Creed, composed by the
Concurrence and Consent of all the Apostles, and of their Senate (or Council)
the CXX? A Creed, in which they, not incidentally (in which case, Men often
speak loosly and incorrectly) but professedly and designedly declare, what is
the true Faith to be believed by all Christians concerning the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit. I say, for this Reason it is not to be much wondered, that Vossius
his Book was so kindly received; or that the Trinitarians, of whatsoever
Persuasion, have (generally) ever since followed the Conjecture of Vossius. If
now and then a learned Man has dissented from the new Opinion; he has always
been laughed out of Countenance by the Crowd of Pretenders to Learning. Vossius
says;

1. St. Luke, in his Acts of the Apostles, would never have omitted so
memorable a Transaction; as the compiling a Creed by all the Apostles, for a
Rule of Doctrine to themselves and their Successors in the Pastoral Office, and
of Faith to the Converts. He has set down many lesser Matters, the Election of
Matthias into the Apostolate of Judas; the Conclusion of the Apostles and
Elders, assembled in Council, concerning the Ritual and Judicial Parts of the
Mosaic Law; and even diverse petty Matters, relating only to private Persons:
and is it credible, that he should not say a Word of the Rule of Faith; of a
Creed, made by the joint Consent of all the Apostles, and intended for the
general and perpetual Use of both Pastors and People? But besides that this
Creed is never spoke of, in the Acts; none of the Apostles mention, or so much
as allude, or refer to it, in any of their Epistles: it is incredible, not to
say impossible, that there should not be so much as a hint given of this Creed,
in all the Apostolic Writings; if indeed it had been composed by the Apostles,
as their Joint Work, for the Use of the whole Catholic Church.

There are abundance of false Steps made, in this reasoning of Vossius. (1) It
is evident enough, that diverse most important Matters were ordained, by the
joint Council and Authority of the Apostles and the CXX, which yet St. Luke did
not think necessary to be inserted, into his History of the Preaching, Travels,
and Persecutions of the Apostles. The Institution of the Lord's Day, instead of
(or with) the Sabbath (or seventh Day) appointed by God himself in the 4 th
Commandment; the Form of Church Government, whether you will say by Bishops, or
by a Presbytery, or in the Independent Way; the solemn manner of ordaining the
Church-Pastors, by Imposition of Hands, and Prayer made for them; the
Love Feasts, the Holy Kiss: all these, every one will confess, are
Institutions, not of one Apostle, but of the College of Apostles and their
Council the CXX; and yet St. Luke has not told us, either when or by whom they
were ordained, but is as silent of their Institution by the Apostles, as of
their composing the Creed. (2) It Is not hard to guess at the Reason, why none
of these (great) Matters, or the compiling the Creed, are particularly recorded
in the Acts of the Apostles; namely, because they are not bare Memoirs, or
transient things; but such as were to be kept up, and perpetuated, by Example
and Practice. Every one sees, that the Lord's Day, the Form of Church-Polity or
Government, the Ordination of Church-Pastors, the Love Feasts, and the Holy
Kiss, are Institutions that needed not to be recorded: because the constant and
universal Practice of them, by the Apostles and the whole Church, was more
effectual to preserve them, than any Register or History would be. The like is
as evident, of the Creed; it was to be orally taught to every Convert, in every
Place, as the Mark of their Christianity: therefore being committed to so many
Witnesses and Memories, it was considered, not as a transient thing (of which
there was Danger that it might go into Oblivion, if not recorded) but as laid
up safely in the Minds and Memories of all the Faithful. Farther, it is an
Observation made by all Church-Historians, that the Ancients (of a long time)
purposely forbore to commit the Creed to Writing; partly, because they would
not expose the Mysteries of Religion, to the Contempt, Raileries and Opposition
of the Heathen: partly, to oblige their own People, to be more careful to learn
it exactly. To this purpose, they cite, among diverse others, the Testimony of
St. Jerome, Epist. ad Pam. "In the Creed, says St. Jerome there, which is not
written with Ink and Paper; but on the (fleshly) Tables of the Heart. (3) It is
not true, what Vossius adds, that the Apostles do not seem to allude or refer
to this Creed, in any of their Epistles. St. Paul says, Romans 6.17. Ye have
obeyed (from the Heart) the Form of sound Doctrine, which was delivered to you.
The (...), Exemplar (or Form) of Doctrine (here) cannot be better interpreted,
than of the common Creed.

It seems also to be meant, Romans 12.6. Let him that prophesies (or, preaches)
preach, (...), according to the Analogy (or, the Rule) of Faith. The Scriptures
of the New Testament not being yet written, the Christian's Rule of Faith could
be no other but the Creed; which (accordingly) by the most ancient Fathers is
expressly called Regula fidei, the Rule of Faith.

1 Timothy 6.20. O Timothy, keep, (...), the Depositum, (or, the thing committed
to thy Trust) and turn not aside. The Depositum or Trust, from which Timothy
might not turn aside, is (generally and very reasonably) understood by
Interpreters, to be the true Doctrine or Faith of the Gospel: but if so, it is
very probable, that the Apostle intended more particularly the Rule of Faith,
the Creed composed by all the Apostles.

2 Timothy 1.13. "Hold fast the Form of sound Words; which thou did hear of me;
Heb. 5.12. Whereas ye ought (for the time) to have been Teachers; ye have need,
that one teach you again the first Principles of the Doctrines (not, the
Oracles) of God; Heb. 6.1. Leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
let us go on to Perfection. Here the Form of sound Words, and the first
Principles, and again the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, are Expressions
so (most properly) applicable to the Creed; that it was too much Boldness (or
Inadvertence) in Vossius, to affirm directly, that there is no Allusion to the
Creed in all the Apostolic Writings: one may say, they not only allude, but
even point to it.

And what does St. Jude (so likely) mean, in these Words; Jude 3. "Earnestly
contend for the Faith, once delivered to the Saints: for there are certain Men
crope in, -- denying the only God; and our Lord Jesus Christ. It is highly
credible, that by the Faith delivered to the Saints, he means the Creed that
was given out by the Apostles, to all their Churches. And does he not refer to
the two first Articles of it, in these Words; for certain Men are crope in, who
deny the only (or one) God, and the Lord Jesus Christ?

2. Vossius his next Argument is yet more weak; nay, perfectly ridiculous. If
this Creed, says he, had been made (and so thought to be) by the Apostles; the
Church would never have presumed, to add any thing to it; and much less, to
take ought from it.

I know not what he means, by taking ought from it; it does not appear, that
any thing has been taken from it: it is still the same, for all that I know, or
have ever read, as at first. But they would not have added; by this he means
the Creeds of Nice, of Constantinople, and Chalcedon: by making of which
Creeds, it is manifest that diverse things were added to the first Creed, namely
the Creed of the Apostles. I answer, (1) The Fathers in these Councils excused
themselves, by pretending, their Creeds were only Explications of the ancient
Faith, or Creed. They professed, to keep close to the Old Faith; without adding
any thing to it: because they added not any new Articles; but only more largely
and fully explained the old ones. In short, they came off from this Exception
of Vossius; as they thought; by calling their Additions, by the Name of
Explications and Declarations, not of Additions. But (2) If they had directly
said; that they thought fit to enlarge the Creed made by the Apostles, by some
other Doctrines taken from the New Testament: I do not think, that this is the
worst thing, of the kind, that Mother Church ever did. It Is known to all the
World, that she has added to, and taken away, from the Sacraments and the
Scriptures: therefore it is, no such great wonder, if also she turned her own
Doctrines into Creeds; and mingled her Articles, with the Articles of the
Apostles.

From the Sacrament of the Supper, she has taken away the Cup; and in the same
Sacrament has changed unleavened Bread into leavened. The Sacrament of Baptism
she has wholly changed, turning it into the mimical Rite of sprinkling; and
also added the Cross, to that (false) Baptism which she administers.

As for the Scriptures, all learned Critics (even of the Trinitarian
Persuasion) agree, that abundance of Words, and some whole Texts have been
added. It Is uncontestable, that they have added; there are three that bear
Record in Heaven, the Father, the WORD, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one. It was expressly denied at the first Council of Nice it self, that the
Apostle Paul said, Great is the Mystery of Godliness, GOD was manifested in the
Flesh; but, which (which Mystery) was manifested, by Flesh; namely, by the Lord
Christ, and the Apostles. And to omit many other (certain and yielded)
Depravations of Scripture, both by adding and omitting: there are shrewd
Presumptions, that to the Institution of Baptism, by our Savior, in the Gospel
of St. Matthew; these Words have been added, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. It appears in the Acts, and Epistles of the
Apostles, that the Apostles never baptized in that Form of Words, but only in
the Name of the Lord Jesus. But we need no more but the Testimony of one of
their own Historians, St. Epiphanius; concerning the Fidelity of the Church (as
the prevailing Party always calls it self) in preserving pure and entire the
Oracles of God. Epiphanius owns in direct terms, that the Orthodox put out of
their Bibles some Passages of Scripture, which they liked not: and the Bibles
of his time, that had not been so used, this good Father (roundly) calls them,
the Bibles that have not been rectified. Ancor. n. 31.

3. Vossius says farther, that none of the Ecclesiastical Historians, tho they
have set down the Creeds made in Councils, have recorded the Creed of the
Apostles: thus Socrates and others register not only the Creeds made in
legitimate Councils, but even those by the Arian Councils; but they have not a
Word of the Apostles Creed. To this, I say, 1. Socrates, and the Historians
that follow him, begin their Histories (at soonest) no higher, than the
Conversion of Great Constantine to the Christian Faith. Therefore it is no
wonder, that tho they record the Creeds in order, as they were composed by the
Councils that assembled under Great Constantine, and his Successors: yet they
say nothing of the Apostles Creed, which belonged to a Period 300 Years older
than the times of which those Historians write. 2. Vossius has not asked; why
Eusebius, the oldest of the Ecclesiastical Historians, and who begins his
History from the very first, has not mentioned or recited the Apostles Creed;
because he foresaw, it would be answered; that Eusebius was a thorow-paced
Arian, a great Opposer of Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra (against whom also he
particularly wrote) who held the Doctrine that the Socinians now do; therefore
perceiving that the Apostles Creed was as much against the Arians as the
Homo-ousians, and that it wholly favored Marcellus, he forbore to take notice
of it in his History. I shall grant, that Eusebius was a most learned
Historian, and that we are extremely in his debt, for the Collection of ancient
Monuments and Memoirs he has left to us: but I could give, and hereafter shall
give, diverse Instances, of his designed suppressing whatsoever of Antiquity,
that favored the Nazarene and Minean (or as we now speak, the Socinian)
Doctrine.

4. The last Argument of Vossius, is propounded by (the present famous)
Monsieur du Pin (in his Eccl. Hist. c. 1. p. 9.) in more advantageous Terms and
Manner than by Vossius: I will therefore examine it, as Mr. du Pin has offered
it. He says, that it is an Opinion established on very good Grounds, that this
Creed was made by the Apostles: but that they wrote, or dictated it, word for
word, just as we now have it; he thinks is very improbable. He chose to
propound his Opinion, after this fallacious manner, that he might not be talked
of (it may be, be censured by his Superiors) for maintaining in terminis an
Opinion, which might be judged to be heretical. For in very deed, Mr. du Pin
does not only not believe, that the Apostles wrote this Creed word for word, as
we now have it; but he thinks, they were not Authors of it at all, in any
Sense; according to him, the Apostles neither made, nor designed to make a
Creed. He says indeed, that it is an Opinion established on very good Grounds,
that the Apostles made this Creed; and the Proposition he undertakes to prove,
is only this, that the Apostles did not write this Creed word for word, just as
we now have it: but his Arguments (which are the same with those of Vossius)
aim at this; that the Apostles neither wrote, nor intended to write any Creed
at all. I have already considered all his Arguments, but only the last; which
both he and Vossius (seem to) suppose, to be the strongest: in truth, it is the
weakest, as being made up of Accounts that are (too notoriously) false; it is
this.

If the Apostles had made a Creed, says Mr. du Pin, it would have been found
the same in all Churches, of all Ages: all Christians would have learnt it by
Heart; all Churches, and all Writers, would have repreated it, in the same
manner and in the same terms. But the contrary is evident, for not only in the
2 d and 3 d Centuries, but in the 4 th also there were many Creeds; and all,
tho the same as to Doctrine, yet different in the Expression. In the 2 d and 3
d Ages we find as many Creeds as Authors: which shows that there was not then
any Creed that was reputed to be the Apostles; or even any regulated or
established Form of Faith. For Ireneus exhibits one Creed, lib. 1. c. 2. and
another, lib. 1. c. 19. Tertullian makes use of three several Creeds, in his
Books de Praescriptione, contra Praxeam, and de Virgin. velandis. See also
Origin peri Archon, lib. 1. and Dial. contr. Marc. Ruffinus in the 4 th Age,
compares three ancient Creeds, of Aquileia, Rome, and the Orient; none of which
agree perfectly with the common one, nor with one another: as will appear
(says he) by the Table, containing the 4 Creeds, at the End of this Discourse.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem (in his Catechetick Lectures) gives us a particular
Creed, used by the Church of Jerusalem, when this Father wrote. The Authors
also that have explained the Creed, as St. Austin, Sermon. 119. St. Maximus,
Chrysologus, Fortunatus, omit some Expressions that are found in the Apostles
Creed as we now have it; as the Life everlasting: and St. Jerome says, that the
Apostles Creed concludes with the Resurrection of the Body; but now it
concludes with the Life everlasting. Lastly, he says, that Ruffinus is the
first, and only Person of the 5 th Century, who asserts that the Creed was
composed by the Apostles; and he proposes his Opinion, only as a Matter that
depended on popular Tradition: the other Authors that are of this Opinion, he
says, took it up on the Credit of Ruffinus; and are too late in time, to be
admitted as Witnesses in this Question, about the Authors of the Creed called
the Apostles.

Never was there less Truth, in so many Words; I shall therefore discuss very
particularly, all that he has said. He says; (1) If the Apostles had made a
Creed, all Churches and all Writers would have repeated it, in the same Manner
and Terms. That all Churches repeated it in the same Terms and Manner, we
affirm; nor will Mr. du Pin ever prove the contrary. That all Writers should
repeat it in the same Manner and Terms, is a childish Supposition: for
sometimes they have occasion to repeat but part of it; sometimes they repeat it
Paraphrastically, thereby to put on it their own Interpretation. Therefore it is
but weakly urged by Mr. du Pin, that Ireneus gives us two Creeds, Tertullian
three, Origin yet another: for of these Writers, Tertullian (de Virgin.
veland.) designed to repeat but only a part of the Creed; the same Tertullian
(de Praescript. and contr. Prax.) as also Ireneus and Origin repeat the Creed
Paraphrastically or Exegetically, that their Reader might take it in their
Sense. It Is to no purpose, that Mr. du Pin urges the Creed in St. Cyrill, used
in the Church of Jerusalem; for no Body denies that after the Council of Nice
(that is, after the Year 325.) the Nicene Creed, and the Creeds made in
imitation of that, were explained in many Places to the Youth and Catechumens,
instead of the Apostles Creed; that People might be infected betimes, with that
Insidelity which the Nicene Council had established and published.

But whereas he has given us a Table of 4 Creeds; namely, the Vulgar, the
Aquileian, that of Rome, and that of the Orient: We ought to thank him, for
(implicitly) giving up the Question to us. The Reader is to know, that by the
Orient (in the Age of Ruffinus, from whom Mr. du Pin takes the Aquileian, Roman
and Oriental Creeds) was meant the Eastern Part of the Roman Empire; namely,
all the Provinces, that spoke the Greek Tongue; which is to say, all Illyricum
and Grecia, the Kingdoms and Provinces of Asia, the Provinces and Kingdoms of
Syria, as far as the Euphrates and Tigris, Egypt, the Islands in the
Archipelago, Adriatic and Ionian Seas; all these (being the better Moiety of
the Roman Empire) were called the Orient. The Church of Rome, tho she was not
(as she now calls her self) the Mistress; yet being the Patriarchal Chair of
all the West, she was the Example of the Churches of the West Part of the
Empire. I affirm now, that these two Creeds, as also that of Aquileia,
perfectly agree with the Vulgar; by which he means the Apostles Creed as we now
have it. Mr. du Pin's Table, which we confess to be exact enough, will show us
no Difference, but what will confirm every intelligent Reader, that without
peradventure they are all but one Creed, made by the same Author or
Joint-Authors. There is more Difference between the ten Commandments, as
recited by Moses at Exodus 20. and as repeated again by the same Moses at Deuteronomy.
5. than between these Creeds: Mr. du Pin will sooner persuade a prudent Reader
that the 10 Commandments in Deuteronomy were not the Commandments spoke on
Mount Sinai, and recorded Exodus 20. than that the 4 Creeds in his Table are not
the same, or came not from the same Hands.

The whole Difference of the 4 Creeds consists in these (unsignificant) Words
and Expressions. The Oriental Creed said, I believe in one God, the Father,
Almighty, Invisible and Impassible. The Roman, I believe in God the Father
Almighty: and the Aquileian said; I believe in one God, the Father, Almighty:
the present (or Vulgar) Creed adds, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

The Roman, and Aquileian, and Present, say; And in Jesus Christ his only Son
our Lord: the Oriental transposes the word only, thus; and in our only Lord
Jesus Christ, his Son.

The Oriental, Roman and Aquileian said; who was born of the Holy Ghost and of
the Virgin Mary: the Present, by way of Explication; who was conceived of the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

The Oriental and Roman said; was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and was
buried: the Aquileian, crucified under Pontius Pilate, buried, descended into
Hell: the Present, crucified under Pontius Pilate, dead, buried, descended into
Hell. But descendit ad inferos, he descended to those below, or as we render it
into Hell, is confessed on all Hands to be an accidental Addition in the Creed
of Aquileia; and from that Creed was taken into the Present Creed, on this
Occasion. In some Churches it was said, was buried; in others, went to those
below; which (every one sees) are equivalent Expressions, and intended to
signify the same thing: but the Church of Aquileia desiring that her Creed
should be most full and complete, took in both the Expressions; tho at the same
time (as Ruffinus, who was of Aquileia, acknowledges) she meant no more by
both, than other Churches by the single word buried. And hence it was, that the
other Churches and Copies of the Creed, which said descended into Hell (or
descended to those below) did omit buried: and so, at this day, does the
Athanasian Creed. But it was not long before this Variety of expressing the
same thing, begat Mistakes: for by occasion of this Expression descended to
those below, diverse began to imagine a local Descent of Christ into Hell. Some
of them said, to triumph over the Devil; others said, to release those Damned
who believed and repented at the sight of him; others had still other (as
ungrounded) Conceits. But the Disputes about the Reasons of our Savior's
Descent to those below, made the Article (taken in general) to be believed; and
therefore it was added at last to the Roman Creed, which with this and some
other Alterations, makes the Vulgar or Present Creed.

All the Creeds say; the third Day he arose again from the Dead.

The Oriental, Roman and Aquileian said; he ascended into Heaven, sits on
the right Hand of God, the Father: the present, to the word Father, adds the
word Almighty.

They all said; from thence he shall come, to judge the quick and the dead. The
Oriental, Roman and Aquilean said; And in the Holy Ghost: the Present, more
explicitly, I believe in the Holy Ghost. The Oriental, Roman and Aquileian
said; I believe the Holy Church, the Communion of Saints: the Present to the
word Church, adds the word Catholic or Universal.

All the Creeds said; the Forgiveness of Sins.

In like manner, they all said; the Resurrection of the Body; saving that the
Aquileian said, of this Body.

The Present concludes with the Life everlasting: the other three mention not
the Life everlasting; because it is supposed and included in the foregoing
Article, the Resurrection of the Body.

I say now, let any one read the ten Commandments at Exodus 20. and compare them
with the same ten Commandments at Deuteronomy. 5. and he will perceive, that he may
better deny them to be the same Commandments, than that these four various
Copies are Copies of the same Creed. The Variations of the 4 Copies are so
inconsiderable, the Causes of that Variation so obvious and evident, that he
that will call them, not various Readings of the same Creed, but 4 several
Creeds proceeding from so many several Compilers, in my opinion ought (if
obstinate in his Error) to take Physic. But if these are only various Readings
of the same Creed, without doubt we have gained our Point, that the Apostles
were the Authors of it. For I desire to know, how it was (morally) possible,
that the East and West; which is to say, all the Churches of Christendom,
should in all Kingdoms, Provinces and Episcopates, happen to have the very same
Creed, both for Number and Order of Articles, and Manner of Expression; if they
did not receive it from the very same Persons, from whom they received the
Gospel and the Scriptures, namely from the Apostles and other first
Missionaries and Preachers of the Heavenly Doctrine? It is granted to us, that
there had been no General Council, when this Creed (as we have made it appear)
was the common and only Creed both of the West and Orient: therefore when all
the Fathers (without excepting any) that speak of this Creed, tell us, they
have received ex traditione Majorum (by Tradition of their Predecessors) that
this Creed was made by the Apostles; they give us such an Account as justifies
and proves its own Truth; for no other Cause can be thought of, how it should
become the common and only Creed of Christians.

(2) Mr. du Pin says; Ruffinus (in the 5 th Century) is the first Person, who
asserts that this Creed was composed by the Apostles; and that too from popular
Tradition: indeed a great many other Fathers say the same thing; but they all
had it from Ruffinus. First, Mr. du Pin reckons Ruffinus to the 5 th Century;
only to lessen his Authority and Credit in this Question: for it is certain,
(and acknowledged by Dr. Cave, and afterward by Mr. du Pin) that Ruffinus
flourished at Aquileia in the Year 360. at which Time and Place he had a great
Friendship and Intimacy with St. Jerome. It is true, because he lived to be old,
he saw the Year of Christ 410 or 411. and from hence Mr. du Pin has taken
occasion, to call him a Father of the 5 th Century. Ruffinus being the first of
the Fathers, that ever wrote an Exposition on the Creed; I mean, the first of
those now extant: it is no wonder that he is also the first that expressly
informs us, who were the Authors of it; tho if he had not told us, who were the
Compilers, the Universality and Antiquity of it, are alone sufficient to
declare the Authors and Compilers. Nor does he say, that he had learned who
were the Framers of the Creed, by popular Report; but tradunt rajores nostri,
our Predecessors (in the sacred Function) have so delivered to us. Which is not
to be understood neither, of bare oral Tradition by the preceding Bishops and
Presbyters; but of the ancient Writers who had commented on the Creed, who (be
says) were very many. None of them are come down to our Times; but of the
Number was Photinus, Archbishop of Sirmium and Metropolitan of Illyricum, who
held as the Socinians now do, that the Lord Christ was a Prophet, not God.
Whereas Mr. du Pin adds, that all the other Fathers (whom he confesses to be
very many, he should have said, All that mention this Creed) took it on the
Credit of Ruffinus, that the Apostles were the Compilers of it: it is rashly
said, None of them quote Ruffinus for their Author; and diverse of them
(particularly St. Austin) alledg (as Ruffinus does) Tradition for their Ground;
which, as I said before, was not only Oral Tradition, but the Tradition of the
ancient Commentators. And when this Critic urges, in the last Place, that St.
Austin, Maximus, and some others, who have expounded the Creed after Ruffinus,
omit diverse Words, nay and Expressions, that are found in the Creed as we now
have it; why has he concealed, that the Words or Expressions omitted by these
Expositors, are only such, as they supposed to be included in other equivalent
Expressions of the Creed? Tho it might also sometimes happen, that they did not
intend, to explain the whole Creed. verbatim, but only the principal Words and
Articles; namely, such as either were controverted by Heretics, particularly
by the Ghosticks and Manichees, or were misunderstood by Heretical Persons. His
Instance of the Life everlasting, omitted by Expositors, will do him no
Service: for it is not an Article (no more than dead, or gone to those below are
Articles) but only an Illustration or fuller Explication of the Article
foregoing, the Resurrection of the Dead.

These are the Arguments of these two very learned Critics (I willingly
acknowledge them to be such) Vossius and Monsieur du Pin, against the Apostles
Creed: I have (I think) not only fully satisfied them; but at the same time
defended our Arguments, for it, against their Evasions. For whereas to our
Argument, from the Testimony of all the Fathers who have ever spoke of this
Creed; and especially of Ruffinus, a most learned and judicious Father,
equalled by Mr. du Pin to St. Jerome; they reply, that Ruffinus was but of the 5
th Age, and spoke only from popular Hearsay, and that all the other Fathers
took it from him: I have shown, that these are partly untrue, partly rash and
ungrounded Affirmations. And whereas to what we alledg from the (confessed)
Antiquity, and the Universality of this Creed; they answer, the Creeds of the
Orient and West were different: I have evinced, that the (pretended)
Differences are apparently only the various Readings of one and the same Creed;
the very Commandments are (much) more differently related by Moses himself,
than the Apostolic Creed by the Churches.

Of St. Clemens.
OF the Monuments and Remains of the Apostolic Age, next to the Apostles
Creed, is the Epistle of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians. This is that
Clemens, of whom St. Paul makes respectful Mention, Phil. 4.3. He has written
an Epistle, in the Name and by the Order of the Church of Rome, to the Church
of Corinth. All the Critics on the Fathers, when they speak of this Epistle,
without an Eye to the Trinitarian Controversies, own, not only that it is
unquestionably genuine, but that it is a most pious, most judicious, and an
elegant Composition: Mr. du Pin very truly adds; "One may discern in this
Writer, a great deal of Energy and Vigor, accompanied with much Prudence,
Gentleness, Zeal and Charity. But when they consider the Doctrine of it, with
regard to the Trinity, and the Person of our Savior, the ablest and antientest
(and particularly great Photius, the most judicious Censor of the Fathers, and
himself a Father) cannot mention it, without Tears in their Eyes. Besides
Photius, Petavius and Huetius (famous modern Critics) sigh it out, that
Clemens was an undoubted Unitarian; and the occasion of this Judgment is,
because of the low and merely humane Characters, which (throughout this
Epistle, even where he affects to speak of our Savior in the highest manner)
he gives of our Savior's Person and Dignity. But I shall be more particular,
than they have been, in referring to the Passages of this Epistle; which have
so grieved the Trinitarian Critics.

First, he always distinguishes the Lord Christ from God; and often so
distinguishes him, that it amounts to a flat and direct Denial, that he is God.

The Apostles, says he, chapter 42. have preached to us, from our Lord Jesus
Christ; and the Lord Christ from God. The Lord Christ then, according to St.
Clement, was not himself God; but one that has preached to us from God, as the
Apostles preached from Christ.

At chap. 58. he has these (deciding) Words; "God the Inspector of all things,
the Father of Spirits, the Lord of all Flesh; who has chosen our Lord Jesus
Christ, and us by him; grant to you Peace, Long-suffering, Patience, through
our High Priest and Protector Jesus Christ: by whom be Glory, and Honor, and
Majesty unto God, now and for evermore. What a Socinian Account is here, of our
Savior? He is, says St. Clement, the chosen of God, as we also are; our High
Priest and Protector, by his effectual Prayers and Intercession for us: and let
Honor, Glory and Majesty, be given to God, by him, now and for ever. Did he
think the Person, of whom he so speaks, was himself God?

But when he intends to say a very high thing, of our Savior; he calls him (at
chapter 16.) the Scepter of the Majesty of God. He alludes here to the Scepter of
King Ahasuerus, which he stretched out to Queen Esther, in token of his
Acceptance and Favor. The Lord Christ therefore, in the Doctrine of this
Father, differs just so from God; as the Ensigns and Marks of Power and
Majesty, differ from that Majesty and Power of which they are only the Marks
and Signs.

But besides these diminutive Expressions, and absolutely inconsistent with our
Savior's being God; I observe, that when he endeavors most of all (at chapter
36.) to extol the real Greatness of our Savior, he minds the Corinthians, that
by him our Hearts and Understandings are enlightened and opened; meaning, by his
Doctrine and Gospel; and that he is exalted above the Angels: to which purpose
he cites diverse Expressions of the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
But tho he there goes over that whole Chapter, for the highest Epithets he
might give to our Savior, he omits the 8 th, 9 th, 10 th, 11 th and 12 th
Verses; in which the Title God is bestowed on him, and the Creation of the
Heavens and Earth is (thought at least to be) ascribed to him. This makes me
doubt, that those Verses were not originally in that Epistle; but have been
since added. St. Clement endeavors there, to ascribe to our Savior all the
most glorious Prerogatives and Pre-eminencies, that (with Truth) he could; he
himself says diverse magnificent things of him: he begins also at the first
Verses of that first Chapter to the Hebrews, goes through the whole Chapter, and
concludes with the last Verses of it; and yet neither calls him God, nor
imputes to him the Creation of Heaven and Earth; nay, of that whole Chapter he
omits only those five Verses which so speak of him, tho they were most of all
to Clement's Design and Aim. It is true, that in those Verses our Savior is
called God in no other Sense, than Solomon was so called; for the Author uses
the very Words that the Psalmist had used of Solomon; and the Heavens and Earth
there meant, are only the New Heavens and Earth foretold by the Prophets, even
the Gospel-Oeconomy and State: yet these Characters of our Savior are so
noble, were so highly to Clement's Purpose and Design, and it was so impossible
for him (who went through the whole Chapter) to overlook them, that I cannot
believe these Verses were then a part of the Epistle to the Hebrews, but (as
many other Passages, both in the Gospels and Epistles) have been fraudulently
added. Or it may be, they were at first a marginal Note, by some Copier; and
being taken by succeeding Copiers as Words that had been overseen, and not as a
Note or Annotation, were by them put into the Text it self of the Epistle. This
Corruption might the more easily happen, without being opposed by any; because
it was a long time (near, if not full 400 Years) before this Epistle was owned
as a genuine part of Scripture, any where in the West, or in many Churches of
the Orient. That which makes this Conjecture (that these Verses have been added
to the Epistle to the Hebrews) still more probable, is, that those Ancients who
owned this Epistle as written by St. Paul, said, it was originally wrote by him
in the Hebrew Tongue, and translated into Greek (as we now have it) by St.
Clement, Eusebius. H. E. l. 6. c. 3. Theophylact. Com. in C. 1. Epist. ad Hebr.
But if so; how can we think, that Clement should omit what was most for his
Design, in an Epistle which himself had translated, and therefore was perfectly
acquainted with it; and in a Chapter too, out of which he had cited so many
Passages, that were much less to his purpose? The short is, St. Clement
describes our Savior, as the High Priest of the Priests of the New Testament:
and when he had the fittest Occasion, and the greatest Opportunity, from an
Epistle of St. Paul, which himself had translated into Greek, to call our
Savior God and Creator, he calls him neither; but only our High Priest, as St.
Paul does throughout that Epistle. From whence, I say, we have these 2 (very
probable) Consectaries; that neither did St. Clement think our Savior to be
God or Creator, in any Sense of those Words; nor were those 5 Verses of that
Epistle of St. Paul, wherein Christ is so styled, originally in that Epistle,
but have been since added.

And hitherto of the Judgment of St. Clement. For tho something might be added
out of a second Epistle, which also bears the Name of St. Clement, I shall omit
it; partly, because the Epistle is rejected as counterfeit, by the most Learned
of the Ancients, Eusebius, St. Jerome, and Photius: partly because the Meanness
of the Style, the Dryness and Flatness of the Thoughts, and the Inelegance of
the Composition, most plainly discover, that it was none of St. Clement's.
Eusebius adds, that the Ancients never alledg or cite the (pretended) second
Epistle of Clement. Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 38.

As to what Dr. Bull quotes out of the first Epistle, and endeavors to improve
by paraphrasing (that is, by wresting) it; it is so trivial, as well as so
remote, that I shall trust the Judgment of any (the meanest) Reader with it:
but out of the 2 d (counterfeit) Epistle, he has abused his Reader with a
broken Citation, which may seem to his purpose, when indeed it is not. The
Words are these, being the very first Words of the Epistle; "We ought
(Brethren) to think of Christ, as of God. It was knavishly done, to omit the
next Words, which were designed by the Author, to explain these: "We ought,
says this Pseudo-Clemens, to think of Christ as of God; as the Judge both of the
Dead and Living. His Meaning therefore was; We ought (Brethren) to think of
Christ, as we do of God; namely, that he also is our Judge. He himself has
taught us, that God has committed to him all Judgment, John 5.22. And why;
because he is God? No, but because he is Man: for so himself adds in that very
Context; God has given to him to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of
Man, John 5.27.

Out of the 9 th Chapter of the same Imposture, Dr. Bull alleges; Jesus Christ
being first a Spirit, was made Flesh. He should not have left out the following
Words; so also shall we, in the Flesh, receive our Reward. In both the
Expressions he seems to design, that the Souls of Men being first created, are
afterward infused into Bodies. They are not the Harmony of the Body, nor
derived ex traduce; but first really made and existent, and then incarnated by
the Divine Power. But it is Dr. Bull's constant Method, to omit what goes
before or after; by which his Author's Intention may be cleared: or to feign
(by occasion of some ambiguous preceding Passage) an Intention which was never
in the Author's Mind; and by such (pretended) Intention to interpret the
Places, either alleged by him, or objected to him. In short, his Reader can
never rely upon his Quotations; but then least of all, when he falls to
explaining or paraphrasing.

Of the Nazarens, Ebionites, Mineans.
LET us now proceed to the Nazarens, Mineans, Ebionites, and Alogians:
concerning the former of which, Dr. Bull grants, that if the Nazarens (or
Mineans) were indeed Unitarians, if these held that the Lord Christ was a Man
only; the Question is at an end. He yields, that the Nazarens being the
Christians of Jerusalem and Judea, who were converted by the Lord Christ and
the Apostles, and flourished there under a Succession of 15 Bishops, whereof
the first was St. James Brother of our Lord: if these believed, that Christ was
a Man only, it will certainly follow, that the Article concerning our Savior's
Divinity can be no longer defended. Judic. Eccl. p. 42.

I do not thank him, for this Concession; for who sees not, that if the
Churches of Jerusalem and Judea, planted by the Apostles, and which endured in
a most flourishing Condition (under 15 successive Hebrew Bishops) to the times
of the Emperor Adrian, were Unitarians; then is the Unitarian Belief concerning
our Savior, incontestably true, and the certain Doctrine of the Apostles? But
before I argue this Point, it will not be unprofitable to the Reader, who is
not versed much in these Questions, if I give a short Account of the Occasion
and Reason of these Names, Nazaren, Minean, Ebionite.

The followers of the Doctrine of Jesus, were first called Christians at
Antioch; a City of Syria, out of the Bounds of Judea: but in Judea it self,
they were (from the first) called Nazarens and Mineans. Nazarens, from
Nazareth, the Place of our Savior's Education: Mineans, from an Hebrew Word
which signifies Heretics. Tertullus, when he accused Paul before Felix, makes
this to be his Fault; that he was a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens,
Acts 24.5. To the other Name Minean or Heretic, St. Paul himself refers, in
his Defense against the same Tertullus; "This I confess, says Paul, that after
the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers: Acts 24.14.
These two Names, Nazaren and Minean, are indifferently used by the Fathers in
the following Ages, that is, they were applied to the same Persons and Sect: so
we learn from St. Jerome, writing to St. Austin, in these Words; "There is to
this day over all the Orient, a Jewish Sect, who are called Mineans; and by the
Vulgar, Nazarens; who believe in Christ, the Son of God. St. Epiphanius, in the
Account he gives of this Sect, says, the Nazarens and Cerinthians began at the
same time, and that all Christians were at first called Nazarens. Epiph.
Haeres. Naz. c. 1. What he says farther of them, shall be alleged in its
proper Place: in the mean time, these Testimonies (which no Man controverts)
are sufficient to show, what was the Cause of this Name, and how ancient it is;
and that the Sect thereby intended, not only endured, but overspread the
Orient, at what time St. Jerome wrote to St. Austin, which was about the Year
416. What is meant by the Orient, was declared before, when I treated of the
Creed.

Ebionites is another Name of the ancient Unitarians, and first (genuine)
Christians; tho not without a Mixture [if their Adversaries (after having
destroyed all their Writings and Defenses) may be accepted as Witnesses against
them] of very bad People among them. It is not certain, whether they have been
thus named from one Ebion, a particular Man; or from the poor and low Opinion
they had of our Savior's Person, owning him indeed to be the Christ, but the
Son of Joseph and Mary: Some of the Ancients affirm the one, some the other of
these. Nor is the Matter worth disputing, because they are (by all) granted to
have been Contemporaries with the Apostles; and that they held the Lord Christ
was a Man only, the Christ, the Son of Joseph and Mary by Generation, the Son
of God by Holiness, Adoption and Exaltation.

The Question now, between Dr. Bull and us, is, not concerning the Ebionites,
for he and all others grant, that the Ebionites held concerning our Savior,
that he was a mere Man; but concerning the Nazarens and Mineans; namely,
whether the Nazarens and Mineans supposed, the Lord Christ was a Divine Person,
and God; or only a Man, a Prophet, the true Messiah or Christ, the Son of God
(not only by Holiness, Adoption and Exaltation, as the other Ebionites said)
but by his miraculous Generation (in the Womb of Mary) by the Spirit or Power
of God? We affirm the latter of these; but not altogether confounding the
Mineans and Nazarens, with the Ebionites. For tho they were both of them Jews,
or Proselytes of the Jews, yet there was this Difference between the Ebionites
and the Nazarens; that the former believed the Lord Jesus was the Son of Joseph
and Mary by Nature, the Son of God by Adoption, Exaltation and Holiness; but
the Nazarens said, he was the Son of God also by his miraculous Conception,
being conceived by the Spirit or Power of God, and born of Mary, who had never
known any Man. But this also is to be noted, that tho the Nazarens held our
Savior's miraculous Conception, by the Spirit of God; and the Ebionites
contended, that he was the Son of only Joseph and Mary: yet because they both
agreed in these two main Points, that Jesus Christ was a Man only, and that the
Law (by Moses) ought to be observed by all Jewish Christians (not by the
Gentile Christians) together with the Gospel; therefore the Vulgar, and even
those Learned Writers (of the Catholic Party) who considered them only in what
they agreed, namely, that the Lord Christ is not God, but Man only, called both
of them Ebionites; as we shall presently see.

Dr. Bull is a very litigious Opposer; it will therefore be expedient, for the
prevention of a great many Elusions and Subtleties, to take notice in the first
place, what he grants to us concerning the proposed Question, What the Nazarens
held concerning our Savior's Person? What Authorities has he owned; and how
far has he yielded this Question: in the yielding of which, he professes, that
the Socinians have carried this whole Controversy concerning the Quality of our
Savior's Person? for it can be disputed no longer, he says, whether our
Savior was a Man only, if the Nazaren Christians were of that Belief.

He grants, that Origin assures us, "That the Jews who believe in Christ,
observe the Mosaic Law together with the Gospel: and that all Jews who own
Jesus to be the Christ, are called Ebionites. Orig. contr. Cells. l. 2. p. 56. I
wish, instead of his wondering at this Account given by Origin, he had been so
sincere, as to let the Reader know, that Origin having lived long in Syria, nay
in Palestine, which is to say, in the very midst of the Nazaren or Jewish
Churches, could not but know their true State and Opinions. He says, all the
Jews that are Christians, are called Ebionites: and does not he (and with him,
all the Ancients) every where tell us, that the Ebionites were all of them
Unitarians; nay were called Ebionites, from their poor and low Opinion of our
Savior, that he was a Man only, not God? Let Dr. Bull produce any of the
Fathers, who have ever named the Ebionites, who do not also (explicitly)
confess, that they believed our Savior to be a Man only. In short, the
Nazarens are granted by all (and by Dr. Bull in particular) to be those
Christian Jews, that were gathered into Churches in Jerusalem and Palestine, by
the Ministry of the Apostles themselves: Origin (who lived among them)
witnesses, that all Jews who were Christians, were named Ebionites or the poor
ones, partly from the poor Opinion they had of our Savior's Person, partly
because they adhered still to the beggarly Principles and Rites of the Mosaic
Law: it unavoidably follows, that the Nazarens were Ebionites in this Sense;
that they held the Lord Christ was a Man only, and observed the Law together
with the Gospel. I said, Ebionites in this Sense; because, as was noted before,
the Ebionites, more strictly so called, believed our Savior was the Son of
Joseph and Mary: but the Nazarens, tho they believed he was a Man only, yet
they held he was miraculously conceived in the Womb of Mary, by the sole Power
and Energy of God, without the Concurrence of any Man.

As Origin makes no Distinction of the Ebionites, into Ebionites and Nazarens;
because of their Agreement in the main Points, that the Lord Christ was a Man
only, and that the Mosaic Law must be observed by all Jewish Christians: no
more does Eusebius, who contents himself to observe, that some Ebionites hold
the miraculous Conception; others of them say, he was the Son of Joseph and
Mary. Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 27. But neither he nor Origin charge either of
them, as Epiphanius in after Ages (from no Author) does; that they owned of the
Old Testament, only the Books of Moses and Joshua, not the Prophets: or that
they calumniated St. Paul, and rejected his Epistles; publishing also certain
Acts of St. Paul, wherein they charge him as an Apostate from the Law, only
because he could not obtain for his Wise a Priest's Daughter. Epiphanius
imputes this, not to the Nazaren-Ebionites, but to those Ebionites who held our
Savior was the Son of only Joseph and Mary: but as I said, he quotes no
Author; and therefore this seems to be one of the malicious Tales which
contending Sects and Parties frequently raise upon one another. So in
aftertimes, the Albigenses, Waldenses, and Wiclevites, were charged with
monstrous Heresies, which they not only abominated, but are refuted by the
Protestant Historians, out of the Catechisms, Sermons, and other Books of those
early Reformers. They were charged with teaching, that the Devil is above God;
that Elizabeth was Christ's Concubine, and taken with him in Adultery; with
other more horrid and foolish things, not fit to be named: but the Protestant
Historians have evinced, to the Satisfaction even of all learned and ingenuous
Papists, out of the Books and Catechisms of those pious Men; that these are
diabolical Calumnies, devised by their Persecutors the Friars.

Farther, Dr. Bull grants, that Theodoret ( Haeret. Fab. l. 2. c. 3.) affirms
expressly, that the Nazarens honor the Lord Christ, only as a holy Man, not as
God or a Divine Person. Because this Father also lived in Syria, was a most
learned and inquisitive Person, and writes in that Work (before-quoted) of all
Heretics and their Opinions; we may (surely) rely on the Account he gives.
'Twas impossible that Theodoret, whose Bishopric was in Syria cava,
whereabouts the Nazarens and Mineans then most abounded; and whose very Design
it was (in that Book which we alledg) to set down the peculiar Opinions of all
the Distinctions and Denominations of Christians: I say, it is impossible he
should not certainly know the Doctrine of the Nazarens, the most famous as well
as most ancient of all those Denominations which dissented from the Church (or
prevailing Party) of those Times. And whereas Dr. Bull excepts, that Theodoret
is a later Father than some he quotes; it is a mere and a wretched Subterfuge.
First, because St. Jerome (before cited) witnesses, that then the Nazarens
flourished over all the Orient; and Epiphanius, that they abounded chiefly in
Palestine and Syria cava. Secondly, because in very Deed Theodoret was
contemporary with Sulpitius Severus, who is (as we shall see) Dr. Bull's only
Author, the only Father who ever mistook the Nazaren Doctrine concerning our
Savior: and the Occasion of his Mistake was, that he lived so remote from
them; they in the Orient, he in the West, that is to say, at about 2000 Miles
distance. Sulpitius began to write (at soonest) about the Year 401. Theodoret
was made Bishop in 420. so Theodoret might be the older Man. But however that
be, one lived in Syria among the Nazaren Churches; the other in the remotest
Parts of Gaul, distant from the Nazarens the whole length of the Roman Empire,
when in its greatest Extent; and therefore it is no wonder, if he mistook the
Nazaren Doctrine.

He grants, again; that Epiphanius ( Haeres. 30. c. 2.) informs us,
Cerinthianis and Nazaraeis fu^sse, (...), the Cerinthians and Nazarens had like
Sentiments: and ( Haeres. 30. c. 2.) Nazaraeos and Ebionaeos capita simul
contulisse, suamque nequitiam invicem communicasse, i. e. "The Nazarens and
Ebionites laid Heads together, and communicated their Impiety (by which
Epiphanius, without doubt, means their Heresy) "one with another. Lastly, that
Epiphanius doubts only of this; whether in this the Nazarens agreed with the
Cerinthians, that the Lord Christ was a common and ordinary Man, or was
miraculously generated by the Holy Spirit (or Power of God) in the Womb of
Mary. Let us put this together; Epiphanius says, the Nazarens and Cerinthians
had like Opinions: but did the former believe (as the other did) that the Lord
Christ was a common Man, born (as all other Men are) of a humane Father and
Mother; or did they grant, that he was a Man indeed, but miraculously conceived
by the Divine Power, in the Womb of a Virgin? Epiphanius professes, that he
cannot, upon his own Knowledge, charge the Nazarens with the former of these
Opinions. Farther, he owns, that the Ebionites and Nazarens were extremely
gracious and intimate, and communicated in the same Impiety; that is, Heresy.

These Testimonies do stagger Dr. Bull, so that at last ( Judic. Eccl. p. 56,
57.) he is willing to grant, that at length some Nazarens were infected with
the Ebionite Heresy, that the Lord Christ is a Man only: and of these Nazarens
(whom he calls the latter Nazarens, tho the Ancients never make any such
Distinction, as the former and latter Nazarens) he thinks, Origin is to be
undestood, when he says, as was before quoted, that the Jewish Christians ( i.
e. the Nazarens) are Ebionites. There never was a more injudicious Paragraph,
unless the Man wilfully prevaricates. For first, why does he say, some Nazarens
were infected with the Ebionite Heresy, when Origin (who is his Author)
expressly says, all the Jewish Christians are Ebionites? (...), says Origin,
(...); i. e. the Jews, that own Jesus to be the Christ, are Ebionites. Contr.
Cells. l. 2. p. 56. Secondly, I desire to know of Dr. Bull, how Epiphanius could
more effectually declare the Doctrine of the Nazarens concerning the Quality of
our Savior's Person, than by saying, they hold as the Cerinthians do; and they
mutually communicate their Heresy with the Ebionites. For was it ever made a
Question, or dares he question it, that the Cerinthians and Ebionites held, the
Lord Christ was a Man only? It Is a ridiculous Subterfuge, when he pretends, the
Nazarens might at first hold the Divinity of our Savior, but afterward
(somewhat before Origen's time) sell off to the Cerinthian and Ebionite
Doctrine. For I request him, to produce but the least Intimation from any
Father or Historian, that the Nazarens changed their Opinion, by falling off
from the Trinitarians to the Unitarians, as he pretends they did: it is a mere
shift, to which he was forced, by the Clearness of the Testimonies given by
Origin and Epiphanius.

But I shall mind him of other Evidences, that the Nazarens were Unitarians; or
held but one Divine Person, and that our Savior was a Man only. Epiphanius (
Haeres. Naz. c. 7.) says; Nazaraei a Judaeis nulla in re dissentiunt, nisi quod
in Christum credunt: i. e. "The Jews and Nazarens differ in nothing, saving
that the latter believe in Christ. But if the Nazaren Christians had held more
than one Divine Person, or that the Messiah or Christ was to be God; they had
differed from the Jews, in two the highest Points of all: for all Men know and
own, that the Jews believed but one Divine Person; and Dr. Bull himself has
largely proved, (out of Justin Martyr) that the Jews expected, that the Messiah
(or Christ) should be a Man only, not God. To the Testimony of Justin, he might
have added Origin contr. Cells. l. 2. p. 79. and l. 4. p. 162.

Farthermore, when Epiphanius (in the Chapter before-quoted) makes doubt,
whether the Nazarens held that the Lord Christ was the Son of Joseph and Mary,
or was miraculously generated by the Holy Spirit in the Womb of Mary: who sees
not, that he took it for granted and certain, that they denied he was God or a
Divine Person; if he had not first supposed that, he could never have made it a
Question, whether they did not think he was the Son of only Joseph and Mary?
Because he know, that the Nazarens believed the Lord Christ was only a Man;
therefore he questions, and otherwise could not question; whether they held, he
was the Son of Mary by Joseph, or of Mary by the Holy Spirit?

To add now no more, St. Austin ( contr. Cresc. l. 1. c. 31.) says; Et nunc
sunt quidam Haeretici, qui se Nazaraeos vocant; a nonnullis tamen Symmachiani
appellantur, i. e. "There are now certain Heretics, by themselves called
Nazarens; but by diverse they are named Symmachians. To know therefore what the
Nazarens held, we need only to inquire, what Symmachus held. Eusebius will
answer; Symmachus was an Ebionite, and maintained Christ to be the Son of
Joseph and Mary. Eusebius. H. E. l. 6. c. 17. But here we are to note two things.
First, the Nazarens did not hold, that the Lord Christ was the Son of Joseph
and Mary; but the Son of God, by miraculous Conception in the Virgin Mary. But
diverse (as St. Austin has cautiously worded it) were not so critical, or so
well versed in the Knowledge of Sects, as to mind or understand the several
Subdivisions of them: therefore because the Nazarens were so far Ebionites and
Symmachians, that they held the Lord Christ was a Man only, tho generated not
by Joseph but by the Power of God in the Womb of the Virgin Mary; they called
them Ebionites and Symmachians, tho both these (the Symmachians and Ebionites)
not only believed that Christ was but a Man, but that he was the Son of Joseph
by his Wife Mary, not of God by the Virgin Mary. Secondly, Symmachus and the
Ebionites, as they held our Savior to be the Son of Joseph and Mary; so they
contended, that the first Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel was added by the
Greek Translator. St. Matthew wrote his Gospel in Hebrew; when it was
translated into Greek, the Translator prefaced it with a Genealogy, and a
Narration that our Savior was conceived by the Holy Spirit of God, and was not
the Son of Joseph: but this Genealogy and Narration, said Symmachus and the
Ebionites, is not in the Hebrew Gospel of St. Matthew, nay is the mere
Invention of the Translator. As for the other Gospels, the Ebionites and
Symmachus did not receive the Gospel of St. Luke: and for that of St. John,
they said it was indeed written by Cerinthus, to confirm his (Platonic)
Conceits about the Logos or WORD; which he supposed to be the Christ, or Spirit
of God that rested on, and inhabited the Person of Jesus.

Let us now, for the Ease of the Reader, sum up this whole Evidence concerning
the Nazarens, in short Paragraphs. All grant, they were the Jewish Christians,
whose first Churches were gathered by the Apostles themselves in Judea,
Jerusalem, Palestine, Syria, Arabia, and the whole Orient. The Question is,
what they held concerning Almighty God, and the Person of our Savior Jesus
Christ: whether they said, there is but one Divine Person, and our Savior is a
Man only; or whether they held a Trinity of Divine Persons, and that our
Savior is God most High? We affirm the former of these, Dr. Bull the latter.
We alledg that,

Theodoret says, in express Terms; the Nazarens honor the Lord Christ, not as
God, but only as a holy Man. We observe, that Theodoret lived where (
Epiphanius informs us) the Nazaren Churches then most abounded, in Syria cava:
and that in the Work by us quoted, it is the very Design of Theodoret, to tell
us the particular Opinions of the several Denominations and Sects of Christians.

We alledg again, that the most learned Origin, who also lived a long time in
Syria and Palestine it self, says; that all Jewish Christians were Ebionites.
And Eusebius, that all Ebionites hold the Lord Christ is a Man only; but they
are divided (says he) into two Sects: for the Symmachians and such like
Ebionites believe, Christ is a Man, the Son of Joseph and Mary; others of them
say, he is a Man (miraculously) generated by the Holy Spirit, or Divine Power,
in the Womb of a Virgin.

St. Austin says, the Nazarens are Symmachians. But he means only, they are
thus far Symmachians, that they think Christ is only a Man, not God.

Epiphanius says, the Nazarens communicated in their Heresy with the Ebionites;
and that they held as the Cerinthians do: both which believed, that our Savior
was a mere Man. He says, they agreed in all Points with the Jews; concerning
whom, it is certain and granted; that they never belleved more than one Divine
Person; and Dr. Bull himself has proved, that they expected the Messiah (or
Christ) should be a Man, not God. Again, Epiphanius makes it appear, that he
took it for yielded, that the Nazarens believed the Lord Christ to be a Man
only; in that he doubts, whether they did not also hold, that he is the Son of
only Joseph and Mary.

To Dr. Bull's Objections concerning the Nazarens.
AS to what Dr. Bull objects, I shall now evince, how frivolous and impertinent
it is. He objects first, the Authority of Sulpitius Severus, who began to write
about the Year 401. Sulpitius says, "The Emperor Adrian drove all Jews out of
Jerusalem: but this tended to the Advantage of the Christian Religion; for at
that time almost all of them believed in Christ God. Hist. sacr. l. 2. c. 31.
This Expulsion of all Jews, from Jerusalem, happened about the Year of Christ
135. The Words almost all are intended to signify, that as the Jews were the
Majority of the Inhabitants and Citizens of Jerusalem; so the most (the far
greater Number) of them were Christians. But when he adds, they believed in
Christ-God; I have proved it to be a Mistake, by the Testimony of those Fathers
who lived among the Jewish Christians, namely, Origin and Theodoret; and of
other Fathers who were much nearer to them than Sulpitius, even Epiphanius and
St. Augustine. Epiphanius was Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, an Island just by
Palestine; and he himself was a Native, and had his Education in Palestine: St.
Austin, from Hippo in Africa, informed himself of the State of the Syrian and
Palestine Churches, not only by Letters to and from the Learned Men of those
Churches and Provinces; but also by some of his Clergy, whom he maintained at
Jerusalem and the Holy Land, only for Intelligence and Information. On the
contrary, Sulpitius lived in Aquitain, a Province of Gaul, in the (remotest)
western Parts of the Roman Empire; at the Distance of above 2000 Miles from
Palestine and Syria, where the Jewish Christians had their Churches; or as
their Enemies (particularly St. Jerome) spoke, their Synagogues. We cannot much
wonder, that at so great a Distance from the Jewish Christians, Sulpitius
mistook their Doctrine, concerning the Quality of our Savior's Person, or
whether he were God or Man: nor will any Man of Prudence think, that one
Sulpitius, at such a Remotion from them, is to be believed, against so many
most learned Fathers, who dwelt partly among the Nazarens, partly very near to
them. Beside, Sulpitius was not a Divine, but a Lawyer; bred a Heathen, and
went over to the Christian Religion after he had long practiced (as they speak)
at the Bar: it is easily conceived, that a New Convert to Christianity, might
not be very skilful in the Knowledge and Distinction of Sects. Therefore
Monsieur du Pin observes concerning Sulpitius, "That tho his Abridgment of the
Ecclesiastical History is the best we have of the Ancients, yet it is not very
exact: He commits diverse Faults against the Truth of History, especially the
Ecclesiastical. Eccl. Hist. cent. 5. p. 112.

Dr. Bull cites also Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 5. where that Historian says; that
the first 15 Bishops of Jerusalem sat but a very short time; but that he finds
in the Writings of the Ancients, that those Bishops received and professed the
true Knowledge of Christ. I believe, there is no learned Man will doubt, that
Eusebius his Author for this, was Hegesippus; who was the first that wrote an
Ecclesiastical History, which he published about the Year of Christ 170, a Work
now lost, to the great Regret of learned Men. But when Hegesippus says, the
Bishops of Jerusalem professed the true Knowledge of Christ, did he mean, as Dr.
Bull supposes, that Christ is God most High? No, he meant, that they professed
(in opposition to the Docetae and others, who held the Pre-existence of our
Savior, and that he was not a Man) he was a true and very Man, and a Man only:
Of this I am persuaded by these Considerations.

First, Hegesippus was himself a Jewish Christian, as Eusebius ( Hist. l. 4. c.
22.) witnesses: but all Jewish Christians, says Origin, (who lived and
flourished above 100 Years before Eusebius) were Ebionites, that is, denied the
Divinity of Christ.

Secondly, The same Eusebius (ibid) says, that Hegesippus made use of St.
Matthew 's Hebrew Gospel; which was used only by the Ebiouites, and Unitarian
Christians.

Thirdly, When Hegesippus (apud Eusebius. ibid.) reckons up the Heresies and
Heretics of the Jewish Nation, that were (says he) against the Tribe of
Judah, and against Christ; he names the Samaritans, Pharisees, Sadduces,
Esseans, Masbotheans, Galileans, Hemerobaptists: but if the Denial of our
Savior's Divinity had been a Jewish Heresy, if the Ebionites or Cerinthians
had been Heretics, in the Judgment of Hegesippus, they must have come into the
Catalogue of Heretics that were against Christ, for it is certain (and yielded
on all hands) that both these Sects denied the Divinity of our Savior. If it
be said, Hegesippus might not reckon the Ebionites and Cerinthians among the
Jewish Heretics; because tho they were Jews by Nation, they were Christians by
Religion: yet at least he would have put them into the List of Christian
Heretics, which he does not. The Christian Heresies, according to Hegesippus,
are the Heresy of the Simomans, Menandrians, Marcionites, Carpocratians,
Valentinians, Basilidiaus, Saturninians; but not a word of the Ebionite,
Cerinthian, Alogian, or Monarchian Heretics, who were all Unitarians. But the
Reader must here take care, that he is not imposed on by Valesius his
Translation of Eusebius: for the Translation, after the Enumeration of the
before-named Heresies and Heretics, adds (aliique) and others, as if some were
omitted; but the Greek Text of Eusebius has no such Words. In short, I say,
Hegesippus gives a Catalogue of the Heresies of the Jews and Gentiles, but does
not account either the Cerinthians or Ebionites among the Heretics; which he
certainly would, if he himself had held the Pre-existence and Divinity of our
Savior.

Lastly, I have before cited Valesius, owning and professing, that the
Ecclesiastical History of Hegesippus was lost by the Ancients: because (like
the Hypotyposes of St. Clemens) it was observed to agree with the Unitarians.
If it be said, But did not Eusebius know this; and yet he always speaks
respectfully of Hegesipput: I answer, without doubt he knew it; but durst not
take notice of it: it was not for Eusebius, to find fault with an Apostolical
Father; he could only dissemble his Knowledge of what the Unitarians (and
particularly his Antagonist Marcellus) would not fail to make Advantage; and
this also is the Reason, as I hinted before, why this crafty Arian will take no
notice of the Apostolic Creed, as composed by them, tho he recites
paraphrastically (that so he may impose on his Reader) the Heads of it. Hist.
l. 1. c. 13.

But if Hegesippus (Unitarian Hegesippus) was the Author whom Eusebius follows,
in the Account he gives of the first 15 Bishops of Jerusalem, that they
professed the true Knowledge of Christ; which will not be questioned by any that
are conversant in Eusebius, or have observed that he professes ( Hist. l. 4. c.
8, and 22.) to follow Hegesippus concerning the Apostolic and following times:
we have also gained another very great Point; namely, this. That not only the
Jewish Christians, but those of Rome and all the great Churches to which
Hegesippus had resorted, to know their Doctrine and Discipline, were also
Unitarians; that is, held (with Hegesippus) that the Lord Christ is a Man only.
For he says ( apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 22.) "That he traveled to Rome, where he
lived under the Popes Anicetus, Soter and Eleutherus, successively Popes of
Rome; but both here, and in all other Episcopates, they keep the Doctrines
taught by the Law and the Prophets, and by our Savior. Briefly, he owns, that
he found the Churches every where to be Orthodox and uniform: of which, if he
was an Unitarian, as (I think) I have proved, the Meaning can be only this;
that they believed, as the Jewish Christians do, the Lord Christ is a Man, the
Prophet and Messenger of God, on whom the Logos or Divine WORD rested. This
perfectly agrees with the Account that the old Unitarians (in Eusebius) give;
namely, that they had kept the Doctrine delivered by the Apostles, and which
was professed every where, till the Opposition made to it, by the Popes Victor
and Zepherin, who succeeded to Eleutherus, as he to Soter, and Soter to
Anicetus, with which Orthodox Popes Hegesippus had conversed. The short is; We
grant that Eusebius says, the Jerusalem-Bishops professed the true Knowledge of
Christ: We answer, he borrowed this from Hegesippus, whom he took for his
Author, especially in what concerned the Apostolic Times, and the Times that
followed, to the taking of Jerusalem by the Emperor Adrian in the Year 135,
that is, while the 15 Bishops (concerning whom our present Question and Debate
is) governed the Churches of Jerusalem and Judea. But Hegesippus being himself
a Jewish Christian, that is, one that believed our Savior to be a Man only,
when he said, the Jerusalem-Bishops professed the true Knowledge of Christ, he
undoubtedly meant, that our Lord was a true and mere Man; against the Docetae
and other platonizing Christians, who held his Pre-existence, and denied that
he was a Man.

Dr. Bull is not ashamed to infer, from St. Austin's Saying, that the Nazarens
confess Christ is the Son of God; that they held he is so the Son of God, that
he was born of God from all Eternity. I say, he is not ashamed of this
Inference, tho he knows that all Ebionites believed Christ was a Man only; and
yet Epiphanius says of them, diverse times, as St. Austin does of the Nazarens,
that they own the Lord Christ is the Son of God. For tho the Ebionites did not
believe the miraculous Conception, yet they said the Lord Christ is the Son of
God, progressione Virtutis, and quatenus ad sublimia coelestiaque provectus
est, i. e. by Holiness, and by his Exaltation to the right Hand of God,
Epiphan. Haeres. Ebion. c. 13. Iren. l. 3. c. 30. But let us recite the very
Words of St. Austin, de Haeres. c. 9, 10. "The Nazarens, as they confess Christ
is the Son of God, so they observe the whole Law; the which, Christians have
been taught that it is to be understood and taken spiritually, not carnally. The
Ebionites also say, that Christ is a Man only, and observe the cernal Precepts
of the Law. These Words, the Ebionites also say, that Christ is a Man only,
would be Nonsense; if the Nazarens, of whom he speaks immediately before, had
not likewise so held.

In like manner he would put a false Meaning on these Words of St. Jerome; "The
Nazarens believe in Christ the Son of God, who was born of the Virgin Mary: the
same, say they, who suffered under Pontius Pilate, and rose again from the
Dead; in whom also WE (i. e. we of the Church) believe. One would have thought,
that when the Nazarens say here; We believe in the Son of God that was born of
the Virgin Mary, was put to Death under Pontius Pilate, and rose again from the
Dead: they had sufficiently declared, that the Son of God in whom they believed
was the Man Christ Jesus; not a Son of God that could not be born of the Virgin
Mary, or die, or rise again. But because St. Jerome says, in whom also we
believe; Dr. Bull cries out, Look here, the Nazarens believed in that Son of
God, in whom the Orthodox believed. We think so too, Doctor; because both
Parties believed in the Son of God, who was generated and born of Mary, died,
and rose again: tho the Orthodox (so called) invented also another Son of God;
a Son that could not be generated and born of Mary, a Son that could not die, a
Son as old as his Father, a second Almighty, another Creator, first made known
by the Council of Nice.

Next, Dr. Bull produces as Passage out of Justin Martyr, to prove that there
were some Christians who observed the Mosaic Law, and yet believed in such a
Christ, who was before Luciser and the Moon: and who could these be, but the
Nazarens? I answer; whoever they were, they were not the Nazarens: most of the
Gnostick Sects, who also observed the Mosaic Law, beld the Pre-existence of
our Savior. What hinders, but that they might be the Cerinthians? Besides, it
is uncertain, whether Justin meant to say, that there were some Christians who
keep the Law of Moses, and yet believe that Christ was before Lucifer and the
Moon: to make out this Sense, Dr. Bull is forced to add these Words to the
Words of Justin, such a Christ as you before described. Judic. Eccl. p. 52.
which Addition seems also contrary to the Context, where it is inserted by Dr.
Bull; for Dr. Bull contends for a Christ (in that Context) who was before
Lucifer and the Moon; and the Context describes a Christ that was crucified,
and to whom GOD has committed the Judgment of the Dead and Living, and has
given to him a Kingdom that shall have no end. This seems to be a mere Ebionite
or Socinian-Christ; a Man, not God.

Lastly, he quotes the Title of the 12 th Chapter of the 6 th Book of the
Constitutions of St. Clement, that is, as Dr. Bull himself confesses, falsely
entitled to Sr. Clement. The Words are these, Of those who confess, but yet
live after the manner of the Jews: Dr. Bull would have it thought, that this
Title speaks of those who confess that Christ is the most High and Eternal God.
These, Mr. Bull thinks, could be no other but the Nazarens. But to come at that
Conclusion, Mr. Bull must first prove; not only that the Nazarens believed the
Lord Christ is God the WORD: but that there were no other Denominations of
Christians, who observed the Mosaic Law. and also believed that Christ is God
the WORD. But he knows, that the Cerinthians, and most of the Gnostick Sects,
did Judaize and also believe the Pre-existence of our Savior, and that he is
God the WORD. But let us grant to Dr. Bull whatever he contends for, from this
Citation; and see how it will advantage his main Cause. The Question is
concerning the Nazarens, whether they held, as the Church now does, that there
is more than one Divine and Eternal Person; are there two, or three such
Persons, is the Lord Christ the eternal God? Yes, says Dr. Bull; for the
Constitutions (chap. 11.) have a Confession to that purpose; and the 12 th
Chapter is concerning those that confess (that is, so confess) and yet live
after the manner of the Jews, that is, observe the Mosaic Law: and these, most
certainly, were the Nazarens. But if the Nazarens confessed in the Form there
mentioned; they were far from believing as Dr. Bull, and the Church, now
believe. Let us hear the Confession at chap. 11. to which the Title urged by
Dr. Bull does refer. It says, "We teach but one God, the Father of Christ; not
a second, not a third, not a manifold God; but one eternal God. One would
think, this were Socinus, or J. Crellius de uno Deo Patre: but toward the
Conclusion, the Author (or Authors) show, that he held the same Doctrine with
Arius; for tho he had said, there is but one God who is Eternal or from
Eternity, yet he owns that Christ is not a mere Man, but is also God the WORD.
That is, there is but one true, one eternal God, yet the Son or WORD is also
God in an inferior Sense: namely, a God that was generated in time, and is set
over the Works of the Creation. Monsieur du Pin deals ingenuously, when he
owns, that the Author of the Constitutions seems to have been an Arian: he
rightly adds, that the Constitutions, as we now have them, were forged after
the times of St. Epiphanius; for that Father quotes them far otherways than,
nay contrary to, what they now are. Eccl. Hist. Cent. 1. p. 29, 30.

If the Reader compares this Section, with what I have alleged in the
foregoing, he will perceive, that it is with the greatest Justice and Truth in
the World, that the present Unitarians claim the Nazarens (or first Jewish
Churches and Christians) as of our Party.

Of the Alogi, or Alogians, etc.
FRom the Nazarens, that is, the Jewish Christians, I go on to the Alogi or
Alogians, who were the ancient Gentile Christians. They were called Alogian, or
Alogi, because they denied the Logos or WORD, of which St. John speaks in his
Gospel, Epistles and Revelation: they said, that all those Pieces were written
by Cerinthus, under the Name of St. John; to confirm Cerinthus his Conceits
about the Logos, and the Millenium or thousand Years Reign of Christ here upon
Earth. For tho the Alogi held, that the Lord Christ is a Man only; as also did
Cerinthus; yet Cerinthus (of the ancient Unitarians) had these two things,
peculiar to himself. 1. That the World was made, not immediately by God; but by
God, by the Ministry of his Angels. 2. That the Lord Christ was a Man only, the
Son of Joseph and Mary; but there rested on him the Logos or Divine WORD, which
he also called the Christ, by which Cerinthus intended the Spirit, Energy or
Power of God, that Power by which he created Original Matter, and made the
World: but as the Christ or WORD descended on Jesus at his Baptism, so it left
him at his Crucifixion. The Alogians believed none of these things: they said,
they had only received from the Aposiles; that the Lord Christ was the great
Prophet promised by Moses in the Law, and the Messiah (or Christ) intended in
the Prophet Daniel, and who (in the Fullness of Time) was sent by God to unite
both Jews and Gentiles under one common Institution, or Law of Religion.

Epiphanius is the first, who gave to them the Name of Alogi: before him, that
is before the Year 368, they were simply called Christians; without any other
Name, that might signify them to be a particular Sect. They were those
Christians of the Gentiles, who retained the sincere Apostolic Doctrine
concerning the Unity of God, and the Person of our Savior, without corrupting
it (more or less) with Platonic Notions, or Gnostick Novelties: they were very
ancient, co-eval with the Apostles; and flourished (as the prevailing Party) in
the Period called the Apostolic Succession, or to about the Year 140.
Epiphanius all along speaks of them, as the ancient Unitarians of the Gentiles:
He says also expressly, Theodotus adjunxit se Haeresi Alogorum; Theodotus joined
himself to the Sect and Churches of the Alogians. Theodotus appeared about the
Year 190; by joining himself to the Alogian Sect, we learn, that before he was
of the Number of the (new) Platonic Christians; who held the Pre-existence of
our Savior. Eusebius is strangely out, or prevaricates too notoriously, when
he says, Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 28. that this Theodotus was the first, who held
that our Savior was a mere Man: for not only the Alogians so held, but so also
did both sorts of Ebionites, and that by Confession of Eusebius himself
elsewhere, particularly H. Eccl. l. 3. c. 27. But Eusebius takes all Occasions,
tho never so fraudulently, to depress the Unitarians, whom he had undertaken to
confute in the Person of Marcellus, Bishop of Ancyra. We may take notice too,
that the Excerpta at the End of Clemens of Alexandria his Books of Stromata,
which bear the Title of the Oriental Doctrine of Theodotus, were not
Particulars of the Doctrine of Theodotus the Unitarian; for the Doctrine of
Theodotus was diametrically opposite to the Contents of those Excerpta: but the
Excerpta are nothing else but a Fragment of the Hypotyposes of St. Clemens
himself; which also is observed by the learned Valesius, in his first Note on
Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c. 11. and again on lib. 6. c. 14. In few Words; that the
Alogi held our Savior was a Man only, is not questioned by any: that they
belonged at least to the Apostolic Succession is proved; because it is
confessed by the Trinitarian Historians, that the Theodotians (who appeared
about the Year 190) joined themselves to the Alogian Churches; and because
Epiphanius speaks of them (throughout) as flourishing in that Period. We have
therefore deservedly here reckoned them, among the ancient and first Witnesses
of the true Doctrine. As to the Reasons which they gave, and which I affirm
not, against the Gospel, and other Works, which we now account to St. John, I
have already (briefly) intimated them, in the Considerations on the 4 Sermons
of his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury. It was 400 Years before the Epistle
to the Hebrews was received as Canonical, any where in the West, and but in few
Places of the Orient; and other Books of the New Testament, especially St.
John's Revelation, were not presently admitted by the Catholic Church: it
ought not therefore to seem strange, that the modern Unitarians allow of the
Gospel and other Pieces of St. John; tho they are aware that many of the
Ancients, and particularly some Unitarians suspected, and (too hastily)
rejected them. As it often happens, that Time detects Frauds and Falsehoods, so
also (not unfrequently) it discovers and vindicates oppressed Truths.

The last Monument or Remain of the Apostolic Succession, which agrees with
the Socinian Doctrine concerning our Savior, are the Recognitions, imputed to
Clemens Romanus. They seem to be falsely reckoned to St. Clemens: but they are
very ancient, published (probably) in the Beginning of the 2 d Century, or the
second Century being but little advanced; when so many other spurious Pieces
were set forth, under the Names of Apostles, or of Apostolical Men. The
Recognitions are quoted (diverse times) by Origin, who began to flourish about
the Year 210. But they are much antienter than Origin, for in a Fragment of
Bardesanes ( apud Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 6. c. 10.) who flourished about the
Year 170, there is a Passage taken word for word out of the 9 th Book of the
Recognitions. Whereas Dr. Cave conjectures, that Bardesanes was the Author of
the Recognitions; his Guess is nothing probable, nay a manifest Mistake;
because the Author of the Recognitions was an Ebionite; but Bardesanes a
Valentinian, that is, held the Pre-existence of our Savior, and that he was
not (as the Apostle speaks) made of a Woman, but brought his Flesh from Heaven.
It remains therefore, that the Recognitions are antienter, not only than
Origin, but than Bardesanes: how much antienter we cannot determinately say;
but probably published when the 2 d Century was but little advanced, when so
many affected to countenance their own Productions, with the authoritative
Names of the Aposiles and Apostolical Men. But tho the Recogaitions are not the
Work of Clemens Romanus, yet they serve to let us know, what Doctrines and
Rites were current or in use in those times: and to this purpose they are
quoted by the severely Critics, of all Parties and Persuasions. I shall not
need to cite particular Passages out of these Books: for it is consessed by the
Trinitarian Critics, and by Monsieur du Pin, who has written last on the
Fathers, that the Author of the Recognitions was a manifest Ebionite. Eccl.
Hist. cent. 1. p. 28.

But hitherto of the Apostolic Fathers, and the Writings and Remains of the
Apostolic Succession. I have proved, I think, that hitherto we have no certain
or probable notice, that there were yet any who publicly professed to hold the
Pre-existence of our Savior; or that he was God, in any Sense of that Word.
But on the contrary, the Apostles Creed. the true (and by all confessed) St.
Clemens Romanus, the Nazaren, Minean or Ebionite (that is, the Jewish)
Churches, the Alogians (or Gentile Churches) Hegesippus the Father of
Ecclefiastical History, the most ancient Author of the Recognitions, were all
of them Unitarians; that is, held there is but one Divine Person, and the Lord
Christ was a Man only.

It should seem then, that very thing happened to the Christian Church, which had
formerly come to pass in the Church of the Jews. For as the Author of the Book
of Judges (Judge. 2.7.) says; "The People of Israel served the Lord, all the
Days of Joshua, and of the Elders that outlived Joshua; -- but when all that
Generation was gathered to their Fathers, there arose another after them, which
knew not the Lord: so the Children of Israel did Evil in the sight of the Lord,
and served Baalim, i. e. the Gods. In like manner, while the Apostles lived,
and those Elders who had conversed with the Apostles, the Christian Church kept
her self to the Acknowledgment and Worship of the one true God; and preserved
the true Doctrine and Faith concerning the Person of the Lord Christ, that he
was a holy Man, the great Prophet and Messiah, promised in the Law and other
Book, of the Old Testament. But (...) the Aposiles themselves, and the (...) of
the Apostolic Succussion, were gathered to their Fathers, then (...)
Corruptions to prevail apace: (...) they sancied a pre-existent (...) of God,
God's Minister and Instrument in the creating of all things, and but little
less than his Father. A Son, said they, who being (tho but the instrumental,
yet) the immediate Creator of all things, is to be worshipped by us his
Creatures. A Son, who, tho with respect to the (...) (as they still spoke) the
true and very God the Father, is but a Minister and Subject; yet with respect
to us (his Creatures) is a God. A Son, who must be called (...), a God: tho
only the Father may be called (...), the God; that is, God by way of Excellence
and true Propriety. In a word, after the Apostles, and Apostolical Elders or
Pastors, were composed to rest, the next Generation, like the Jewish Church,
did Evil in the Sight of the Lord, and served Baalim: that is, the half-Gods of
their own devising. Nemo repent fit turpissimus, therefore here they stop a
considerable time; namely, from about the Year 140 and 150, to the Nicene
Council, or the Year 325. at what time, as we shall see hereafter, Superstition
and Impiety made a sudden and wonderful Advance.

The first Defender and public Patron of the Apostasy, mentioned in the
foregoing Paragraph, was Justin Martyr, about the Year 150. Our Opposers can
quote no Father (or genuine Monument) older than Justin Martyr, for the
Pre-existence of our Savior; or that he ought to be called a God, in so much
as the restrained inseriour Sense, before said. Dr. Bull indeed pretends to
prove the contrary, from (the counterseit) Barnabas, the false Ignatius, alias
Pionius, and the Impostor Hermas: how injudiciously, I think, has been
competently shown in these present Papers; but I will yet oppose to him one
Authority, which (I doubt not) will convince the indifferent unprejudiced
Reader.

Eusebius, that capital Antagonist of the Nazaren and Alogian Christians; and
who searched with the utmost Diligence, into the remotest Antiquity, for
whatsoever might seem to make against them, quotes ( H. E. l. 5. c. 28.) a very
ancient Author, whom (in his foregoing Chapter) he reckons among the
Ecclesiastical Writers that deserve (says he) to be esteemed for their
laudable Zeal and Industry. This laudable Man, you must know, wrote a Book
against the Theodotians and Artemonites, who were Branches of the Alogians:
what Eusebius there cites out of him, is as follows: "The Unitarians pretend,
that the Apostles and all the Ancients held the very Doctrine, concerning the
Person of our Savior, that is now maintained by the Unitarians: and that it is
but only since the Times of the Popes Victor and Zepherin, that the Truth has
been adulterated and discountenanced. This would be credible, if (first) the
Unitarian Doctrine were not contrary to Holy Scripture; and if diverse before
Victor and Zepherin had not contended for the Divinity of the Lord Christ,
namely, Justin Martyr, Miltiades, Tatianus, Clemens of Alexandria, Ireneus,
Melito. To whom we may add the ancient Hymns or Psalms, wrote from the
beginning by the Brethren; which speak of Christ, as the WORD of God, and
attribute to him Divinity. I will omit now, that all these, but only Justin,
were but Contemporaries to Victor and Zepherin; or after them: for it is home
to my purpose, that the first whom our Opposers (of those early times) could
quote, was Justin Martyr, who says himself, in his first Apology, that he
presented his Apology in the Year 150. The Epistles of Barnabas and Ignatius,
and the Prophecies and Visions of Hermas, were not (it should seem) yet come
out of the Mint; or were so well known to be Impostures, that no Body durst to
alledg them, in these Controversies. The Question between Dr. Bull and the
present Unitarians is, concerning the Fathers and Monuments of the Apostolic
Succession: whether these held our Savior's Pre-existence and Divinity?
Eusebius answers us, out of a laudable Author; that Justin Martyr opposed our
Doctrine, that is, he gives up to us the whole Apostolic Succession; which is
as much as the Socinians ever claimed. As to the Hymns or Psalms of the
Brethren, which (he says) spoke of Christ as the WORD of God, and attributed
to him Divinity; it is plain, that he spoke rashly and at adventures, when he
added, they were composed by the Brethren from the very first: for seeing the
Authors of them were unknown; so also of necessity must their Date. Is doubt
not, these are the Psalms in Honor of Christ, which were put down in the
Patriarchal Church of Antioch, under this Censure, that in very deed they were
novel Compositions, by later Men, and containing some dangerous Strains. As we
learn from a Letter of the Council at Anticch, apud Eusebius. H. E. l. 7. c. 30.

Having said what was necessary, concerning the Apostolic Fathers, I might now
proceed immediately to the Primitive Fathers, so called, to distinguish them
from the Fathers that lived after the Nicene Council, or the Year 325, who are
simply called Fathers. But because I would have nothing else to do, in the 2 d
and 3 d Parts of this Answer to Dr. Bull, but only to examine and discuss his
(impertinent and most fraudulent) Citations out of the Fathers; and to oppose
to them (the certain and clear) Testimonies of the same (and other) Fathers:
therefore here I will consider the two Passages in Dr. Bull's Defense of the
Nicene Council, which (in my opinion) are the only Parts of his Book that
needed to be at all remarked on by the Socinians. The first is, concerning the
Grounds on which Justin Martyr and the following Fathers built their new
Doctrine of our Savior's Pre-existence; and that he was (tho a Ministerial and
Subordinate, yet) an Agent in the Creation of all things. The other is; whether
the Explication of the Trinity (or how three Divine coeternal coequal Persons
and Spirits, can be but one God) given by Dr. Bull, as out of the Fathers, be
not an undeniable unavoidable Tritheism?

Of the Grounds on which Justin Martyr, and the following Fathers, built their
Doctrine of our Savior's Pre-existence; and that he is a (Ministerial) Creator.
AFter Dr. Bull had quoted some Passages of the Fathers, wherein they say, it
was the Divine WORD who appeared so often to the Patriarchs, as to Adam,
Abraham, Jacob, Moses: He takes notice also that some learned Men of the
Moderns (at p. 20. he calls them viri quidam doctrissimi) deride these
Citations, as mere Dreams of the good Fathers; and hold it for a certain Truth,
that it was only an Angel who appeared so often, and on so many Occasions, to
the Patriarchs: but the Angel, say they, is called Jehovah and God, because on
those Occasions he represented the Person and Authority of God. He notes again,
that others may object hereupon; if the Fathers were mistaken in the Ground on
which they did build their Supposition of our Savior's Pre-existence, it is but
too probable, that they have erred also in the Supposition it self, namely,
that the Lord Christ did pre-exist, or had a Being before he was born of the
Virgin Mary. He answers to the several Arguments of the viri quidam doctissimi;
and I intend here to examine his Answers.

1. They argue; that indeed it is said (at Exodus 3.4.) God called to Moses out
of the midst of the Bush: but it is owned in the (preceding) 2 d Verse, that it
was indeed an Angel of the Lord that appeared to Moses, in a Flame of Fire, in
the midst of the Bush; and St. Stephen also assures us, ( Acts 7.30.) There
appeared to Moses an Angel of the Lord, in a Flame of Fire, in the midst of a
Bush. Dr. Bull replies; 1 st. The Divine WORD, who is the true God, might be
called here an Angel; because he appeared in such manner as Angels were wont to
appear. 2 dly. Some of the Fathers said, that it was an Angel that appeared in
the Bush; but the Divine WORD was in the Angel; and it was God in the Angel,
that spoke to Moses these Words, I am the God of thy Fathers. 3 dly. It Is an
absurd, nay horrible Opinion, to think or maintain, that the Angels ever (as it
were) acted the Person, and part of God, by assuming his incommunicable Name
Jehovah, or his Person, Authority and Attributes. He says, it was never heard
of, that an Ambassador (in delivering the Message or Commands of his Master)
took on him the Person and Style of his Master; but all Ambassadors say only,
thus says my Master.

Now in answer to these Elusions; first, Mr. Bull has but imperfectly reported
the Argument of those learned Men, to whom he endeavors to answer. For they
not only alledg, that the Person who is called Jehovah at Exodus 3.4. is
declared at ver. 2. of the same Chapter, and by St. Stephen at Acts 7.30. to be
only an Angel; therefore called Jehovah and God, because he represented the
Person and Authority of God: but they prove this by Examples, and by very
cogent Reasons. Moses tells the Israelites from God, Exodus 23.20. "I send an
Angel before thee in the way, to bring thee into the Place that I have
prepared: Beware of him, obey his Voice, provoke him not; for he will not
pardon your Transgressions, for my Name is in him. Who sees not here, that the
Meaning is, the Angel being to represent my Person, and to exercise my
Authority, therefore my Name is in him; or therefore he is called by my Name,
even Jehovah, or the LORD: which is the Name by which this Angel is all along
called in the following History, set down in the subsequent Chapters and Books
of Moses. Again, when it is said at Genesis 7.16. that Noah and his Sons, and the
Creatures that were to be preserved, being entered into the Ark, the LORD (Heb.
Jehovah) shut them in; and when the Angel that wrestled with Jacob is called (
Genesis 32.30.) God: is there not an absolute necessity of saying, that these
Angels had the Names Jebovah and God given to them, on the account that they
were heavenly Messengers, that represented the Person of God? For is it
congruous to say, God shut the Door; and God, wrestling with Jacob, prevailed
not against him? In a word, the viri doctissimi show, first, that it is expressly
said concerning a mere Angel, that the Name of God was in him: And next, that
very often the Nature and Quality of the Action, that is imputed to the Person
who bears the Names Jehovah and God, evinces, that the Person spoken of, is
Jehovah and God, only by Representation. But let us now weigh Dr. Bull's
Answers.

He says, first, the Divine WORD, who is true God, might be called an Angel,
when he appeared to Moses in the Bush; "Because God appeared in such manner, as
Angels are wont to appear. But we cannot grant, that if God appears in
suchmanner as Angels are wont to appear, God may therefore be called an Angel:
tho Dr. Bull desires us, that of all Love we would grant it; for he only says
it, and offers no manner of Proof, of so absurd and (in very deed) impossible a
Supposition. And we give this (incontestable) Reason, why the Person who
appeared in the Bush to Moses, and is called sometimes Angel, sometimes God,
was only an Angel who was called God on the Account that he represented God;
because if he were God, and therefore spoke these Words, I am the God of thy
Fathers, in his own Name, not in the Name of another, or as representing
another: He should have been called God only; and not Angel, which is to say
Messenger. Nor do I know, why Dr. Bull pretends here, God is called an Angel in
this Place, "Because he appeared in such manner as Angels are wont to appear:
there was no Cause at all, why he should say so; at least there is nothing in
the Text or Context, to countenance his so saying. But our Argument is
extremely probable, while we say; if it was indeed (not an Angel, but) God
himself that spoke these Words, I am the God of thy Fathers, he could be only
called God, and he was not at all an Angel, that is a Messenger. Briefly, it is
(say I) a Chimera, founded on nothing, what Dr. Bull here says, that the true
God is called an Angel in this Context, because he appeared in such manner as
Angels are wont to appear: for the manner of appearing here was wholly unusual;
there never was any such Appearance, whether by God or Angel, either before or
since. But we argue solidly and concludingly, when we alledg; if it be not an
Angel that speaks here, in the Name and Person of God; but God himself, and in
his own Name: it is against all Propriety and Grammar, that he is called (both
by Moses and St. Stephen) the Angel (or Messenger) of the Lord.

But Dr. Bull has a 2 d Evasion: "Several Fathers said, an Angel indeed
appeared in the Bush; but God was in the Angel: and it was not the Angel that
spoke, but God in the Angel. This is a Whimsy, tho he should quote an hundred
Fathers for it. For if God himself was in the Fire, and the Voice was from God,
not from the Angel, what need was there, that an Angel should be there at all?

Lastly, he says, it is an impious Opinion, that Angels ever (as it were) acted
the Person and Part of God; by assuming the incommunicable Name Jehovah, and
the Authority and Attributes of God. No Ambassador, he says, ever took on him
the Name and Style of his Prince; but the Ambassador says only, thus says my
Master. He is a bold Man, to charge even Angels themselves; and so many Writers
of holy Scripture, as ridiculous and impious; for giving the Name God to those
that represent God. Has not our Savior himself told us, that they also are
called Gods, to whom the Word of God comes, that is, the Magistracy, as all
confess. And for the Name Jehovah, which Dr. Bull calls the Incommunicable
Name; I ask, how comes Jehovah to be a greater Name, or more incommunicable,
than God? And why has he said nothing to so many Instances as the Socinians,
and his own viri quidam doctissimi, give of Persons, and even of Places; on
which the Name Jehovah is bestowed, in the Historical Books of Scripture? What
he says of Ambassadors serves only to show, that he has forgot some part of his
Academical Learning, and is but little acquainted with the World. There is no
Freshman in Oxford or Cambridg, but will inform him, out of the Roman
Antiquities; that Public Messengers were wont to assurne the Name and whole
Style of the Persons whom they represented. The Fecialis or Herald at Arms
denounced War, in these Terms; "I the King and People of Rome denounce and
proclaim Hostility and War, against the King and People of N. At this present
time, in the Christian Countries, Ambassadors in some Cases, take on them the
Name and Style of their Prince; as in all Espousals, and some other Cases: but
they always retain the Majesty and Dignity of the Prince or State from whom
they come; they always speak with the Hat on; and their Persons are sacrosanct,
that is, they cannot be arrested, confined or punished, they can only be
required to depart out of the Kingdom. This whole Defense therefore of Dr. Bull
is either groundless, or directly false. For if it had been God who spoke to
Moses, out of the Bush, he being present, and speaking in his own Name these
Words, I am the God of thy Fathers: he could not have at all been called an
Angel, that is Messenger. And if God himself, as Mr. Bull pretends, was in the
Fire, there was no Occasion, that an Angel also should be there. And it is
utterly false, that public Messengers do not assume the Name, or the Style, or
Dignity of the Sovereigns that send them, and whom they represent. I shall
therefore thank Dr. Bull, for giving up his Cause to the Socinians. For if it
was the WORD (or Son) as he says, that appeared (in the Bush) to Moses; it
follows, that the WORD is not God, but the Angel (or Messenger) of God: for he
can never elude our Argument, that if the Person that spoke these Words, I am
the God of thy Fathers, had been God himself speaking in his own Person, and
there present, he could not have been called a Messenger of the Lord either by
Moses or St. Stephen. Dr. Bull must of necessity grant, either that the WORD
did not appear in the Bush; which is to yield that his Fathers mistook, in the
chief Ground on which they built our Savior's Pre-existence: or that the WORD
is but a Messenger, not God; which is to yield his Cause.

2. It is argued again, against Dr. Bull's Fathers, by the viri quidam
doctissimi, that indeed it is said at Exodus 20.1. God spoke all these Words,
namely the ten Commandments: but other Texts inform us, that God is said to
have spoke the Commandments, and given the Law; because it and they were given
and spoke by an Angel (attended or accompanied by other Angels) in the Person
and Name of God, or as representing God; Acts 7.53. They received the Law, by
the Disposition of Angels. Gal. 3.19. It was ordained by Angels, in the Hand of
a Mediator; i. e. it was commanded or spoken by Angels; yet not immediately to
the People, but by the Mediation (that is, the Intervention) of Moses: the
Angels spoke it to Moses, in the Mount; he to the People: Heb. 2.2,3. "If the
Word spoke by Angels was steadfast; -- how shall we escape, if we neglect so
great Salvation, which at first began to be spoke by the Lord [Jesus,] and was
confirmed to us, by them that heard him? None ever doubted, that all these
Texts speak of the Law; and (the first and second) of the ten Commandments more
especially: but we see it is here said, they were received from Angels, were
ordained by Angels, were spoke by Angels; of which the Meaning can only be,
that the Angels spoke, ordained, and gave the Law, in the Person of God, or as
sustaining the Name and Person of God; we can no otherways reconcile these
Texts, to those other which impute the giving and speaking the Law to God
himself.

Whereas Dr. Bull replies; the Law indeed is sometimes said to be given by
Angels, and spoke by Angels, because they were present and attended when God
gave the Law: Almighty God came, he says, waited on by his Angels, to manifest
his Greatness and Majesty. I ask; seeing, according to Dr. Bull, God was
personally present, nay it was he that spoke the Commandments and the Law: how
could the Holy Scriptures say of the Angels, who assisted only at Attendants
and Servants in the Train of the Celestial King, that they gave, they ordained,
they spoke the Law? If his Majesty should come to Parliament in his Robes, and
other Marks of Sovereign and Legislative Power; but withal waited on by the
Gentlemen of his Chamber, or others whom he thinks fit to call to him: will any
one be so absurd as to say, that these Gentlemen made a most gracious Speech to
the two Houses? The Scriptures often tell us, the Commandments and Law were
spoke, were ordained, were given by Angels: True, says Dr. Bull out of his
Fathers; for the Angels were present, they waited on God when he gave,
ordained, and spoke the Law. Who sees not, that at this rate of answering and
arguing, he may also impute the Acts of our Kings and Parliaments, to their
Mace-bearers and Door-keepers?

Whereas he refers us to Deuteronomy. 33.2. and Psalm. 68.17. as Texts that will prove
to us, that God himself was with the Angels at Sinai, where the Commandments
and Law were delivered: it had been but civil, if he had repeated the very
Words of those Texts. Readers (commonly) take it very unkindly, when (lazy)
Authors send them of an Errand; and generally to a wrong Place too. It may be,
I am reading below Stairs in my Parlor; my Bible is on the Stool, by my
Bedside, two Stories higher: is it good Manners in an Author, to oblige me to
clamber up, with gouty Knees and Hands, into my Bedchamber, to search for
certain Words which he himself durst not recite, for fear I should laugh at
him? Well, but I have looked into the Texts, which Mr. Bull was ashamed to
relate: and I will assure our common Reader, that they do not at all say, that
God was any more with the Angels in Sinai, than he is in all other Places;
which is not such a sort of Presence as will answer Mr. Bull's Purpose. We
doubt not, God was at Sinai in the midst of the Angels; in such Sense, as it is
said by David, ( Psalm. 68.25.) "It is well seen my God and King, how thou go
into the Sanctuary; the Minstrels go before, the Singers follow, in the midst
are Damsels playing with Timbrels. Or as he is in the ordinary Congregations of
such as assemble to hear or pray. But we say, such (general) Omnipresence
notwithstanding; it is the Minister, not God, that (immediately) exhorts the
Congregation: and at Sinai the Angels, not God, immediately gave and spoke the
Law; that is, as representing the Person of God, and by his especial Mandate,
Orders and Directions, they gave the Law and the Commandments.

3. Again, they object to Mr. Bull's Fathers, Heb. 1.1,2. "God, who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, [as by Visions, Dreams, Apparitions of his
Angels] spoke in times past by the Prophets to the Fathers, has in these last
Days spoken to us by his Son. Here now are Dr. Bull's Fathers and St. Paul at
utter Variance. St. Paul says, God in times past spoke to the Patriarchs and
the Jewish Church by his Prophets, in diverse manners; by Dreams, Apparitions of
Angels, Visions, Burdens, Inspirations: but at length, in these last Days, in
the Gospel-Age with which the World shall conclude, he has spoke to us by his
Son. Dr. Bull's Fathers, on the contrary, pretend, that God spoke all along in
the Old Testament-times, not by a created Angel, but by his Son the eternal
WORD. The Socinians are absolutely of opinion, that one St. Paul is to be
preferred, to all the Fathers: and tho on this Account they are reckoned grand
Heretics, yet they are content to be reproached for their Adherence to
Scripture.

But what says Dr. Bull? He is never at a loss, he answers. When St. Paul says,
it is but in these last Days, or in the Gospel-Age, that the Son of God has
spoken to M^ the Meaning is, he did not before speak immediately to Men. How
so; why not immediately, if he appeared visibly, was heard audibly, and
directed his Speech immediately to the Person (or Persons) to whom he appeared?
No, all this is not immediate spealing, Dr. Bull says. It Is a hard Case truly;
but when the Scriptures say farther, that God (that is, the Angel who
represented God) spoke to Moses face to face, as a Man to his Friend; shall not
this neither be immediate speaking? Doubtless, it must not; for if it be, Dr.
Bull has lost his Cause; which is the only Reason, why, speaking audibly,
visibly, face to face, and as a Man to his Friend, is not immediate speaking.
But when the Apostle says; it is but in these last Days, in the Gospel-Age, that
God has spoke to Men by his Son: who gave Dr. Bull (or Friend L. de Tena)
Authority to add to his Words immediately, or immediatione suppositi? The
Apostle speaks in unlimited Terms; it is, says he, but only in this Gospel-Age
that God has spoke to Men by his Son: fair and softly, cries Dr. Bull; it must
be understood cum grano salis, or good Paul is quite out; for when all is done,
God spoke to Men by his Son, nay by none but him, from the very first. For the
Son spoke to Men from the Beginning, in the Likeness of an Angel; not indeed
immediately, but visibly, audibly, as a Friend to his Friend; and directing
also his Speech immediately, to the Person, and to no other, to whom he at that
time appeared. And this they call, interpreting of Scripture; their Cause
indeed requires such Interpreters.

But to prove, that the Lord Christ did indeed pre-exist; and was that Angel
who led the Israelites through the Wilderness, Dr. Bull alleges 1 Cor. 10.9.
"And let us not tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed
of Serpents. The Israelites then were destroyed of Serpents, for their tempting
(that is, provoking) the Lord Christ with their Sins, while (in the Appearance
of an Angel) he led them through the Wilderness. To this Text Grotius answers,
that without doubt, Let us not tempt Christ is a false Reading: and that we
ought to read with the Alexandrian Copy, "Let us not tempt God, as some of them
tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents. Dr. Bull replies, the Authority of the
Alexandrian Copy cannot be opposed to the Syriac, Latin and Arabic Versions,
to St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, and Theophylact. Yes, the Alexandrian Copy is
much antienter than any of those Versions or Fathers: the Latin (which is the
first) was made by St. Jerome, above 100 Years after the Alexandrian Copy. But
why has Dr. Bull suppressed it, that one of his own Historians (St. Epiphanius)
has expressly informed us, who was the particular Man that corrupted this Text:
the Heretic Marcion, instead of let us not tempt the Lord, that is to say God,
published in his Copies, let us not tempt Christ: Epiphan. l. 1. T. 1. p. 358.
Edit. Petav. This Corruption is very ancient, for Marcion (one of the first
that defended our Savior's Pre-existence; and to support that Doctrine,
corrupted this Text) flourished about the Year 150. But after the Nicene
Council, it is no wonder that many Trinitarians followed (in this Text) the
Copies of Marcion, as being then near 200 Years old; and it was after the
Nicene Council, that all the Versions and Fathers to whom Dr. Bull appeals
concerning this Text, appeared.

But to confirm farther the Pre-existence of the WORD, or Son of God, Dr. Bull
dares pretend that it is a part of the Jewish Cabbala, or traditional Knowledge,
which that Nation derived from Moses, he from God. Hereupon he cites some Words
of the (Apocryphal) Wisdom of Solomon, which (according to him) is a very
autient Book; also some Expressions of Philo Judaeus, supposed to be a Jew by
Religion as well as by Nation. He appeals also to the Chaldee Paraphrases (or
Translations of the Old Testament by Onkelos and Jonathan) as if these spoke of
the WORD, as a Person, and the great Messenger of God, under the Old Testament:
And finally, he says, Masius (on Joshua) has quoted a certain Rabbi, and an old
Jewish Book called Tanchumam, which speak of the WORD much after the manner as
does the Author of the Wisdom of Solomon.

He says first, that the Pre-existence of the WORD, as a Divine Almighty
Person, and as the Son of God, is a part of the Jewish Cabbala, or traditional
Knowledge: Then, to prove this, he cites Passages out of Philo, the Wisdom of
Solomon, the Paraphrases of Onkelos and Jonathan, a certain Rabbi, and the Book
Tanthumam. He thinks, it should seem, that these Jewish Writers had their
Notion of the WORD, from the Jewish Cabbala. I cannot but wonder, I coufess,
that a Protestant Divine should believe the Jewish Cabbala; or think that the
Jews had a traditional Knowledge or Institution, concerning God and Religion,
distinct from the Books of Moses and the Prophets. I had thought, that all
Protestants, nay all Christians, were agreed, that the Cabbala is the Invention
of the Pharisees and Masters of the Pharisaical Sect, not a Trudition from
Moses. If the Cabala had come from Moses; or had it been acknowledged by the
Prophets and ancient Jewish Church, as of Divine Revelation and Institution: it
would have been often mentioned, appealed and alluded to, in the Books of the
Old Testament; and there is no question that Ezra (when he made the Collection
of Canonical Books and Monuments, immediately after the Return from the
Babylonish Captivity) would have had an especial Care of the Divine Cabala, or
Traditional Knowledge. He would have committed it to Writing, lest it should be
lost or corrupted: He would have added it to the Canon of Scripture, when he
collected all other Pieces that had been written by the Prophets, or other holy
Men; He that has left to us the Proverbs of Solomon, his Book of Love, nay the
Story of Ruth, would not have neglected the Divine Cabala. But I shall put this
Dilemma to Dr. Bull; let him take it by which Horn he likes best. Either the
Cabala of the Jews is of humane Invention, or of divine Appointment and
Revelation. If the former, why has he quoted (in so great a Question as this
now before us) a spurious Work, an Imposture, an impious (Pharisaical) Addition
to the Holy Scripture: will such fraudulent Arts as these, help or credit his
Cause? If the other, if the Cabala is a Tradition of Divine Revelation and
Institution; it is of equal Authority with the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets; and Dr. Bull ought to bind it up, with the other two Parts of Holy
Scripture, namely the Old and New Testaments. Dr. Bull may do as he pleases;
but the Socinians acquiesce in that Judgment which our Savior himself has made
of the Cabala, at Mat. 15.6,9. where he calls this Traditional Law, the
Commandments of Men, a mere humane (Pharisaical) Figment; he adds there, that
by this Tradition of theirs they contradicted and made void the true and
genuine Commandments of God. It is in vain therefore that Mr. Bull tells us of
a Cabala of the Jews; of which he (precariously, and without having read it, or
so much as knowing what it is) supposes, that it not only speaks of the WORD,
but speaks of it as a Person and the Son of God: and afterward, falls to
citing some Jewish Authors; who from this Cabala (as he again untruly supposes)
discourse of the WORD^ a pre-existent Person, the Son of (...) by Generation,
and God's Messenger (...) Minister during the times of the Old Testament. I
say, this Pretense of Dr. Bull is vain, because supposing the Cabala did speak
of the WORD, as a Person and the Son of God, preexistent to the Creation it
self; and supposing again, that the Jewish Authors (whom he cites) had taken
their Doctrine from the Cabala: yet what will all this avail, when the Cabala
it self is (so certainly) not a Tradition from Moses or God; but a (mad)
Collection of Follies and Chimeras, the sickly Dreams of the (Fanatical)
Pharisees.

The Jewish Cabala is so far from owning a Trinity, that this very Doctrine of
(Apostate) Christians, is the chief Offense that the Jews take at the Christian
Religion: it is the great thing that their learned Men (in all Books and
Conferences) object to us, that we have departed from the first Commandment,
and have advanced a second and a third God. Farther, they as little believe the
WORD, when taken (in the Platonic Sense, namely) for a Person; or that God has
a Son, who was his Minister in the Creation of all things, and his Messenger or
Angel to the Patriarchs. In short, neither now nor formerly have the Jews
believed, that the WORD is the Son of God, but only his Power, Energy and
Virtue. Dr. Bull will never produce any thing of the Cabala, that but looks
this way. And see here, what Origin, who flourished about the Year 270 fays of
the Jews; "I have disputed often, says this most Learned Father, with the
Jewish Rabbis that were of most Esteem; but I could never meet with any of
them, who approve this Doctrine, that the WORD is the Son of God: Contr.
Celsum, l. 2. p. 79. Again, l. 4. p. 162. he is more express in the case; "
Celsus is ignorant that the Jews do not believe, that the Messiah (or Christ)
whom they still expect as to come, is not God, nor the Son of God. But Dr. Bull
himself, tho here (to serve the present turn) he contends that the Jewish
Cabala speaks of the WORD as a Person and the Son of God, elsewhere ( Judic.
Eccl. p. 170.) owns and proves, that "the Jews do not expect any Messiah or
Christ, promised to them by their Prophets, but who shall be a mere Man. And he
cites Tripho the Jew, saying, "We Jews expect a Christ, who is a Man, born of
Men. But if this was the Opinion of the Jews concerning Christ, that he shall
be a Man only; why does Mr. Bull pretend in this Place, that the Cabala (or
Traditional Doctrine of the Jews) which by them is supposed to be of Divine
Revelation, teaches the contrary, namely that the Christ is to be a Divine
Person, the eternal Son of God, and himself also God? He will never reconcile
these Contradictions to himself. But let us now examine, of what Authority his
Quotations, out of some Jewish Books, are.

His first Citation is out of the Apocryphal Book of Wisdom; Wisd. 18.15,16.
"Thy Almighty WORD leaped down from Heaven, out of his Royal Throne; as a
fierce Man of War, into a Land destined to Destruction. He brought thine
unfeigned Commandment, as a sharp Sword; and standing up, filled all things
with Death: he touched the Heaven, tho he stood upon the Earth. In sober
Sadness, this was a terrible WORD: his Feet stood on plain Ground, and yet his
Head touched (not the Clouds or the Ether, but) Heaven it self; and with his
Death-dealing Fauchion, he even depopulated the whole Country, in a few
Minutes. It Is sufficient however, I suppose, to sober People, if we say
hereupon, that this same was only a Chimerical, not a real Almanzor; and that
there is no Body but Dr. Bull, that will ever be afraid of his Puissance. But
Dr. Bull objects, that however this Passage serves to show, that the Author of
the Book of Wisdom, who was a Jew, believed the WORD. Right, but then he should
have observed too, that the Book as we now have it, must be as much reckoned to
the Translator who was a Christian, as to the first Writer of it, who (it may
be) was a Jew. Let us hear Grotius, in his Preface to his Annotations on this
Book: "The Book of Wisdom was written by a Jew, who lived after the times of
Ezra: but some Christian or other (who was a Greek) happening on it, he has
given it us in the Greek Tongue, but with diverse Additions to it, taken from
the Christian Religion. Of this kind, no Man will doubt it, is this Description
of the WORD, which is wholly Christian, as Christianity began to be taught
about the middle of the second Age: the Jews, as we have heard from Origin,
never believed such a kind of WORD; namely, that is a Person, the Son of God,
or God.

His next Allegation is from the Paraphrases of Onkelos and Jonathan, Jews that
translated the Old Testament into Syro-Chaldaick, after a Paraphrastical way.
But I cannot perceive, that any of his Citations out of these Paraphrases speak
of the WORD in the Platonic Sense; namely, as a Person, or as a God: but only
in the Jewish and Socinian Sense; namely, as the Energy and Power of God, or
God's powerful effectual Mandate. As to his last Quotation, from a Paraphrase
of Jonathan on the Psalms; which has some Appearance of being to the purpose
for which Mr. Bull alleged it: whereas Jonathan seems to read, the Lord said
to his WORD, Sit on my right Hand; Jonathan's Words may better be rendered thus,
the Lord said by his WORD, ( i. e. his Mandate or Decree) Sit on my right Hand.

But Philo speaks home; he (expressly) calls the WORD the Son of God, his
first-begotten Son: to whose Care (says he farther) as to the Vicarius and
Deputy of God, the whole Creation is committed; and by whom it was originally
made. But I shall never believe, that a Jew by Religion, wrote those things
concerning the WORD, that we see in Philo's Works. Eusebius suspects, Photius
directly affirms, that Philo was a Christian. This last adds, that by occasion
of some Displeasure taken, Philo departed from the Christian Religion. I
believe, with Eusebius and Photius, that Philo was a Christian: but I make no
question, that Eusebius is mistaken in thinking, that this is the Philo who was
sent on an Embassage to the Emperor C. Caligula; but a Philo of the second Age,
toward the expiring of it, or of the 2 d Age just expiring. For he describes
the Therapeutae, that is the Christians, both in their Discipline, their
Studies, and their manner of interpreting Holy Scripture; not as they lived or
were in the Apostolic Times, but in the Close of the second (and Beginning of
the third) Age.

Lastly, as to the (obscure) Rabbi cited by Masius, and the (unknown) Book
Tankumam, enough has been said to evince that if they speak of the WORD as the
Son of God, they may be written perhaps in Rabbinical Hebrew, and by Jews by
Nation, but such Jews as were come over to the Christian Religion; there being
nothing more certain than that the Jews never owned a Son of God in any other
Sense but of Adoption, Sanctification, Exaltation, and such like; nor do I
think, that Dr. Bull himself will again insist on Jewish Authorities, whether
they be these or any other. He should make himself ridiculous to all learned
Men, by persevering in such a notorious Mistake as this; that the Jews either
now, or in any time past, believed the WORD as a Person, or that God begat a
Son, who was pre-existent to the World, and was (together with God) the Creator
of it: it is for this very Doctrine, that the Jews have pretended ever since the
Council of Nice, and at this day do pretend, that Christianity is a Revolt to
Heathenism and Paganism.

There remains now but one thing more in Dr. Bull's Defense of the Nicene
Faith, that I intend to consider in this first Part of my Answer to him; his
Explication of the Trinity: or how three Divine Persons and Spirits, each of
which has all Divine Perfections, and is singly and by himself God, nay perfect
God, are (for all that) but one God.

On the Explication of the Trinity, according to the Fathers and Dr. Bull.
THAT three Divine Spirits and Persons, each of which has all possible (real)
Perfections, and therefore is (singly and by himself, as the Athanasian Creed
speaks) a most perfect God, are but one God, is so monstrous a Paradox; that we
might justly wonder, such a contradictory and impossible Doctrine being
(unhappily) got abroad, was not immediately hissed again, into the Hole, from
whence the Chimera first sallied; did we not know, that the Propagation and
Conservation of this Affront to common Sense, and to all the Principles of
Knowledge and Silence, was the Work and Effect of such penal Laws, as would
equally have restored the whole Body and System of Paganism. While the Question
about the Trinity was disputed, only by Argument and Authorities of Holy
Scripture; the Proverb was, all the World is against Athanasius, and Athanasius
is against all the World. And in Constantinople it self, the then capital City
of the whole Roman Empire, the Trinitarian Conventicle was so thin, that it had
more Benches than Men to fit on them: and their Preacher was forced to comfort
his almost empty Fold with such Reflections as these: "The Unitaries, says he,
have the Churches, but we (we Trinitarians) are the Temples of God; they have
the People, but the Angels are with us: my Flock indeed is little, I easily
tell all my Sheep; but they hear my Voice, they follow me, and will not follow
Strangers. Greg. Nazianz. Sermon. 35. against the Arians. But the Empire falling
at length to a Prince, who was a bigoted Trinitarian; he applied the Imperial
Authority, and the Awe of his Armies, which comfilied (for the most part) of
Soldiers and Officers who had been born (bred and continued) Pagans, to
establish Trinitarianism by Terrors and Force. He ('it was Theodosius) and his
Successors began with taking the Churches, (...) in all Unitarians, by military
Force: then they were prohibited to hold their Assemblies, Conventicles they
were now called, within the Preciucts of Cities or Towns. Next, he called
general Councils, but admitted none to Session or Vote but Trinitarians: to
whose Creeds and Canons, all that stood for any (the very least)
Church-Preferment, must subscribe, before they were admitted to their Places.
Afterward, all Disputes against the Decisions of these Councils were forbid to
all without Exception: to Churchmen and military Officers, on pain of
Deposition; to Laymen, if they were free, under the Penalty of Banishment; to
Servants, under pain of corporal Chastisement, and that too (says the Law)
after the severest manner. They proceeded farther, they required all Persons,
to deliver up all Heretical Books, that they might be publicly burnt;
denouncing horrible Punishments to such as should presume to hide or conceal
any such Books. While the Civil Power acted his Part in this (outrageous)
manner, the Ecclesiastics were as industrious another way: the Underlings of
them sought the Favor of their Superiors, by turning Informers against the
Heretics and their Assemblies; others (that could read and write) took upon
them the corrupting, or as they then spoke, the correcting the Bibles; adding
and leaving out as themselves pleased. Nor would they have left to us, any
Remain of genuine Christianity; or suffered a single Unitarian to escape their
Barbarities: but that their Divisions concerning their own Doctrine, their own
Disputes de Asini umbra, diverted often their Rage and Treachery, from the
Scriptures and the Unitaries, to the Members of their own Party and Communion.
Dares Dr. Bull, or any other, deny any thing of this? when they do, this (and
much more) shall be proved upon them, from the most allowed of their own
Historians, and from the Codes which contain the Imperial Constitutions.

We may say then, that Trinitarianism is not so much a Religion, as the Law of
the Bizantine (or Constantinopolitan) Emperors; it was first introduced by
military Force, then confirmed by Edicts of the Arbitrary Emperors of
Constantinople. Well, but when Folly and Impiety are once established by Law,
and are the only way to Preferment, there will never want a great Number, who
will court the Favor of the Government, by endeavoring to represent the
current Doctrine of the Times, as possible, nay as reasonable and agreeable to
Scripture: and from hence came the Explications of the Trinity, by the
Parasites of those times; whom now, in regard of their Antiquity, we call the
Fathers, These Explications were various, and contrary to one another; Dr. Bull
has made choice of the most tolerable and passable Accounts given by the
Fathers: and tho he has patched up one Hypothesis (or Explication) out of many
and diverse, I will be content to take it, as he gives it. He represents it, as
the ordinary Explication, of all the Fathers; as well the Ante-nicene as
Post-nicene: let us see what it is, and then make our Reflections upon it.

They said, there are three infinite Persons, known by the Names of Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit; each of which has all Divine Perfections, and in their
highest Degree. They are so many distinct, tho not divided or separated
Substances and Essences: they are as much three Spirits, as they are three
Substances and Persons; each has his own proper and personal distinct
Understanding, Will, and (Almighty) Energy. It is true, that they said also,
that the three Divine Persons are consubstantial, or have the same Substance:
but they did not mean thereby the self-same Substance, or the same Substance in
Number, but the same for Kind and Properties; that is, their Substances are
(alike) Divine, Immortal, and Unchangable. They are consubstantial to one
another, as Stars are consubstantial to Stars; that is, their Substances, tho
diverse in Number, have the same Properties and Qualities. In short, the Father,
Son and Spirit, are distinct (intellectual) Substances; and are consubstantial
(or of the same Substance) as their Substances or Essences are alike infinite,
immutable and immortal: they are also (and therefore) distinct Beings; and
because they are intellectual and spiritual, they are three Minds and three
Spirits, as much as they are three Persons and Substances. Lastly, because each
has all possible (real) Perfections, therefore each of them is true God.

I dare to affirm beforehand, that Dr. Bull is so well satisfied, that this is
the Notion that the Fathers had of the Trinity, that he will own it for theirs
and his, and will not (disingenuously) deny that he intended this Explication
or Account of the Trinity, in the several Chapters of his Defense of the Nicene
Faith, where he speaks (either designedly or incidentally) of this Point. And
his Book has given him such a Reputation all over Europe, even in the Catholic
Countries; and his Citations out of the Fathers, so plainly evince, that this
was their Sense; that (I believe) no Trinitarian will be so rash or hardy, as
to call him Heretic, or to attack or write against him as such; tho others (of
less Esteem) are now loudly challenged of Heresy, for this very Explication. In
very deed, it is the Doctrine of the (Post-nicene) Fathers, and of all the real
Trinitarians: and since the Revival of these Controversies, diverse learned
Writers (by Name Dr. Cudworth, the late Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Gloucester, Dr. Sherlock, Mr. How, and others) embrace this Notion of the
Trinity. It Is not unlikely, that (by degrees) it will exclude the (Sabellian
Nominal) Trinity of the Schools; and not only exclude it, but be the Occasion
that it shall be declared Heretical. It Is true, that more commonly in
Universities, they go the way of the Schools; but the scholastic Trinity
implies so many Follies, and is so certainly nothing else but a disguised
Sabellianism: that the real Trinitarians may probably enough carry their Point
against the Nominals; if the Difference between them, breaking out into a
Contention, shall fall into the Hands of able Managers.

We have seen how the Fathers understood the Trinity; but the Difficulty is
still behind: how did they make out the Unity of God? For if there are three
spiritual intellectual Substances, three infinite Spirits, three (eternal,
all-knowing and all-powerful) Minds, Three, each of which is a perfect God: do
we not lose the Unity of God, the principal Article of revealed Religion, and
the grand Design of both the Testaments, while we believe and affirm three such
Persons? Dr. Bull here offers his Hand, at a dead lift; he tells us, the
Fathers easily came off from this Exception or Doubt, by saying,

1. The Son and Spirit had their Original, their Being, and Godhead, from the
Father: therefore having proceeded from him as their Principle and Fountain,
they are not distinct Gods from him, but one God with him. The Fathers granted,
that were not the Son and Spirit originated from the Father, the three Divine
Persons being so many several Principles, would also be so many Gods: but
because the Son and Spirit are not (as the Father) self-originated or
unoriginated, but from the Father; therefore they are rightly said to be one
God with him.

Every one sees, that there lies this Exception, against this Account of the
Unity of God. If to be originated from the Father, will make the Persons so
originated to be one God with him, or one with him and with one another; it
follows, that not only the Son and Holy Spirit, but Angels also and Men (nay
the whole Creation, the very vilest Parts of it) shall be one God with the
Father, and with the (pretended) Trinity, and one with one another, because
they are all originated from the Father. Therefore the Fathers said,

2. Bare Origination from the Father, will not constitute the Persons so
originated one God (or one) with him, or with one another, unless they have the
same Substance with the Father; that is, as has been said, the same for Kind
and Properties. And this Confideration, they said, excludes all Creatures from
being one God or one with the Father, or the blessed Trinity: for created
Substances are finite, subject to Change and Accidents. In a word, they are
wholly unlike to the Divine Substance.

They foresaw, that it would be again objected here. If to be originated from
another, who is of the same kind with the Persons so originated from him, will
make them all to be one; for Instance, will make the Son and Spirit to be truly
one, and one God, with the Father from whom they are originated: then two Sons,
or a Son and Grandson, because they are originated from the same Father, and
are of the same kind with him, shall also be one with him; they shall not be
three Men, but one Man, as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are not three Gods,
but one God. To wind themselves from this most certain and solid Reasoning, the
Fathers devised a third Elusion, as wise as either of the two former: they said
that,

3. Origination of two Persons from a first Person, tho they are all of the
same kind, will not make them one, or one God; except (as it most luckily
happens between the three Divine Persons) the originated Persons are propagated
interiori productione: that is, are generated by an internal Production, so
that they are (always and inseparably) in the Person that produced them. And
this at length is the Fathers whole Explication of a Trinity in Unity. They
said, in short, three distinct Divine Persons, Substances, Spirits, each of
which is (singly and by himself) a perfect God, are notwithstanding but one
God; because the second and third Persons are originated from the first, and
are of the same Kind and Properties with him, and are generated or propagated
by an internal Production, so that they inseparably and always remain in the
Father, and he in them. This, in effect, is to say; that naturally, properly
and truly speaking, there are three Gods, or there are three Gods in Number:
but in regard that God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, are of the same kind
with God the Father, are originated from him, and are eternally and inseparably
in him; they may (in a Catachrestical, improper and respective Sense) all be
called one God.

I will examine very particularly, the whole Hypothesis of these Fathers, their
Trinity of Substances, Minds and Spirits; and their Explication (now laid down)
how three such Persons and (Divine) Minds can be but one God? Only for
preventing (if it may be) future Cavils, I would first take notice, that this
Explication of the Unity of God (or how three Persons can be but one God) by
the Fathers and Dr. Bull, evidently supposes, that they held the three Divine
Persons are so many distinct Substances, Minds, and Spirits, as well as
distinct Persons.

I think, it is sufficient, to prove that the Fathers held the three Persons are
so many distinct Spirits and Minds, in that they so certainly affirmed them to
be distinct spiritual Substances: if the three Divine Persons are three
distinct Substances, all Men (the very nominal Trinitarians themselves) will
grant, that they are distinct Minds and Spirits. Dr. Bull has incontestably
proved, by a great Number of Quotations, and might have proved by a great many
more; that by consubstantial, or of the same Substance, the Fathers meant not
the same Substance in Number, but the same in Properties. As Stars are
consubstantial to Stars, and the Bodies of Men to the Bodies of Beasts; because
they are Substances of the same kind (that is, corporeal) and of the same
Properties, for all Stars are lucid, and the Bodies of Men and Beasts are
organized, and subject to Alteration: So are the three Divine Persons
consubstantial, being of the same kind, that is to say spiritual; and having
the same Properties, namely Eternity, Immutability, Omnipresence, and the other
Divine Attributes. I will undertake for it, that none of the Nominal
Trinitarians (as angry as some of them are) will ever attempt to confute Dr.
Bull's first Chapter of his second Section; where he gives this Account of the
word Consubstantial, out of the Fathers. But if the Divine Persons are
therefore Consubstantial, because they are of like kind, and have the same
Properties; their Substance is not the same in Number, but only (as Dr. Bull
speaks) the same in Nature. And if this be true, as incontestably it is, that
the Fathers believed the three Divine Persons to be so many distinct spiritual
Substances in Number: it will be controverted by no Body, that they are also
(in the Judgment of the Fathers) distinct Minds and Spirits.

Secondly; But (as I said) the beforementioned Explications of the Unity of
God, or how the three Divine Persons are yet but one God, are another, and an
invincible Declaration; that they held the said Persons are three Minds,
Spirits and Substances. If the Fathers had held, that the three Persons are but
one only (numerical) Substance, one infinite Spirit, one omniscient Mind and
Energy; and that they are called Persons, only because the one (numerical)
Substance subsists in three Modes, that is, after three several manners: I say,
if this had been the Opinion of the Fathers, the Question would not have been,
how the three Persons can be but one God, but how they can be called Hypostases
or Persons? As at this day, no Man is so foolish, as to charge the Nominal
Trinitarians with Tritheism, or holding three Gods; but only with Gotham
Philosophy and Divinity, in calling Modes (or a Substance subsisting after
three manners) Persons, when it is so obvious that Modes are not Persons, but
certain Affections and accidental Denominations belonging to Persons. The
Fathers would never have troubled themselves, nor would any ever have objected
it to them, or demanded it of them; how they could say there is but one God, if
the three Persons (by them so called) were but one (numerical) Substance
subsisting three manner of ways, or in three relative Modes: all the Question
(as I said) would have been, what they meant by this Gibberish, subsisting in
three Modes or three manner of ways? What Occasion was there for the Fathers to
tell us, the three Divine Persons may be called one God; because the Son and
Spirit are originated from the Father, are like to him in all Divine
Properties, and subsist in him: what need, I say, was there of these Excuses,
or how are they possibly applicable to the three Divine Persons; if the Persons
were not taken to be so many Spirits, Minds and Substances, but only a
threefold manner of Subsistence of the same (numerical) Substance, Mind and
Spirit?

I omit (for the present) a great deal that might be farther said on this
Subject; because when the Nominal Trinitarians have called, till they are
hoarse, weary and ashamed, to Universities and Bishops to espouse their Cause,
and to censure the real Trinitarians: after all, the very Names by which the
three Divine Persons are called ( a Father, his Son, an Holy Spirit distinct
from both) do so manifestly imply those Persons to be distinct Beings,
Substances, Minds and Spirits, and not Modes or Relations only of the self same
numerical Being and Spirit; that it will always be carried against them, by the
Majority of considering Divines. All their Appeals notwithstanding, it will not
be long, e're they are told by their Superiors in the Church, that it is
expedient for them to be quiet, left themselves be censured as Sabellians, or
as we now speak Unitarians. To sum up all, I say, the Fathers beld that the
three Divine Persons are three distinct (spiritual, intellectual) Substances,
three Minds, three Spirits: this appears, say I farther, by their Explications
of the word Consubstantial; by their Answers to this Question, how three such
Persons can be but one God; and by the Terms which they use concerning the
three Persons, a Father, his Son, a Spirit distinct from both.

These things being, I suppose, sufficiently established, we may rely on it,
that Dr. Bull will not deny that I have truly reported what the Fathers (the
Post-nicene Fathers say I, but Dr. Bull says all the Fathers) held, both
concerning the three Divine Persons, and how we must understand them to be but
one God. Therefore now, I will examine his whole Hypothesis; it has these
Parts. 1. There are three Divine Hypostases, or intellectual Substances, three
ommscient almighty Minds and Spirits; each of these has all Divine Perfections,
and is singly and by himself a most complete and perfect God. 2. Yet does not
this contradict that most great and indisputable Truth, visible in the Works of
Creation, and ascertained by Revelation of holy Scripture; that there is but
one God: because of the three Divine Hypostases and Spirits before described,
the second and third are originated from the first; have the same Nature and
Properties, that he has; and are propagated from him by an internal Production,
so that they are always inseparably in him, and he in them, by a mutual
Pervasion, Immeation or Penetration.

There is no necessity that I should concern my self, against the first of
these Propositions; for if I disprove the second, the first will fall of it
self: if three Hypostases or Spirits cannot be one God, this sort of
Trinitarians must either give up their three distinct Substances, their three
Minds and Spirits; or openly profess, that they believe three Gods.
Notwithstanding, it will not be amiss, or besides our Purpose, if we show these
Gentlemen, that whatever Arguments militate against a Plurality of Gods, prove
also (no less effectually and directly) that there can be but one Divine
(intellectual) Substance, but one infinite Spirit and Mind.

How do Philosophers and Divines establish the Unity of God; or, that there
neither is, nor can be more than one God? They say; all Plurality of Beings of
the same kind and sort, is from the Imbecility, Weakness and Unsufficiency (in
some respect or other) of those Beings: for if a Being be absolutely perfect,
infinite in all Perfections, all-sufficient for it self, and for the Beings to
which it relates; there is no need, that it should be multiplied, or be more
than one. We see, say they, that all Nature has nothing that is superfluous,
nothing in vain; wherever one of the sort is sufficient, as one Sun and such
like, the Individuals of that kind never proceed beyond Unity. But the Divine
Nature, as the most excellent of all, will much more exclude all Multiplicity:
more Infinites, more All sufficients, would be such an impertinent Repetition,
so altogether vain and to no purpose, that we cannot think of it, without
immediately rejecting it. This is the first Argument, used by Philosophers, to
prove the Unity of God; no Body will contest it, that it equally proves but one
infinite Spirit, one all-sufficient Mind, one absolutely perfect Being.

They say again; it implies a Contradiction, that there should be more than one
all-sufficient God, Mind or Spirit; because such a Supposition pretends to make
an infinite Addition (of the same kind) to what is (already) infinite, and to
increase All Sufficiency.

And, if there are more Gods, or more Minds and Spirits, infinite in their
Perfections, either they are all of them unoriginated; or one only is
unoriginated, and the rest are derived from him by Generation or Creation. The
Trinitarians, with whom we have now to do, answer; that only one, the Father,
is unoriginated, the other Persons are propagated from him. But they can never
answer, either why the Father should propagate from himself, only two Spirits
as perfect as himself; or why, seeing those two are as perfect as he, they also
should not generate their like? If the two propagated Persons and Spirits
cannot generate their like; they are not such perfect Beings as the Father is:
and consequently are neither Gods, nor absolutely perfect Spirits. If it be
said only, they will not generate their like, because three absolutely perfect
Spirits are enough; it is not only frivolous, but silly: for if three perfect
Spirits are more desirable by one another, or more necessary to the World than
one such Spirit or Mind, by an unavoidable Parity of Reason, seven or ten
Spirits and Minds, that are all-sufficient and absolutely perfect, must be more
desirable, and more requisite to the World than Three. Again,

It was Aristotle that observed, and it is an Observation worthy of so great a
Man; that the Unity of God is discernable in the Constitution and Frame of the
World. For such is the Uniformity and good Order of the whole; and all the
Parts (both in their Qualities and Motions) so manifestly tend to one and the
same End, namely the Service of Man, and the Conservation of the World it self
in its present State; moreover, these Parts continue in their first Motion and
Course, so steadfastly and invariably: that it appears they were contrived, and
are regulated, not by more Gods, Makers, or Almighty Spirits, but by one only
Law and Mind.

Last of all, that there is an allwise God; we prove beyond Contradiction, by
that perpetual Wisdom, Contrivance and good Sense, which is seen in the Whole
and the Parts of the World; and which must be previous to the World and its
Parts, else how came (blind unthinking) Matter into such a wise Order? But we
have no manner of Proof, not the least Intimation, that there are more such
Gods; as undoubtedly there would be, both in Nature and by Revelation, if
indeed there were more such.

These Reasons have always persuaded all Philosophers and Divines, that there
is but one (supreme and infinite) God; and they proceed as directly against
more infinite all-perfect and creating Spirits or Minds, as against more Gods.
In very deed, there never was any Philosopher that made any Distinction,
between three Gods and three infinite Minds and Spirits: he would have been
esteemed not in his right Senses, by the Philosophers, who should talk of one
God and three infinite all-perfect Spirits; with them, one God, and one
all-perfect Spirit were convertible Terms, and used for each other; and indeed
they ever will be, by all that consider what they say.

But Dr. Bull, and the Fathers whom he follows, are persuaded; that tho all
Nature and Reason are against it, yet it is a Divine Revelation, that there are
three infinite (intellectual) Substances, three all-perfect Spirits, three
all-sufficient Minds: and that they may be said to be but one God, on the
Accounts beforegiven; and which I will now examine. He, and his Fathers say,

1. The second and third Minds are originated from the first; the Son and
Spirit have their Being, Life and Godhead from the Father: therefore they are
one God with him. There never was a more absurd thing said by Men. They pretend
to prove the Unity, or declare the Unity; by what is the first Cause of
Distinction, Diversity, and separate Existence. God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, are propagated, from God the Father; therefore they are one God with
him: no Friends, no; therefore they are separate Beings, and distinct Gods,
from him; as distinct and separate as Cause and Effect can be, which is the
very first of Distinctions. and the Ground and Reason of all subsequent
Distinction.

And what kind of God have these Gentlemen devised? A God who is, in one part
of his Composition, in that part which they call the Father, unoriginated; but
in his two other Parts, the Son and Spirit, not only originated as to his
Godhead; but as to his very Being and Life. To say, as Dr. Bull and the Fathers
do, that the Son and Spirit have their Being, Life and Godhead from the Father,
or are originated in respect of all these from the Father; implies that they
differ from the Father as prior and posterior, former and latter: for the
originated Spirits (or Parts of God) must of necessity be posterior (latter or
postnate) to that Spirit (or part of him) from which they are originated; the
very term Origination is a Confession of a natural Posteriority, which cannot
be in God. To grant to our Opposers that Distinction of theirs, prior in Nature
and prior in Time; they cannot thereby secure their Cause: for if the Son and
Spirit are originated, as to their Substance, Being, Life and Godhead, from the
Father; they are posterior in Nature to him, and therefore can neither be God,
nor essential Parts of him. Posterior in Nature (or postnate) is as
incompatible to God, as posterior in Time; for it implies an Accession to him,
and a Change in him. If there be something in God, that is posterior in Nature,
to something else in God; then the whole of God is not connate, there has been
a Change and Accession in him: which because our Opposers dare not say, neither
ought they to say the other; namely, that there is somewhat in God, that is
posterior in Nature to somewhat else in him; and yet to give up that, they
know, is to give up their Cause.

But themselves, that they may not seem stark Fools, take notice; that if to be
originated from the Father, will make the Son and Spirit to be one God with the
Father; the whole Creation, the very vilest parts of it, shall be one God with
him, because they are originated from him; that is, they give up this first
Solution or Explication of the Unity; and they alledg, in the next Place, after
this manner;

2. We do not affirm, that bare Origination from God, can make the Persons so
originated, to be one God with him: but only when they are so originated from
God; as to have the same (specific) Substance and Properties that he has;
that is, when the originated Persons have, like him, immortal, unchangable
Substances; and are omniscient, omnipotent, and the rest that God is. As who
should say; we make it out, that three infinite Spirits are but one God, by
increasing their first Distinction and Diversity. They were sufficiently three
Gods, by the Origination of the second and third, from the first; but we will
more ascertain them to be so, by the Multiplication of Substances and specific
Properties. I ask, what is it that constitutes or essentiates a God; is it not
this, That we suppose a spiritual Substance, that is immortal and unchangable,
and has the Divine Properties of Omniscience and Omnipotence? If so, then by
supposing more such Substances, with such Properties belonging to them; we do
not suppose one God, but three. In short, I say; they propose such an
Explication how three infinite Minds and Spirits are but one God, as all Men of
Consideration will take to be a Declaration and Assertion of three Gods: for
they will have three infinite Minds to be one God, because they have three
distinct Divine Substances, qualified each of them with (all) distinct Divine
Properties; when these Substances and Properties are the very Marks and
Notifications of their distinct Divinities, or that they are distinct Gods.

But themselves also acknowledge, that if Origination from the Father, and to be
(specifically) consubstantial with him, were sufficient to make the Son and
Spirit one God with the Father: then James and John being originated from their
Father Peter, and consubstantial in all Respects with him, it will follow, that
Peter, James and John, are not three Men, but one Man; or Peter, James and John
are one Man with Peter. To get rid of this, they advance a third Bull, more
ridiculous than either of the two former: it is this.

3. If the originated and consubstantial (and Divine) Persons are propagated
(from the first Person) by an internal Production; so that they are always and
inseparably in the Person that produced them; they are thereby most truly one
God with him. Here the Reader needs only to consider, that we are arguing
concerning three such Persons as are confessed (by these Opposers) to be three
distinct Substances. Now to say of two of these Substances, that they are
propagated by an internal Production, is a Bull; to add, that that they are
inseparably in the Person that produced them, is another: but it is worst of
all, to say; that by their Inexistence in the Father, the Son and Spirit are
one God with him; this (I say) is a worse Blunder, a more inexcusable
Oversight, than internal Production, or inseparable Substances.

Internal Production, when said of Substances, is a Contradiction, both in the
Sense and Terms: it is as much as to say, a Production not produced; a
Generation not generated.

And a Substance being that which can exist separately, or by it self; and
needs not, as an Accident, to inexist in something else: therefore an
inseparable Substance is a Substance without being a Substance, or a Substance
and no Substance. Dr. Bull will answer, it may be, the Substances of the Son
and Spirit are always and inseparably in the Father; not from a natural
Inhability to subsist (as they are Substances) by themselves, or separately:
but only because the Nature of the Divine Unity requires, that the second and
third Persons of the Godhead, should always inexist in the first; and he in
them. But if this be the Meaning of inseparably; it is impertinently, as well
as falsely added. Impertinently, because the word always had been enough; and
only proper to be here used. Falsely, because things are not inseparable, if
only they are not actually separated, but of their own Nature have an Hability
to exist separately. The Bull therefore remains, against whatsoever Excuses:
but were that which the Doctor aims to say never so true, we shall see
presently, it will not in the least avail his Cause.

For, as I said, the greatest Blunder and Inobservance of all, is what Dr. Bull
(and the Fathers) take to be the Strength of this Hypothesis; namely this; that
the second and third Persons being always in the first, are therefore one God
with him. For it is to be noted, that these Gentlemen hold, not only that the
Son and Spirit are in the Father, but he also in them: it is the mutual
Inexistence of all the three Persons, and not only of the Son and Spirit in the
Father, that makes them to be one God. I ask hereupon, whether this mutual
Inexistence, Immeation or Penetration of the three Persons, be such; that their
Substances become continuous, as the Parts (for Instance) of the same Piece of
Gold are; or only contiguous, like more Pieces of Gold that are heaped (or
bagged) together? Are the Substances of the three Divine Persons, I say,
continuous; as (to use another Instance) the Parts of the same Angel or Soul
are continuous and indiscerpible? or are the only contiguous, as God or the
Divine Substance (which pervades all things, Spirits as well as Bodies) is
contiguous to the things which it pervades and immeates?

If Dr. Bull says, that the Divine Persons, Minds and Spirits, or the three
Divine Substances, have such a mutual Inexistence, that they become continuous;
as the (assignable conceivable) Parts of each Person's own Substance are, or as
the Parts of an Angel or Soul are: He says thereby, and therein, that the
Substances and Persons are identified; which is Heresy, because (as the
Athanasian Creed speaks) it confounds the Persons. If the Substances are
continuous, and thereby identified, the Properties also of the three
Substances, in Mr. Bull's Hypothesis, will be identified too: for in this
Hypothesis there cannot be distinct Understandings, Wills and Energies, if the
Substances are not distinct, but continuous, and (thereby) identified. But we
need not to insist on this; for Dr. Bull dares not say, that the Substances of
the Divine Persons are identified or continuous: he must say, and will say,
that they do so inexist in one another, that they are only contiguous; there is
only a Contact of their Substances, not an Identification or Continuity. But if
there be only a Contact of the three Substances, they are as much three Gods,
and separate Substances in the Physical Sense of the word separate: as three
Men embracing one another, are three distinct Men, not one Man; or as God and
the Creation are separate Substances, tho he inexists in (pervates or immeates)
the Works he has made, and they again exist in him.

The Fathers that were Philosophers, when they said, the three Divine Persons
or Substances are in one another, meant, by their mutual Love and Agreement:
but those Fathers that were not learned, or understood only the Platonic
Philosophy, which is wholly moral and metaphysical, and never meddles with the
natural Reasons of things; I say, the Fathers that were not natural
Philosophers imagined such an Inexistence of the three Persons, that the said
Persons were physically and substantially in one another, and thereby (say
they) one God. They knew not, that a substantial Inexistence must either be by
the Continuity of the Substances; which confounds the Substances or Persons: or
only by Contiguity or Contact, which can no more make three Divine Persons and
Spirits to be one God, than three Men fitting close on the same Bench, are
thereby one Man; or than God, who is in all Spirits (whether Angels or Souls)
and they in him, are the same Being or the same Substance, not separate
Substances.

In short, Dr. Bull and these Fathers say; the three Divine Persons are three
distinct several Substances, and do substantially immeate (or inexist in) one
another: yet so, that they are not continuous or identified, as the Parts of
the same (numerical) Substance are, but only contiguous. We say hereupon, that
this will never make them to be one God, because mere Contact is only a
juxta-Position, not a real Union. All Philosophers, but only the Platonists who
understand not Physics, or the Nature of things, will assent to this
Reasoning: and I doubt not, it was one of the Causes, why the Schoolmen (who
were learned Philosophers) unanimously agreed, that three distinct (Divine)
Substances are most certainly three Gods; and they (the Divines of the Schools)
have been followed by all the Divinity-Chairs in Christendom, from about the
Year 1200 to this present time. I do not believe, there is a Chair in
Christendom that will own more than one Divine Substance; or will admit that
three Divine Substances can be one God. Dr. Bull will not approve his
Hypothesis to the Chairs, or to Universities or Schools of Learning. I am of
opinion however, that so arrogant a Man as Dr. Bull will not let go his
Hypothesis; it being too the Doctrine of the Fathers, and of a great many
learned Men who treat of these Questions as Divines, not as Philosophers: and
Dr. Bull having acquired so great a Reputation all over Europe, by his Book;
the Chairs and Nominal Trinitarians will not, it may be, adventure to attack
him.

But if after all, Dr. Bull, fearing the Numbers and Reputation of the Nominal
Trinitarians, will deny his Hypothesis; and (in hopes to compound with them)
pretend that it differs not (or not materially) from the Doctrine of the
Schools: besides that all discerning and ingenuous Men will laugh at his
Pusilanimity; I shall not desire an easier Task, than to prove from his own
Book, and from innumerable Quotations of the Fathers, that both they and he
hold three distinct Divine Substances, and consequently so many Minds and
Spirits, both which are rejected as Heretical (nay as Tritheistical) by the
Schools and their Followers.

I will conclude this first Part of my Answer, with observing, that tho Dr.
Bull says here, that the Fathers believed the three (Divine) Persons are one
God, because the second and third are derived from the first, have like
Substances and Properties with him, and all of them do mutually immeate one
another: yet this is not the Explication of any particular Father, much less of
all of them; but an Hypothesis that Dr. Bull has pieced up, from the Writings
of diverse Fathers. The Fathers explained the Unity in Trinity, each of them his
own way. One said, the three Persons are one God, because they are in one
another, by mutual Love and Agreement. Another said, they are one God, because
of the Subordination and perfect Subjection of the second and third Persons, to
him who is the first God. Another, they are one God, because the Son and Spirit
are propagated from the Father. Another, because they unanimously govern the
World; that is, they are one God, because they are one Monarchy, and thereby
(as it were) one Ruler. Some of them said, three Divine Persons, and three
infinite Spirits are God and the Godhead; in such Sense as all Men are called
Man or Mankind. As three golden Coins of the same Emperor are called Aurum,
Gold, not Aura, Golds, in the Plural: So in proper speaking, three Divine
Persons, because (like three Men, or three golden Coins) they are
consubstantial; that is, have the same specific Substances and Properties;
they are (in proper speaking) to be called God, not Gods. This was a very
ridiculous Reasoning, contrary both to Grammar and Philosophy; and yet it was
the Explication of some of the most learned of the Post-Nicene Fathers.

Briefly, these two things I affirm: That Dr. Bull's Explication of the Unity
of God, is indeed taken out of some of the Fathers: but it was not (as it is
laid down by him) the particular Explication given by any one of them, much
less the agreed and common Explication of all of them; but part of it is from
some, other Parts of it from other Fathers. Secondly, the Fathers advanced
several other Explications; on which some of them insisted, more and rather,
than on any part of Mr. Bull's. The Ante-Nicens chiefly urged the Unity of
Love, or else of Monarchy: the most learned (but least judicious) of the
Post-Nicens served themselves of the (pretended) Consubstantiality, or that the
three Persons having like Substances and Properties, are therefore one God; as
all Men or Mankind are called Homo, and as three (or more) golden Coins are
called Aurum, Gold; never Aura, Golds. But of these things I shall speak fully,
in the Conclusion of the third Part of this Answer to Dr. Bull.

The CONCLUSION.
I Have said what I intended in this first Part. In the Second I will report
the Doctrine of the following Fathers, concerning the Trinity and the Person of
our blessed Savior, in their own Words: By the following Fathers I mean those
Fathers who flourished from about the Year 150, to the Nicene Council, or the
Year 325. In the last Part I shall discover Dr. Bull's Frauds and Mistakes,
detect his Sophistries and Elusions; and confront his Misrepresentation of the
Fathers, with the Confessions and Judgment of the Critics, who have either
published or commented on the Writings of the Fathers. Here and now it remains
only, that I inform the Reader, who has not seen Dr. Bull's Books, why I have
answered so indifferently, and without any particular Deference to the Merit of
his Learning and Abilities: for it cannot be denied, that this Gentleman is a
dextrous Sophister; or that he has read the principal Fathers with a more than
ordinary Application, Diligence and Observation. Dr. Bull has written two
Books, his Defense of the Nicene Faith, and Judgment of the Catholic Church,
designedly and directly against the Unitarians; whether they be Arians or
Socinians. In the first of these he attacks more particularly Chr. Sandius, a
very learned Arian; and the Author of Irenicum Irenicorum, who was Dr. Zwicker
M. D. a Socinian. Dr. Zwicker is complemented by Dr. Bull, with such Flowers as
these; Bipedum ineptissimus, the greatest Fop in Nature: Omnium odio, qui
veritatem and candorem amant, dignus; deserving the Hatred of all Lovers of
Truth and Sincerity. Of Sandius he says, He has ship-wrack'd his Conscience,
as well as his Faith; a Trifler, a mere (empty) Pretender: He adds at p. 331.
He has only transcribed the Author of Iren. Irenicorum; and in one Place, he
prays for Sandius as one that is mad. This, and such as this, is Dr. Bull's
constant Language concerning these two very learned Men: nor does he ever reply
to them, without pretending an absolute and incontestable Victory; and casting
some most unworthy Scorn or other upon them, by occasion of his supposed
Advantage. He never calls the Arians by any other Name but Ariomanitae, the mad
Arians; and Socinianism is always with him the Atheistical Heresy, I do not
remember that he ever calls our Doctrine by a better Name. In short, he has
expressed such a Malevolence; and has so notoriously and infamously broke the
Cartel of Honor and Civility, that was thought to be agreed and established
between Persons of excellent Learning, or great Abilities, when they happen to
be engaged in contrary Sides; that no Respect or Tenderness can be shown to him
by any Unitarian. His Barbarities and Immanities toward a Person so little
deserving such Usage, and so much above Mr. Bull in all Regards, as Sandius
was; and his Arrogance toward, and (hare-brain'd) Contempt of all Unitarians,
whether ancient or modern: I say, his Temerity and Extravagance in this kind,
is so excessive, or rather is so outrageous, that he has lest to himself no
manner of Right or Claims to the very least Degree of Humanity or good Manners
toward him.

And see here what Judgment he makes, of the late Socinian ^atises, that have
been published (...) six or seven Years last past; (...) face to the Judgment
of the Catholic Church: "Diverse impious Wretches, within these few Years, have
attacked the principal Article of the Faith; namely, the Divinity of our
Savior: Some of them are Arians, others Samosatenians or Socinians; I may say
of both, as the great H. Zanchius somewhere does of L. Socinus, Fr. Davidis,
Blandrata, and other Founders of the Socinian Heresy in the last Age. I do not
read, without Disdain, the silly and mad Defenses of the new Arians and
Photinians: for I cannot meet in their Writings with the very least Degree of
Wit, or good Sense; they have nothing but the Repetition of old exploded
Follies, or new Weaknesses of their own. But lest they should think that they
have gained the Victory; or should mislead the Weak, some pious and learned Men
have deserved the public Praise and Thanks, by opposing themselves to the
Sophistries of these Triflers. It is in this strain that Dr. Bull has treated
us, every where; in every Page of his two Books: therefore it could not be
reasonably expected, that in answering, we should fall prostrate to such an
inveterate and supercilious. Malevolence and Arrogance; or make court to such a
Hildebrand as this Man (even) affects to show himself.

I know not, whether he will persuade many that a Diabolical Spirit is a fit
Guide to be chose, in the Search of sacred Truths: or that those have the true
Faith, who have not the least Grain of Charity? If Mr. Bull had railed so
bitterly, only at the present English Socinians, and their Writers, we might
have imputed his Intemperance to his Fear, or to his Ambition. We might
apprehend, that he begins to doubt, that this (growing) Sect may, one day, turn
him out of his Parsonage, or his Prebend: or that by Zeal and Bigotry he
intended to recommend himself to his Superiors in the Church, and merit a
Bishopric or Deanery. But why has he insulted the Dead; nay looked back 1200,
and 1400 Years, scattering his Gall and Venom into the U^s of Confessors and
Martyrs, of the second and third Ages of Christianity? Even those whom
Dioclesian and Julian the Apostate, not only spared, but honored and rewarded
for their Sanctity and Learning; Dr. Bull has broke up their Monuments, and
scattered their Ashes.

His Metropolitan not only preached it, to the most considerable Audictory of
England; but published it too, from the Press, to all the World: "That the
Socinians argue Matters, with Temper and Gravity; that they reason closely, and
clearly, with extraordinary Guard and Cantion, with as much Dexterity and
Decency. The ablest Managers, says he, that ever yet meddled with Controversy;
in comparison of whom the Jesuit is a Scold and a Bungler. Archbish. 2 d Ser^
on the Divin. of our Savior. (...) But Mr. Bull, because (...) more Wit and
Judgment than three Archbishops, answers immediately from the Oxford-Press;
that his Grace is either mad, or dotes; that since he (Dr. Bull) has wrote
against the Socinians, it is impossible they should have the least Temper,
Dexterity, good Sense, or ought else, that may recommend them to Esteem. The
Man grows warm; let us part for the present, lest we also grow as foolish as he.

Aug. 19. 1695.
FINIS.

