Plain and Peaceable ADVICE To those called Presbyterians IN SCOTLAND.

By Alexander Skene.

Long diversa sunt carnificina and pietas, nec potest aut veritas cum vi, aut
justitia cum crudelitate conjungi. There is a vast difference betwixt Butchery
and Godliness, neither has Truth any concord with Violence, of Cruelty with
Righteousness.

Lactan. Milit. lib. 5. cap. 20. Truth is not propagated by Swords or Spears,
nor by Soldiers, but by Persuasion and Counsel.

Athan. Epict. ad Vit. Sell. ag. lib. 1. Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much
as lies in you, live peaceably with all men, etc.

2 Cor. 10.4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds.

LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Clark, in George-yard in Lombard Street. 1681.

TO THE READER.
THe serious sense I have of that necessary Duty by which all Christians are
obliged, not only to love one another, but even their Enemies, Mat. 5.44. and
the great Abhorrence they should have against that Spirit of Cain who slew his
Brother, has not only engaged me, and those of my Persuasion, to forsake that
principle and practice of Fighting, and to prefer the peaceable way of Christ
even under greatest sufferings, Isa. 53.7. but also moved me to write this
ensuing Disswasive to them whose principle and practice has drawn on
themselves much Sufferings, and occasioned greater Severities to be enacted
against the Dissenting Worshippers of God from the National way, then probably
would otherwise have been; whereby not only they have met with sad Afflictions,
but even others (whose chiefest desire was only to have liberty to Worship the
Lord in Spirit and in Truth, according to their Consciences) have been made to
suffer (these three years and a half by gone) by frequent and long
Imprisonments, etc. Though we conceive the Narratives of all these Penal
Statutes against Meetings, might sufficiently have guarded those who never were
Seditious in practice nor principle.

But if they to whom this is directed, would once at last be induced to that
behavior that is most suitable to the Gospel of Peace, and to the Spirit of
true* Christianity; it is my hope in the Lord, that he would incline the hearts
of our Rulers, both Supreme and Subordinate, to make their Moderation so far
known, as to allow a just liberty of Worship to all, whose differences are no
ways inconsistent with the Peace and Prosperitys of the Nation.

Waiting for this Mercy from the Lord, in his appointed time, I commend this
small Endeavor to his Blessing.

The 5th of the 6th mon. 1679. A. S.

TO THE PRESBYTERIANS IN SCOTLAND.
KNowing that ye look on it as a duty to fight by military weapons in defense
of your principle, yea to promote your Cause and your pretended Reformation by
the power of the Sword, in which ye are confirmed by some of your Preachers,
who are always laboring to persuade you to this, as one evidence of your Zeal
for God, and not to spare to hazard your Lives, Liberties and Estates in such a
glorious Cause, as they call it.

In reference to which, I have found freedom, out of that love I bear to the
welfare of your Souls, the peace of our native Country, and that duty of
obedience and subjection we owe to all that are set up in lawful Authority over
us, as we are men and Christians, (whether active or passive, wherein we cannot
with a good conscience give active obedience) to lay before you these following
Considerations.

1. Consider how short ye are of that promise and Prophecy of Gospel Times,
(when Christians shall be recovered out of the Apostasy, and come to the
primitive Simplicity) which is mentioned Micah 4.2, 3, 4. and Isa. 2.2, 3, 4.
When many Nations shall say, Come, and let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways,
and we will walk in his paths, etc. And he will judge among many people, and
rebuke strong Nations afar off, and they shall beat their Swords into
Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall not lift up
Sword against. Nation, neither shall they learn War any more, but they shall
sit every man under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, and none shall
make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Where, first, this is observable, that this promise is to be accomplished when
many Nations shall come to own the true God, which was not so under the
Mosaical dispensation, till the Gospel of Jesus Christ was preached amongst the
Nations, and the Gentile World converted to Christianity.

But it may be objected, That Wars were never more amongst the Nations, then
since the Nations became by outward profession to own Christianity, and so it
continues unto this day; To which my second Consideration shall serve for
Answer, thus:

Before the defection from the Simplicity of the Gospel, in the first and
purest times of Christianity, it was not so, as is witnessed by Doctor Cave's
Primitive Christianity, citing Testimonies out of Origens and Tertullians
Apology, page 326. chap. 2. page 55. chap. 1. where he brings in Celsus
objecting to Origin, that Christians refused to help the Emperors in their
Wars; Origin answers, That they did really assist and help him, and that rather
with Divine than humane weapons, according to the command of the Apostle, I
exhort, that first of all, supplication, prayers, intercessions, etc. be made
for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority. And tells him, the
more eminent any man is for Piety and Religion, he will be able to afford
greater assistance to his Prince, then a great many Armed Soldiers that stand
ready to fight for him, and to destroy his enemies.

But to clear this further, see that famous Letter of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
the Roman Emperor, to the Senate of Rome, which is recorded in the Works of
Justin Martyr in Latin; Also in John Fox his Acts and Monuments, commonly
called the Book of Martyrs, his first Tome, page 46. (who though he reports
according to Eusebius, the Christians to have been a Legion of the Emperors
Army, yet the Letter it self shows the contrary where the Emperor says, I
caused to be sent for these men who were called Christians, who did their
endeavor, but without either Weapons, Munition, Armor, or Trumpet, as men
abhorring such preparation and furniture, but only satisfied in trust of their
God, whom they carry about with them in their Consciences. And for your sakes I
shall set down the Letter at length.

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Emperor, to the Senate and People of Rome.
I Give you to understand what success I have had in my Wars in Germany, as
also what I intend, and with how much difficulty I have victualled my Camp,
being compassed about with seventy and four fierce Dragons, whom my Scouts
descried to be within nine miles of us, and Pompeianus our Lieutenant has
viewed, as he signified to us by his Letter; wherefore I thought no less, but
to be overrun, and all my Bands, of so great a multitude, as well my Way-ward,
Main-ward, as Roar-ward, with all my Soldiers of Ephrata, in whose Host there
were numbered of fighting men, nine hundred seventy and five thousand. But when
I saw my self not able to encounter with the Enemy, I craved aid of our Country
Gods, at whose hands I finding no comfort, and being driven of the Enemy to an
exigent, I caused to be sent for those men whom we call Christians, who being
numbered were found a good indifferent number, with whom I was in further rage,
then I had good cause, as afterward I had experience by their marvelous power,
who forthwith did their endeavor, but without either W^^pon, Munition, Armor,
or Trumpet, as men abhorring such preparation or furniture, but only satisfied
in the trust of their God, whom they carry about with them in their Consciences.

It is therefore to be credited, albeit we call them wicked men, that they
worship God in their hearts; for they falling prostrate on the ground, prayed
not only for me, but for the Host also that was with me, beseeching their God
for help in that our extremity of lack of Victuals and fresh Water, for we had
been now five days without Water, and now in our enemies Land, even in the
midst of Germany, who thus falling upon their faces, made their prayers to a
God unknown of me: And there fell amongst us from Heaven a pleasant and cold
shower; But amongst our Enemies a great storm of Hail mixed with Lightning; so
that immediately we perceived the invincible aid of the most Mighty God to be
with us.

Therefore we give these men leave to profess Christianity, lest perhaps by
their prayers we be punished with the like, and thereby make my self the
Author of such hurt as shall be received by the Christian profession; And if
any man shall apprehend one that is a Christian, only for that cause I will
that he being apprehended, without punishment may have leave to confess the
same, so that there be none other cause objected against him, more then that he
is a Christian; but let his accuser be burned alive. Neither will I that he
confessing and being found a Christian, shall be enforced to alter the same his
opinion, by the Governor of any of our Provinces, but lest to his own choice.
And this Decree of mine, I will to be ratified in the Senate House, and command
the same to be proclaimed and read in the Court of Trajanus: And that further
from thence it may be sent unto all our Provinces, by the diligence of Veratius
Governor of our City Polione. And further we give leave to all men to use and
write out this our Decree, taking the same out of our Copy publicly in the
common Hall set forth.


According to Cluverius his Latin Epitome of the History of the World, this
Emperor began his Reign in the year 162. and died 180. which was about one
hundred and twenty years before History reports any thing of a Christian
Legion, which may bear this sad and woeful remark, (that though it was for a
good cause in refusing to worship false Gods) that whole Legion was cut off and
perished by the Sword, after they had been twice decimated, at last they were
all Massacred without the least resistance made by them, under Maximinianus,
Colleague in the Empire to Dioclesian, who raised the tenth persecution; which
makes the words of our Lord good, Mat. 26.52. Put up thy Sword into his place,
for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. However this
Scripture may be applied here, I am sure it may be a weighty warning to all
private persons, that are not in Authority, to take up Arms in defense of their
opinions, let your Preachers plead the contrary as they will.

Consider thirdly, let all people walk in uprightness and righteousness toward
God and all men, that they may in Faith fully rely upon the Arm of the
Almighty, who has said he will Judge among many people, and rebuke strong
Nations afar off: if a person or a people knew the true exercise of Faith in
this case, they would say with David, Psalm. 3.6. We will not be afraid of ten
thousands of people who have set themselves against us round about.

O but this were a tempting of God, if the ordinary means should not be used --
Answer. In no ways, for this is but to beg the question; if weapons and Arms be
the true ordinary means in the Gospel Times, when God has said, Swords are to
be beaten into Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks, etc. See also what
the Lord has said, in confirmation of this truth, Hosea 1.7. But I will have
mercy upon the House of. Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and
will not save them by Bow, nor by Sword, nor by Battle, by Horses, nor by
Horsemen. So Hos. 2.18. When the Lords People have not only forsaken their
Idols and Idolatry, so as not to have their names any more remembered, as verse.
16, 17. Then verse. 18. In that day I will make a Covenant for them, with the
Beasts of the Field, and with the Fowls of the Heaven, and with the creeping
things of the Earth, and I will break the Bow and the Sword, and the Battle out
of the Earth, and will make them lie down safely. The surest ordinary means of
defense, is true peace with God, grounded upon faith in him, and a good
Conscience.

Consider that of Exodus 34.23, 24. Where the Lord said, Thrice in the year
shall all your male children appear before the Lord God, neither shall any man
desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice
in the year. Now if Israel of old, that were engaged often even by the Lords
allowance, to fight the Lords Battle by Military weapons against their enemies,
(all which were but typical of the Spiritual Warfare which Christians are to
fight) if they at such times were to forbear, and did forbear all outward
defense by carnal weapons, at the Word of the Lord, saying, No man shall desire
your Land; How much more should reformed Christians trust in the Lord, and lean
to his defense, who has said, I will have mercy on the House of Judah, and
will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save them by Bow, nor by
Sword, nor by Battle, by Horses, nor by Horsemen.

The Israelites had many malicious enemies round about them, as the Edomites,
Ammonites, Moabites, Philistims, that of themselves were ready to wait all
opportunities to take advantage against them, especially when all their males
were gone up to Jerusalem, and all their Land left destitute of men for
defense; yet it was never found, that any Nation invaded their Land during the
time of their Feasts, till Titus Vespasian the Roman Emperor came with his
Army whilst they were in Jerusalem, after they had caused the Lord of glory to
be Crucified. But then their defense had forsaken them: So long then as the
Lords people keeps his way and abides in his truth, and trusts alone in the
living God, they need fear no enemy whatsoever: Such as return to the Primitive
simplicity of the Gospel in faith and practice, will find all these promises
fulfilled, though others that are not come to that state think fit to use Arms.

4. Consider, if these Truths had been believed and received in this Island,
there had much blood been spared that has been spilt these 30 or 40 years by
gone, and the desired Reformation carried on, in a more peaceable and
prosperous way then it has been, as may be seen, matters standing as they do
at this day. It is wonderful that your eyes are so blinded, that ye reflect
not, nor look back upon your disappointments and fruitless labor, by your Wars
and Fighting, in pretense to set up Presbyterian Government, and in pursuance
of Reformation by Arms. I do not question but there have been many of several
ranks, that were engaged so in a mistaken zeal; for truly the way and manner
was not approved by the Lord, compelling all by force and violence to comply
with you, though contrary to their Judgment and Light. If you pretend a good
intention, that will not justify a bad Action, witness Vzziah his putting
forth his hand to the Ark of the Lord, when the Oxen shook it, the Lords anger
was kindled against him, and smote him till he died, 2 Samuel 6.7.

5 It were worth your serious Consideration, that if these Preachers continue
to stir you up to rise in Arms, they have not much of self-interest in their
eye, they being now secluded from their places, and that Power and Authority
they and their Brethren had, (during our late sad troubles and Wars in this
Kingdom) taken from them, whether therefore they seek not to imbroil the
Nations in new Wars, rather then still to be thus deprived?

But I conceive it were more suitable for them to evidence as much care and
zeal, in exciting all persons and people whom they could influence, to search
and try their ways, and to turn unto the Lord God with their whole hearts, and
seek more after a personal Reformation, and after a new Creation in their
inward man, then to delude people by stirring up a carnal zeal for outward
Reformation, when there is no true zeal for real conformity to the Spirit of
Jesus in the heart.

6. Consider, if the way of Fighting and Arms was a means to spread the Gospel
at first among the Nations: Christ sent forth his Disciples as Lambs and Sheep
among Wolves, and they by pains, and labor, and sufferings, did propagate the
Gospel, and will ye imagine to carry on any true Gospel-work another way? They
suffered imprisonments, beatings, scourgings, stonings, and all manner of evil,
and will ye by resisting evil with force and violence, apprehend to promote the
Kingdom of Christ in these Lands? The best Arms the Primitive Christians used,
were preces and lachrymae, prayers and tears; and so long as ye make use of
Swords and Guns, can ye upon any just ground lay claim to be their Successors?
Remember that the Lords House after the Captivity (which our Babylonish
Captivity under Popery resembled) was not built by might nor by power, but by
the Spirit of the Lord, Zach. 4.6. Even so our Reformation from Antichristian
Idolatry and Superstition, whether Root or Branch, is not to be by Sword or
Spear; but the Lord is to consume it by the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall
destroy him by the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. O that ye knew the
virtue and power of the Spirit of life and truth, ye would soon perceive the
folly and vanity of your carnal weapons, and of the Arm of flesh! wherefore let
Christ who is the head of the true Church, be the sole defender of his Faith,
which he has wrought in all the true members thereof, else acknowledge your
Faith and work of Reformation ye pretend too, to be none of Christ's, but merely
humane, and therefore must be upholden by the Arm of man.

7. Consider, this your way is liker the Children of Antichrist, then the
Disciples of Holy Jesus, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. So his Disciples behaved themselves, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13.
Being reviled (says Paul) we bless; being persecuted we suffer it; being
defamed we entreat; we are made as the filth of the World, and are counted as
the offscouring of all things unto this day. Thus we may see the frame of that
Spirit that was in the Christians of old; They were far from rendering evil for
evil, or repelling force with force, the weapons of their warfare were not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor.
10.4.

Whereas it is the Spirit of Antichrist to make use of carnal weapons in
defense of false worship, it was given to him to make war with the Saints, yea
to overcome them, Rev. 13.7. yet nevertheless verse. 19. He that kills with
the Sword, must be killed with the Sword. This is a retribution threatened and
promised to come upon Antichrist, and all that walk in his steps: see his
lording way in his forcible impositions, verse. 16, 17. He causes all ranks to
bow to him, and receive marks of conformity to him, yea not to have the liberty
to buy or sell, or the common privilege of Subjects, except they be such.

Now if ye be so dealt with in any degree at such a time as this, ye should
reflect upon your selves, how much this was your own way when power was in your
hands, and had the Authority of the Civil Magistrate upon your side; But I wish
ye and all others, that employed your power to stir up the Magistrate to
persecute others for matters purely conscientious, to consider how far ye are
from any just right to lay claim to the Holy Mountain of the Lord, which is his
Church in Gospel Times, as is Prophesied Isai. 11.9. They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my Holy Mountain. Consider how far this excludes force and Arms
from being instruments to defend the Faith of the Gospel, or to promote it, as
now the most part of these called Christians use to do, these weapons and means
never having been used, till the simplicity of Christianity began to be lost,
and the Apostasy began to creep in. It was the pride and ambition of the Bishop
of Rome and his Clergy, and Arrians, and Nestorians, that would needs have all
men to bow to them, and to conform to their impositions, that first stirred up
the Kings and Princes of the Earth to persecute all whose Consciences could not
comply with them; And shall ye, who think your selves a part of the Reformed
Churches, tread their steps?

8. Wherefore consider that place of the Apostle, James 4.1. From whence come
wars and fightings amongst you? Come they not hence, even from your lusts that
war in your members? Is it not evident that all the Wars that have been in the
World, have proceeded from no other ground, but either from Pride,
Covetousness, Ambition, or Revenge? And if ye shall pretend that your fighting
is for the cause of God, the Apostle says in plain terms it is not so, but from
your lusts, even Pride, and Ambition, to have the Pre-eminence in the Earth,
and Revenge against them that are your opposers; and these that pretend to be
the Disciples of Jesus Christ, or people of God, should be ashamed to be acted
by such principles.

9. Consider whether it be not the sense of this fighting disposition in you,
that has occasioned the severity of such Acts of Parliament against your
Meetings for worship, whereby not only ye, but those who are Innocent, and
altogether abhorrent from such principles of fighting, are made to be
sufferers, by frequent and long Imprisonments, and to undergo Fines and
poindings: whereas if ye had been as peaceably disposed, as others are under
these sufferings, it might have pleased the Lord to have moved the hearts of
our Superiors to have resented from these severities; And though ye had
remained under sad sufferings when Innocent, ye should have had a share of that
peace and comfort with others, that it was purely for the Testimony of a good
Conscience, that wishes no Evil to any man.

Wherefore as ye would show your selves to be a people answering the Prophesies
and Promises of Gospel times, Micah 4.2, 3, 4. Isa. 2.2, 3, 4. Isa. 11.9. and
65.25. As ye would approve your selves Christians according to the Innocence
thereof in primitive times, and to be their true and real Successors; As ye
would evidence your selves to be a righteous people, that can trust and rely
upon the Lord God alone, for the preservation of the whole Interest of the
Kingdom of Christ, and of your own personal interests in time and Eternity: As
ye would not wish these Nations to be again involved in blood and confusion: As
ye bear a love to the peace of your native Country; as ye would be free from
that imputation of building up Sion with blood, (which was never justly imputed
to the true Disciples of Christ, nor primitive Christians, though under
greatest sufferings, and though for their power, able sufficiently to defend
themselves;) As ye would wish not to manifest your selves to be the brats of
the Antichristian Whore, who is still drunk with blood, yea with the blood of
the Saints, by her not ceasing to stir up the powers of the Earth, to persecute
all who will not come under her mark and name: And as ye would not wish to be
acted by a spirit of lust, pride and revenge, lay aside your Arms and fighting
principles, and commit God's work to his own Government, and follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which none shall see the Lord; and commit your
cause unto God, and let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their Souls to Him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 1
Pet. 4.19. And in this only will be your strength and peace.

Remember David was not permitted to build a House unto the Lord, because he
had shed much blood upon the Earth; that work was reserved for Solomon, who was
a man of peace, 2 Samuel 22.8, 9. Wherefore do not dream, neither be persuaded by
men, that ever the Lord will honor Men of War and Blood, to pr^^^ (...) the
Gospel of peace.

Take this from one, who with many of his (...) has been a sufferer for his
Conscience these diverse y^ bygone, with whom these blessed Promises and
Prophesies abovementioned, are begun to be accomplished, both in our principle
and practice; Though we are a people against whom ye have much causless
prejudice and malice, through the many gross misrepresentations of our
opposers; yet I am, and hope ever to remain,

A real well-wisher of your Souls, and of all Men, AL. SKENE.


