A SERMON Preached (May 16. 1680.) AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr Tho. Gilson, Late
Minister of the Gospel.

By SAMUEL SLATER, Minister of the Gospel.

Isa. 57. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockeril at the Three Legs in (...) Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market, 1680

To my worthy Friends, that Society of Christians, who were lately under the
Pastoral care of Mr. Tho. Gilson.
IT was a smart and startling Providence which in a short time took away first
the Wife, and then the Husband, making the Children Orphans, and you sheep
without a Shepherd. His worth was very great, and therefore so was your loss.
God has been pleased to deprive us of many eminent and useful men of late, and
those not only among the hoarheads, (whose thread of life had been drawn out to
a considerable length) but also among the young and strong, and middle aged,
who according to the course of nature might have lived much longer, and
labored and done good. It is not for any to quarrel, for God may do with his
own as he pleases. Let us make a right interpretation of the dispensation, and
a wise improvement. None of us know how soon we may be called hence; may every
one of us therefore live to the best purpose we can. Oh that we might all mind
our work, and get that done, and then the sooner we go to bed, the better it
will be for us, though possibly not for the world. Your deceased Pastor said
upon his Deathbed, When others live sixty or seventy years before they have
done what they were sent for, if I can dispatch mine in fifty, I have no cause
to complain; his Sun being set when he was not much past the meridian of his
age, I did entertain you with the following Discourse, which I have here at the
importunate desire of his Relations and others unwillingly published. The Lord
accompany it with his blessing; and if any get good by it for their souls, I
shall rejoice. I beg that this loss may be sanctified to your gain, that you
may have a Pastor set over you according to Gods own heart. And I beseech you
to live in love, follow those things which make for peace; walk so as that you
may adorn the Gospel; and so the blessings of the everlasting Covenant be your
portion. I am

May 21. 1680. Yours in our dear Lord Jesus, SAMUEL SLATER.

JOH. XII. 26. If any man serve me, let him follow me: and where I am there
shall also my servant be.
You find in the 20th verse of this Chapter mention made of certain Greeks, who
(as we may probably conjecture) through their converse with the Jews, and
reading the Old Testament translated into their own language, had attained to
some knowledge of the God of Israel, and upon the Jews great Solemnities came to
worship him together with them at Jerusalem. Where being informed of those
great things which the Lord Jesus had done, and in particular of his raising up
Lazarus out of the Grave, they applied themselves to Philip, and acquainted him
with their desire to see Jesus; Philip told this to Andrew, and both of them
told Jesus: whereupon our Savior graciously admitted them into his presence.

But they (as it is likely) having heard of his being looked upon by many as
the promised Messiah, and dreaming with others of a Temporal Kingdom which he
should have in this world, were willing to come under his Government, and to
list themselves in the number of his Subjects, by that means hoping for Earthly
preferment and advantages. Our Lord Jesus therefore knowing what is in man,
makes it his business to correct their mistake, and to set them right in their
apprehensions concerning him; assuring them, that the hour was come in which he
should be glorified; yet withal intimating to them, that he must first be
rejected, condemned and ^rucified. He was to fall like a corn of wheat into the
ground and die, but after that he should spring up again, and bring forth much
fruit unto the world; not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles: Giving
them withal to understand, that if they would be his Disciples, they must write
after the copy which he sets them, and carry their comforts, yea their very
lives in their hands, ready to lay them down whenever they should be called
thereunto. This he does in the Text, and the verse preceding it. In the words
which I have read, there are two things observable:

First, Christ's command or direction, If any man serve me, let him follow me.
Here, says Grotius, he does tacitly insinuate his being a King, who has under
him Officers or Ministers of State for the management and administration of the
affairs of his Kingdom; and whosoever will be one of these my servants, he must
follow me through swords and daggers, through thick and thin, by the way of the
Cross, through self-denial, and contempt of the world; they must imitate his
example, both in his holiness, and in his sufferings.

Secondly, Here is Christ's most gracious and encouraging promise, Where I am;
that is, where I am now, as God, and where e're long I shall be, as Man; in the
place of highest felicity and glory, there shall my servant also be; as he
follows me in the way, so he shall be with me in the end. I will not leave him,
nor lose him, he shall not come short home. Non divelletur in laetis qui adfuit
in tristibus. If we be joined in the troubles, we will not be separated in the
comforts. He that did partake with me in the sorrow, shall certainly share with
me in the reward. So the Apostle Paul likewise assures us, Romans 8. 17. If
children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that
we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. It is this Promise
upon which I shall raise my following Discourse. The Doctrine is this:

Doct. Herein lies the happiness of the servants of Christ, that in the same
place where he is, they one day shall also be. Those that do now cleave to him
by unfeigned Faith, and embrace him by sincere love, and follow him by cheerful
obedience, and desire him with ardent longings, shall at last be with him in
perfect happiness. You read in 2 Cor. 5. 6. Whilst they are present in the
body, they are absent from the Lord. But when they are once absent from the
body, when their souls have got out of this crazie tottering Tabernacle, when
they have once put off this threadbare wornout garment of flesh, they shall
immediately be conveyed with all possible speed by the holy Angels into those
blissful mansions, where they shall be present with the Lord. In the handling
of this most precious and comfortable Truth, these things are to be done:

First, I shall enquire what or who this Jesus Christ is.

Secondly, Who are his Servants.

Thirdly, What is that place where Christ is, and what the Excellencies of it.

Fourthly, What this being where Christ is, does import.

Fifthly, Give you some reasons why Christ's Servants shall be where he is.

Lastly, Improve the Doctrine in a way of Application.

First then, What or who is this Jesus Christ? One might justly wonder, that
any in such a Congregation as this is, any in such a City as London is (where
the Everlasting Gospel is so plentifully and powerfully preached) should be
grossly ignorant of Christ, unless it be children lately weaned from the breast,
fools and madmen, or such as turn their backs on all Ordinances, and live
altogether as beasts in the world, because without the practices of Religion.
But alas! not withstanding those glorious beams of light, and means of knowledge
which God in his goodness has so liberally vouchsafed, I am afraid, many among
us are without the knowledge of the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent. Though to know them as we ought to know them be of great and everlasting
concernment, no less than life eternal, Joh. 17. 3. whom therefore some of you
do ignorantly talk of, him do I thus declare unto you.

Jesus Christ is the second Person in the Sacred Trinity, the only begotten and
eternal Son of God, who did in the fullness of time humble himself so far as to
become man, being conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary,
having a true body and a reasonable soul, and so continues to be very God and
very man in one Person for ever. He is Gods most beloved Son, and man's most
entire friend. In a ready compliance with his Fathers will, and out of the
abundance of his love to those his poor people whom his Father had given him,
he to the wonder and astonishment both of Heaven and earth, was pleased to
assume our nature, and so to become our Brother in order to his being our
Redeemer. And thereupon having not only an heart but likewise a right to the
work, he did engage thereunto notwithstanding all foreseen difficulties, cost
and sorrows, and so gave himself a sacrifice, and his life a ransom for them.
The chastisement of our peace was upon him, that by his stripes we might be
healed, Isa. 53. 5. He was made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4. 4,
5. He died that we might live; he knew no sin, and yet was he made sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Upon him was the curse,
that upon us might be the blessing. This Jesus has taken upon himself all
relations which speak affection in him, and encourage confidence in his. He
has undertaken all Offices that make for their advantage. He is our Prophet to
teach us, our Priest to save us, our King to rule and defend us. Having humbled
himself and become obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, therefore
God has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name,
Phil. 2. 8, 9. Him he has set up as King upon his holy hill of Zion, where his
Throne is so sure, that though the Heathen rage, and the people imagine, and
the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together,
yet they cannot overturn it. Psalm. 45. 6. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever, the scepter of thy Kingdom is a right scepter. His undoubted right it is
to reign in every one of our hearts. He does reign in his Church, and he shall
continue so to do in spite of Rome and Hell, Pope and Devil, with all their
abettors, until all his enemies be made his footstool, and then comes the end
when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. In
short, Jesus Christ is Emanuel, God with us, God in our nature. I will report
of him to you, as the enamoured Spouse did to the inquisitive Daughters of
Jerusalem, Cant. 5. when they asked her, what her beloved was more than another
beloved? she answered, He is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, his
mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely. Totus, totus, desiderabilis;
all amiable, all desirable, there is nothing amiss in him, nothing wanting in
him. This, my Brethren, this is our Beloved, this is our Friend.

In the next place I am to show who are his servants, those I mean unto whom he
does here promise, that they shall be where he is. And here I might tell you
that all true believers are Christ's servants, who having their chains knocked
of, their Prison-doors opened, and being delivered from the bondage of Satan
and corruption, do serve the Lord in righteousness and holiness. Again, some
are Christ's servants, as being appointed and called to act for (...) and his
interest in some particular place or function; thus Paul calls himself a
servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. and he calls Epaphras and Tychicus his
fellow servants in the Lord, Col. 1. 7. and Col. 4. 7. because they did
together with him serve Christ in Preaching the Gospel; and so every faithful
Minister of the Word is called a servant of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2. 24. The servant
of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient.
But I shall speak of Christ's servants in general, as comprehending all holy and
gracious ones, and shall give you a fourfold character of them by which they
may be known.

1. Those that are the servants of Christ are employed and taken up about the
work of Christ. If we would know whose servant any man is, we may observe and
consider whose work it is that he does. He that does the work of sin is the
servant of sin, Romans 6. 16. His servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. He is the servant of the Devil,
that does the work of the Devil, tempting men to sin, or accusing and troubling
the Saints in and for that which is good, 1 John 3. 8. He that commits sin
is of the Devil. And our Savior told the wicked Jews, Joh. 8. 44. That they
were of their Father the Devil; and he proved it by this, because the works of
their Father they would do, in contemning the truth, and opposing Christ, this
is the Devils work, and it is dirty work; and all those who are busy in it,
you may easily know to whom they do belong. If you see the Devil in a man's
life, you may safely conclude him in his heart. On the other side, the servants
of Christ will be employed about the work of Christ, they will study his mind,
obey his commandments, follow his orders, and apply to that duty which he
requires of them. Ye are my friends (says he) Job. 15. 14. If ye do what
soever I comman^ you. Not pick and choose, quarrel this, and stick at that, but
comply with all my wills, and do whatever I bid. This David knew full well, and
therefore said, Psalm* 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respec^
to all thy commandments. Whereas half-obedience will certainly cause blushing
and confusion at the last. To follow the Lord fully was Caleb's commendation.

2. Those that are Christ's servants have chosen him for their Lord and Master.
There are a great many in the world who do some of Christ's work after a
fashion, and would be upon that score reckoned among Christians, and of the
household of Faith, who yet never made Christ their choice. Nay, they rise up in
most desperate opposition to him, and to his government, both in their hearts
and in the world. We rea^ Luke 19. 14. of some that say, We will not have thi^
man reign over us. No, no, any one rather than him But now every true servant
of Christ chooses him, an^ does most freely give up himself to him, and is no^
only willing but also earnestly desirous that Christ should bore his ear in
token of his everlasting Dominion over him. Alas, poor soul! he finds a
comfortable alteration, he has served others, and know^ what a vast difference
there is between Christ an^ them; he has now better work, and kinder usage and
greater hopes, and more noble expectations, an^ so is fully of the Churches
mind, Isa. 26. 13. O Lord our God, other Lords beside thee have had dominion
over us, but by thee only will we make mention of the name. We will own no
other, none to Christ, none to Christ.

Thirdly, Those that are the servants of Christ have their hearts engaged in
his work, and not only their hands or their outward man. Such indeed are spoken
of, Isa. 29. 13. Who drew near unto God with their mouths, and with their lips
did honor him, but they had removed their hearts far from him, and their fear
toward him was taught by the precepts of men. Those men's services God does not
accept, and their persons he will not own. Though they claim a relation to him,
and cry, Lord, Lord, and can tell stories of their prophesying in his name, and
casting out Devils, and doing many wondrous works, yet he will profess unto
them, that he never knew them, and command them to depart and be gone from him.
And what is the reason of this? because he knew them to be a company of base
hypocrites, who were a mere complement, and gave him no more than the shell and
outside. If you be Christ's servants, you rest in nothing external, you will not
take up in any thing, unto which an hypocrite can attain. Your hearts are sound
in Gods statutes, and do accompany all your acts of duty. When you profess his
name, and keep his Sabbaths, and seek his face, and hear his Word, and sit down
at his Table, and plead his cause, your hearts are in all; when you confess
sin, it is with a mourning heart; when you beg his grace, it is with a longing
heart; when you speak his praise, it is with an enlarged heart. Psalm. 84. 2. My
soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God.

Lastly, Those that are Christ's servants do in all their work and duties
sincerely aim at the honor and glory of Christ; as the word and will of Christ
is their only rule, so the honor of Christ is their great and principal
design; and so that be accomplished, they are well pleased, however other
things go. The Apostle Paul in Romans 16. 17, 18. speaks of those which cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel. He does not
there speak against all that are offended and do divide, for in some cases that
is a duty, and according to the Doctrine which we have received. Our Reformers
did no more than what they ought to do, when they were offended at the
Idolatries and Superstitions of Rome, and divided from them. And though they
make a great clamor and noise about Schisms, they themselves are the greatest
and most notorious Schismatics; but he speaks there against those that cause
divisions and offenses, and he commands the Romans, and in them all Christians,
to mark them and avoid them. And he gives this reason for it, they serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly: that which they aimed at was their
private gain and advantage, that they might grow rich, and live splendidly, and
fare deliciously. Now these men do not serve Christ; if the belly be a man's
end, Christ is not his Master: the same holy Apostle assures us, Phil. 3. 18,
19. They are enemies to the cross of Christ, (and if to his Cross, then to his
Crown), whose god is their belly, and who mind earthly things. A real servant
of Christ then is one that makes Christ his end. He serves the interest of
Christ, and he seeks the glory of Christ; and makes it his great desire, study
and endeavor to exalt the name, and enlarge the Kingdom of Christ in the
world; this spirit acted Paul; this was it he aimed at, Phil. 1. 21. To me to
live is Christ. He had his life from him, and he improved and laid out his life
for him. And the same we find in John Baptist, witness those passages of his,
Joh. 3. 29, 30. He that has the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom which stande^h and hears him, rejoiceth greatly, because of the
bridegrooms voice. This my joy therefore is fulfilled, he must increase, but I
must decrease.

Now let us put all these things together: He is a true servant of our dear
Lord Jesus, who has chosen him for his Lord and Master, does make Christ's work
the business of his life, and applies to it with his whole heart, sincerely
aiming at his glory.

Having thus seen who is the Servant, our next work will be to enquire
concerning his preferment; and in order to our better understanding of that, we
must consider what place that is where Christ does reside: I shall tell you in
a word, it is Heaven, the habitation of Gods Holiness, the place where his
Honor dwells; thither he took his joyful flight when he left this world
which lies in wickedness, Act. 1. 11. This same Jesus which is taken up from
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into
heaven. And there he now is in Glory and Majesty, 1 Pet. 3. 22. Who is gone
into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels and Authorities, and
Powers being made subject unto him. And there he is to continue, Act. 3. 21.
Whom the Heavens must receive, until the times of the restitution of all
things. And it is from thence his people do joyfully expect him, Phil. 3. 20.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body. Now Heaven is a very good place to be in, Earth in its
greatest beauty is a dunghill if compared to it. Take briefly some account of it.

First, Heaven is an high place: Gods promise runs thus, Psalm. 91. 14. I will
set him on high, because he has known my name. And when he brings his people
to Heaven, this Promise has its full accomplishment. Hell is an horrible pit;
those miserable ^ouls that for supine neglect, and God-daring provocations are
condemned thither, go down indeed into the deep, yea into the depths of sorrow.
They are cast so low, that they are quite out of the reach of comfort. The
Divine hand will not reach them any succor or relief, and none other can. But
Heaven is a lofty place, they that go thither are upon the rising hand. It is
man's preferment and advance. Christ is set down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high. Nay, he is said to be far above all Heavens; that is, far
above those Heavens which are visible, and within our present view. He is above
the Airy Heaven, and above the Starry Heaven, in the highest, the Heaven of
Heavens, where is the Throne, and the most Glorious Presence of God, which is
invisible to us in this lower world. Oh that you who are high-minded, would be
heavenly minded! you do debase your selves, and act unworthy of your extract
and original till you soar this pitch; that is the highest place, there is the
highest Glory. All things else are sordid and base, dung and dogs-meat, if
compared with Heaven, and the blessed enjoyments there.

Secondly, Heaven is a spacious and large place; Earth is narrow and scanty,
men have not room enough in it, nor comforts enough; they can hardly ^ive one
by another; their vast desires and shortcommons cause great discontents, and
very frequently mad work; hence proceeds such shouldering and scrambling and
quarreling, as we too often see. But in Heaven there is room enough, and Crowns
enough, happiness and glory enough. There is indeed but one God, and there
needs no more, because he is alsufficient. The glorified Spirits there do
altogether as fully enjoy God, and as entirely as if but one enjoyed him. He
will be as much thine, as if he were solely thine. One God is so the happiness
and satisfaction of all the Saints, as that all God, an whole God is the
portion of every Saint. So that in Heaven there is perfect peace among the
coheirs, no mutual envi^s and animosities, no disturbances created to one
another. Do but make out your title, and labor for a meetness, and then you
shall find both entrance and entertainment; get but an heart in a due frame,
fit for the company, glory, and business there, and you need not fear
admission. None shall be excluded from thence, because Heaven is not capable of
receiving them, but because they are not in a fit case to be received; they
want their oil, and their wedding garment; and such as these would as ill
beseem that holy hill, as filthy swine would a Princes Court. Indeed the glory
there would as ill become them; for Honor is not seemly for a fool. Our
Savior has told us, That in his Fathers house are many Mansions, Joh. 1. 4.
2. -- Locus est and pluribus umbris. Calvin observes, he does not say, Varias
and dispares; he does not tell us of disparity that is in them, but the
multitude of them, pluribus sufficient, sufficient for the company; as many
mansions as there are to be inhabitants. In you^ Fathers house, O Saints, there
is bread and lodgin^ enough, and to spare; you shall there dwell at eas^ In
that bottomless boundless ocean of happiness yo^ shall bathe and sport your
selves with unspeakabl^ and eternal delight.

Thirdly, Heaven is a secure and safe place, ther^ you shall be out of gun
shot; upon this account it i^ far better and more desirable than this world. B^
your estate here never so large, your advancemen^ never so high, your comforts
never so many, they ar^ u^certain at the best. Asaph was offended at the
prosperity of wicked men, whom pride compasses (...) a ch^in, and violence
covers as a garment; but h^ says, they are set in slippery places, from
whence they may soon tumble. Nay not only bad men, but the bes^ are liable to
assaults and troubles, and both afflictin^ and amazing alterations. Job had his
changes, Davi^ his castings down as well as his liftings up. No plac^ is to be
found here in which a man may be perfectly free from the fear of evil. Here are
dangers from within, the corruption and sin which dwells in us^ dangers from
without, wicked, ungodly and unrea^ reasonable men, who are desperate enemies
to the power of godliness, and to the exercises of that Religion which is pure
and undefiled before God and the Father, and do encompass the little flock
(...) Christ like a company of ravenous wolves. An^ there is danger from
beneath, Satan the Prince o^ Darkness, a politic, potent and unwearied
adversary, who will send forth his messengers to buffet and cast his fiery
darts to wound, and use his wile^ to deceive and entrap. He has his variety of
engines and methods, and it is well if we be not ignorant of them. We are not
safe in our assemblies, nor in our ^amilies, no, nor in our closets and
greatest retire^ents, when we have sequestered our selves from all ^ompany, we
shall have a treacherous heart within ^o hinder, and at our right hand a Devil
to resist us. ^ut in Heaven there is nothing to affright nor to of^end. There
is no possibility of sinning against God, ^o fear of losing our happiness, no
danger of falling from that height of holiness and glory unto which we shall be
advanced. There will be no sin within to defile, no Devil without to seduce, no
enemy nor wicked men to Inform, persecute or disturb.

Lastly, Heaven is a most sweet and pleasant place; ^here is fullness of joy,
and pleasures for evermore; that is the mountain of spices; where there is
absence and scarcity of nothing that would afford contentment and highest
satisfaction to the most raised, enamoured and enlarged soul. Christ called it
Paradise, when he told the converted Thief, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise; He meant Heaven. The earthly Paradise was a lovely and delicious
place, a garden of pleasure, that was a type of Heaven; but that Terrestrial
Paradise did fall as far short of Heaven, as the brazen Serpent did of Christ
the Lord of glory. It is most certain, were Heaven no other kind of thing than
what besotted wretches and vain worldlings in their idle dreams fancy to
themselves, it would be a pitiful contemptible thing, no better than the
Heathen Poets Elysian fields, incapable of filling up the capacity of the
immortal highborn soul, and unspeakably short of the hopes and expectations of
the followers of the Lamb, who now cheerfully wade through so many troubles and
difficulties, and take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing that they
have a better and more enduring substance, such as has not entered into the
heart of man to conceive of. It is such a place as does surpass the most
sublimated thoughts of the most enobled souls. Should one come from thence, he
could not fully describe it, but would rather invite you to come and see. It is
such a place as shall express, and to the life set forth the greatness and
goodness, and glory of that God which framed it. Give me leave to set before
you something of its amiable beauties and excellency in these four Particulars.

1. Heaven is full of light. If it be a pleasant thing to behold the Sun, what
is it to behold the Sun of Righteousness darting forth his brightest beams of
love and glory, with which he shall not dazzle but delight the glorified eye,
that will be strengthened, and enabled without weariness to fix and dwell upon
such an object! God and Christ are the Temple of that City, so that it has no
need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God does
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, Rev. 21. 22, 23. And where there
is such full and glorious light, there can be no cloud nor darkness. No, there
is no ignorance, no error, not the smallest mistake, no half notions, or
imperfect apprehensions of things. Here we seek and cannot find; propound many
questions, but receive no satisfactory answers; we follow on to know, yet are
deficient in our knowledge. But there all Truths are plainly revealed, all
Mysteries are clearly and fully opened, the most abstruse Providence are
interpreted, the most difficult Questions are resolved, and not one ^not left
untied. The meanest Saint in Heaven (if there be any differences and degrees of
glory there) knows God, and himself, and all things better than the best read,
and most learned Doctor upon earth; what was puzling here, is plain there; for
they see as they are seen, and know as they are known. The Lambs there do most
delightfully wade through those deeps in which the admired and lofty Elephants
here are swallowed up.

2. Heaven is full of grace and holiness. It is called the holy hill, and the
habitation of Gods holiness. It is a glorious place, and God and holiness are
the glory of it. Holiness here is in its infancy; there, in its strength and
glory. Saints when arrived there, have attained to their highest perfection,
because they do fully enjoy God, and are completely conformed to him. Now, al^!
the groans of a longing soul are these: Oh! I have not apprehended I have not
yet att^ined, neither am I already perfect. And therefore he reaches forth to
that which is before, and presses on to the mark. The children of God here
meet with many troubles from without; but that which must breaks their rest,
and above all things imbitters their condition to them, is sin and sou^-wants;
under this he complains. There is a great deal of corruption s^ll much dross
after all my refi^ings, and much chaff after all my winnowings. O wretched m^n
that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? And there is but a
little grace, a dim eye, and a feeble hand, and a short breath; how does faith
stagger, and hope faint, and patience tire? Ah my leanness, my leanness! I say
it is under these things that the renewed and truly gracious soul does more
groan and lament than under all the pressures of the world. Were these wants
supplied, these burdens removed, he would carry others comfortably, and laugh
at the frown of a creature, and the shaking of the spear. Now in Heaven there
is no sin, and all grace; all fairness and no spot, nor wrinkle, not the least
blemish. David in Psalm. 17. 14. had been speaking of the flourishing estate of
the men of this world, who have abundance for themselves, and enough to spare
for their babes, though this is a cutting and killing consideration, that what
they have now is all the comfort they are like to have; They have their portion
in this life. Well now observe, every one as they like, says he, verse. 15. As
for me, I will behold thy fac^ in righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness. Here they complain that they are so unlike to God,
that while they call him Father, and bear his name, they have no more of his
nature and image; it is the design of the Gospel and work of the Spirit to
change them into that image from glory to glory; but in Heaven there shall be a
perfect change, such as will issue in their satisfaction, 1 John 3. 2. Beloved,
now are we the sons of God, and it does not ye^ appear what we shall be; but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
^e is. When once you come to Heaven, there will be an heaven in you, God will
make all grace to abound, but especially and above all, Love shall shine forth
with the greatest luster, and burn with the most vehement flame. There God will
magnify his love upon you, and there shall you abound in your love to God.
Here it is your great grief that you can love God no more; and you may pick
matter of comfort and joy out of that very grief. It is a sign thou love God
dearly, if thou do indeed mourn because thou can love him no more. And in
this also rejoice, that in Heaven your love to God will be perfected. There you
shall love him as much as he requires, though to all eternity you shall not
love him so much as he deserves. He shall have your all, though that all falls
short. It being utterly impossible that a created love should be commensurate
with Divine Perfections.

3. Heaven is full of excellent company. It is no lonesome solitary place. In
this world wheresoever we come we find but a few, alas too few that do in
sincerity fear God. Atheists, and Papists, and Hypocrites, and Formalists, and
profane ones overspread the earth, and like ill weeds come up apace; the
flowers appear only here and there. We have indeed many Professors, a power of
people that call themselves Christians and he that will may believe them such;
but how few be there that are experimentally acqu^inted with the power of
godliness, and have Christ formed in their hearts! But in Heaven there is great
store of them, and none else. In a clear frosty night, if you do look up, you
will see the Sky full of Stars, but there are inconceivably more on the other
side There is already an innumerable company of Angels, and spirits of just men
made perfect; what do you think then will there be when all shall meet together
in the morning of the Resurrection. (...)! what a noble, glorious, huge
Assembly will that be! Without doubt, you will find company enough, and that so
good as you will never be weary of it; never weary of God, and Christ, and
Angels; no, nor of any Saint. Here all the people of God have their
imperfections, and one thing or other does sometimes render them unacceptable;
and you would be rid of such an one, if you could, handsomely do it; but there
will be no such thing in the Mansions above; as all there are brethren, members
of the same body, so are all quickened and acted by the same Spirit, all filled
with the same Grace, all fitted for the same employment, all delighted in the
same work, all singing Allelujah, and all in tune; so that there will be no
jarring, not the least discord, but a perfect harmony, and by consequence a
most ravishing delight.

4. Lastly, Heaven is full of happiness and glory. Such happiness, as if it
were not for that work which God has sent us hither to do, we might well count
and call it our loss and misery to be absent from it. Such a glory as all the
admired glories of the world are no better than baseness if compared with it.
What are Scarlet-gowns to a robe of Righteousness? what a Crown of Gold to the
Crown of Life? There is the Glorious Presence of God, there is Christ in his
Glory, Angels and Saints in theirs. The very vision of this is Bea^ifical.
Blessed will be the eyes that shall see it. Our Savior tells us, Mat. 13. 43.
That the righteous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. What
a beauty will there be! what a light will they give, when there shall be such
an innumerable company of righteous ones, and every one of them as splendid as
the Sun it self! It is night notwithstanding the twinkling of all the Stars;
but certainly when so many Suns meet together without any cloud, they will make
such a day as yet the world never saw. Will you sit down a while and think of
this, O ye besotted worldlings, that dote so much upon the glittering vanities
here below, and pride your selves in things of naught; you that prefer these
toys and trifles before those beams and beauties with which gracious souls
shall be invested, after all the dirt and scorn and reproach that you have cast
upon them: you, I say, you are the true Fanatics, being juftly chargeable with
as childish folly and Bedlam-madness, as he that should go about to applaud and
extol the sorry light of a slimy Glowworm, before that glorious Luminary in
the firmament, in whose light and influences the world does rejoice. Thus I
have given you a small account of Heaven according to Scripture reports; all
that is said here, or can be said by us, is short of that which it is; one half
has not been told.

The Third thing which I promised, is to consider, what may be the import of
our Saviors gracious promise to his Servants, that where he is, they also
shall be: What comfort and happiness is contained in the bowels of this
promise. I answer in general, as much as heart can wish, enough to reward all
your duties, enough to defray the charges of all your sufferings, enough to
silence all your desires, and to fill you with admirings; when David had been
re-minded of what God had done for him, in advancing him from the sheep-cote to
the Throne, he brake forth into this humble and thankful exclamation, Who am I,
O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto! how much
more will you, when you come to heaven, see cause to say, Who am I, O Lord God,
a poor contemptible worm, a little handful of rebellious dust! and what are all
my duties and services, all my prayers and tears, all my sorrows and
sufferings, that thou have brought me hitherto! But more particularly, I answer
thus:

1. Being where Christ is, does import a sight of his Glory, Cant. 3. 11. Go
forth, O ye d^ughters of Jerusalem, and behold the Crown wherewith his Mother
Crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his
heart. This is to be understood of Christ, of whom King Solomon was a Type;
when you go out of the body, you shall see the Crown wherewith his Father
crowned him, at his ascension, which was the day of the gladness of his heart.
Here we walk by Faith, and not by sight: there we shall walk by sight, and not
by Faith; Faith will be swallowed up of vision, and hope of fruition: Christ
will be the main and principal object, which glorified eyes will fix upon, and
be taken up with the contemplation of; it is true, they shall see others,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, David, Peter, Paul, and all the Saints; and also
their former Friends, Acquaintance and Relations, with whom they took sweet
counsel, and converst in the things of God; and I make no question, but they
shall know them too; Nevertheless, the great object about which they shall be
conversant, shall be, as I said, the Lord Jesus Christ: we shall see him as he
is. 1 John 3. 2. and this very thing our dear Lord Jesus declared to be his
will concerning them, Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am, that they also may behold my glory which thou
have given me. And that one sight is infinitely beyond all the sights in the
world. When good old Sim^on had seen Christ in his infancy and state of
humiliation, he was willing to have his eyes immediately closed, as not caring
to cast one look more toward earthly allurements; Lord, says he, now let
thou t^y servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation; yet
that was much short of seeing Christ in his exaltation. Austin, as I have read;
wished he might have seen Rome in her temporal Glory; but alas what would that
have been to the seeing of Christ in (...), sitting upon his Throne, at the
right (...) Majesty on high!

2. Being where Christ is, does import an intimacy of communion with him; here
indeed they have a fellowship with him, 1 Jo^. 1. 3. Truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Here is a fellowship of
interest and friendship; but it is accompanied with distance and absence, like
that of a wife with her husband, or of children with their father, who is in a
foreign Country, beyondthe Sea: in heaven this fellowship shall be completed;
Christ and Believers shall not only be interested one in another, but they
shall be one with another; therefore look again upon that forementioned passage
of our Savior, I will that those which thou have given me, be WITH ME where I
am; not only where I am, but with me where I am; so that there they shall have
an immediate and undisturbed and full communion with Christ, and with God in
and through Christ; Asaph could say, while upon earth, I am continually with
thee, Psalm. 73. 23. and so are you frequently in duties and ordinances; there
is many a gracious visit, loving embrace, sweet and comfortable intercourse;
but in heaven, you shall be with him after another manner than ever you were in
all your lives before; Lord, said the penitent Thief, remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom. To day, says our Savior, shall thou be with me in
Paradise; not only in Paradise, but with me in Paradise: and indeed, this is
the sweetest flower in that Garden, this is the best and choicest part of the
happiness above; the reproach of Christ was by Moses counted greater riches
than the Treasures of Egypt. What then is the presence and bosom of Christ? to
depart from him is the worst ingredient in wicked men's misery; to be with him
is the Crown and completion of good men's felicity.

3. Being where Christ is, does comprehe^ it ^joyment of happiness together
with him; God ^fied Christ with his own self, and he will glorify the Saints
with Christ; as the wife partakes in all the riches and honors and
advancements of her husband; so does the Believer in the glory and preferments
of Christ; the o^l of gladness, the Spirit and Grace poured out upon him,
descends to all his members, the lowest and meanest of them; so shall the
glory: they shall so be in Christ's company, as to be suited to it, he shall
not be ashamed to own them and call them Brethren, he shall be the King, they
the Courtiers; he shall shine as the Sun, they as the Stars; he shall shine
with his own beams, they with light communicated and derived from him: Solomon
sat clothed with Glory and Majesty, and the Queen did stand at his right hand
in Gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45. 9. The very bodies of the Saints, (which were made
of dust, and are become vile by reason of sin) shall then be made like unto
Christ's own most glorious body: the sights whlch Believers have now of Christ,
are transforming sights, by them grace is begun, and improved, as 2 Cor. 3. 18.
We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the
Lord. Yet these are but transient sights, and as in a glass; what then will be
the issue, and product of that full view which they shall have in heaven? what
a blessed glorious change will that make upon them! they shall see God, and
enjoy him too, and be like him; Christ's glory will be theirs, as his members,
and every one of them shall have such a personal glory, as that he shall see no
reason to envy another.

4. Being where Christ is, does carry along with it unspeakable delight; so
that the glorified is not only pleased and satisfied, but also filled with
amazement and wonder at the Divine love and goodness. Oh that God should ever
do so much for him! Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Christ finds fullness of joy in the
glorious presence of his Father and so do the Saints in the glorious presence
of Christ. The presence of the Creatures does afford no more than an empty,
scanty, fading joy; and indeed what else can be expected from empty enjoyments!
But the presence of God in Heaven affords a fullness of joy, such as cannot
enter into them, but they must into it. Well done good and faithful servant,
enter thou into thy Masters joy. Joy unspeakable and full of glory is the
offspring of faith, what is that then which is caused by sight? What! it is
such a joy as fills the soul up to the brim; nay more, such as does even
swallow it up, surround and encompass it as an huge vast Ocean does a little
vessel cast into it. In that state the Saints are enlarged to their utmost, and
yet they find the joys and delights there, are above and beyond their
capacities; they cannot contain but must admire them. Oh how does the released
soul stand and gaze, how is it wrapped up into a kind of ecstasy as soon a^ ever
it enters into the gates of that City, and treads upon the golden street
transparent as glass, and there beholds what delights, what feasts, what
glories the great God has prepared for them that love him!

5. Lastly, this being with Christ does import an unchangable state, an
eternity of duration. His servants shall not only be with him, but they shall
be always with him. This world is full of Vicissitudes, the changes are rung
every day. Changes and wars are upon me, said poor Job. And David cried out,
Thou have lifted me up and cast me down. Christians, do you not find it so in
respect of your spiritual condition? Here are meetings and partings, approaches
and recesses, comfortable visits, and mournful withdrawings too; short
communion, but long absence Sometimes the gracious enamoured soul triumphs, it
skip^ and leaps for joy, He is come! I, he is come! but then again he sits down
mourning as a Turtle alone, and weeping, cries out with the be-nighted deserted
Spouse, I sec^ him, but I cannot find him: I call him, but he gives me n^
answer. But there is, there will be no such thing in Heaven. 1 These. 4. 7. We
shall meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Ever,
without end, and without intermission; we shall so be with him, as never to be
without him, never from him. But what is the reason os all this? why shall
Christ's servants thus be where he is? I will tell you in a few things.

1. The relation which is between Christ and them call^ for it. Christ is their
Master, and they his servants; and should not servants follow and wait upon
their Lord Christ is their King, and they his Courtiers; and should no^
Courtiers, Favorites, wait upon their Prince? They are his children whom his
soul traveled for; yea, he died i^ travel; and should they not live with their
Father. They ar^ here espoused to him, and at the day of the Resurrection they
shall be married to him; at that day shall be the solemnization of the
Nuptials; and should not they cohabi^ with their Husband? Nay, the Church is
his Body, and all true Believers are his members; and certainly they should not
be separated from their Head. Christ hat^ been graciously pleased to take upon
himself all relation^ to his people, and those do not only call for utmost
dearness but likewise for all possible nearness; as relation does call for
cohabitation, so cohabitation does maintain and uphold affection in its life
and vigor. And so,

2. Christ and his people are united in most entire affection; they love most
dearly, their hearts are knit one unto the other, there is no such love in the
world, as that which Christ bears to them, and which they again bear to him.
The love of Jacob to Rachel, and that of Jonathan to David, though it passed
the love of women, was cold as ice if compared with this flame; and is it not
pity that those who love so well, should be parted? since Christ has placed
his delight in them, and they their happiness in him, is it not pity but they
should live together, and rejoice together, and be a comfort to one another?
The Lord Jesus has abundantly manifested his love to them in this, that let
them be how they will, and where they will, he does come and keep them company;
when any of them are in prisons, he visits them there, and puts songs into
their mouths; when some of them were in a fiery furnace, he came to them, and
walked with them, and was a shadow to them from that heat. His sweet promise
runs thus, in Joh. 14. 18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to
you. Whoever leaves you, though friends, and estate, and all leave you, I will
not; when you have no comforts, I will bring you some. And sure those who are
such friends at a distance, should come into a closer fellowship.

3. They have been together in troubles; these servants have again by way of
grateful return expressed their love to their Master. Afflictions, tribulations,
persecutions, death it self could not divide them; and what! shall they be
divided at the last? Certainly nothing shall separate them from the presence of
Christ, whom nothing could separate from the love of Christ. They have drunk of
the cup which he drunk of, and been baptized with the baptism which he was
baptized with, and therefore they shall enter into his joy, and be with him in
his Kingdom. They have carried his Cross, and they shall be with him upon his
Throne. They have sought his battles, and been with him in his conflicts,
therefore they shall share in his Triumphs. Peter thought he had done something
when he said, Mat. 19. 27. Behold we have for saken all, and followed thee,
what shall we have therefore? Sure he thought Christ was beholding to them for
leaving a few old nets, and leaking boats, and pitiful household stuff, to
follow him. Our Savior might have shown him his error; but observe his answer,
verse. 28. Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye
shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. q d.
Do not trouble your self, Peter, neither you, nor any of my faithful Disciples
shall be losers by me, though you and they may be sufferers for me; you forsake
little things for me, but you shall have great things from me. You part with
Nets, and I will give you Thrones. But here remember, that the Saints losses
and afflictions do not merit this happiness; no, read Romans 8. 18. The
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us. Yet through the condescending love, and rich
grace of God, that happiness shall attend and crown those troubles. Romans 8. 17.
We are joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may
be also glorified together.

4. The friends and servants of Christ cannot be happy upon other terms. Being
with Christ is the only thing that can afford rest and satisfaction to them,
all the world besides cannot do it. Let the Saints have never so great a
confluence of Creature-delights, suppose them possessed of Relations, friends,
estate, honor, peace, plenty, what you will, these are nothing if alone, mere
Ciphers, unless the enjoyment of Christ put a significancy into them. Without
the presence of Christ, and the manifestations of his love and favor, all
these things are in their esteem vanity and vexation of spirit. The heart of
poor tender Rachel was so let out to her children, and her comforts so much
bound up in them, that when they were not, she ^efused to be comforted. Now the
heart of a true believer is as much set upon Christ, and his comforts are as
much bound up in Christ; he knows that if he lose him, he loses all; if he
miss of him, he is an undone man. Hence it comes to pass, that if Christ does
now hide, and withdraw the manifestations of himself, and suspend his
influences; the gracious Soul cannot sit still, but up it gets, and away it
runs, searching and enquiring, with trembling and tears, Saw ye him whom my
soul loves? Cant. 3. 3. If during this state of desertion and darkness, he
repairs to the precious ordinances, and there hears a Son of consolation, whose
lips drop as an Honeycomb, and is entertained with the most sweet cordial
promises, the marrow and fatness of the Gospel; yet he is not refreshed, all is
to him as a dry ^chip, as the white of an egg, if he do not meet with Christ
there: the Lord Jesus is to him all in all, he alone is all, though there be
nothing else; but all things are nothing, Heaven and Earth are nothing without
Christ. Psalm. 73. 25. Whom ^ave I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee. Paul had, doubtless, a very considerable
number of dear and loving friends upon earth, as well as Enemies, and he had a
great deal of excellent work to do here; yet notwithstanding all his friends
and work, he had, good man, a desire to depart and^ to be with Christ, which he
counted far better, than what? than any thing you can name in this world.

5. Lastly, There is a place in Heaven already taken up for them, yea, for all
and every one of them by name; as the house is built, and richly furnished, so
the ^ooms are disposed of, Joh. 14. 2. In my Fathers house are many mansions; I
go to prepare a place for you, t^ prepare it, and that for you; I will take it
up for you^ and when he ascended into Glory, he entered, as in hi^ own person,
so in his people's names, Heb. 9. 19, 20* Which hope we have as an anchor of
the soul, both sur^ and steadfast, and which entered into that within the vail
whither the forerunner, even Jesus is for us entered. Mat^ that, he is entered
for us, not only for our good, tha^ he might there make intercession for us,
and prese^ our prayers to his Father, and from thence convey Spiritual
blessings to us, but he is entered in our name. The high Priest under the Law
was, you know, a Type o^ Christ; and when he entered into the Holy of Holi^ he
carried the names of all the Tribes with him, upon his breast: So did Christ
our high Priest, at his entranc^ into the most holy place, Heaven, he entered in
the name of all his people; which clearly showed that they must follow him
thither, for otherwise this action o^ Christ was in vain, and that is
impossible; nay, upon this account Believers are said to sit in Heaven in
Christ; as they shall one day sit there with him, so they do no^ sit there in
him. Ephesians. 2. 6. God who is rich in merc^ has raised us up together, and made
us sit together i^ heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

If now after all this, you ask me when that blesse^ day shall come, in which
the Servants of Christ shall be with him. I answer in a few words, when they
have finished their course, and completed that work which God has given them
to do, according to what our Savior said, Joh. 17. 4, 5. I have glorified thee
on the Earth, and finished the work which thou gave me to do and now O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self And so that of Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7,
8. I have fought a goo^ fight, I have finished my, course, I have kept the
faith^ henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. When Death gives its fatal
stroke, and breaks that union which had been between their souls and their
bodies, then do their enlarged and nimble souls post immediately to Heaven,
making no stay by the way, in ^ome imaginary Paradise, or feigned Purgatory;
nor do they forget themselves and continue in an idle and unprofitable sleep,
till the Arch-Angel's Trump awaken them; but they take their direct and speedy
flight ^o the Mansions above, the Palace of the Great King. And then at the
last day, when the morning, the joy^ul morning of the Resurrection shall dawn,
their sleep^ng bodies (having been calcined, and purified in the grave as in a
refining-pot, shall be awakened, and raised out of their beds of dust, and
being fitted to accompany their souls in their most sublime and noble
employments, shall be reunited to them, and together with them made partakers
of all that happiness, and invested with all that beauty, glory and perfection,
which they are capable of. I have finished the Doctrinal part, and shall now
make some improvement of it in a way of Use.

Use 1. From what has been said, wicked men may ^ee cause to fear and tremble;
if the rule of contraries hold true, they may from hence learn what will become
of them, and where their lines will fall; you that have to this day lived in a
state of estrangement from Christ, and emnity to him, you that do grieve and
always resist the Holy Ghost, you that slight and reject the ^enders of Christ,
that despise his grace, that refuse to ^ake his yoke upon you, and submit to
his government, but break his bands asunder, and cast away his cords from you;
you that hate his image instamped upon his Saints, and cannot endure the power
of godliness, bu^ are the servants of Sin, that delight to drudg for the Devil,
and gratify your base lusts; whither are you going? what will be the end of
these things? where shall you take up your everlasting abode, unless you face
about, and steer another course? doubtless with the Master whom you have
chosen; the Devil you will serve, and to the Devil you shall go; read your doom
pronounced by the mouth of a despised Savior, and righteous Judge, Mat. 25. 41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. And this I will confidently tell you, whatever pleasure and delight you
do now find in the Devils work, you shall find none in his company nor
condition at the last Some of you are Desperado's, stark mad, and wish God to
damn you; know, you do more than a Devil da^e do, and you need not do it, for
your damnation sleeps not.

Use 2. I would exhort you all, one and other, to enter into Christ^ Family,
and become his faithful Servants. Now, Now, O Sinners! change your Master; Why
should you slave for a lust? why should you take pains to ruin and undo your
selves? what profit ca^ you have of those things which will cause shame, and
sorrow, and death? Look to the issue of things, and judge them by that. He is a
wise man that is so at his latter end; and he is an happy man that will be so
to all eternity: Not he that swears and curses, drinks and whores, is merry and
mad while he lives; but he the has hope, a well-grounded hope in his death. My
Friends, If Baal be God, follow him; if Sin and Satan can bestow you holding,
lasting, everlasting happpiness, cleave to them; but if they cheat you, and
will ruin you, forsake them, and for certain they will do it; for the wages of
sin is death. And I beseech you act like wise and considerate men; what
satisfactory reason can you give, why you should not give up your selves to
Christ? His government is sweet, his yoke is easy, and his burden light. His
Law is the Royal Law of Liberty, and his Commandments holy, just and good; he
has indeed a Rod of Iron, but that is only for his obstinate and implacable
enemies, whom he will dash in pieces like a Potters Vessel: as for his
Subjects, he rules them with a golden Scepter of righteousness and grace. Come,
come, put your hand to his plow, my Soul for yours, you will never repent of
it; he will help you at your work, and comfort you in it, and crown you after
it. Be you wise therefore before it be too late; choose him for your Prince, who
will be your Savior; the strength and comfort of your hearts here, and your
portion for ever.

Use 3. But I shall now direct my discourse to you that are the Servants of
Christ, and have given up your names and your hearts to him; some things I have
to desire of you, and oh that I may prevail with you! I am persuaded that I
shall. Suffer then a fourfold word of exhortation.

1. While you are upon earth, be industrious, do as much as you can, lose no
time, bury no talent, always abound in the work of the Lord, remembering that
you shall not be always here; nay, you shall be but a little while here: you
must go to the place where Christ is. 2. Pet. I. the Apostle tells the Saints
to whom he wrote, That he would not be negligent to put them in remembrance;
but as long as he was in this Tabernacle he would stir them up by putting them
in remembrance, i. e. he would be exceeding industrious. And why so? He gives
the Reason, verse. 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle.
How soon you may have your Summons and remove, none of you can tell; your
breath is in your Nostrils, and may be stopped in a moment: you see God does
sometimes give very short, and makes a quick dispatch. Oh! therefore gird up
the loins of your minds, ply your business, and follow it close; let no duty be
neglected, no day lost, no golden season and opportunity slipped or trifled away;
fill up your time, places and relations, that so your works may be found
perfect before God; and when you go hence, you may neither mourn nor blush, but
hear your Master telling you, That you have been faithful in your little.

2. During your abode here, maintain and keep up a most close and intimate
communion with Jesus Christ; make fellowship with him the work of your days,
and you shall find it the comfort of your lives. Enoch walked with God; D^vids
eyes were ever toward the Lord; Asaph was continually with him; and this has
been the practice of all the Saints in their Generations. The Doctrine we are
handling, does oblige you to it: You shall hereafter be where Christ is,
therefore love to be where he is now, much in ordinances, frequent in holy
duties. Let not Christ come into your Families and Closets, and find you absent
at the hours of Prayer, or his work thrust out by the world: Let not him come
into the Assemblies of his people, and find your places empty in the time of
public worship; let not the King of Saints come to his Table, and want any of
his guests; but be you there too, and let your Spikenard send forth its smell.
He walks in the midst of Golden Candlesticks, walk you there too, and not with
vain persons, nor in any path of the destroyer. Oh! Love the habitation of his
House, the place where his honor dwells. Count Sabbaths your delight; look
upon Prayer not as your task but privilege. Often ca^ to mind and meditate upon
that of David, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will
seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life,
to be hold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. Oh! that the
same frame of Spirit might be in every one of us.

3. Acquaint your selves with Heaven beforehand; one day you shall come
thither, that is your home: here you are Pilgrims and Strangers, as all your
Fathers were; that is your own Country, there you shall take up your
everlasting abode; be there now as much as you can; lay aside those weights
that press down, and the sins which do so easily beset you; get upon the wing,
soar a-loft, and let your conversations be in Heaven, as the Apostles and
primitive Christians were, Phil. 3. 20. Well may miserable worldlings, like
blind Moles, dig and bury themselves in the earth; alas! their treasure is
there, there portion lies wholly in the things of this life: And it is no
wonder at all to see their minds and hearts where their portion is. But as for
you, my Brethren, who cannot rest in this World, because it is polluted, and
would be of all men most miserable, if you had hope only in this life; you,
whose Head, and Happiness, and Inheritance is above, should be of more sublime
spirits, and thoughts and affections. Be not you choakt with worldly cares, nor
disquieted with worldly fears, nor drowned in sensual worldly delights. When
there is nothing but disorder and confusion in the world where you sojourn,
there is a perfect calm and serenity in the Country to which you are
traveling. And when you have peace and pleasure here, sip and look up,
remembering there is something above infinitely better.

Lastly, Be so wise, such good Husbands, as to make the best improvement you
can of your godly Pastors, Friends and Relations while you enjoy them. You see
by daily experience, they do not, they must not live for ever in this world;
yet a little while you see them, and yet a little while and you shall not see
them. It is expedient for them that they go away. Their dear Lord, whom they
serve, loves them too well to be always without them: He must have them with
him. He loves them too well to suffer them always to toil and labor among a
disingenuous and ungrateful people, always to contend with and suffer by a
wicked and malicious world. He must and will have them home to himself.
Therefore know your duty, and your advantages, while they are afforded you; let
there be wisdom in your hearts, as well as a price in your hands, and get as
much good by them as you can. Hear their wisdom, attend to their counsels,
inquire after their experiences, observe their carriages; let your converses be
spiritual, your discourses heavenly, that they may be profitable, and minister
to you both grace and comfort.

Use. Let me now in the last place speak something to you by way of
Consolation: Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says our God. Some of you are
mourners, and I would not dismiss you without a Cordial, especially now there
is one at hand. This consideration, That Christ's S rvants shall be where he is,
may comfort you,

1. Against all the uncertainties and troubles of this world: they are many and
great, In the world ye shall have tribulation, said our dear Master; who dealt
faithfully with his followers, and has told them the very worst, that they may
not be offended. No Saints must expect to go from one Heaven to another. A
Wilderness lies in your way to Canaan. Gods Ministers especially must expect
to meet with hard usage here, many a frown, and frump, and abuse, contrary to
the Laws of Princes Ambassadors. But the King of Saints who commissioned and
sent them, had far worse entertainment, and the servant must not expect to be
above his Lord. Wel^, let things be how they will, and the present day is so
very dark, that for a time they are like to be worse than they are; yet let not
your hearts fail, but hold up your heads, for they will be better one day. If
you do not see what you desire in this world, you shall in the next. There will
be no cause of complaint when you arrive at that place where your Lord is; the
joys of Heaven will make you a plenary amends for all your sorrows and
afflictions upon Earth.

2. You may from hence ^e relieved as to the shortness of the present life:
Though some have their line of life drawn out to a very great length, so that
they see those days in which they have no pleasure, but they awake at the voice
of the bird, and the Grasshopper is a burden; yet others are taken off in the
midst of their days when their bones are full of marrow, and their breasts of
milk; others presently after their Meridian, before the shadows of the evening
are upon them, as was your late beloved Pastor. However it be, an eternal life
with Christ in Heaven will make you a full amends for a short life on earth.
What you want here, you shall have there. Here you have but few days, and those
full of trouble; there you shall have but one day, yet that one knows no
clouds, no night, no end, and it is full of joy and glory. Though we are but
little with you, and our friends but little with us, it matters not much so
long as they and we shall be ever with the Lord.

3. From this cordial truth we may fetch comfort against death it self: It is
indeed a King of ^errours, but upon this account a messenger of Peace. Christ
by his death has conquered it, and pulled out its sting, and by the purchase
of this blessed privilege has put sweetness into it. So that though it has a
pale, ghastly and frightful countenance, yet it comes upon a good errand to
believers, and does them a most remarkable kindness. It is a dark passage to a
glorious palace. It closes the eye that it may see no more trouble; and when
that eye is again opened, it shall behold matchless glory. It separates between
nearest and dearest relations, the Husband and Wife, Parents and Children,
Pastor and People, Soul and Body; it breaks up families, and turns the Body
into putrefaction, and a stink; but it sends the Soul to Heaven. Snatcheth it
from friends on earth, that it may go to a God above; turns it out of a crazie
cottage, that it may dwell in a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. In a word it strips it of flesh, that it
may be clothed with Immortality And then in the last place:

4. This may comfort us under the departure (I do not call it loss) of our
dearest Friends and Relations, and in particular, under this late dispensation,
which has so much of wormwood and gall in it; upon the account thereof many of
you are pained and grieved at the very heart. There is indeed a great and
dismal breach made upon you; and give me leave to say, he that is not affected
and afflicted, is too too stupid; and I would wish him, when he is at home,
seriously to consider and examine what kind of spirit he is of. But as for you
whose hearts do even bleed within you, my advice is, that you would set your
Pastors gain against your own loss. And let this set just bounds to your
sorrow, that where Christ is, there is his Servant also, fully satisfied with
his love and likeness.

IT may now be rationally expected, that I should expatiate in the
Commendations of your deceased Pastor: but I shall be short and sparing; not
because there is want of matter (for the subject is copious), but because of my
Relation to him, which will render me in the thoughts of some an incompetent
Judge, and his Encomiums in my mouth suspected. And the truth is, I am no great
friend to Panegyricks, or Funeral Orations: They do not deserve to have flowers
strowed upon them, whose names will stink and rot, when their friends have done
their best; and they do not need them, whos^ Works praise them in the Gate; and
will do so, when their Adversaries have done their worst. What therefore I
shall say, you may take thus in short.

He was, as I am verily persuaded, a truly godly man; I do not say a perfect
man, omnibus numeris absolutus, one free from spot, mistake, or failing. Light
up candles, walk thorough the world, search narrowly, and find me out such a
person if you can. But after Thirty-five years knowledge of him, I dare say he
was an Israelite indeed; He did not mock God, nor in his profession cheat man;
he did not personate the Saint, but was one.

He was excellently furnished for the work of the Ministry, having choice
natural parts, and great acquired abilities. God had given him both the head
and tongue of the learned; He was well stored, and having a door of utterance,
could readily bring out of his treasury good things, both new and old: He was a
Workman that needed not to be ashamed. Wheresoever he came and labored, solid
and judicious Christians rejoiced in his light.

He was industrious and diligent in his Masters business; not a loiterer, but a
labourer in the Vineyard; one that would dig for knowledge, and then sweat in
scattering spiritual riches: He did not think much to spend, and be spent for
God and his People: He had so large a soul, that he once crazed his head; and
if he had had two bodies, it would have worn them out through an earnest desire
of getting and doing good.

He was really set for the spiritual advantage, and eternal salvation of
precious souls: He sought the advancement of Gods Honor, the enlargment of
Christ's Kingdom, the deliverance of captivated Sinners out of the Devils
clutches; it was his joy to see any subjected to the Truth, and walking in it.

His work is now finished, and his race run: He will Pray for you no more,
Preach to you no more, Administer Sacraments among you no more; he will advise,
instruct, exhort, reprove you no more; he will mourn over you, be troubled for
you, and grieved by you no more; he will delight and rejoice in you no more,
unless it be at the last day, when those that were wrought upon by his Ministry
shall be his joy and glory, and crown of rejoicing: He is now at perfect rest
where Christ i^, and where he finds his labor was not in vain. Whatever
unkindnesses he met with in this world, he meets with nothing but love and
loveliness in that world. I shall have done when I have made three Requests to
you, whom he has left behind.

1. Live the Sermons he preached among you; let not what he preached be lost
now he is dead; he has sown precious seed, Oh let it root in your hearts, and
bring forth much fruit in your conversations: It is not the Gospel heard, but
the Gospel believed and lived, that will save you.

2. Beware of all unbrotherly breaches and divisions; let this breach which God
has made upon you, prosper to the healing of all other breaches. Keep
together, and walk in love, and manage all things according to Scripture-rule.

3. Look out for a supply; Seek earnestly to God, and advise with good men.
Labor for one sound in the faith, of a gracious prudent spirit, and of an
exemplary life; one that may happily build upon the foundation already laid,
and be an instrument in the hand of God to make you meet for an inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ.

FINIS.

