A SERMON Preached at St. JAMES's Church, Westminster, April 2. 1696.

UPON THE DISCOVERY of the late Horrid Conspiracy against the PERSON of Our
Gracious KING WILLIAM.

By JAMES SMALWOOD, Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of ROMNEY, etc.

Published at the Request of the Parish.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall,
1696.

A SERMON Preached at St. James's Church.
Matthew. XIII. 13. Seeing, they see not; and hearing, they hear not; neither do
they understand.
THese Words are a short Character of the Jewish obstinacy against the clear
Light of our Savior's Gospel, and the undeniable Testimonies that did attend
it.

But I design not at present to Discourse upon that Subject. Certain it is, our
Savior Christ both taught and did such things as none but God, or one acted by
a Divine Power, could possibly have taught, or done. And therefore those Men
that were Eye Witnesses to all his Miracles, and saw him daily and hourly
perform such things as were contrary to the course of Nature, and above the
Skill of any Impostor, nay the Power of Angels or Devils to perform, and still
would hold out against all those Condescending Demonstrations of his Power.
Those Men, I say, were most stupidly perverse, and were deservedly given over
as Brute Creatures, beyond Conviction.

And indeed our Savior speaks these words out of an Ancient Prophet, as an
accomplishment of a Curse fore boded upon that People: In them, says he, is
fulfilled Ver. 14.
the Prophecy of Esaias, which says, by hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive.

And I could heartily wish the Prophecy had been fully completed, and had
ended there; it were well if it did not reach down even to our times, and that
there were not even amongst us Christians some to be found, that are as
obstinately blind as ever the Jews were; Men that will not see even in these
their days the things that belong unto their Peace. Though God Almighty Luke 19
42.
in the distribution both of his Mercies and his Judgments has sufficiently
manifested himself to the World; yet seeing, they see not, and hearing they
hear not, neither do they understand.

The Text being thus brought down, and made applicable to our own Times, I
shall first lay down these two Propositions, which seem to be intended by it.

First, That it is the highest contempt and grossest affront that can be
offered to the Divine Majesty, for Men, after the clearest manifestations of
God's Power and Wisdom, still to hood-wink their Understandings, and to persist
in Blindness.

Secondly, That it is the heaviest Curse that can befall Men, to have their
hearts waxed gross, and their ears dulled, and their eyes closed, Mat. 13. 15.
and so to be forsaken of God. And then,

Thirdly, I shall enquire who they are that may most deservedly be judged to
fall under this Curse.

1. It is a high affront to God, after the clearest demonstrations of his
Wisdom and Power, for Men still to persist in Blindness. And the Reason is
this; because it is a plain despising of God's two chief Attributes, his
Wisdom, and his Power.

1. It is a contempt of his Wisdom; the Wisdom and Knowledge of God is like
himself, Infinite. By this he is able to penetrate into the hidden Thoughts and
Contrivances of the Hearts of Men, and to discover all their secret and
concealed Designs. Woe unto them, says the Prophet Isaiah, that seek deep to
hide their Counsel from the Lord, and their work is in the dark, and they Isa.
29. 15.
say, who sees us? Surely your turning of things upside down, shall be
esteemed as the Potter's Clay.

God knows the whole Bent and Inclinations of Men; for he first endued their
Minds with what Faculties and Powers they have: He that made the Heart, surely
knows all its Turnings and Windings, all its Corners and Labyrinths. Thus holy
David argues, He Psalm. 33. 15.
fashioneth all the hearts of Men; and therefore, he understands all their
works; that is, the Works acted in their Hearts, in the innermost Closets and
Recesses of the Soul; he needs no Spies to inform him of Men's Consultations,
all things are naked and open to his Eyes from all Eternity. By virtue of this
Infinite Knowledge God is privy to all Plots, be they never so closely laid:
How successfully might Men carry on their Plots, if they could be but once
assured that no body plotted but themselves! But this is sometimes apt to
startle them, and make them less Confident of their Projects, when they have a
Suspicion that others are at work too, and such as are every way equal to
themselves in Cunning and Conduct. Now in this Particular, God by his Infinite
Knowledge has a vast Advantage against all the Policies of Men: As they Plot,
so does he too; he has Designs as well as they, and Designs beyond them; he is
always present at their Cabals, and Consults, and shifted Meetings, and
therefore can trace and observe their Motions. And it is wonderful to consider,
what Methods and Instruments God Almighty is sometimes pleased to make use of,
to baffle the most Dark and Secret Conspiracies: How he does sometimes employ
his very Enemies for the promoting of his own Cause: How he can inspire
sometimes some of the very Agents to betray the Villainies of their Fellows: How
he can govern and overruled both the Understandings and Wills of Men, as shall
best serve his own wise Purposes and Decrees. Let Men design things never so
warily, and make them never so secure, even to a Confidence of an
Infallibility; let them reckon of it as a Blow that cannot miss, yet after all
God can defeat and frustrate them; he can clap in his Arm just between the
Dagger and the Body; he can, as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, Put a hook Isa. 37.
20.
into the nose, and a bridle into the lips of a proud and insolent Enemy, and
can turn him back by the way that he came.

If therefore God be of that Infinite Knowledge, as to be always present to
Men's most retired Thoughts; if he sees from all Eternity every little
Occurrence that can either further or prevent their Designs, how plainly do
those Men contemn and villifie God's Omniscience, that perceiving all this,
will still be driving on their foolish Plots, and will not comply with the
present Government of Affairs, though they know God governs all: Which brings me
to the Second Attribute of God, which these Headstrong Men by their conceited
Devices do plainly affront, and that is his Power.

2. The Power of God is almighty, irrisistible, and uncontrollable: 'Twas he
that made the Heavens and the Earth; and then we may well make the Prophet
Jeremy's Conclusion from it, that nothing is too hard for Jer. 32. 17.
him: He that with a Word made this great Fabric of the World, may surely with
the turn of his Hand manage every thing in it so as to be subservient to his
Will.

But not to insist upon that wide and extensive part of God's Power, which must
be acknowledged in the Government of the World, let us consider it only as it
can govern the Hearts and Minds of Men, that so those Men that will run blindly
in an Error, and will shut up their Eyes against the plainest Convictions, may,
if they please to abate a little of the Heat of their Tempers, and to mitigate
their Passions, return once to a better mind, and forsake that Jewish
Stomachfulness, which is directly opposite to the gentle and mild Genius of the
Gospel.

That God therefore has a Sovereign Power over the Hearts and Passions of Men,
as well as any other part of his Creation, is as certainly true, as that he
himself was the first framer of them. He that can set bounds to the Sea, saying
hitherto shall thou go, and no further, can also quiet and subdue the most
swelling Thoughts and disorderly Affections of weak Man; he can let them loose,
like the Winds, when he pleases, and for Reasons best known to his Wisdom, to
bluster and make disturbances in the World a while, and when they have finished
the work that he designed, he can call them back again, compose and quiet them
in an instant. Dicto citius tumida aequora placeat, Virg. Mat. 8. 26.
he can rebuke the Winds and the Seas, and make the black Cloud that was
charged with Thunder, and ready to burst upon us, pass gently away into Smoke
and Vapor.

Therefore, not only the Wisdom but the Power also of God appearing evidently
to be thus great, and irresistible, what Notions of God must we suppose those
Men to have, who will not submit to His Government, and that which is so
signally appointed by him? What sort of Spirit must influence the Minds of
these Men, to make them so resty and untractable under a meek and merciful
Master? What makes them, as the Jews of old, to rebel against Moses, whom the
Lord has, as a Guide and Ruler, set over them, and who has safely conducted
them through many Dangers and Difficulties, and long for some Foreign Egyptian
Pharaoh to bring Slavery and Bondage upon them, and to blacken the Face of
their Religion, and drown the Light of the Gospel in a thick Darkness? Nothing
certainly can be said of these Men, but that they are perfectly infatuated, and
wilfully in the wrong.

II. And this leads me to the Second General, namely, That it is the heaviest
Curse that can befall Men, to have their Hearts thus waxed gross, and their
Eyes dulled.

And that Curse God sends upon them for Two very good Reasons:

1. Because they will not consider the Judgments of God. 2. Because they will
not consider his Mercies.
1. It is a great Curse not to consider the Judgments of God. King Pharaoh was
an eminent Sufferer under God's Wrath upon this Account: For we read, the
longer that he resisted the Judgments of God, the more was his wicked Heart
hardened, till at last he arrived at a monstrous degree of Hardness, having
been, as the Text tells us, hardened under Ten Plagues. And the whole Nation of
the Jews have a long time been, and still are, a lively Instance of God's
Indignation for this Sin of Obstinacy, after many and great Judgments, for
their Correction, sent upon them.

2. It is a great Curse not to consider the Mercies of God; and this we find
charged as the highest piece of ingratitude upon the People of Israel, that
they remembered not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the hands
of all their Enemies, neither showed they kindness to Gideon, who had been
their Judge. 3. 34.
Deliverer, according to all the goodness he had showed Israel. God resented it
highly that they were ungrateful to Gideon, whom he had made the Instrument of
their Deliverance; Gideon that Mighty Man of Valor that demolished the
Idolatrous Altars of Jude 6. 12. 6. 27. 9. 17.
Baal, that often hazarded his own Person in Battle against their Enemies, and
at last Conquered and Subdued them. And yet for all these his good Services,
that they should make such unkind and unworthy returns to him, God we read was
very much displeased at them, and as a token of his great displeasure, we may
read afterward what a Curse God laid upon them; for not long after they became
a Prey to their Enemies.

And that which aggravates this sort of Sin, and provokes God's anger against
it, is chiefly, that it is committed against our own Knowledge; we see and feel
God's Mercies and Judgments, and yet we are still so perverse and incorrigible
as not to be prevailed upon by them; neither the Afflictions that God exercises
us with, nor the Deliverances that he works for us, make any impression upon
us. We, I am sure, of this Nation, have often been tried by both; God has used
all means both to sweeten our Blood by gentle Lenitives, and to purge it by
sharper Remedies; and if there still are found amongst us Men that will not be
Converted, and be Healed, they must be Mat. 13. 15.
given over as Men in a desperate Condition, and beyond Cure; which brings me
to the third General, and that is,

III. To enquire who those Men are that may deservedly be thought to fall under
this Censure? And there are two sorts that I think most justly do, and those I
shall not scruple openly to name; one is the downright professed Papist, and
the other is he that affects to be called a Jacobite; Men though of different
names, yet both embarked in the same Cause, and both full of the same turbulent
Spirit.

1. What Spirit the former of these are of, not only their Actions all along,
but numbers even of their own Books do inform us. It is a Spirit that does not
only thwart the orderly and peaceable Principles of Christianity, but is
contrary to Humanity it self. These Men by Plots and Conspiracies, by Fire, and
Sword, and by Subverting the Peace and Order of the World, have always
endeavored to promote and advance their Religion; nay, they value not the
Sacrificing of Kings and Princes to the accomplishing their Wicked Ends and
Purposes; as if the God whom the Christians Worship, were not a God of Order,
but Confusion; and Kingdoms and Societies of Men were formed for no other end,
but to be a Victim and Burnt-Sacrifice when ever any warm Zealot or bigoted
Priest should so think fit. But what a scandal must this be all this while to
the Christian Religion? what exact representations of Christian Love and
Charity here are? how far more honorable apprehensions of the Divine Nature
had even the Heathens themselves, than these Men? Dii Immortales ad usum
hominum fabrefacti paene videantur, says Tully, the Nature of the Gods seems to
be exactly framed for the use and benefit of Mankind.

But when Religion once comes to supplant Moral Honesty, and to prescribe Rules
contrary both to the Natural Compassion of Mankind, and the peaceable Laws of
the Gospel; when it once teaches the absurdest and most dangerous Maxims; as,
that Equivocation in some Cases may be used, that Men may tell Lies upon some
Accounts; or that to kill a Man for God's sake, is no Crime, when it serves to
no other use but to inflame the Tempers of Men, and set a sharper edge upon
their Spirits, and so to make them ten times more the Children of Wrath than
they were by Nature; then surely Religion loses its Nature, and ceases to be
what it pretends: For what is Religion good for, but to reform the Manners and
Dispositions of Men, to restrain Humane Nature from Violence and Cruelty, from
Falsehood and Treachery, from Sedition and Treason. It were a great deal better
for the peace and quiet of Mankind that there were no such thing as Religion,
and that Humane Nature were left to the conduct of its own Inclinations, which
in a great many Men are mild, and merciful, than to be acted by a Religion
which inspires Men with so wild a Fury, and prompts them to commit such
Outrages.

This is the Spirit of the former sort of Men, which I speak not out of any
virulency or rancour against them, but what may be justified out of hundreds of
their Lessius. Molina. Escobar. ^iliutius, etc
own Authors. And truly, if my Text may be justly applied to any sort of Men in
the World, it may certainly to this; Men who will not open their Eyes to the
light of the Gospel, but cast all the mists and shadows before it they can
devise, to hinder both themselves and others from being enlightened, and
convinced by it. These Men, and the Images they Worship are both alike, and we
have them very well described in the 115th Psalm. Eyes have they, but they see
not, ears have they, but they hear not, etc. they that make them, are like unto
them, and so are all they that put their trust in them. So much for the former
sort.

Secondly, And truly the latter sort of Men, they that love to distinguish
themselves by a Name, are as much to be Condemned as the former. The Jesuit,
and the Jacobite, are equally well wishers to the present Government; but one
thing may be said of both of them, they neither of them do their Masters; from
whom they take their Name, much Service. It Is true, I have so much Charity for
the latter, as to think their Principles are not so much tinctured with Blood
as those of the former are: I cannot think that all their Obedience, and
Long-Suffering, and Passiveness, and Submission, are already changed, and quite
gone over into the other Extremes of Cruelty, and Treachery, and Murder; Vice
has its Degrees and Progresses as well as Virtue; and as no Man can by one
single Act of Piety, or Charity, or any other Virtue, nay not by a few repeated
ones, deservedly arrive at the Character of a perfect good Man; so neither do I
think that a Man can all on the sudden, though some of the Schoolmen Teach
otherwise, become an Accomplished and Completed Villain. However, if we may
judge of these latter sort of Men from this late Barbarous Conspiracy, wherein,
upon invincible Testimonies, we are assured some of them were engaged; we have
all the Reason in the World to put no fair Construction either on their Actions
or Intentions. But I would gladly know what Reasons these Men can give for
their mighty uneasiness under, and their endeavourings to subvert the present
Government? I cannot conceive any, unless these Three may serve for some;
either,

I. They are dissatisfied with the present King; Or, II. They long for their
former Master. Or, III. They have some Pressures of Conscience laid upon them.
1. As for the first, How can any Reasonable Man be dissatisfied with our
present King? If they dispute his Right, was he not called in by the Voice of
the People, which is the same with that of God? Was not the Kingdom just
running into Anarchy and Confusion? Our holy Religion prostituted and left
defenseless? The Laws of the Land made of no Force or Activity? and all
occasioned by the Vacancy of the Throne? And who, I would know, when the Helm
of the Government was thus shamefully left and deserted, had a more rightful
and lawful Title to step in and save our sinking Ship, than our present King?
He wss no Subject, therefore no Usurper; He was a Prince wholly independent of
the Power of England, and so nearly related to the Throne, that he was rightly
and justly concerned to see it filled, and the Government kept upon its ancient
Bottom (if it may be said to have had then any Bottom at all, when it was so
unfaithfully undermined) This was an honorable and just Action, and what Men
of all Principles, I mean all Protestants, were then very well satisfied with;
and why they should not be much more so now, unless it were the Novelty that
then pleased them, I cannot imagine. Indeed, I rather think that we have much
more Reason now to be satisfied than before; for now a long time his Authority
has been confirmed and ratified by the Estates of the Nation, with whose
Determinations all private Subjects are bound to acquiesce; this makes him our
Rightful and Lawful King. But what should equally engage the Hearts of his
Subjects to him, is the Goodness and the Prudence of his Reign over us, His
exemplary Courage abroad against his open Enemy, and his sedate Conduct at Home
amongst some ungrateful and untractable People: Indeed, all his Virtues do
sufficiently recommend him to the Love of his People. And if after this
indisputable Right to the Crown, and those good Qualifications of a Governor,
there are still those Men amongst us, that, like the ancient Israelites, will
murmur against God and his Servant Moses, if they will plot against, and
maliciously conspire the Destruction of our good Deliverer, they must expect to
have the same Vengeance fall upon them, as did upon them; God will rule in the
midst of his Enemies, and if they will not bow to his gentle Scepter, he can
take up a Rod of Iron and break them in pieces. It is a Saying of a King
represented to us by our Savior in the Gospel, Those Luke 19. 27.
mine Enemies that would not I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay
them before me.

2. The Second Reason, why some Men are dissatisfied with the present
Government, may be their Longings after their ancient Master. Why truly, this
carries a fair and a specious Face outwardly with it; there are some Allowances
to be made for Humanity and Compassion; and the Afflictions of a Friend or a
Neighbor, and much more of a Prince, do naturally touch the Bowels and
Affections of Mankind. But if you will either recollect the Unhappinesses of
the last Reign, or consider how great our Miseries might probably have been, if
the late King should have happened to be brought in by the help of a Foreign
Power, no reasonable Man, I am sure no true Son of the Church of England, ought
to be discontented with matters as they now stand.

1. If you will recollect the Unhappinesses of the last Reign: In what a
Condition was both the Church and State like then to have been? How did
Idolatry creep into the Worship of the one, and Arbitrary Power invade the
Privileges of the other? The Laws of our Land were infringed and trampled
upon, the Governors of our Church were imprisoned, our Universities were
poisoned with Errors; indeed, God Almighty was pleased to let all their Designs
be carried on so far, as if he were resolved to bring us just to the Mouth of
Destruction, that so his Goodness and Omnipotence might appear the plainer in
our Rescue.

2. Let us consider the Miseries we might probably have fallen into, if the
late King should have happened to be brought in by a Foreign Power. The
Principles and cruel Designs of Popery may plainly be understood by any who
have a mind to it; we have had Trial and Experience enough of them in this
Nation, especially now lately we have had a dismal and horrid View, though
(blessed be God) it was but a transient View of the true Spirit and Temper of
that Religion: But then to consider the Tenets of that Religion, joined with a
natural Implacableness of a Man's own Temper, and that exasperated not only by
the Instigations of vile Men about him, but likewise by the irksom and
vexatious remembrances of his own Losses. All this, I say, put together, what
could be expected from the Success of such a Design as this? Good God! to what
a height of Barbarity would their Insolence and Rage have drove them, if their
Plots had taken effect? There is no expecting Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles. Mat. 7. 1^
The Foundation of this true Romish Attempt, like that of ancient Rome, was to
be laid in Royal Blood; and what After-works were to be expected from such
Beginnings?

And now, since by the undeserved Mercy of God to us, we have escaped their
Rage and Fury, can any Member of our Church have any Adherency to the
Maintainers of these bloody Principles? Can any Professors of the true and
peaceable Faith of Christ have any Affection for the Defenders of such a Faith
as This? In short, to use the words of Ezra, Seeing that thou our God have
punished Ezra 9. 13, 14.
us less than our Iniquities deserve, and have given us such a Deliverance as
this, should we again break thy Commandments, and join in Affinity with the
People of These Abominations, would not thou be angry with us till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?

But it was not only Popery that was coming in upon us, but a Foreign Power.
When God threatens his People with the severest sort of Foes, he adds this as
the most aggravating Circumstance, I will bring a Nation Jer. 5. 15.
upon you from far; a Nation whose Language thou know not, neither
understandest what they say. Nor was it only a Foreign Power that was coming,
but a Power that has hitherto exercised the greatest Inhumanities, a Power that
has disturbed the Peace of Christendom, a Power that, were not the Power of God
greater than it, would overrun all the Bounds of Right and Wrong, and would
swallow the whole World without Remorse, and make the very Church of Christ a
Prey to its Insatiableness. I would therefore have those Men that are
Well-wishers to their Old Master, as they term him, consider, they cannot have
him without this Power we have been describing: And how small Gainers either
their Master or themselves would be by this Power, if it should prevail, may
easily be guessed from the many wonderful Loving-kindnesses and Mercies it has
hitherto been guilty of in all its Conquests.

Thirdly, The third Reason why some Men will not comply with the Government may
be some pressures of Conscience they may pretend to be laid upon them; but what
those pressures are, who can tell? Sure I am, a great many are taken off; here
are no Persecutions now for Conscience sake, no Imprisonments for bare
Non-compliances; nothing that is heavy or grievous to the Subject, but what the
misfortune of a War makes unavoidable. But one thing there is thas lies heavy
at the bottom of some Men's Stomachs, and that is some Oaths and Obligations,
and Subscriptions, which the Wise and Great Council of the Nation think proper
to be taken, and entered into. And when the Government has thus determined them
to be proper, I think it no offense to any any Man's Conscience to comply with
them.

The Throne became vacant by Cession, or Desertion, and the next Heir by
Rightful Succession was placed in it by the hand of God, and the consent of the
People; which was solemnly confirmed by the Three Estates of the Government.
Then forms of Oaths of Fidelity were Composed and Tendered to the People, and
undoubtedly with the greatest Prudence, and Wisdom; for Men are apt to sit
loose in their Obedience, without the restraints and ties of Conscience, and
then nothing but Power can keep the wavering parts of such a Government
together. The People are a fluid Body, like the Sea, and every Wind puts them
into a Disturbance, and Commotion, therefore Oaths are of great use in a
Government, to fix and settle the Subjects of it.

But the most preposterous Creature of all is, he that can take the Oaths, and
yet speak and act against the Government, that can deliberately in a Court of
Judicature Swear Fidelity to a Prince, and with the next Glass of Wine mix his
Confusion. It is indeed a thing much to be lamented, that Men can thus trifle
with their Consciences, and I could heartily wish the Church of England could
not be taxed with the having of some of this stamp in her bosom. Indeed they
would make far fitter Members for the Church of Rome, where Equivocation, and
the palliating of a Man's Conscience is as much Tolerated, as speaking of Truth
is Commanded in the true Church of Christ.

I have now done with the two sorts of Men which my Text seemed directly to
point at, the Men that seeing, will not see, nor hearing, will not hear,
neither will they understand. And I will now make use of the same Inference
from these words to you, that our Savior did to his Disciples, but blessed are
your eyes, for you see, and your ears, for you hear.

I hope there is no body here but what is fully convinced of the continual
Endeavors of the Romish Party against us, how close they are in their
Contrivances, how eager they are in their Pursuits, and how Barbarous they
would be in their Executions. Not to recount all their Plots and Conspiracies
since the Reformation, let us but thoroughly look into this last contrived
against us: How deep was it laid, and how far was it carried on? What
Preparations of War did, as out of the Clouds, on the sudden appear to us from
afar? And how secretly were their Combinations carried on here at Home? And
yet, by the merciful Providence of God how happily and how strangely was it
prevented, even when it was just upon the point of Execution!

Plots and Conspiracies against the Church of Christ and Lawful Governments,
prove often to be of the same Nature in the Political Body, as Boils and Tumors
are in a Man's Natural Body; all the ill Blood gathers together, and there it
frets and ferments for some time, and is very angry and peevish, till it
digests and grows ripe, and then it is either lanced and probed to the bottom,
or it often breaks of it self, and lets out the Corruption, and afterward the
whole Body is much the better for it.

Indeed we have great Reason to thank Almighty God for his Critical Discovery
of this black Conspiracy that was now laid against the Person of our Sacred
King and all his good Subjects at once: It was truly come to a full Head and
Ripeness; and the Design, as it was Cruel and Tragical, so certainly would the
Execution of it have been Universal, it had broke in like Wildfire amongst us,
and none would have escaped its Wrath and Fury: And God, we cannot but confess,
might have justly stood aloof from us in the Day of our Distress, and might
have said to us as he once did to the Children of Israel, So often have I
delivered you from the hands of your enemies, but ye have still provoked me
more and more, wherefore I will deliver you no more. But his tender Mercies
have been far greater unto us.

And now what may God justly expect from us in return for this his Goodness to
us?

1. That we should glorify him by off ring him Praise and Thanksgiving, and by
ordering our Conversation aright, that he may still delight to show us his
Salvation.

2. That we should live quietly and peaceably under Him that he has placed over
us as our Lawful Governor, praying to Almighty God that he would defend and
protect him both against all open Violence, and against all secret Attempts;
that he would guide his Counsels at home, and prosper his Arms abroad; that he
would give Him a long and happy Reign over us, and keep Us in humble and due
Obedience to him. Lastly, That he would cloth all his Enemies with shame, but
upon himself let his Crown, flourish. And this we beg for Jesus Christ his
Sake. Amen.

FINIS.

