A FATHER'S LEGACY.

Sir Henry Slingsbey's INSTRUCTIONS.

To his SONS.

Written a little before his Death.

LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond, 1658.

A FATHER'S LEGACY To His SONS.
IT is not unknown unto me (my dear Sons) how many persons of quality have
bestowed their Pens on this Subject, wherein I am to address my self out of my
fatherly and tender care toward you. The ground of my discourse shall be
Instruction; whereto, I am confident you will be ready to give the more serious
attention, in regard it proceeds from his mouth, and devotion of his heart; who
with a parental and tender affection ever loved you while he was living: and
now dying leaves you this Memorial as my last Legacy for your future benefit,
improvement and direction. Our last expressions usually retain the deepest
impression; especially, being uttered by a tongue whose relation did highly
indear us; and whose words are the very last he shall speak upon earth: being
within few hours to pay his debt to Nature: and stand at that Bar, and
appear before that High Court of Justice, from whence no Appeal will be
admitted. But my Preamble must not be long, seeing the definite Sentence of
death has limited my time so short.

My beginning shall receive life from Him, from whom we all derive our
beginning; whom you are above all things to fear: and that with no servile but
filial fear; not so much for fear of punishment, or hope of reward, as out of
pure zeal and cordial love to his sacred Majesty; who will recompense our
momentany sufferings with Crowns of immortal glory: and cloth our constancy
with incorruptible robes of beauty. But no combat, no conquest; you are to
fight a good fight before your warfare become a triumph. And trust me, my Dear
Sons, such influence has my long imprisonment wrought upon me: nay, such divine
operations has his powerful Spirit acted upon my poor Soul: as I hold him a
weak-hearted soldier, that faints under the conduct of such a Commander; who
patiently died for our sins: and victoriously rose for our justification. I
must ingenuously confess, that upon my first restraint, my conflict was
something difficult; before I attained this Christian attemperature and
composure to my resolves: I could not for a season, but friendly converse with
that, which I now mortally hate. He that consorts with the Pelican, cannot
choose but smell of the Wilderness.

I begun by help of my solitude and long retirement (a place to me of infinite
improvement) to recollect my self, and seriously to meditate how my too near
and familiar society with the world, (though never deeply drenched in it) was
the high way to procure a divorce with God. It was my study therefore to leave
it with my affection, before such time as I became enjoined to leave it by a
necessitated dissolution. I considered how the life of a wise man was to return
to God; and to hold all things under him as Secondaries: Him only the Primary
Good. This was the Mirror that flattered not.

During my late privacy, occasioned by my captivity, store of vacant hours
were reserved for me; the expense whereof conduced more highly to my inward
benefit and advantage, then all my fore-past liberty. For before I knew not
what it was to wrestle with my self, till restraint (an useful, though unwelcom
Messenger) brought me to a due and exact consideration of my self; and the
present condition whereto I was reduced. Yet in this my retire and recesse from
the world, I could not choose but encounter with some dangerous Remoraes to
foreslow my passage and proficience. Assiduate Offices of professed amity, visits
of friends with other obligiug ties of relation were daily contriving new, but
affectionate ways, how to call me from my self, and reduce my thoughts to a
more familiar converse with the world: and considerable motives to induce, and
effectual enough to operate upon a mere humane fancy, were presented to me: but
none more powerful acting, then my tender reflection upon your young and
unexperienced condition, my dearest children: whom, as it had ever been my
constant care to educate in a corresponsive way to your extraction: so it was
my desire that my ancient and lineally descended estate, might without
encumbrance fall upon you my Elder Son: together with such a competent
conferment upon your younger Brother, as the convenience of his fortunes might
disingage him of that servile condition; which too usually the young Gentry of
our Land, through neglect of timely provision, become liable to, I mean
beholdingness or dependence on the Elder. The discussion of these, seriously
weighed, brought me to consider, what I could not forget with honor; how you
were those precious pledges wherein I had treasured all my inferior hopes,
being next in care to the eternity of my Soul. In this my Treaty with the
World, I bethought me likewise how your virtuous Sister, whose pure and
unblemished fame has conferred an high additament to my comfort: and
incomparably revived me in this my irrevocable Sentence to the Scaffold; how
She, I say, was not to be neglected, but highly tendered: for though she
appeared completely qualified, and with the choicest ornaments of Nature richly
furnished; nay, with Noble Relations sufficiently strengthened yet there is
something more required to make a person of Honor, be she never so personally
accomplished, a Mistress of great Fortunes.

These were thoughts of a long discourse, and strong debate: neither, were they
with less vehemence seconded by such, whose settled and immutable affections
(such was their integrious candor and intimacy to me in my greatest extremes)
aimed no less in their prudent advice, at the future success and advanceme^t of
mine then their own. And their Bosome-Counsels dispatched it; so as, what the
constancy (or what others termed it, pertinacy) of opinion would not assent to,
the amicable care of faithful Trustees effected. This quieted my thoughts, and
brought me again to my self.

And I found this calm and well settled composure, a precious princely
structure. I found no Billows dispassionately acting to endanger the passage of
my late surcharged Vessel: All appeared to me as in a calm Sea: and as one in
a safe harbor, I begun to recall to mind those Divine Contemplations; which my
late converse with secular occasions, had so prejudicially estranged from me. I
begun to take a more serious view of what I had to my intellectual gain
observed, and what I had in my own default neglected, I took my mark as by a
Landscape, how the world was a shop of disguises and false faces. And I
concluded upon my review of these, summing them up to their utmost period: How
all things were vanity, save only to please God, and to serve him. Make this
your Anchor-hold, and you may sail safely; you shall manage your affections
with that equal and discreet temper, as nothing can be possibly acted by you to
disparage you: or lay the least aspersion on your honor. It is not to be
questioned, but the high estimate that men set upon this world, captives their
affections: making them heavily leave what they did so heartily love. For what
men enjoy with delight, they must necessarily forgo with grief. Be continent
then in your desires, and indifferent in your enjoyments, and you shall leave,
what you did so coolly love without disgust. But this would prove a receipt of
hard digestion to their Stomachs, on whom these inferior contentments have
taken seasure: make devotion then your complete Armor, to secure you on the
Main, and conduct you to a peaceful Harbor. The only way to free you from this
servitude, is to bring the world to serve you, and not you it. Being ever
observed to be an imperious Mistress, but a submissive Servant.

I shall now take occasion to make my recede from the World (as I find my
enjoined hours near approaching) and take a turn or two in the Temple; But
fearful be my feet to enter into the Sanctuary with too much confidence: I
shall not, though you be mine own, propose to you Rules of Religion: I hope
your education by the assistance of Gods Spirit, has already initiated and
grounded you in those Principles that may not only inform your knowledge how to
believe; but for the practive part too, what to do that you may eternally live;
yet excuse my fears, I cannot leave you so: though my desires have ever gone
along with an humble fervor of being rather an Hearer, then a Teacher: my
tender zeal to your proficience and progress in Christ's School, will not suffer
me to omit any thing that may necessarily conduce to your spiritual inabling in
matters of eternity.

Above all things, then my Dear Ones, be it your especial care to beware of
Novellisme. It is this whose pernicious seed has spread so many dangerous
Sects, Schisms and Heresies. Nay, the only ruin to the foundation of
Religion: having begot so many main breaches and fearful rents in the Church;
as it is above the compass of humane wisdom to make up the decays of so
disjointed a Fabric: or how to contrive a way for repair of those demolitions:
As it is the finger of God that can only effect it, so may his name only have
the glory of it.

For you my Sons, may it be your desire rather to appear faithful and
fervorous Professors, then forward and contentious Disputants.

It has been an inherent property to many of our ancient Schoolmen, either
transported with the Spirit of singularity: or from some other discontent
arising from their fruitless pursuit after some especial Office or place of
Preferment; to enter the Lists: and become professed Champions for broaching
Error and Sedition; by embroiling the quiet of the Church, and exposing the
long-continued Unity which she formerly enjoyed, to those fatal miseries of
endless Divisions: which broke forth into National Quarrels, and such
implacable Hostility; as the Church became a constant Patient. But no hand so
inclinable to pity, as to apply to her bleeding wounds a timely remedy. Now,
resolve me, did not such Arguments springing from the brains of those ambitious
and opinionate Sectaries produce bitter fruits, when their poisonous Doctrine
begot such dangerous distractions in many flourishing and eminent States? Lend
not your least attention to these: the perverseness of their spirits usually
invert all sense: and the inconformity of their depraved Doctrine, will sooner
entangle then inform your Judgment. You have learned better things: rely then
on those just and orthodoxall Principles, which retain in them that powerful
efficacy, as they will teach you how to believe, and how to live. By which
means (for a better rule I cannot prescribe you) your blameless Conversation
shall manifest to the world the fruits of your faith. How fruitlesly bestowed
are those empty hours, that are employed with what subtilty of arguments they
may dispute, but never with what purity they may live. Polite Orators, but
profane Professors. Such Sophisters are but titular Christians. Believe it,
there ought to be no controversy, but conference among the Servants of Christ.
Which being discraetly seasoned with meekness and mildness, beget more converts
to Gods honor, then a thousand fiery spirits shall ever do, by speaking in
thunder.

I would not willingly be thought to fall short of that Parental zeal which I
owe you. Men have nothing to give, but what they receive; and what I have
received, I shall here by advice freely communicate unto you. Subjection to
Superiors is a precept of high consequence; I shall not insist on each
particular; it is too large a field to walk in, and to lofty an air to descant
on: It may suffice, that I am to sacrifice my life in that contest: and without
averseness in so high an interest. For you my Sons, be it your especial care
to submit your selves to your Superiors in all lawful things. It is an
undispensable injunction: and ought by persons of each distinct quality, when
they are conscientiously thereto obliged, to be religiously observed. This
might seem to oppose my Tenent; but I shall make it perspicuously appear to
any uninteressed judgment, much otherwise.

The Crime wherewith I stood charged, was Treason; which my Conscience dictated
to me, bare the Cognizance of Loyalty. To which Principles, as I was nursed it,
so I mean to death to continue a constant professor of it; wherein if any one,
as there be many, should oppose my opinion; and tax me first of obstinacy in my
refusing to submit to any Composition: and since in appealing from the
Jurisdiction of that High Court; whereto I conceived I could not be in a
capacity to be subject, being neither sworn nor known unto it. Though I was, as
some thought, slow in my Reply and personal defense at the Bar; may it stand
with the patience of good men to hear the modest Apology which I here
recommend to their perusal after my death: wherein, my dear ones, you may
return a grateful office to your dying Father, in communicating it to our
Relations; or any Persons of Quality that shall hereafter request it. Words
spoken in season retain precious resemblances; but I am confident, no words
could have been spoken by me at my Arraignment, that would have been construed
seasonable: So highly was the Presidentall Court prepossessed against me. My
defense shall be short, dissecting it self into two particulars.

Motive I.
THe first relates to a Case of Conscience; which to oppose even in matters of
Indifferency, would raise such a tempest in the inward Region of the Soul, as
would not be quickly calmed. I understood, how I could enjoy no peace in it by
checking it: and that in the careful composure of it, rested my quiet: having
not only sufficiently learned, but experimentally felt, how there was in it
either a continual Feast to cheer me; or a cloud of Witnesses to condemn me. I
conceived then how the Cure of a troubled Spirit was a receipt of high and
precious consequence. It was my assiduate care therefore to remove all such
subtle witnesses from within me, that might at the High-Court of Trials
condemn me: as for other Testates, they were the least of my fears: I knew how
Conscience would prove my individual Consort; I held it therefore dangerous to
displease it, lest I should perish by it. This might seem to be of light weight
in a temporizing skale: but it poized more heavily in mine.

My high obligations confirmed by Oath, and bound in, I must confess, with an
inviolable tie of religious love, had so inseparably united my thoughts to the
devotion of allegiance; as the serious and constant observance of it begun to
have that influence over me, as in the end it resolved to a Case of Conscience.

Sundry Disputes with sinewy Arguments to decline my opinion were frequently
entertained by me, during my several places of imprisonment: but I apprehended
all these two weak motives to alter my resolution, or lessen my affection to
such an incomparable object of Sovereignty. Upon these premises I conceive
that if I should appeal even to those who are aptest to traduce me, or inveigh
against that constancy (mis-construed contumacy) which appeared in me, they
could not in skrewing their censures to the highest pin, interpret it otherwise
then an error of Love, but no love of Error: being so integriously grounded;
as it admitted no alloy or mixture with By respects or self-interests; which is
become such an Epidemicall Disease, as it has got generally an influence over
the whole World.

But to return to you, my dear Sons, to whom and for whose benefit these my
last Directions are addressed; Be it your care in the free enjoyment of a
private condition: or in what quality soever it shall please the Almighty One
to rauke you; to mould your spirits to that temper, as your discreet carriage
may free you from public censure. Many eyes and many ears require cautious
and preventive thoughts. The only way to be secure, is not to be active in
affairs of State. As for those who make it their practice to be Fishers in
troubled waters; it were very strange for them who practice that Trade long to
gain by their purchase. Privacy, as it is the only recluse of safety; if your
hours in it be not well employed, it may become as dangerous as a place of
agency. Caves may be as proper for designs as Theaters for action. It is the
mind that makes the undertaker free, whether he be residentiary in a
Wilderness or in the World. Be it your care to reserve a sickle for your own
harvest. He cannot choose but lay himself open to many dangers, who desires to
have an Ore in every Boat: or too officiously to engage his person in others
Concerns. Make your thoughts your own; and loyal desires cannot redound to your
prejudice. It is want of secrecy, and too much credulity that makes many
Freeborn Subjects, Bondmen by forfeiture of their liberty: and by their profuse
tongues subject their heads under others girdles.

I have been conscious herein my self, which moves me to be more intentive to
this Caution; the neglect whereof has brought so many men's estates and lives to
ruin. For the Liberty of a Subject, as I hold it to be a brave but rare
interest; so I should account him, if it were my fortune to live with him,
unworthy the title of so eminent a privilege, who will not stick to engage
that Liberty to the ear of a stranger. But let me not forget my self by
insisting too amply on these observances: I shall now descend unto the second
Motive, which not only induced but confirmed me in my resolution to Loyalty.

Motive 2.
IT has been my fortune to hear sundry persons as well Spiritual as Secular to
enlarge themselves by way of Argument upon this Subject: and some of these, to
my knowledge, men of singular abilities: and in all the progress of their
Disputes touching Legal and Lineall Soveraigntie, they positively concluded
for me; though the Arguments of Paraeus, Zuinglius, Buchanan, with sundry other
Anti-Monarchiall Authors were frequently and with much vehemency alleged,
pressed, and pursued: so as, even those who were of the adverse Party,
pretending themselves convinced with soliditie of Argument, and strength of
Reason, seemed wholly satisfied with those rational Assertions: though, indeed,
their plausible pretenses proved to my self and others colorable disguises,
merely to catch and circumvent us; being afterward, to expedite our dispatch,
produced for evidence against us. But look not upon these Agents with a
vindicative eye, as you tend my commands. Your Father has forgiven them, do
you the like. He retains a slight memory of his patience and dolorous
passion, who forgave his own death: that cannot in the recollection of his own
unworthiness, pass by all indignities; nay, who with much composedness has not
learned to smile upon the affronts and injuries he shall occasionally suffer in
this life. I must confess, the first Onset or Encounter, before I became well
schooled in the discipline of suffering, presented to my frailty sundry
inseparable difficulties: But custom and continuance has sweetened those
disgusts; finding them, if seasonably applied, and temperately digested, the
soveraignest Receipts that the constitution of man can partake: by submitting
his will to his command, whose inscrutable wisdom far above the pitch of all
humane apprehension, declares his infinity by sweetning those sufferings, which
an indulgent or innate love to our selves had so much imbittered. We cannot
share in a Crown, if we have no part in the Cross. And blessed be his Name that
has armed my weakness with this resolution: preparing in me a mind no less
ready to bear, then Justice was to inflict: my actions by Gods assistance shall
in this approaching hour of my suffering express it: though I shall appear slow
in the elegancy or flourish of words (for I never professed my self an Orator:)
neither, indeed, should I hold such a dress suitable to any one going to his
death. But to pass from these; it behooves me to look upon you, so long as it
is permitted me to live with you; my tender zeal therefore of your future
welfare enjoines me to recommend one particular to your care; which infinitely
concerns you: that is, your choice of Company. Good Acquaintance will improve
both your knowledge and demean: by your conversing with these, you shall every
day get by heart some new lesson, that may season and accommodate you. Whereas
our debauched Gallantry (the greatest Impostor of youth) would by their society
quickly deprave you. Now to apply a remedy to so dangerous and infectious a
Malady, be tender of your honor; beware with whom you consort: Be known to
many, but familiar with few. Wherein, above all things, make use of this
Directory: it will prove highly useful to you in these relations of society. It
was the observation of a Divine Moral; and well deserves the attention of the
pregnantest and prudentest apprehension. Make ever choice of such for your
companions, of whom you retain this grounded opinion, that you have either hope
to improve them, or be improved by them. The one, as they argue a fairer,
docile and pliable disposition: So the other being endued with parts, may by
degrees bring their attentive consorts to an higher pitch of knowledge and
moral Perfection. And great pity it is, that our youth, even in the eminentest
Extractions, should make so light an estimate of time: as to hold no Consorts
fitter for their Concerns, nor corresponding with their tempers, then such who
only study a fruitless expense of time: making no other account of Hours, then
Harbingers of pleasure: and as airy Lures to attract their light and liquorish
appetites to prohibited delights. Be tender then, as you wish success in the
world, or the continuance of my Blessing, or the Honor of the House from
whence you came: and your own Reputation; the preservation whereof shall make
you live in me now dying: and raise you an honest Fame in mine Ashes. Fame is
such a precious odor, as neither those who are in the highest rank can impair
it without an impeachment to their Honor: so neither those of a lower
condition can justly nor conscientiously tender it, but it will send forth a
fragrant breath upon the preserver. Houses are but weak material structures,
subject to breaches and decays; unless repaired and supported by the general
approvement and repute of their enjoyers.

I could challenge from many descents, but my thoughts have ever been estranged
from titular arrogance: holding only Fame to be the strongest continuer of a
Family: being born up with such an impregnable Arch, as it needed no groundling
Butteresses to preserve it: nor any Secondaries to prevent an untimely ruin.

It has been my fortune to make experience of a pretensive stay which proved so
unsteady, that if I should live many years (as now my short life is measured
forth to a few hours) it would make me henceforth to remember that cautionary
advice: Let not the Titles of consanguinity nor affinity betray any man into a
prejudicial trust.

Whence it was that I observed some Persons, no sooner advanced to places of
unexpected greatness, then they put on the severe countenance of justice,
pretending to imitate the example of Titus Manlius, who in a case of Justice
gave sentence against his own Son. But I found those to be only formalities;
or politic semblances: they would not disoblige themselves for their friends
security. These differed far from Themistocles opinion, amicable candor and
resolution; who being requested to bear himself indifferently in his censure:
and even to his own to put on the face of rigor, answered; Be it far from me
not to pleasure my friends in all things.

As for my addresses, they were so qualified in their relation to obedience, as
they stooped not to any ones application nor assistance.

Now Tom, as you are the immediate hope of my house: so be it your care to
entertain no thought below your self. Your course has been hitherto
approveable: enabled by generous education abroad: and imitable examples at
home: those to adorn; these to complete.

Being thus grounded, set your self to those tasks that may usefully improve
you; and by degrees accomplish you. In private and retired hours consult with
the dead; being the best means to make men wise: make devout Books your
discreeet Consorts: they will tell you what you are to do without fear of
censure. These will beget in you a contempt of that (the World I mean) which
detracts most from the excellency of man.

Seneca wished for Philosophy, whereto he was entirely dedicated, that as the
face of the universal World comes into view, so that Philosophical Idaea
might be presented to us as a spectacle most unlike unto the World. I am
confident, Tom, it is the lowest of your scorn to suffer your thoughts to be
depressed with inferior objects. Continue that resolution; it will arm you
against all Occurrents.

In the carriage of public affairs, my advice is that you appear cautious:
Many by putting themselves upon numerous employments have lost themselves:
though in neighbourly offices to be modestly active, manifests signal
arguments of piety. But in all concerns appear just. This will beget you a
good report among men; and acceptance before the throne of Grace. All Justice
is comprehended in this word Innocence, all injustice reprehended. And if it
were just to pronounce such a Sentence upon loyal Innocence, I appeal to
above. The practice of this Divine Office will render you blameless in all: by
measuring your self by others; others by your self; and in doing unto others,
as you would have done unto your self: And to sum up your directions in
brief, that they may be more impressive in your memory: Express your self
moderate in arguments of dispute, close in your counsels, and discreet in your
discourse.

As for your hours of recreation, let them never so overtake you, as to make
your thoughts strangers in what most concerns you. And make choice of suitable
consorts in these. For though Precepts induce, Examples draw: and more danger
there is in a personal Example, then any doctrinal Motive: whence it is very
observable, that those whom we intimately affect, have such attractive
influence over us: as whether it be in the pursuit of pleasure or profit, we
suffer our selves to be drawn thereto by their choice, without much examination
of the probability of the issue, whereto their assayes are directed. All men
are taught to eschew evil, and to do good: and there are innate seeds in every
pious disposition moving him to the observance of that direction: But the
nature of things is such, that where a good man is joined with a bad, the bad
is not bettered by the good, but the good corrupted by the bad. We may then
truly conclude that this world is a dangerous Pesthouse: and if men out of a
natural desire of conserving their health, and of avoiding what may endanger
it, would be loath to enter into an house that is infected: much more are they
to decline all occasional ways of infecting their inward house, much more
precious because partaker of immortality. But I am hopeful that the influence
of Gods grace seconded with your constant and entire devotion, will
sufficiently strengthen you against all such humane frailties, which either the
pronenesse of nature, or the corruption of these times may suggest. The Lord
prepare you to entertain all occurrents, with patience and che e fullness. To
your Superiors lawfully set over you, pre sent your self in due obedience: and
in all your actions acquit your self (for herein consists the hope and
accomplishment of yo ur felicity) a faithfully instrument of Gods glory.

Now one word to you, Harry, who though younger by course of nature, has been
ever dear and near my heart since thine infancy. Thine innocence has here for a
season been a sufferer with thy Father: but let it not grieve thee to partake
with him who does so truly tender thee: and whose Parental hopes have been ever
highly treasured in thee. Neither can I conceit otherwise (having had such
experience of thy natural towardness) but thou rejoycest in thy suffering upon
such an occasion, and with so dear a friend. But I hope it will not hold
consistent with the prudence nor justice of this State, that a Fathers guilt
should by way of punishment descend in a generation. I shall sacrifice my life
freely, as one, subject to an assumed authority: be it their goodness to spare
innocence: though I should in my loyal thoughts hold such a Present a precious
Pledge in relation to a just Sovereignty, and a subjects duty. But I hope, my
blood may sufficiently expiate the grandeur of my crime, if it were greater,
without farther revenge.

The fortunes left you by the assistance of our friendly Trustees (for I have
been long time a stranger to mine own) may by Gods providence appear competent
for a younger brother: Sure I am, it is all I can do for you. Be it your care
by honest ways to improve them; at least to preserve them; which is good
husbandry in these days. In a word, if your estate be not sufficient for you;
be sufficient for your Estate. This was the advice of a wise Statist, observe
it.

Return my blessing to your Sister my dear Bab: and tell her from a dying
Father, that she needs no other example then her virtuous Mother for her
Directory: in whose steps, I am confident, she will walk religiously. Her
modest and blameless demean can promise nothing less.

And now my Dear ones, as my desire is that you should in this last Legacy of
my Love and Parental duty remember me; so my request is that neither you nor
any of my Relations suffer that memory they retain of me to be accompanied with
immoderate grief. After a troublesome voyage encountered with many cross winds
and adverse billows, I am now arriving in a safe Harbor: and I hope without
touch of dishonor. As for death, though it appear terrible to all flesh; I
have long expected it, and by a conscientious consequence prepared me for it.
And to make it more familiar to me; before I was called up to this City, I made
my Coffin my Companion; that I might with more resolution look Death in the
face, whenever it should assault me. An Hatchet to a weak spirit may present
more fear: but a Fever to a Patient more pain.

My peace I hope is made with God: having in those solitary hours of my
retirement made this my constant Ejaculation: O, how can we choose but begin to
love him whom we have offended? or how should we but begin to grieve that we
have offended him whom we love? This was the solace of my choice, which through
Gods goodness shall admit no change: and with this will I end, drawing now
toward my end.

A Receipt of continual use and Application.
MY Heart is signed with the signet of Gods love;

My hatred is only bent against sin and my self;

My Joy is in God my Savior;

My Grief that I am not all his;

My Fear, even in this short remainder, is to offend him;

And my Hope is to enjoy him.

Devotionall ADDRESSES, After his Sentence OF DEATH.
DEaths Doom to sensual Ears sad tidings brings,
For death's the King of fears, and fear of Kings.
But to a Mind resigned, a welcome Guest,
And only Convoy to the Port of Rest;
A freer from Restraint, wherein I long
Estranged from Earths content, sung Sions Song.
BEing now to put off my Garment of Mortality, in assured hope to exchange it
with the White Robe of immortal glory.

In this my farewell to Earth, it is my fervorous desire to bequeath these my
last Addresses to you, the dearest Pledges I had upon Earth.

Draw near me, and hear those last words which I must ever on earth speak to
you. Sure I am, that the dying words of an affectionate Father, cannot but
fasten deeper, and retain a memory longer, then the speech of the movingest
Orator.

Fear God above all things; it is the beginning of wisdom: and will enrich you
above your Portion. You are now in the ripening progress of your Time: and
entering the first Lists of your Youth, wherein you are here surrounded with
numerous temporary trials; let good company seconded with the exercise of piety
season you: so shall his blessing, who has blessed me with constancy in
suffering, crown you.

Be honest in your ways; spare in your words; plenteous in good works.
Proportions God has given you, portions by Gods providence (though lessened by
these occasional overtures) I have left you; enrich these with the best
portion, the ornament of Virtue.

Specious features are not to be valued to the precious embellishment of that
inward beauty, which accomplisheth a Divine Soul.

Be what you seem to be; and seem what you ought to be: I never loved that
countenance, which could promise much, and perform nothing. Reality is the
only Cognizance of a good Conscience.

Ever reslect on him that made you: and make Devovotion your constant Diary to
conduct you.

Be tender of those you rank with; either to better them, or to be bettered by
them. Dead Flies corrupt the preciousest Ointments. Be humble to all; Humility
is the way to Glory: this it is will make you amiable to the Creature; glorious
in the sight of your Creator.

Learn how to obey, that you may know better how to command.

In the consideration of humane felicity, there is nothing becomes more
incurable, then what is habituate: when custom of sin takes away all sense of
sin. Old sores require long cures.

Reserve Divine thoughts for sanctified rooms: In holy places is the Devil
ever busiest.

No disease more dangerous then the Lethargy of sin. This sleep brings ever an
heavy awake: For though like a tender Nurse, she sing a sweet Lullabee to her
deluded child, it is ever in worst case, the more it sleeps; for it dies in
sins-slumber, and perishes untimely by the blandishment of her Mother.

Consider this, my dearest Ones. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you:
Suffer not the first motions of sin to seize on you. Pray continually, because
you have an enemy assayling you incessantly: the Combat is short, your Crown
eternal.

In the heat of the day, think of the Evening: The earnest-penny will recompense
your pains: Continue to the end, and your reward shall be endless.

Be not too curious in enquiring what you are to receive after this life; but
so labor that you may receive your reward of glory after this life. Many, by
too curious an itching after what there were to receive, have deceived
themselves, by loving their Reward more then God.

Let nothing on earth take your hearts; Let the Divine Love only possess them,
so shall you find quietness in them.

That heart cannot want, that possesses God. He will be a light to direct it,
that it stray not: A comfort to refresh it, that it fail not. For all earthly
helps, they must either leave us, or we them. Wherein it faleth often-tims
forth, that we are most afflicted even in those, wherein we expected most
comfort.

It is one thing to live on Earth, another thing to love Earth. To be in the
World, and of the World, are different conditions. Tabernacles are not to be
accounted Habitations. While we are sojourning, we must be journeying toward
Canaan: nor may we rest till we get home.

O my tender Ones (for never were children more dear to a Father) make every
day of your life a promising passage to your native Country. As every day
brings you nearer your grave, may every day increase in you the richness of his
grace.

Let the joys of Heaven and torments of Hell be familiar with you; by
meditating of the felicity of the one, and infelicity of the other; these to
deter, those to allure.

Be not too much taken with Fashion; it is the Disease of this age: Comeliness
is the most taking dress to a discreet eye; whatsoever is else, borders on
sin, and becomes reputations stain.

I am not now very old, when this Judicial Sentence has enjoined me to leave
you, yet never did that spreading vanity of the Time much surprise me.

For my part, I did ever rather affect not to be known at all, then to be known
for Singular. It is a poor accomplishment that takes her essence from what we
wear. The Rind makes not the Tree precious, but the Fruit.

Neither speak I this to excuse my frailties. I confess my diversions have been
many; but through my hearty Conversion and unfeigned Contrition, by the merits
of my Savior, I hope, my peace is made.

Now to continue my final Bequest, My desire is, that you would be circumspect
in your discourse. Though no Society can subsist without Speech, yet were it
very necessary to be cautious of the Society to whom we direct our Speech. I
may experimentally speak it, having so highly suffered by it. Few or none have
ever been hurt by silence; but many, too many by too prodigal speech have
engaged their freedom to the power of their Foes: varnished over with the
specious pretenses of Friends.

Let your whole Life be a Line of direction to your selves; and of instruction
to others.

Be more ready to hear then to teach; and above all things, let your Famebe a
living Doctrine to your family.

Be diligent in the vocation or employment you are called unto: and be ever
doing some good work: that the devil may never find you unemployed: for our
Security is his Opportunity; to prevent his sleights, give no way to sloth.

When you come into any Holy place, call him to mind, to whom it is dedicated.
Hold your selves then as retired from the world: and lift up your hearts to
Him, who is your Hope and Help, both here and in a better world.

Esteem of all men well; and of your selves the worst.

Suffer with others, when you shall hear them desamed: and preserve their report
as well as you may. For it is not sufficient to be tender of our own, and
impeach others: but to tender others as our own.

Stand always in an humble and religious fear.

Be not ashamed to confess, what you were not ashamed to commit.

If at any time, through frailty, you fail; with tears of unfeigned contrition
redeem your fall.

Walk with an undefiled Conscience; knowing that you are in his presence, whose
eyes are so pute, as they cannot abide miquity; and whose judgment so clear, as
it will search out hypocrisy.

Keep your bodies undefiled; Temples should be pure and unpolluted.

If your desire be to honor your Maker, you must make your heart his Harbor.

Every Country has one chief City; and that situate in the Heart of the Land;
and becomes the Kings Seat. Your heart shall be the City of the King of Kings,
so you guard the gates of your little City, that no sinful intruder nor
usurping designer enter nor surprise them; no corrupt affection win in upon
them.

Now the better to secure your State; let your eyes your City-Centinels, be so
directed, that they become not distracted: by wandering abroad, they beget
disorder at home.

All neighbourly offices I commend unto you; they gain love, which is the oil
of our life. But too much familiarity I do not admit; Charity is expedient to
all, Familiarity to few.

Cherish Affability, there is nothing that purchases more love with less cost.

Friendship is properly termed the Fruit of virtue; without which ground it
becomes an unripe fruit, and loses its kernel.

Prefer restraint of the Body before that of the Mind; there can be no true
freedom, so long as the Soul is liable to thraldom.

I have been known to sundry Holds; yet I found my infranchized mind, when I
was most estranged from enjoyment of liberty, to be the freest enjoyer of it
self.

Hold nothing comparable to the estimate of a clear Conscience; a continual
Feast admits no competition with a Cloud of impeaching Witnesses. This has
been my Anchor hold to secure my Vessel.

The terrors of Death are but objects to the eye; with a momentany sense of a
little pain to the body: whereas if the Soul through the gusts of a restless
Conscience, grapple with death; and gives up her hold, her sufferings are to
eternity. A short storm should not discourage us, when we are within the ken of
our Harbor.

Prosperity is a fair gail; but the memory of it rather afflicts then
refreshes us; when our security has thrown us upon a shelf, before we come
ashore.

If earthly enjoyments had seized on me; my death might have proved more
Natural, but through those Preparations wherewith Gods goodness has furnished
me, perchance not so welcome.

I am now to put off that which troubled me most; to become clothed with his
righteousness, whose Allsufficiency has pleaded my cause.

In my Period to these; and to order your course the better in the Current and
Progression of your affairs: Let not the Sun shine upon you, before you have
commended your selves to that Son of Righteousness, to direct you in all your
ways; and enrich you with all good works.

To conclude, (for I feel my failing Faculties, through continuance of my long
restraint, and late necessary addresses, drawing near their conclusion;) Let
your youth be so seasoned with all goodness, that in your riper age, you may
retain an habit of that which your youth practiced.

Well-spent Minutes are precious treasures; whose reviving memory in our
recollection of what we gathered by them, will refresh your fainting Souls in
their sharpest gusts of humane frailty.

To speak of Marriage to you, I will not; only this, let a religious fear
accompany those acquiescences: wherein, I conceive a parity in descent, a
competency of Fortune, but principally our harmony in a religious profession
may conduce highly to your future comfort: and remove those occasional
discontents, which a failing in any of these too usually procures: which
completed, may your Choice thus equally tempered with discretion and affection
admit no change: so shall a pious emulation in your succeeding Relations second
your choice.

Prefer your Fame before all Fortunes: it is that sweet Odor which will
perfume you living, and embalm you dying.

I find my self now, through the apprehension of my approaching Summons, which I
shall entertain with a cheerful admittance, breathing homeward: the eye of my
body is fixed on you; the eye of my soul on Heaven: Think on me as your Natural
Father; and of Earth as your Common Mother. Thither am I going, where by course
of Nature, though not in the same manner, you must follow.

I am to act my last Scene on a Stage; you in a turbulent State.

Value Earth as it is; that when you shall pass from Earth, you may enjoy what
Earth cannot afford you; to which happiness your dying Father, hastening to his
dear Spouse and your virtuous Mother, faithfully commends you.

Additional Instructions privately delivered before his coming to Tower Hill.
DEar Sonns, as you were tender to me, remember these Funeral Advertisements of
your adjudged Father. The serious observance whereof I shall account my
Ceremonial Obsequies.

Be zealous in your service of God: ever recommending in the prime hour of the
day, all your ensuing actions designed and addressed for that day, to his
gracious protection.

Be constant in your Resolves, ever grounded on a religious fear, that they may
be seconded by Gods favor.

Be serious in your studies: and with all humility crave the assistance of
others, for your better proficiency.

Be affable to all, familiar with few.

Be to such constant Consorts, where you have hope to be daily proficients.

Be provident and discreetly frugal in your expense: never spending where
honest Providence bids you spare: neither sparing where Reputation invites you
to spend.

Continue firm in brotherly unity: as you are near in blood, be dear in your
affection.

Honor those to whose charge you are entrusted.

And sweet Jesu, with thy grace enrich them, to thy glory, their Relations
comfort.

His Letter to a Person of Quality, and his late fellow-Prisoner.
Sir;
TO render you an account of my present condition since my remove to this City:
and return a grateful satisfaction to your expectance in all such concerns or
occurrences as have encountered me since my commitment to the Tower; in relation
to your desires and expressions by Letter, for which, I hold my self highly
obliged to your indeerment and noble resentment in my sufferings. I shall
acquaint you briefly (for no long time must be now permitted me,) in these my
last lines: as the definite Sentence of death pronounced upon me, has
sufficiently assured me.

Some short time after my commitment, Mr. Mordant, Dr. Hewit, and my self were
ordered to appear before the High-Court of Justice at Westminster: where we
stood indicted of High Treason: and where Mr. Mordant by his discreet carriage,
and singular preparation, seconded with the fair acquiescence of the President,
after a long and anxious examination of his cause, became acquitted. Doctor
Hewit denying the jurisdiction of that Court: after he had alleged sundry
arguments and reasons to strengthen his appeal: and evince the illegality of
their proceedings (having debarred himself of the benefit which he might
probably have obtained, as some verily thought, by submitting to a trial)
received the sentence of death. Which, I can ingenuously assure you, Sir, he
received with much constancy, resolution and composure. Though it has been
reported since the time of his impeachment, that upon maturer advice of such as
by a more peculiar relation had an influence over him, he could have been
contented to submit to a trial: and that petitions were presented to that
purpose, but through some titular defect or other, he might not be admitted to
that favor. Howsoever, I am very confident, that this Gentleman was so
conscientious in all his actions: and so confirmed in his professed zeal, as he
would entertain nothing below himself.

High and of weighty consequence were the Articles that were drawn up against
me: and these laid to my charge with much vehemence. Especially my conference
with some persons at Hulb; which I conceived (as I then told them) to be rather
a secular discourse; and such sociable chat, as it might be in any equal
judgment, held sooner for a jest, then a design of State. Whereto the Attorney
was pleased to make answer facetiously according to his usual manner, and with
much punctuality: That he never heard in all his time, that treason was held a
jest. And then with a supercilious smile turning himself toward me: Sir Harry,
said he, you have jested your self fairly out of your Fame, Estate, and now
according to the merit of your cause very like to jest your self into a grave
to your lafting dishonor. I insisted not much upon defense nor vindication of
mine innocence; for I understood, it was effectless. Those Persons who were my
accusers, were for time, place, and every circumstance, such convincing
evidence, (besides their personal prevalency in the eye of that Court) as my
reply in what tenor soever would have proved fruitless: and either not heard at
all, or expounded to my disadvantage: The only Guard, then, that I stood upon,
was Silence and Patience.

Though as the case stood in my particular, I could not hold those Persons my
competible Accusers: nor well deserving estimation in that high Court; being
such, as their compliance (had not probable hopes of preferment diverted them)
could have conscienciously closed with my Principles: but the fears of danger,
and the hopes of honor; were in the first such determents; and in the later,
such inducements; as they begot in them an indifferency in the one: and a
resolution for the other.

I would not willingly give you a trouble, as I shall not to the world long.
The Court, upon the evidence given, adjudged me to die: but by Petition and the
Protectors clemency: not in that dishonorable manner, as we were sentenced. So
as my resolved Soul, now in the merits of Christ, is winging her flight for
Heaven. My preparation becomes freer from distraction, by the gentile demean
and civilities of our Lieutenant: and by his command, of the Soldiers modest
carriage toward us, in our private devotions, and other holy Duties. Which
pious Office, as it conduces much to our peace, so it cannot but redound
highly to the Commanders honor. Compassion in places of Command, where
Authority may be executed without control, deserves, for the rarity of it, an
eminent Attribute.

Dear Sir, He begs at your hands the assistance of your Prayers, who, as in his
Life, so now at his Death, in the reallest Offices of Love, remains

Your most affectionate Servant, H. S.
June 4. 1658.
FVnerals are for the Dead: Memorials for the Living. Solemnity of the one,
cannot parallel the Memory of the other. The one limits to time, the other to
Eternity.

HIs Corpse by means was permitted to be privately carried down into Yorkshire;
there to be interred in the Burial-place of his Ancestors: which was done with
all decent Solemnity.

HIS EPITAPH.
DEad unto Earth, before I past from thence,
Dead unto Life, alive to Conscience
Just, and by Justice doomed; impeached by those
Whom Semblance writ my Friends, their witness Foes.
My Silence in Reply implied no guilt,
Words not believed resemble Water spilt
Upon the parched surface of the floor,
No sooner dropped, then heat dryes up the shower.
To plead for life where ears are prepossest,
Sounds but like airy Eccho's at the best.
The Hatchet acted what the Court decreed,
Who would not for his HEAD lay down his head?
Branches have their dependence on the Vine,
And Subjects on their Princes, so had mine.
The Native Vine cut down, her Cyenes wither,
Let them then grow or perish both together.
Thus ^^v'd I, thus I died; my Faith the Wing,
That mounts my Kingly zeal to the Highest King.
FINIS.

