Jovis 6 die Aprilis 1699.
ORdered, That the thanks of this House be given to Mr. Smalwood, for the
Sermon by him Preached before them Yesterday, at St. Margaret's Westminster,
and that he be desired to Print the same, and that Mr. Gerrard and Colonel
Mountague do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell Cl' Dom' Com'.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons. AT St. Margarets
Westminster, On Wednesday the 5th of April, 1699.

Being a solemn day of Fasting for Imploring a Blessing on his Majesty, and all
his Dominions, and for averting those Judgments we most justly deserve, and for
the distressed Protestants abroad.

By James Smalwood, Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Romney, and
His Majesty's own Regiment of Foot-Guards.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, and R. Basset, in Fleet Street. 1699.

Mr. SMALWOOD's FAST-SERMON Before the House of COMMONS. April 5. 1699.

A FAST-SERMON BEFORE THE House of Commons.
PSALM. 80. last ver. Turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts, show us the light of
thy countenance and we shall be whole.
IF we read over this whole Psalm, we may plainly discover by it, that the
people of Israel were, when it was composed, under some great and heavy
affliction, Thou feedest us with the bread of tears, and thou give us
plenteousness of tears to drink; Thou have made us a very strife unto our
neighbors, and our enemies laugh us to scorn, says the Psalmist, v. 5. and 6.
whereupon according to his usual custom he addresses himself to Almighty God
for Relief and Succor, Hear O thou shepherd of Israel, says he, v. 1. stir up
thy strength and come help and us, verse 2. How long will thou be angry with
thy people that pray, verse. 4. and to mention no more of his pathetical
Supplications, no less than three times in this short Psalm, which adds
extremely not only to the fervency, but also to the Beauty and Harmony of his
Prayer, he repeats the words I have chose for my Text, Turn us again, O Lord
God of Hosts, show us the light of thy countenance, and we shall be whole, or
as the old Translation renders it nearer the Hebrew, Turn us again, O Lord God
of Hosts, cause thy face to shine upon us, and we shall be saved.

Now though the people of Israel's case at that time, and ours at present is
not altogether the same, tho (blessed be God) we of this Nation do not now
labor under any public affliction, neither have our Enemies any great reason
to laugh us to scorn; yet to show that this Psalm is very suitable to the
occasion of our present meeting, we may observe the Holy Prophet prays
particularly for three things in it, wherein we may reasonably suppose he
judged the welfare of the people to consist, and which three things we are by
public Authority enjoined this day to pray to God for.

1. He prays for a Blessing upon the King, let thy hand be upon the man of thy
right hand, and upon the Son of Man, whom thou have made so strong for thine
own self. v. 17.

2dly. He prays for the afflicted condition of the Church, That God in his
great meroy and goodness would relieve and comfort that, and this he couches
very elegantly under the Metapher of a vine, Thou have brought a vine out of
Egypt, thou have cast out the heathen and planted it, thou made room for it,
and when it had taken root it filled the land, why have thou then broken down
her hedge, that all those that go by pluck off her grapes, the wild boar out of
the wood does root it up, and the wild beasts of the field devour it. verse. 12.
13.

3dly. He prays to God to remove and avert those judgments which the manifold
sins and provocations of the people had justly deserved, and that is employed in
the words of my Text.

These three things the Holy Prophet particularizes in this Psalm, exactly
agreeable to the duty required of us this day: But what he chiefly sues for,
and lays the stress of his Prayers on, as a means of procuring the other two,
and indeed all Blessings whatever, is a general conversion and repentance of
the people; this is his chiefest aim, this we find the main scope and burden of
this his heavenly Song, therefore it is he repeats these words so often, and
heigthens them still with greater vehemence and ardour every time than other;
Turn us again O God, verse. 3. Turn us again O Lord God, verse. 7. Turn us again
O Lord God of hosts, show us the light of thy countenance and we shall be
whole. verse. 19.

The words are of themselves very plain and intelligible, not to spend
therefore any time in the explanation of them. From the consideration of the
circumstances which King David and his people were now in, which was under the
Judgments of God, and the methods that he took to remove those judgments, which
was a general conversion of the people from sin, I draw these two doctrinal
conclusions.

1. In respect to God, that the chief end and design God aims at in sending
judgments upon a People or Nation, is to reclaim them from their sins.

2. In respect to Men, that the only way a People or Nation has to avert God's
judgments, is to turn from their sins.

I shall speak to these two Points, and then apply them to the business of the
day.

1. The chief end and design God aims at in sending Judgments on a People is to
reclaim them from their sins. It may here be said, that the end of all the
dispensations of God to mankind is to convert them from sin: For this very
purpose did he send his Son into the World, to draw and win us to himself, by
the promises of Heaven and Eternal Happiness, and all the attractive motives
that can be supposed to work upon Humane understanding, and for this only
reason does God daily bestow his mercies and benefits upon us; according to
what St. Paul tells us, The goodness of God leads us to Repentance, Romans 2.
4. Why then if the gentler methods of lenity and mercy may have the same
effect, does God use the severer ways of reclaiming men by pouring Judgments
and Afflictions upon them?

To this I answer, The ways which God chiefly delights to deal with mankind in,
are gentleness, Romans 2. 4.
Goodness, Forbearance and Long-suffering, God does not Lam. 3. 33.
afflict willingly nor grieve the Children of Men, says the Prophet Jeremiah,
nay, the whole tenor of Scripture discovers this to be the nature of God; and
were it not that we are such perverse Creatures as not to be wrought upon by
kindness, so wild as not to be tamed by gentle usage, God would not handle us
in any other way, I drew them with the cords of a Man, with the bands of Love,
says the Holy spirit in the Prophet Hosea, but the Jews but still so
stiff-necked and untractable they would not follow, so that v. 11. 4.
they almost forced God, contrary to his inclination, to take the rod into his
hand, and when they would not lead then to drive them, God was forced to turn
those soft cords into whips, and those bands of Love into shackels of Iron.

And yet when God comes to take this course with Man, he still, like a prudent
Parent, aims at nothing but his good and benefit by it, if he puts a yoke upon
our necks, it is but to breing us to humity, if he puts the bitt into our
mouths, it is but to check our career in sin, if he afflicts us, it is not
because it is pleasant to him to deal harshly with us, but because it is
profitable and necessary for us so to be dealt with.

This the holy Scripture informs us to be the end of all the severe methods of
Providence toward the Sons of Men, this, Moses tells us, made God exercise the
people of Israel with all the hardships could be inflicted on them for forty
years in the Wilderness, He led thee through that great and terrible Wilderness
wherein were fiery Serpents, and Scorpions, that he might humble thee, and that
he might prove thee, to do thee good at the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 15. So that
the afflicting Providence of God are not only apt in their own nature to do us
good: but, which is a great argument of his goodness, God intends and aims at
this end alone by them. Indeed we often read in Scripture of God's Anger and
Wrath, and heavy displeasure, and Fury and Indignation, but it is always
against Men's sins and not their persons; and if his resentments are so great as
to provoke him to inflict any Judgment, yet still it is with a merciful design
in the end. If he has visited a Nation with any Plague, or sore Disease, it was
only to let out its corruption, if he has thrown us into the Furnace of
affliction, and tried us so as by Fire, it was that he might refine and purify
us from the dross of our Sins; If he has embarass'd us in War and Battle, it
was only to let out so much hot blood, that the whole body might be the more
cool and temperate, and healthful afterward; so that, though it cannot be denied
but that the Judgments of God are evil in themselves, yet considering the
intention of them, they are no real objections against the mercy and goodness
of God, but rather Arguments for it.

My first Doctrinal conclusion appearing thus evident, namely, That the chief
end and design which God aims at by sending his Judgments upon a People, is to
turn them from their Sins, that so they may be saved; what follows but that we
make the right use of this Doctrine. If Judgments which are in themselves very
irksome and grievous to humane nature, must be the remedies of sin, why will we
not live regularly and prevent them? What corrupt humors are to the body, that
sin is to the soul, its greatest Disease and Malignity; now if we will contract
ill humors and distempers, if we will make our selves sick, that is our own
mismanagement and solly, and no fault of the Physician, but if when we are sick
the Physician does recover us, though it be by the most unpleasant and bitterest
draughts, we are most certainly beholden to him; all Temporal and Worldly
Judgments are properly medicinal, and if we will but suffer them to have their
kindly operation upon us, they will work our cure, and how grievous and
distastful soever they may seem for the present, they will prove mercies and
blessings in the end, for this reason Holy David reckons afflictions amongst
the blessings of his Life, It is good for me, says he, Psalm. 119. 72.
that I have been afflicted: And he gives the reason for it in the same Psalm,
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have learnt thy precepts; But
however, although David did make the right use of his afflictions, although he
applied what God administered aright, and it wrought its intended cure upon him,
yet still that Man must be allowed to have lived most cautiously who the least
wants such sharp Physic; He certainly must be judged to take a greater care of
his health, who by a Temperate diet and Regular way of living prevents
sickness, than he that suffers a malady to grow upon him, and to corrupt the
whole mass of his blood, so that nothing at last but the most violent courses,
and the most painful applications can restore him to his former health. And
this brings me to my other doctrinal conclusion from the Text, which this.

2dly. That the only way a Nation or a People has to avert God's Judgments, is
to forsake their sins.

The Christian Religion as it prescribes the best and most reasonable precepts
of any Religion that ever was in the World for the peace and happiness of every
private Man; so likewise does it afford the most expedient rules for the safety
and preservation of Public Communities; conversion from Sin, and Repentance,
Mortification of our Lusts and Appetites, by Watchings, Fastings, and Prayers,
and the humiliation of our Bodies, in order to raise in our Souls good and
devout thoughts, are duties required from all of us by our Holy Religion, and
tho these duties may be said to tend most directly to the reformation and
amendment of single persons, yet because the whole consists of its parts, the
compounded Body of a Nation must find a benefit from the good which accrews to
the several members of it; and therefore it is King Soloman says that
righteousness exalts a nation. The practice of Virtue and Piety begets a
Reverence and Honor, a Reputation, and a worldly Glory to any people; but on
the contrary, be a Country never so exalted by Dominion and Power, and Wealth,
and all other temporal advantages, and wanting at the same time in the moral
accomplishments of Virtue and Justice and Piety, that Country will by degrees
grow base and contemptible, and in the end be ruined, for the same Wise man
tells us, sin is the reproach of any people, and this will appear to be true
from two causes.

First, From the nature of the thing it self.

Secondly, From the Judgments of God.

1. From the nature of the thing it self: Whatever Nation degenerates in its
Manners, must decay gradually in its Power and Strength, and consequently, is
in a ready way to Ruin. Sin, of what kind soever, is against the Interest of a
People: Lewdness and Intemperance, and such like Vices, debase Men's Courage
and Spirit; they breed Infirmities and Diseases, which spoil the Strain of a
Nation, and then it becomes languid, feeble and cowardly, and at last must be
the Scorn, as well as the Triumph, of its Enemies. Irreligion, Profaneness and
Atheism quite unhinge a Government; for where there is no Belief of a God,
there are no Hopes or Fears of future Rewards or Punishments: And when you are
once come to that, what can hinder all manner of Wickedness from breaking in
upon you? Falsehood and Injustice, Persidiousness and Treachery, Theft, Rapine
and Murder, and all the Black Crew of Villainies, must burst in where the
Barrier of Religion is broken down: And whenever such a Flood as this pours in
upon a Nation, what can hinder it from being ruined, either by others, or it
self?

2. It is not only that the Nature of the State it self will bring Ruin on a
wicked People, but God's Judgments will likewise fall upon them. Inded, as to
private Persons, the Case is not the same; for God is sometimes pleased to let
good Men live miserably, and the Wicked to prosper in this World; but there is
a very good Reason for it, because he reserves the Rewarding of the one, and
the Punishing of the other, till a more convenient Season of Retribution. But
God does not deal after the same manner with Nations, because public Bodies
and Communities of Men, as such, can only be rewarded and punished in this
World: In the World to come, all Corporations and Societies will be quite
dissolved; God will not then reward or punish Nations, as Nations; but every
Man must give an Account of himself, and accordingly receive his own Personal
Sentence: Therefore the general Sins of a Nation cannot escape God's Judgments
here upon Earth, unless they be prevented by a National Repentance.

And indeed, all along the History of the Old Testament, we find this to be
true by the different Providence of God always suited to the Manners of the
Jews; they were constantly prosperous, or afflicted, according as Virtue or
Vice reigned amongst them. Nor was it toward his own People alone that God
used this constant Method; St. Austin tells us, That the mighty Success and
Greatness of the Romans was a Reward given them from Heaven, for their eminent
Justice, Temperance, and other Virtues. And though we must not peremptorily
conclude, that the Administration of God's Justice shall be the same to all
Nations that it was to the People of Israel, yet thus much may be probably
concluded from it, That as God always favored that People when they were
obedient to him, and sent his Judgments among them when they rebelled against
him; so he will also deal with other Nations; and this Conclusion is drawn from
an Everlasting and Unchangeable Cause; and that is, the Justice of the Divine
Providence.

This is what Religion and Reason teach us, That the only Way to procure God's
Blessings, and avert his Judgments is, to work a through Reformation on our
Lives: And it were to be wished that all Men were so well disposed, that
Religion by its Authority, and Reason by its Force, might be sufficient to
establish this Truth in the Minds of Men; but the Corruptions of Humane Nature
will always make a strong Opposition against it; and the Degeneracy of the
present Age in particular is so very great, that no Arguments drawn either from
the invincible Demonstrations of Religion, or the Light of Reason, seem to be
sufficient for it.

It Is true, at the first Planting of Christianity, we find the great Author of
it then complaining of the Insensibility of Men, that their Hearts were waxed
gross, Matt. 13. 45.
and their Ears were dull of hearing, and their Eyes were closed; lest at any
time they should see with their Eyes, or hear with their Ears, or understand
with their Hearts, and should be converted, and he should heal them: And
therefore our Savior then accompanied his Doctrine with Miracles; and where he
could not prevail with Words, there he convinced by Actions. But now it has
pleased God to withdraw that Power, and has left his Church to be carried on
and supported by more ordinary and Humane Ways, by the Succession of the
Ministerial Function, by the Power of Preaching, and using all such Arguments
and Motives to bring Men to their Duty, which the Holy Spirit has revealed to
us, and designed for these good Purposes: But this, we find, will not do; Paul
may plant, and Apollos may water: The Ministers of the Gospel may use what
Means they can to reclaim Men, but still we see no visible Effects of all their
Labors; Men will not hearken to the Voice of these Charmers, charm they never
so wisely. We are Psalm. 50. 5.
taught therefore, in this Case, to call in the Assistance of the Civil Power,
and the Countenance of Authority; we must apply to them who are our Governors,
to them who St. Peter tells us are sent by God, for the 1 Pet. 2. 14.
Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of those that do well: Which,
indeed, was never more necessary to be done than in this present Age, which is
prodigiously sunk into Atheism and Profaneness, and consequently into the
foullest Immoralities, and the most Bestial Vices whatever; Vices of such a
kind, that, though, in Obedience to St. Paul's Direction, I shall not so much as
once name them among you, yet the Remembrance of a late public Example cannot
hinder us from thinking of some of them.

It Is this Universal and Monstrous Wickedness that has excited You, our wise
Governors, to provide several Laws that might be thought effectual for the
suppressing of it; and, to mention no more, One, I think, if it were carefully
put in Execution, would contribute much toward the suppressing of Atheism and
Irreligion; and that is, The Act against the Papists. That Looseness of
Principles, and consequently Libertinism of Living, which may be observed now
to spread and grow upon us, may be imputed in great part to some Emissaries of
Rome, who still are (I speak it knowingly) lurking among us: These Men, by what
Authority I know not, I am sure not by his from whom they unworthily take their
Name, assume to themselves a peculiar Propriety of the Guidance of Men's
Consciences; they creep into all Companies, and get possession of as many
Families as they can; and then, by their Arts and Insinuations, they beset and
undermine the Principles of Men's Religion; and oftentimes, while they
endeavor to bring a Man over to their Religion, they craftily steal away his
own, and leave him without any. Popery, by its own very Tendency and
Disposition, must gradually lead Men into Atheism, Superstition, and an
Idolatrous Worship; set up many Gods, and then, as it is the Humor of Mankind
to start oftentimes from one Extreme to another, rather than they will have so
many imposed upon them, they will choose to have none. Nay, if you trace Atheism
to its Fountainhead, you will find it springs from the corrupt Manners of the
Romish Court: Italy was the place where it chiefly reigned for some time; our
Ancestors here in England, if History may be credited, knew none of those
Italian Vices: But in this last Age, Atheism began to travel over the Alps,
and infected France; and now at last it has crossed the Seas, and has invaded
our Nation, and (which is much to be lamented) has prevailed too in it.

I have dwelt a little upon this Article, because I think the only Way for this
Nation to flourish and be happy, and for the Protestant Church to stand pure
and incorrupt, is, to remove, if possible, all those far from it, whose
Business and Study it is, not only to distract our Government, but also to
pollute our Manners.

But I leave this, next to God, to the Great and Wise Council of the Nation. I
proceed now,

Thirdly. To apply what has been said to the Business of the Day. And because
we have heard, First, That the chief Design of God's Judgments upon a People,
is, to reclaim them from their Sins; and Secondly, That the only Way a People
had to prevent and avert God's Judgments, was, to forsake their Sins; therefore
Conversion from Sin, to God, must be esteemed a necessary Spiritual Duty: And
though this Duty is most certainly always very requisite and seasonable, yet
there are some Seasons when the Church does most chiefly require it; and, to
name no more, this present Season is the greatest; now in the Time of Lent, but
more especially in this Magna Hebdomada, this Great Week before the
Resurrection, we are called upon to make a strict Re-view of our Lives, and to
humble our Souls in God's Presence, and to bewail our manifold Transgressions,
and to devote our selves afresh to his Service. This Obligation the holy Church
lays upon us: But still there is another Engagement for our most solemn
Humiliation on this Day, Public Authority has added a further Injunction on
us: To answer therefore this double Obligation, and that we may perform the
Office of the Day aright, let us enquire what we have now to do; and that I
shall consider of after this Twofold Manner:

First, Generally; What all Days of Humiliation do require of us.

Secondly, Particularly; What this Day distinctly requires.

First, All Days of Public Humiliation seem to require these Three Things at
our Hands:

1. That we should humble our selves before God, every one for his own Personal
Sins, whereby he has provoked God, and increased the public Guilt, and done
his part to bring down the Judgments and Vengeance of God upon the Nation.

2. That we should likewise heartily lament the Sins of the Public, especially
the great and crying Sins of the Nation, whereby the Wrath and Indignation of
God has been so justly incensed against us.

3. We should prosecute this our Humiliation with an Actual Reformation and
Amendment of our Lives for the future.

I do but just mention these Particulars, without any Enlargement on them that
I may more fully speak to the Duties of the Day, which are these Three:

1. We are this Day to pray to God that he would avert those Judgments which
our manifold Sins and Provocations have most justly deserved.

2. That he would, in his great Mercy and Goodness, relieve and comfort such as
suffer abroad for the Protestant Religion.

3. We are to implore a Blessing from Almighty God, upon His Majesty, and all
His Dominions.

1. We are to make our Supplications unto God for the Averting of those
Judgments which our manifold Sins and Provocations have justly deserved. It Is
true, we of this Nation have lately received no small Tokens of God's
favorable Inclinations to us, in bestowing upon us a Grateful and an
Honorable Peace; a Peace that, I hope, may prove a competent Recompense to us
for all our Toils, and Fatigues, and Expenses: But if we continue to lead Lives
unsuitable to such Blessings received, how easily may God find a Way to let in
the same Enemy afresh upon us? King David tells us, That the Lord gives
Strength unto his People; the Lord gives his People the Blessing of Peace: That
is, God Almighty defends, and protects his People: but it is only so long as
they are obedient to him; for he says in another place, If a Man will not turn,
God will whet his Sword, and will bend his Bow and make it ready, and prepare
for him the Instruments of Death. God Almighty has dealt all along with this
Nation, as he formerly did with his own peculiar People, the Jews: He has
exercised, and made Trial of us, by all the wise Arts of his Divine Providence;
we have felt the Powers both of his Mercy, and his Justice, Alternately: Out of
his Mercy he would never destroy us quite, yet it has, as it were, puzzled his
Justice how to save us: We read of four sorts of Judgments wherewith God
formerly used to endeavor to reclaim the Ancient Jews, Plague, Fire, Sword and
Famine; we in this Nation have, in a few Years, felt the former Three; and,
indeed, we have some Reason to fear, from the remarkable Defect and Decay of
the Seasons for some Years last past, that if we do not repent in time, and
deprecare God's heavy Displeasure against us, his Providence may be a preparing
the Fourth, and the most dreadful of them all, a Famine, for us.

Let us therefore, with the greatest Importunities, make our Addresses now to
Almighty God, that he would be pleased to avert those terrible Judgments which
we so righteously have deserved, and to which the great Sins of the Nation do
now so justly expose us; humbly beseeching him, not for us, but for his his own
Name's sake, and because we are his People, and are called after his Name, and
because his holy Faith and Religion are professed among us, that he would be
pleased to hear the Prayers and Supplications of his Servants, which they have
made before him this Day. And, together with our selves, let us pray unto God,
that he would please,

2. To regard our distressed Brethren in the Faith, all the World over;
particularly, to relieve and comfort those that suffer abroad for the
Protestant Religion. It Is a mighty Scandal to the Christian Religion, and what
all Jews, Turks and Pagans may justly reproach the Followers of Christ with,
that there are such implacable Divisions, and such barbarous Persecutions
practiced and kept up among us. The Doctrine of the great Author of our Faith
was made up all of Love; this was the distinguishing Character his Disciples
were to be known by, If they loved one another: Yet in a certain Church, and a
Church too that boasts it self the only true Church of Christ, we find that
Badge and Character quite worn off; for, instead of loving those who cannot
persuade their Consciences to swallow such gross Absurdities as they do
themselves, these Men think they do God good Service if they kill them. I might
produce many Instances of this outrageous Zeal, against the Romish Church; The
cruel Inhumanities against the Vaudois, the Butcheries of the Albigenses and
the Poor of Lions, the total Extirpation of the Protestants in Moravia,
Silesia, Bohemia and Hungary, the Massacre of the Hugonots in France, and the
English Protestants in Ireland; not to mention those Ignominious Flames that
were kindled in our own Queen Mary's Days, and that terrible and unparalleled
Design that was laid to destroy the Lords and Commons of our Nation at one Blow
in the succeeding Reign, are all Memorable Examples of the Popish Cruelty. But
we need not look back into History to furnish us with Instances of this kind;
how many living Objects of our Compassion are still under great Pressures from
them in the neighboring Countries to us! And how many Thousands have fled from
thence, to us, for Refuge? There, indeed, the Vine of the Lord does most
apparently suffer; there the Wild-Boar of the Wood does root it up, and the
Wild-Beasts of the Field devour it. But let us, with King David, say, Turn thee
again, O Lord God of Hosts; look down from Heaven, behold and visit this Vine,
and the place of the Vineyard which thy Right Hand has planted, and the Branch
that thou made so strong for thine own self.

3. The Third Duty of the Day is, to implore a Blessing from Almighty God upon
His Majesty, and all his Dominions. And here I think it altogether unnecessary
to use any Arguments to excite your Zeal, or to heighten your Affections;
Interest, which is the first Spring and great Director of all our Actions, if
not Gratitude, will recommend this Duty to us: The great Benefits and
Advantages we have already received from him, are sufficient Motives to pray
for his long and happy Reign over us. He that has preserved our Rights and
Liberties, that has rescued our Religion, that has maintained our Laws, that
has defeated the Designs of our Enemies, that has subdued the Disturbers of our
Peace; he that has run all Hazards of his Life, often crossed the Seas,
traversed many Countries, ventured his Person in Battle, and sometimes very
narrowly saved it; he that has opposed, and stemmed too, the Tide of a Power
generally thought irresistible: In a Word, he that has settled us in Peace at
home, and procured us Honor abroad; if he does not deserve our hearty good
Wishes, and most sincere Prayers, I know not what Obligations can extort that
Duty from us.

The Kingdom of England is now in as hopeful a Condition as any Nation can be,
if we are not wanting in some Cases to our selves: If we can preserve our Peace
with as much Prudence and Unanimity, as we carried on the War with Heartiness
and Courage; if we keep our Country as quiet within our selves, as we defended
it bravely against others; in a Word, if we live up to the Rules of our
Religion, as well as we fought for it; then will England, in time, not only
recover its Strength and Riches, flourish and grow great within it self, but it
will be able to give Laws to all its Neighbors round about it: And, indeed,
not to flatter our selves, there is no Kingdom I know of in the World so every
way capable of being made Great and Glorious, as we are now at this time; and
that upon these Two Accounts:

1. We have a King, whom God seems to have brought into the World, to have
trained up and preserved on purpose for us: A Man of our own Religion, and
indeed, of a true English Temper and Genius; a Man skilful and courageous in
War, wise and satisfied in Peace; a Man that reposes a great Trust in the
Fidelity of his Subjects, and a Man in whom they may repose theirs; a Man so
wholly disposed for the Good of his People, that he is always ready to hearken
to their Counsels, and to comply with them; a Man, in short, altogether
inclined, and every way qualified, both to serve, and to protect his People; a
Man, to sum up all, of whom I would not be thought to speak too great a Thing,
if I say he is as brave a Warrior as either Alexander or Caesar was, because I
design to speak yet a greater, and that is, that he is as good a Christian as
either Constantine or Theodosius was.

2. We have a People, famous in the World for great Valor and Courage, always
having had a good Skill in Arms, and of such undaunted Spirits, that if we were
united within our selves, we are able perhaps to grapple with the most potent
Kingdoms near us. We are a happy Nation too in our Situation: When the Prophet
Ezekiel tells us of the Happiness of Canaan, he describes it to be a Land of
Unwall'd Ezekiel. 38. 11.
Villages, where the People are at rest, and dwell safely; all of them dwelling
without Walls, and having neither Bars nor Gates: So we of this Nation have no
need of Walling and Fortifying our Towns, as some of our Friends upon the
Continent are forced to do; because, as the Prophet Nahum speaks of the City of
No, we have the Sea for a Rampart to us. We are still Nah. 3. 8.
happier by our Constitution and Government, which, by its excellent Laws and
Administration, so effectually provides for the Security, Quiet and Comfort of
the People, that of no Nation under Heaven may it be more properly said, that
every Man may sit Mic. 4 4.
under his own Vine, and under his Fig Tree, and no Man shall make him afraid.
And we are happiest of all in our Church; a Church, which for Purity of
Doctrine, Decency of Worship, and all Advantages for Piety, may compare with,
if not exceed, any Church upon the Face of the Earth.

These are the peculiar Advantages of England, and these are the Happinesses we
at present enjoy; there is but one thing wanting to continue and secure these
Blessings to us, and without that, all our Skill in Arms, all our Natural
Courage, all our Plenty and Security, our wholesome Laws, and wise Constitution,
will not be able to support and maintain us; and that is, True Godliness and
Virtue. Let us all therefore pour out our most Affectionate Prayers unto God,
to assist us with his Grace in the Attainment of these Accomplishments: And to
his Grace, which he is never backward of affording us, let us add out own
Endeavors; let us show the good Effects of these our Days of Humiliation in
all the other Days of our Life. What shall it profit us to depend upon our
Mortification and Fasting, when God shall say, as he speaks by the Prophet
Zechary, Did you at all fast unto me, even unto me? The proper Fruit of Fasting
is, to forsake our Sins, and become better for the future; without this, all
our Fasting will but fill us with Wind, all our Tears will be but as Water
spilt upon the Ground; in a Word, all our Penances will but create us Pain
here, and increase it hereafter.

But if we do now unfeignedly resolve to amend for the future, and shall
prosecute those Resolutions in the Series of our Lives, we may then hope that
God will incline his Ear unto us, and hear: In sure and certain Hopes of which,
we now, according as we are appointed.

1. Pray, that God would bless, preserve and keep our present King, as the
Instrument by which he himself has chose to work such wondrous Deliverances
already for us: May never any Foreign Forces, or Intestine Conspiracies,
prevail against him; May never any Jealousies be somented between him and his
People; May he always think himself secure in the Hands of his English
Subjects, and may they know they are so in his. Together with himself, May God
bless all his Dominions; May they grow in Strength, increase in Riches, and
excel in Honor; May he keep steadfast the true Friends to the Government, and
baffle the Hopes of those that are not; May he give Wisdom to the Wise, and
stop the Mouths of the Foolish.

2. As the Consideration of our own Welfare and Interest prompts us to wish our
selves all the Good imaginable, so let our Compassion stir us up to pray for
the Relief of our distressed Brethren the Protestants abroad: May God, in his
due time, as he once did the Children of Israel, lead this his People through
those Red Seas of Blood, through those Wildernesses of Pains and Troubles, if
not into some pleasant Land here upon Earth, yet to the Heavenly Canaan at
last: May he give them Constancy in their Faith, and Patience under their
Sufferings; and whatever Numbers he is pleased to suffer to be diminished from
the Communion of his Saints here upon Earth, may he add to the Noble Army of
Martyrs in Heaven.

Lastly, Let us pray unto God, that he would look down upon this sinful People
of England, and that he would avert those Judgments which, we must confess,
might be our due Reward.

But instead of Judgments, God has heaped Mercies upon us of late; he has first
saved us from the Slavery of our Consciences, and indeed, of our Persons; next,
he has frequently delivered us from the Devices of Wicked Men, who have used
several Ways and Means to ruin us; sometimes by endeavoring to take off our
King, sometimes by corrupting our Coin, and by many other Ways, which Restless
Spirits are fruitful enough at inventing. And now at last, he has crowned all
his Mercies to us, in the Blessing of a Peace: Thou have made Wars to cease
amongst us; thou have broke the Bow, and cut the Spear in sunder, (as holy
David speaks.) Nation shall not now lift Sword up against Nation; neither shall
they learn War any more, says the Prophet Isaiah of the Israelites, when they
repented, and turned unto God. May We also repent, and turn, that we may have
the Benefit of this Prophecy too: May this our Peace prove firm and lasting,
and may we never again be embroiled in Wars and Blood. However, I heartily wish
that the King may never want such Subjects, of such Skill and Courage, such
Loyalty and true Honesty, to defend him, our Country, and our Church, upon any
Occasion, as his late English Army was. But then, I will crave Leave to add
this one Prayer, to end all; and I believe every Soldier that was in the Army,
I am sure every true Englishman, that loves his Country, will join with me;
and that is, How necessary soever an Army may be, in Times of Exigency, for the
Defense of our King, our Country, and our Church, yet God grant that neither of
them may ever again have Occasion to make use of their Swords, or to try either
their Skill, or their Courage.

FINIS.

