A CATALOGVE OF SUPERSTITIOUS INNOVATIONS IN The change of Services and
Ceremonies; of presumptuous irregularities, and transgressions, against the
Articles of Religion, Act of Parliament for uniformity, Canons, Advertisements,
Injunctions, and Homilies.

And Lastly, Of sundry perjurious Violations of the local Statutes of Durham
Cathedral Church, which the Dean and Prebendaries, and all other Members of
the said Church, took their corporal Oaths, to observe, and obey, at their
admittance and installation, according to that in the 13. Chap. Deadmissione
Canonicorum.

Omnes cujuscunque nominis and conditionis fuerit jurabunt.

Brought into Durham Cathedral by Bishop Neal, and the Dean, and Prebendaries
of the said Church.

Opposed by Peter Smart, Prebendary of Durham, lately restored to his said
Prebend, All censures and sentences of the Commissioners and other Judges,
being Reversed and Cancelled by the High Court of Parliament, after his eleven
years imprisonment, and fourteen years persecution in the several High
Commissions of Durham, London, and York, for Preaching against the
Superstitious Innovations in Durham, aforesaid.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642

A Catalogue of Superstitious Innovations in the change of Services and
Ceremonies; Of presumptuous irregularities, and transgressions against the
Articles of Religion, Act of Parliament for uniformity, Canons, Advertisements,
Iujunctions, and Homilies, etc.
INnovators in Durbam, offended against the Church of England, in taking away
the Communion Table, and in place thereof, erecting an Altar contrary to the
Injunction for Tables in Churches, which commands Altars to be removed, and
Communion-Tables, brought into all Churches, and Chapels, both Cathedral and
others, that uniformity might be observed.

2. They likewise offended against the Church of England in all her
Church-Books (in which the word Altar for Communion Table is never put,) I mean
the new Testament, the Book of Commonprayer, the Injunctions, Canons, Articles
of Religion, and Homilies; they offended I say, in that they give to the holy
Table, the name of an Altar, it being no true Altar; not so much as the Image
of an Altar, or having any likeness, or resemblance of an Altar.

3. They offended in making it a brave and sumptuous Altar, with much gay and
gaudy superstitious and unlawful furniture; whereas (according to the
advertisements, and eighty two Canon) it ought to be a Table, not an Altar, a
decent Table, not curiously carved, not gorgeously beautified, painted, and
gilded, to move admiration, nor vile filthy and rotten, to make it base and
contemptible in the sight of the people.

4. They offended in making it of stone, whereas it should be of Wood, and
setting it upon stone Pillars, or upon a Wall; whereas it should stand upon a
frame, according to the Injunctions, Can. de Ae^ituis Ecclesiarum, And the
Latin Canon which says, Curabunt Mensam ex asseribus composite junct^m, quae
administrationi sacro-sancte communionis inseruiat, and practice of Durham, and
other Cathedral and Parish Churches, since the reformation, 1. Eliz. when
stone Altars were demolished, because they were unmovable, fastened to the
ground, and so heavy, that twenty men could not bear one stone Altar, but they
should be light and portable, for it is the Deacons Office to carry, or remove
the Table, and how can it be portable, if it be like to Durham Altar, on stone
columes, or Wormeth Altar, on a stone Wall; and how can the Deacons do their
Office in removing the Table from place to place, as occasion serves, and our
Church enjoyneth; which is unpossible, if it be of Marble stone^ and a double
Table as Durham is, so heavy as a Wain-load of stones, and fastened to the
ground also.

5. They impudently transgressed, especially in some Parish Churches, in not
placing the holy Table where morning Prayer, and evening Prayer are appointed
to be said, but at the East end of the Church or Chancell, whereno part of
evening Prayer is ever said in any Church at an Altar or Table, but in Parish
Churches; where there are long and narrow Chancels, the people in the Body of
the Church neither hear nor see the Priest at his Altar in the East, and
consequently cannot be edified.

Also in Cathedral Churches, where the Table is placed so far from the
Congregation, the Minister officiating thereat, cannot so well be heard, nor
the people so well be edified, as when the Table stands in the Body of the
Church, or Quire, near amongst the people.

6. Innovators in Durbam and York, have notoriously transgressed against the
Book of common Prayer, both in Cathedral and Parish Churches and Chappells, in
setting the Communion Table with neither side toward the North, so that the
Minister cannot stand at the North side, as the Rubric enjoins him to do, and
as the custom is of all Ministers officiating.

7. Innovators in Durham and York have grievously offended in teaching falsely,
and maintaining, That Priests, Sacrifices, and Altars are indifferently used
for Ministers, Sacraments, and Communion Tables in the Liturgy of the Church of
England; for those things are indifferently used, which are used pr^miscue, as
Synonimous words of the same signification are used commonly.

But our Church Liturgy uses not the words Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar
indifferently, and so commonly as the words Minister, Sacrament, and Communion
Table;

For Altar is never mentioned in our Liturgy, but the Lords Table, and Lords
Board; nor Sacrament is ever termed a Sacrifice in the Liturgy; for at the
Communion all that receive are appointed to say, Accept, O Lord, this our
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: And again, not the Minister alone, but
all the Communicants must say, We offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our
souls and Bodies to be an holy and lively Sacrifice, neither is the word Priest
ever so much as once mentioned in the Text of our Liturgy, save only in the
Rubric, which are rules and directions how to use the Liturgy:

As for example, In the Absolution, God has given power and commandment to his
Ministers (not Priests) to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent,
the Absolution and Remission of their sins: And in the Letany, That it will
please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church,
etc. And another place, Endues by Ministers with righteousness (not Priests)
because the word Priest, implies a Sacrifice, as says Bishop Latimer; and it
is never used in the Word of God, for a Minister of the Gospel: so that by
using the words Altar, Priest, Sacrifice, they speak not the language of their
Mother the Church of England.

8. They offended in opposing the Fathers, and the primitive Church, against
the Church of England, and the grave and learned Bishops which reformed the
same, in defense of Altars, Priests, Sacrifices, etc. which they prefer
before Communion Tables, Ministers, and Sacraments.

Doctor Morton, now Bishop of Durham, in his Apology, page 165. says,
Primitive antiquity (as has been confessed by Papists themselves) did abstain
from the names of Priest, Altar, and Sacrifices, tearming them according to the
tenor of the new Testament, Elders, or Bishops, Tables and Eucharists.

In the after times, the Fathers presumed to take a greater liberty of speech;
but they never meant to defend such popish sacrilege, as is the having of
Priests, Sacrifices, and Altars: And because ages more degenerating did set as
it were a Byas upon the phrases Priests, Sacrifices, Altar (which had been used
by the Fathers improperly) to draw them to a proper signification, flat
contrary to their first Institution; therefore did Protestants wish, That those
ancient Fathers had rather contained themselves within their more ancient
bounds, than that their liberty of speech should have occasioned in Romanists
that prodigal error in Doctrine. Thus much says Doctor Morton.

9. They notoriously offended in removing the Font so often from the ancient
usual place where heretofore it stood, contrary to the advertisement, The Font
shall not be removed; and the 81 Canon, The Font shall stand in the ancient
usual place.

10. They offended highly in adoring the Altar, falsely so called; for when it
is gorgeously adorned with brave and rich Furniture, and set up on high at top
of the Quire or Chancell, removed from the base and profane multitude, as they
account them, and carrying a greater Majesty than it had, being a plain
Communion Table, standing in the Body of the Church, then they bowed down to
it, and worshipped it, more than ever the papists did, making it thereby an
execrable Idol; they bow down, I say, their bodies before the same Altar, and
toward no other thing or place in the Church, as if it were the most holy
thing the Church of God has, (as Doctor Duncomb blasphemously writes, in his
Determination) holyer than the Bible it self, to which none make legs, or bow
their bodies.

11. They have offended in contradicting the Church of England, and endamaging
our reformed Religion, in not defacing nor abolishing monuments of Idolatry,
but repairing, adorning, beautifying, and multiplying them, more than ever they
were in time of popery, contrary to the 23 Injunction, in which, charge is
given for the abolishing of things superstitious.

That Candlesticks, Pictures, Paintings, and all manner of Monuments of
Idolatry be taken away, utterly extinct, and destroyed. So that there remain no
memory of the same in Walls, Windows, or elsewhere, Item, In the Articles of
the first year of the Queens visitation, 1559. The second Article enquireth,
whether Candlesticks, Images, Pictures, and other Monuments of Idolatry, and
Superstition, be abolished: Hereby it appears that the intention of the
Church of England, was at the reformation thereof; from Popish Superstition,
and Idolatry, that Massing Copes, and other Altar Clothes, embroydered with
Images: That Candlesticks, Tapers, Crosses, Crucifixes, etc. being once
ejected, must not be brought in again, and set upon the Communion Table, or in
Windows above the Table, as is done in Durham, and other Churches adjoining.

12. They offended in rejecting the Homilies, and Injunctions, and consequently
the doctrine of the Church of England, because they condemn Images, Altars, and
other superfluous ornaments.

The Homily of the place, and time of prayer, has these words of a woman,
saying, to her neighbor at the first reformation of Churches in England; Alas,
alas, what shall we now do at Church, since all the Saints are taken away,
seeing all the goodly fights we were wont to have are gone, seeing we cannot
have the like piping, and chanting, and playing on the Organs that we had
before. But dearly beloved, says the Homily, we ought greatly to rejoice, and
give God thanks, that our Churches are delivered from all these things which
displeased God so sore; but now, those abominations which were taken away at
Durham, are restored again with great advantage.

13. They offended in calling their superstitious Trinkets, Ornaments of the
Church, which our Church disalloweth, and condemns, as being disgracements of
Religion, and abominations in the Church of God.

Thus says the Homily against the peril of Idolatry, and Superstitious
decking of Churches. The Lords holy Name ought to be called upon by public
prayer, and thanksgiving; his holy Sacraments ought duly and reverently to be
administered, not gaudily, flauntingly, theatrically, histriorically; due
reverence is stirred up in the hearts of the godly by the confideration of
those true ornaments of the house of God, and not by any outward Ceremonies, or
costly and glorious deckings of the said House or Temple of the Lord, as Saint
Bernard says, Orantium in se retorquent aspectum, impediunt affectum, Such
glorious spectacles draw away from God, the mind of them that pray, and they
hinder holy affections, or meditations.

Praetendunt ornatum (says Heming^us) in his Enchiridion, speaking of Images,
Si illi ornat^^ adjunctum sit ullu^ periculum, sit maledictus. They pretend
that they are set up for Ornaments, but cu^sed be such Ornaments, to which the
peril of Idolatry is joined; And again, Spiritus Sanctus, says Ezekiel, Chr.
20. Vocat Idola abominationes oculorum, sed puluis and ciuis ea vocat ornamenta
oculorum, The holy Ghost calls Images the abomination of the eyes, but man
that is but dust and ashes, calls them the ornaments of the eyes, and then he
concludes, Verus ornatus Templorum, utilis and Deo, gratus est, concio,
cantio, oration, communio and non haec quae vel impediunt vol vitiant, The true
Ornaments of the Church profitable to men, and acceptable to God, is, the
preaching of Gods Word, the singing of Psalms, the administration of the
Sacraments, and Prayer, and not such things as do hinder and defile the same.

14. They have offended against their Mother, the Church of England, in taking
away the ten Commandments, where they placed their Altar; for having cast out
the decent Communion Table at the same time, they sent away into the Country
the Decalogue fairly written in golden Letters, contrary to the express words
of the 82. Canon, and practice of all our Churches.

The ten Commandments shall be set upon the East end of every Church or Chapel
where the people may best see and read the same; So they were placed in Durham
Cathedral, very fairly written, and hanging upon the Wall, till the Lords
Table was taken away, and a brave sumptuous Altar daily adored by all sorts of
people, specially, Priests and Clerks, with bowing down their bodies before it.

Till (I say) a glorious high Altar was erected with Crucifixes, and other
Images of Saints and Angels, even of the Trinity it self.

Which Idols (as the Church of England calls them in her Homilies) could not
endure the presence of Gods second Commandment, which forbids Images and
Idolatry; and much more reason had they to remove the Decalogue out of their
sight, since the fourth Commandment also was by them abrogated, which
commands the observation of the Sabbath, Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath day, the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou
shall do no manner of work. At the end of the fourth Commandment, our Church
enjoyneth the people to kneel down, and say, Lord have mercy upon us, and
incline our hearts to keep this Law, What Law? The Law for observing the
Christian Sabbath; which word Doctor Linsell said, My stomach rises when I
hear Sabbath, call it no more Sabbath; And Bishop Neal said at his visitation
in Durham, I see no reason but that the Festival day of a Saint, may be
preferred before Sunday, what is Sunday?

15. They have ridiculously and superstitiously offended in the use of Copes,
and other superstitious Vestments, falsely called Copes, at unlawful times and
places.

And they continued even till this time, 1642. in the same abuse, being
admonished and taught the truth, they will not amend, nor acknowledge their
error.

The 24. Canon says thus, in all Cathedral and Colligiat Churches, the holy
Communion shall be administered by the Bishop or a Prebendary, the principal
Minister using a decent Cope, and being assisted by the Epistoler and Gospeller
agreeably, according to the advertisements published, Anno 7. Eliz.

The advertisements made by Commissioners authorized, under the great Seal of
England, says thus:

At the administration of the holy Communion in Cathedral and Collegiat
Churches, the principal Minister shall use a Cope with the Epistoler and
Gospeller agreeably, and at all other prayers at the Communion Table, to use no
Copes but Surplesses; The 45. Canon says the same, When there is no Communion,
it shall be sufficient to wear Surplesses. By this it is manifest, That the
Copes must be decent, and they must never be used, save only at the
administration of the holy Communion.

But Durham Innovators did say their second Service daily when there was no
Communion at their Altar, and after every Sermon, one of the Priests did put on
a Cope, to say, two or three Prayers at the Altar, not suffering the Minister
to dismiss the Congregation with blessing of Gods peace as was wont to be done
in Durham, and all other Cathedralls of England, till very lately some new
fangled Deans, and ignorant Canons, absurdly have imitated Durhams fooleries.

16. They offended in using, and justifying him that used a Cope in the Pulpit,
a Hood being appointed, and sitting in his Stall in a Cope at time of divine
Service and Sermon; at which times, Hoods are always commanded to be worn by
Graduates, which are never put on with Copes, and Copes are always forbidden,
save only at the administration of the holy Communion.

This was done in Durham, contrary to the example of all Churches, either
popish or Reformed; contrary also to the express words of the Canon and
Injunctions. In the 25 Canon thus we read, In the time of Divine Service in
all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Deans and Prebendaries being Graduates,
shall daily, at the times of Prayers and Preachings, wear with their Surplices
such hoods as are agreeable to their Degrees.

The Advertisement says the same, Item, That the Dean and Prebendaries wear a
Surplice with a Silk Hood in the Quire, and when they preach in the Cathedral
or Collegiate Church, to wear their Hoods.

Master Burg^yn, the first setter up of Altars, and introducer of other popish
Ceremonies in that Country, having taken three Degrees in Cambridge, offended
thrice in wearing a Cope without his Hood; without which Hood he preached
twice; and once sat in his stall in a Cope when he preached not, as if he had
been some Sir John lack-latine, or simple petty-Canon.

17. They offended both in using sumptuous Copes glittering with Images; and
among the rest, of the blessed Trinity; God the Father, in the likeness of an
old man; God the Son, in the likeness of a younger man; the holy Ghost, in the
similitude of a Dove, wrought upon red Velvet with Gold, Silver, and Pearl; one
of which was taken from a Mass Priest.

As also in using scurvie, py-bald, curtal'd, and ridiculous Vestments, falsely
called Copes (being indeed very fools coats) at the Communion Table, and that
daily at the Administration of the holy Communion; whereas by the aforesaid 24
Canon, a decent Cope is only commanded; and by the Latin Canon all Vestments
defiled with superstition are forbidden: in the latin Canon de officio Decani,
thus we are taught, Nullus ex ordine Ecclesiastico quocunque nomine censeatur,
utetur ulla vest superstitione contaminata; No Ecclesiastical person, by what
name soever he be called, shall use the gray Amice (as they call it) or any
other Vesture defiled with like superstition.

18 They have wickedly transgressed against the 49. Injunction, in abusing the
laudible Science of Music every day, and every Service without understanding
of the people, and edification.

The 49. Injunction wills and commands the laudible Science of Music be so
preserved, that the same in any part of Service, he not so abused in the
Church, that thereby the Common Prayer should be the worse understood of the
hearers. That there be a modest and distinct song, so used in all parts of the
Common Prayers in the Church, that the same may be as plainly understood, as if
it were read without singing. And although one Hymn of more exquisite Music,
in the beginning or end of Common Prayers may be sung; yet respect must be had,
that the sentence of the Hymn may be understood and perceived.

Notwithstanding this Injunction, our Durhamers have been so eager upon piping
and singing, that in stead of the Morning Prayer at 6. of the clock, which was
wont to be read distinctly and plainly, for Scholars, and Artificers before
they begin their work, they brought in a solemn Service, with singing and
Organs, Sackbuts and Cornets, little whereof could be understood of the people,
neither would they suffer the Sacrament to be administered without a continual
noise of Music both isntrumental and vocal, to the great disturbance of those
holy actions.

19 They offended in multiplying unlawful Anthemes, and disallowing lawful
Psalms-singing by the whole Congregation, before and after Sermons; according
to the custom of all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and of Durham it
self, before Doctor Cosins and other of Bishop Neals Chaplains became Cannons
of that Church; which unlawful forbidding of Psalms to be sung in a vulgar
tune, according to the custom of all other Churches: they have continued to
this present year, 1642.

20 They offended in singing the Nicene Creed not after the manner of distinct
reading, as the aforesaid Injunction commands, and as that which is called the
Apostles Creed is sung, yet forcing the people with brawling in the time of
Divine Service, to stand up upon their feet, all the time that it is sung
though they understand nothing, neither can they perceive, whether it be a
prayer or a Creed contrary to the Rubric and Injunction, and 18 Cannon which
injoyneth the people to stand up, when the Apostles Creed is said, saying with
the Minister in an audible voice, which none can do when the Nicene Creed is
sung by the whole Quire, with all their musical instruments.

21 They offended in taking pipers and singers for assistants, at the
Administration of the holy Communion: which are disturbers rather, which is an
Innovation in Durham, begun there when Doctor Cosins was made Prebendary of
that Church; for both in England, and all other reformed Churches all are
commanded to depart which do not communicate.

22. They offended in chanting in the Quire amongst singing men and children;
which is a base employment, for Mayor Cannons, Prebendaries, and Preachers,
amongst whom it is a thing unaccustomed, and unlawful, when they sit in their
Prebendall stals disallowed by Bishop Howson their Diocesan in his Visitation,
and forbidden by Gregory the great, who says, Prohibitum est, ne quis in
Ecclesia cantet nisi inferiores ordines ut pote subdiaconi; Diaconi vero
lectioni and praedicationi incumbant. It is forbidden (says he) that any chant
in the Churches but men of mean degree, none above Subdeacons, but Ministers
or Deacons, must apply themselves to reading and preaching, for that makes most
for the peoples edification, to which all must be done.

In old time, Omnes simul psallebant in Ecclesia, all Christians did sing
together in the Church; yet now, Soli Clerici canunt, the Clerks only sing, as
Bellarmine confesses, li. 2o. de verbi Dei, cap. 16. and lib. 1. de bonis
operibus, cap. 16. Yea though the Papists confess, that it was given in
commandment by St. Paul (says Bineus) that the faithful in their Assemblies,
should praise God together with heart and voice by singing Psalms, yet they
tell us (says Bellarmine) that Ecclesiasticae institutione optime provisum
est, ne praeter certos ad hoc inscriptos alii in Eccl^sia canerent. It is
excellently well provided for by the Orders of the Church, that none should
sing but a set number appointed for that purpose, viz. Priests, Clerks,
Singingmen and Quiristers.

23 The most impudent and most unlawful Innovation that ever was seen in any
Cathedral Church of England; was that of taking away the Morning Prayer at 6.
of the clock, which had continued above sixty years; and putting in the place
thereof, the ordinary Morning Service appointed to be said at ten of the clock,
which continued about two years.

Injunctions were given S^ptember 25 1o. Eli^ by William Lord Eures, Doctor
Sands, and others, Commissioners authorized under the great Seal of England, to
the Dean and Chapter of Durham, and to all other Ministers of that Church, to
be observed by every of them, in their offices and degrees* for the advancement
of Gods glory.

The 10. Injunction is this, consisting of 5 clauses, the first, that you shall
have your Divine Service at due or convenient hours in your Church.

2 And that you shall (besides your ordinary Morning Prayer and Service) have
every working day, at 6. of the clock in the morning, the Common Prayer with
the English Letany, and Suffrages, instead, and in place of the morrow Mass.

3 To the intent, that the Scholars of the Grammar School, and other well
disposed persons may daily resort thereto.

4 And that some be appointed weekly as it shall come to their course: either
such as were appointed for the morrow Mass, or else some of the petty Cannons.

5 And that to be done in some convenient place of the Church.

24 The foresaid Morning Prayer at six of the clock, our Innovators of Durham,
might not alter or disanull.

1 Because it was ordained and established by lawful Authority, of the
Sovereign Prince and Parliament, under the great Seal of England; in the
general reformation of the Church, which private men without authority, might
not take away nor change, without the danger of excommunication and
deprivation, for their impudent sauciness, in rebelliously withstanding the
Kings Laws.

2 Because it was contrary to the custom of Durham Cathedral, which had
continued ever since the first year of Queen Eliz. 1559. till the second year
of our Sovereign Lord King Charles; to the observation of which custom, all
Durham Prebends, take expressly their corporal oath when they are installed.

3 Because it is contrary to all Cathedral Churches in England, (as Bishop
Howson said) which Cathedrals still retain their Morning Prayers, plainly read
by one Minister, with a Psalm in the end, in a vulgar tune, which all the
Congregation may sing together.

4 Because these Injunctions being made for the advancement of Gods glory, the
taking away of this Morning Prayer distinctly said, is the hindrance of Gods
glory, with the devotion and edification of Scholars; and other people for whom
it was ordained: without which edifying knowledge, no service can be acceptable
to God, either in Cathedral or Parish Churches.

25 In the foresaid Injunction for 6 a clock Prayer, 5 clauses are contained;
against every one of which our new fangled Durhamers, have notoriously
offended, they have overthrown and turned upside down, the whole frame and form
of all forenoon Services, confounding the ordinary Service at 10 a clock with
the 6 a clock Prayer, and bringing in a new found second Service to be said
alone, without a first at the ordinary accustomed hours of the day, by which
they have depraved the whole book of Common Prayer, and the Rubricks thereof.

26 Concerning the first of which five, in Durham Cathedral, the Divine
Service called in this Injunction the ordinary Morning Prayer, has not been
kept at convenient and due hours, the usual time whereof was all the time of
Queen Eliz. and King James, between the hours of nine and eleven; but our
brainsick Innovators of Durham, removed the ordinary Service to 8 a clock, and
so it continued about a year, and all that time, they had 3 forenoon Services,
one at 6. another at 8. and a third at 10. of the clock, afterward upon better
advice (because three Services in one forenoon were tedious) they took quite
away the plain and best Morning Prayer, appointed by this Injunction, and put
in place thereof, the ordinary Divine Service, and called the people thereunto,
by the ringing of three Bells, to which not 3 persons usually resorted,
especially in Winter, time, and dark mornings.

27 The ordinary Morning Prayer (called the Mattens and Divine Service in the
foresaid Injunction) which appoints it to be said at due and convenient hours,
that is between the hours of nine and eleven, (according to the custom and
practice of all Churches) is that which is ordained in the book of Common
Prayer, the Rubricks prescribing the manner of saying the same, for time,
place, order, and fashion of rights and Ceremonies without alteration;
according to the Cannon of our Church.

Observabunt ordines and ritus desoriptos in libro publicar^m precum, tam in
legendis sacris Scripturis, and precibus dicendis, quam etiam in
administrations Sacramentorum: ut nov^ detrahant aliquid, neve addant, neve de
materia, neve de forma.

Again, the 14. Cannon says, all Ministers shall observe the orders and
Ceremonies prescribed in the book of Common Prayer, without either adding or
diminishing any thing in matter or form.

Our seditious Innovators of Durham have not observed the orders and rights,
prescribed in the book of Common Prayer; but they have added, diminished, and
altered the whole form of Divine Service, and two years together they have had
no ordinary Morning Service, according to the Rubricks.

28 For 2 years together from 1627. till 1629. our Durham Innovators, Mr. Cousin
and his Associates, would not suffer any ordinary Morning Prayer to be said at
the due and usual time, between 9 and 11, in the place where Evening Prayer
was duly said; but every day, working days, and holy days, they went to the
Altar (as they termed it) to say a second Service, so they call the Communion
Service, which is no part of the ordinary Morning Prayer; as appears by the
last Rubric before the Letanie, and before that which they call the second
Service, Thus ends the order of Morning and Evening Prayer throughout the
year.

Neither is the place where their Altar stands, the accustomed place, for
saying any Divine Service, being at the East end of the Quire or Chancell, so
far in some Churches from the Congregation, that they can neither see the
Minister, nor hear what he says, nor understand so well as they do the Evening
Prayer, said in the usual place among them.

29 The first Rubric, in the book of Common Prayer, is this.

The order where Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used and said.

The Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in the accustomed place of the
Church, Chapel, or Chancell. And the Chancels shall remain as they have done
in times past.

This Rubric our Durham Innovators have violated sundry ways, for here we see
one place is appointed for Morning and Evening Prayer; not two places, one for
Morning, and another for Evening Prayer.

Evening Prayer has been used in the accustomed place, in which it is always
said in the midst of the Quire. This alteration our irregular Durhamers made
themselves, without the determination of the Ordinary, who by the 14 Cannon is
limited, that he may do nothing whereby edification may be hindered, and how can
the people be edified, when they cannot hear the Minister, as is done in Mr.
Burgoyns Church at Warmoth, etc?

Again, whereas the Rubric says, Chancels shall remain as they have done in
times past; our new fangled Durhamers, and other country Priests (following
their example) have made Cancellos inter Cancellos, Chancels within Chancels,
that is, an Enclosure, to divide their Altar Eastward from the Quire, as the
Sanctum Sanctorum was separated with curtains from the rest of the Temple; who
ever heard of 2 Chancels in one Church, till Durhamers invented it? contrary to
this Rubric and the example of all Churches in England in former times. So
that they have a holy Church, a more holy Chancell, and at the East end thereof
a most holy enclosure, where the Altar must stand, unto which no man or woman
may have access but Priests only.

30 Another Rubric says, Then shall follow certain Psalms in order, as they
be appointed in the Table made for that purpose.

And another Rubric says, Then shall be read 2 Lessons distinctly, with a
loud voice that the people may hear; the first of the Old Testament, the second
of the New, like as they be appointed in the Calendar.

The Minister that reads the Lessons, standing, and turning him so, as he may
be best heard of all that be present.

No Psalms nor Chapters were read, either of the old or new Testament (which is
a principal part of Divine Service) by our Durham Innovators for the space of
two years, and consequently they had no ordinary Morning Service in their
Cathedral in the usual place, time, and form, as is prescribed in the book of
Common Prayer, Cannons, Injunctions, and Act of Parliament for Uniformity,
which commands all Churches to be uniform; unto none of which Durham Cathedral
was agreeable in their Morning Services.

31 The Act of Parliament for Uniformity has these words: If any person, or
Minister, in any Cathedral, or parish Church, shall by open fact, or deed, or
by threatening, compel any to sing or say, any common or open prayer, otherwise
or in any other manner, or form, then is mentioned, in the book of Common
Prayer, let him be indicted.

Again in the same Act, no rite, order, form, or manner, at Mattens, or Even
song, may be used in Cathedral, or Parish Churches, but that which is
appointed in the book of Common Prayer.

The form of Morning prayer, was altered in Durham Cathedral, by dividing it,
into 2 parts, to be said at two distinct times.

Most of the Rubricks with sundry Cannons, and Injunctions, have been violated,
and broken by means of that division.

Many rites, and ceremonies, have been changed, and unlawfully used.

Men have been enjoined, at forbidden times, to wear unlawful vestments,
condemned by our Church; some have been compelled with threatening and penalties
to obey their unlawful commands: As was evidently seen in the morning Prayer,
which by the Injunction, and custom of 60 years continuance, was said in a
place appointed thereunto, by one petty Cannon alone, plainly, distinctly, and
briefly to be ended at seven a clock.

But new fangled Durhamers would have their new devised morning prayer, to be
said, and sung* solemnly in the Quire, with all the voices of men and children,
and musical instruments, whom they forced; to be present, at that unlawful
Service, and there to abide till all was done at 8 a clock, whereby they have
deserved many ways to be indicted, and for their contumacy deprived of all
their livings, according to the Statute. In that being often admonished, they
would not amend for the space of two years.

32 But the most notorious Innovation, and most contrary to the foresaid Act of
Uniformitie, was that which Mr. Cousin and his Associates took up at Durham
about the year 1626. to go in a Cope to the Altar to say 2. or 3. prayers after
every Sermon, which is a strange ceremony, not mentioned in the book of Common
Prayer, or Cannons, and consequently forbidden.

They would not suffer the Preacher to dismiss the Congregation, with the
blessing of Gods peace; as was wont to be done in Durham, and all other
Churches of England.

They allege for themselves, the Rubric after the Nicene Creed.

After the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow one of the Homilies, set
forth by common Authority. And after such Sermon, Homily, or exhortation, the
Curate shall declare unto the people, whether there be any holidayes, or
fasting days in the week following.

And earnestly exhort them to remember the poor.

This Rubric makes nothing for this fond Innovation, for it says, After the
Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow one of the Homilies. And then it
says, after such Sermon, Homily, or Exhortation, the Curate shall declare
whether therebe any holidayes, or fasting days.

Here is a contradiction, or rather a nonsense, if the words be no^ rightly
understood.

If there be no Sermon, and then, After such Sermon, Homily, or Exhortation,
what means this?

After such Sermon, if there be no Sermon, the meaning of the Rubric is plain,
and the practice of all our Churches expound it, when there is no Communion, if
there be no Sermon preached in the pulpit, the Curate being no preaching
Minister, shall read an Homily or Exhortation; which Homily is termed a Sermon,
not preached in the pulpit on any text of Scripture, but read as the rest of
the Service by the Curate, with no conceived prayer, or Psalms sung before or
after the Homily: and then the Curate when the Homily is done, must proceed as
the Rubric directs him, to declare to the people, whether there be any
holidayes the week following: and he must exhort them, to remember the poor,
saying one or more of these sentences.

Now in what Cathedral Church does any Curate after Sermon, warn holidayes,
or fasting days, or read any sentence to exhort the people to make any
collection for the poor?

But every Preacher in a Cathedral Church goes up to the pulpit, takes a
text of Scripture, has a Psalm sung, and makes a prayer, before the Sermon;
Which Sermon being done, concludes with a prayer, he sits down in the
pulpit till the Psalm be ended, and then standing up, he dismisseth the
congregation with the blessing of Gods peace.

Thus the Reformers of the Church understood their own Rubric, and this has
been the practice of all Churches of England; till lately fantastical
Innovators in Durham, changed and corrupted the whole form, and fashion of our
Church Service: and other Churches ignorantly and superstitiously have lately
begun to imitate Durham, in the same ridiculous Innovations.

33 They have offended in preaching and defending them that did preach against
the religion established, and impudently traducing vilifying, and disgracing
the grave and learned reformers of our Church, as Doctor Cousin did in his
Sermon of the Parable of the Tares, That the Reformers of our Church when they
took away the M^sse, they marred all religion and the service of God, they
called it a reformation, but it was indeed a deformation, and Doctor Linsell
said that the Reformers of our Church were ignorant Calvinisticall Bishops,
contrary to the advertisement: no person shall preach any matter tending to
dissension or to the derogation of the religion, and doctrine received.

34. They offended in altering orders established, and ceremonies prescribed,
and taking upon them to make new orders for the observation of unlawful
sermons and ceremonies without the Kings authority under the Great Seal of
England, for which presumption they are excommunicated, though they pretend the
Bishops authority to whom they give transcendent authority, which is
notwithstanding limited by the local statutes of Durham Church, and by the
Cannons both old and new: his office is assigned to preach and to see that the
Church Service and Sacraments be rightly administered as is prescribed in the
Common Prayer; he may not hinder preaching by preferring petty ceremonies and
solemn services with piping and singing before Sermons, nor corrupt with
unlawful orders and new rites both Service and Sacraments according to the
first Latin Canon. 1571.

35 They offended in making Gloria Patri a Creed, and making the people to
stand when it is said, it being no Creed, but a prayer. At which they are
enjoined to kneel, as likewise forcing the people to stand, when the Nicene
Creed was sung, and to kneel when some prayer is sung. Though the people could
not understand whether they were prayers or Creed.

The seventh Article of religion D^ tribus Symbolis acknowledges but three
Creeds, to be said in Churches, viz. the Nicene Creed, the Creed of Athanasius,
and the Apostles Creed. Innovators in Durham have added a fourth Creed, Glory
be to the Father, to the Son, etc. and they enjoined the Ceremony of
standing, as if it were as good a Creed as the Apostles Creed, being indeed no
Creed, but a prayer: for it is part of the Letany, which is nothing but prayers
at which all are enjoined to kneel Therefore they are excemmunicated ipso
facto by the 5. Canon, as depravers of the book of Common prayer and the
Articles of religion.

36. They offended in burning of Wax-candels, in excessive number, two or three
hundred at a time, when and where there was no use of lights, as namely on
Candlemas day 1627. when the days were lengthned two hours, and Service might
be done an hour before day light was gon^, as it was in Westminster-Abbey this
year 1641. no Candles being lighted there at Evening prayer.

37. They offended likewise in turning their f ces to the East, and orcing the
people so to do. which is a Ceremony not allowed in our Church: in this Doctor
Cosins offended, not only in turning the readers Deske at morning prayer, and
the Deanes Pue, that they could not sit with their backs toward the East; but
also when he administ ed the Communion, he stood on the West side of the Table
with his face toward the East, and back toward the people; which is a
Ceremony the Popes Priests are enjoined to use at Mass, and the care of the
reformers of our Church was, that Ministers of the Gospel should not be like
Mass Priests, in superstitious Ceremonies, or that our holy C^munion should be
like their Idolatrous Mass. Again the turning of faces always Eastward in the
Service of God, is a Ceremony not appointed by the Church of England, nor
mentioned in the Book of Common prayer, as Bishop Harsnet confessed openly
upon the Bench at York; and consequently it is forbidden by the Act of
uniformity under great penalty.

The Prebendaries of Durham incurred the horrible sin of perjury in not
conventing me before the Chapter there to be examined and matters debated, if
they had any thing to lay to my charge, according to the Statutes in that
behalf, and their oath.

The words in the second Chapter are these: 38. In excessibus corrigendis
decani and Canonicorum eaest prerogativa qued ratione Prabendarum non
convenieutur extra capitulum, quia cause huius^^^di queratione Prabendarum
emergunt, in capitulo decani and capituli judicio terminari debent, Such is the
prerogative of the Deane and Prebends, that all faults among them must be
judged by the Deane and Chapter, they must not be convented by any out of the
Chapter House.

And again in the third Chapter:

Si quaevis quaestio aut controversia inter aliques de Capitule ^riatur per
Decanum and Capitulum debet terminari. And the conclusion is:

Forensia enim judicia, fratres subire non decet. All these they have violated
in casting me into the whirlepoole of the High Commission Court at Durham,
London, and York, and therefore I humbly desire the Right Honorable House of
Peers to finish and conclude my cause according to the impechment transferred
unto their Lordships by the honorable House of Commons, whereby satisfaction
may be made unto me for the excessive wrongs and losses which I have sustained.
By this it appears that all controversies betweens Prebendaries, must be
ended in the Chapter house unless the crime be so great that the Visitor must
examine and correct it; by whom and none else, the delinquent may be deprived,
and not by the Bishop, uulesse, Idem Canonicus in offensa aliqua aut crimine
gravi, veluti Haeresi, adulterio, furto, perjurio, atqueid genus aliis
culpabilis inventus fuerit. And then says the statute 37. chap. Fiat
sequestratio praebendae, interim dum talis accusatio coram Episcopo visitatore
pendeat. Now it is well known, that the late Bishop Howson in his Visitation
1631. and at sundry other times cleared me, not culpable of any fault, which
could deserve so great punishment, or any at all. But contrarily did say, that
Doctor Cousin was a factions and seditious man, and that he deserved to be
expeld for corrupting the Church Service and Ceremonies. They (Doctor Cousin and
others) proceeded against me maliciously and trecherously, by a strange and
unheard of suspension, from coming to Durham Church, only at the same time
that I kept residence contrary to the statutes, which bind me to be present in
the time of Divine Service every day, and this they did in the midst of my
Residence; so that I could not come to Church ten days together, being
prohibited by the sentence of suspension, naild up upon my stall.

They are bound by oath to maintain and cause others to maintain all rights,
privileges, and customs of the Church, this Law, right, and custom they
perjuriously violated.

39. They perfidiously and most uncharitably conspired against me all of them,
not one excepted, not to come to my residence continuing one and twenty days,
and though they were often invited, and kindly entreated, yet not one of them
would once come to my house, such a thing was never heard of before. And it is
contrary to their Oath, Omnes probatas and Probandas bujus Ecclesiae
consuetudines observabo. I take my Oath that I will observe all approved
customs of the Church.

40. They made another most damnable conspiracy against me in the
Chapter House, in sending letters full of horrible slanders and diabolical
calumniations to Doctor Laud then Bishop of London, and sour other Bishops,
which are since dead; and this they did many times: one of which Letters I
have, full of untruths, making the Bishops believe (...) I am an enemy to the
Church, a man unsufferable, and that I (...) against his Majesty's Chapel.
All which are most false and some of them knew they were false, and therefore
they are perjured, and by the statute to be expeld, Statuimus ut nemo in
virtute juramenti Ecc^^si^ prastiticontra Decanum aut Canonicos, quicquam dicat
aut denuntiet, nisi quod verum crediderit, cap. 40. By virtue of their Oath all
are enjoined to say nothing against any Canon, but what they believed to be
true.

And this sending of Letters by Messengers hired on purpose was oftentimes on
the Churches charges, whereof a good part was mine own (...) and in all other
suite^ against my self, they used my own money which is theevery, robbing me,
and endeavoring to kill me with my own sword.

41. They made a sequestration of all my living, belonging to my Pre^^^^. All
the Prebendaries then in Durham with the Deane, concurring to belie and slander
me, ( viz.) that I preached contra pios and salubr^^ ritus Edclesiae in grave
p^riculum animae suae, etc. That I preached against the godly and wholesome
Ceremonies of the Church, whereas there was not a word spoken against any
approved Ceremony of our Church, but only against unlawful Innovations
condemned by our Church. If they can name any truly, I will loose my life.

42. And although Haec lis nunquam pend^bat coram Episcopo visitatort, for
Bishop Howson kept no visitation till my cause was transmitted to London and
York they made that damnable sequestration twice: first, before the suspension
sealed the 9 of August 1628. which because they thought to be wrong, they
amended that error with a capital crime, for scraping out the date, an^ what
they would beside and writing other words or figures in place thereof, they
sealed that false sequestration ag tine, contrary to their Oath in these words.
Statuimus eti m ut Sigillum Commune nunquam albae chartae aut Palinxesto
opponatur sub poena perjurii and perpetuae amotionis ab ha^ecelesiae, illius
qui opposut, and quiad id faciendum consenserit, and ad satisfaciend^m pro
damnissint obligati.

The Common seal must not be put to scrape parchment under the pain of
perjury, and expulsion out of the Church of Durham, and the must be bound to
make satisfaction, for the wrong done.

These treacherons Durhamers, Doctor Cousin, Mr. J^mes, with their fellows were
not content with their Vill^nous casting me into the whirlepoole of the high
Commission, where I have been cost from Durham to London, from London to York,
from prison to prison, more then 13. years together, and utterly undone by
their barbarous, more then Turkish and Paganish Practices.

They were not content I say, to plague me with all manner of punishments the
merciless: Commisioners could inflict upon me, in all the fores^id places, but
in the Chipter houses they would bite me, and prejudicate my cause before it
came to trial, with a malicious sequestration of my living twice sealed in the
comp sse of one month, and that perfidiously and sl^nrdrously fraughted with
diabolical calumniations.

They perjuriously have offended in detaining from me all that I have lost
these 14 years since 1628 with above 1200. pound, which I have spent siucethis
Parliament began in maintaining witnesses, etc. whilst they maintain their
witnesses. as they have done all their suits of law against me upon the Church
cost, and by the statutes of Durham Church, which they took their Corporal
Oaths to obey, they are bound to pay to me, as appears by the 14. and 15
Chapters.

If any Prebendary be absent from Durham Church, being hindered by any lawful
impediment, and namely by imprisonment, he shall enjoy all profits, and
commodities arising any ways from his Prebend, as if he had all that time
been present.

The words of the statute are these. Quod si ob aliquod illorum impedimeenterum
(viz. profectionem ad Parliamentum and moram ibidem, Incarceratonem non
voluntarium etc.) iliquem Canonicorum abesse ab ecclesia hac comingerit, in
omnibus tamen commodis and emolumintis, ration^^ corporis prabenda sua, and
quotidianarum distributionum, a dicta ecclesia percipiendis, pro praesente
haberi volumut.

I Peter Smart one of the Prebendaries have been absent from the Church of
Durham 12. years, I have been all that time Ligiteme impeditus: for I have
been by my false brethrens fault and procurement imprisoned, and by wrongful
excommunication, suspension, and degradation as is adjudged by the high Court
of Parliament, kept from my house and Church, and all my means, has been
taken from me, the sum of all which amounted to above 14000. pound, a great
part of which I should have recovered of Doctor Carre and his heirs, which
because the Deane and Chapter hinder me from obtaining, being mine own, which
he wrongfully got and possessed, I am to have it of the Deane and Chapter of
Durham, and by their oath they are bound and must pay it me, besides
satisfaction, they must make for other wrongs they have done to me and mine.

They perfidiously granted the registers office to Thomas Bullock, and Abraham
Clarke, there being a Chapter Act for my Son William Smart, to succeed Mr.
Brown according to his petition, granted upon a great Chapter day, themselves
persuading me to take him from the universitie to put him to the Inns of
Court, and to make him a notary public, which being done, they being offended
with me for withstanding their Popish innovations in the Church, treacherously
beguiled my said son to his great loss and undoing, and they suffered Mr.
Brown, who enjoyed the said office, to sell the same to the said Bullock, and
Clarke, contrary to a Chapter Act, expressly forbidding him to sell it, but to
leave it to the Chapters free gift, as he freely received it, they committed a
double perjury in this, first in making two Registers put jointly in one
patent, whereas by statute and custom, there must be but one register, and in
swearing Bullock, and not Clarke; contrary to the express words of the
statute. Omnes prater pueros jurabunt. All members of tge Church except Boys,
must take their oath.

46 They made a lease to Mr. Toby Blaxton, for the use of Mr. Cousin of hay
ground belonging to me, which I had enjoyed many years, by custom of the
Church as ten prebendaries always have done, they made a lease (I say) of
that, which by custom only uses to be holden, and not by lease, which is
manifest perjury, of which no president can be showed, never any lease was
heard of before to be made in that kind.

47 They prejuriously offended in making to the said Cousin a lease of the Tith
Corn of Pittington, allotted to the 4. Prebend, which was mine.

They granted likewise to Doctor Carre, a lease of my Tyth Corn of Shadforth,
belonging to the 4. Prebend.

They perfidiously wrought means to put me out of my living, and brought in
Doctor Carr, who had got in the space of 11. years, above 4000. pound out of
my livings, which they do all they can to keep from me, though the Parliament
acquitted me of all censures, whereby it is manifest, that Doct. Carre was
never prebendary of Durham the 4. Prebend, which was mine, being never actually
void.

48 The statutes of the Church, viz. Cap. 17. have these words. Volumus ut
singulis Anni terminis stipendia omnia tam Decano and Canonicis quam aliis
Ministris, numrecentur, and solvantur, And again Statuimus and ordinamus; ut
Thesaurarius qui pro tempore fuerit stipendia omnia prout statutis nostris
assignantur tempore suo numeret and persolvat, and illa etiam quae sub anni
exitum pro Communi dividenda sunt solvenda. Stat. cap. 22, De officio Thesaur.
These clauses of the statutes, some of the treasurers have not observed, as
well in not paying where it was due, as also in paying where it was not due,
where both the statutes and Custom of the Church forbid them to pay, and as I
understand, they have made Chapter Acts against me, to keep me and mine from
my own, they conspired altogether to be perjured, and to divide my moneys
amongst themselves.

Doctor Duncon late treasurer of Durham, refuses to pay me the stipends
belonging to my prebend, which were unpaid to Doctor Carre, amounting to the
sum of about 40. pound, and neither he nor Doctor Nayler now treasurer, will
pay to William Withrington my servant the stipend due to him, though by their
oath they are bound to pay stipends Decano and Canonitis and aliis Ministris,
whereof he is one to the Deane and Cannons and other officers whereof he is one.

49 Yet the most profane Epicurisme, and Sacralegious implety of the Deane and
Prebendaries appears in bestowing of Church livings with charge of souls, of
which if they be very commodious, they will accept of themselves, as Doctor
Cradock did North Allerton worth 200. pound per annum, having above 600. pound
per annum before he took it, not to preach therenor reside upon it, being
Bishop Neales Chancellor, Prebend of Durham, and Vicar of Gain^ord (for he
never preached there nor ministered the Sacraments, nor said service) but to sell
it, for 500. pound, which the minister that bought it, held but two years till
Cradock dyed, afterward Mr. Blaxton got the same North-Allerton having a
Prebend of Durham, and parsonage of Sedgefield worth 800. pound per annum at
which living he never preached for 16. years nor said service, being lusty and
able enough to do any thing, saving the duties of his calling.

This man resigned and bargained away many livings; Woodhorne, Red Marshall,
his Arch-Deaconry of York to his Son in law Doctor Cousin, his Prebend of
York, and Vicaridge of Allerton to his Son Thomas Blaxton, and lastly his
rich personage of Sedgefield and Prebend of Durham to his Son Robert Blaxton,
both worth 800. pound por annum.

50 Of all other, their execrable impiety, is seen in committing the charge of
souls to them that they know are incapable, as namely Witton Gilbert, to
Joseph Cradock; the foresaid Doctor Cradock Son, who was not full minister,
nor yet is, neither did he ever preach, or say Service there; not long after,
they gave to the same Joseph Cradock another called Walsend, worth about 60.
pound per annum, where likewise he never officiated, but presently he sold them
both, one to Henry Hutton Clerk, and the other to Sir Nicholas Tempest for
220. pound, after these two he got a third living called Middleton George,
where he never did any service nor lives there, but with the money he got for
these places, he bought a Commissary ship, of Richmond in Yorkshire, whereof
he has made extraordinary great profit, whereby diverse complaints have been
made against him.

Likewise they have given to William Smith a Minor Cannon, the Vicaridge
Edlingeham, about 40. miles from Durham, contrary to the statute in the 24.
Chap. that the benefice must not be above twenty four miles from Durham,
where he seldom or never comes, nor keeps a sufficient Curate.

But they refuse to collate upon one Master Carwardine a painful preacher, the
Vicaridge of Aycliffe, which by the order and custom of the Church, I Peter
Smarth Senior Residentiary, have presented him unto having right so to do, as
was proved this Parliament, by the testimony of two witnesses, and they keep
in a deboyst and scandalous minister, one George Leake, as appears by a
petition, at this time preferred to the Lords of the Parliament, by the
parishioners there.

OF all the aforesaid Fifty Superstitious Innovations, in Services and
Ceremonies of irregularities, and transgressions against the Church of England,
Articles of Religion, Injunctions, Rubricks, Cannons, etc. Now let us take a
view and see, of which amongst the 50. I, or my accusers and persecuters of
Durham, London, and York are most guilty, and deserve more to be punished.

1 Innovators in Durham, contrary to the Injunction, commanding Altars to be
removed, and Communion Tables set up: have done quite otherwise, they have cast
out of the Church lawful Tables, and brought in unlawful Altars.

2 They have left the language of their Mother the Church of England, in using
the word Altar, and leaving Table.

3 Instead of a decent Table, they have set up a brave and sumptuous Altar,
with much Superstitious and unlawful Furniture.

4 Instead of a Wooden Table, standing on a Frame, they made a Stone Altar, on
a Wall, or St one Pillars, and consequently heavy and unmovable, whereas it
should be light and portable, that it might be removed as occasion requires.

5 The Rubricke commands the Communion Table be placed where Morning Prayer,
and Evening Prayer are appointed to be said, that is in the body of the Church
or Chancell: but they place their Altars at the East end of their Chancells or
Quires, where Evening Prayer is never said, nor all Morning Prayer, so that the
People cannot well hear, nor be so well edified.

6 Our Church commands that the Minister Officiating, shall stand at the
North-side of the Table, but they set up Altars or Tables Altar-wise, along by
the Wall, with neither side toward the North.

7 Our Lyturgie, and all our Church Books use constantly the words Minister,
Sacraments, Communion Table: but our Durhamors, and Yorkers say falsely, that
the words Altar, Sacrifice, Priest, are indifferently used in our Lyturgie,
where indeed they are never used, only in the Rubricks Priest is used sometimes,
never in the Text: Minister is used always in the Text, and sometimes in the
Rubricks.

8 They prefer Altars, Priests, Sacrifices, before Communion Tables,
Ministers, Sacraments alleging falsely that the Fathers of the Primitive
Church did so. I say the learned Divines that reformed the church of England,
rejected many things, which some of the Fathers erroneously maintained, as
namely this of Altar, Priest, Sacrifice, and our learned Bishop Morton says
the same, That their liberty of Speech, occasioned in Romanists that prodigal
error in Doctrine.

9 They removed the Font from place to place, from the East end of the Church
to the West end, from the North to the South, where lately it stood. I say,
with the Injunction, the Font must not be removed, and 81 Cannon, the Font
shall stand in the ancient usual place.

10 They adored their brave Altar, making legs to it, and bowing down their
bodies oftentimes, and profoundly before it, more then ever the Papists use to
do: I say the Table is as holy as the Altar, yet none make legs to the
Communion Table when it stands as the Church appoints, in the body of the
Church.

In these 10. points concerning Altars, judge rightly o Bishop and High
Commissioner, who maintains the truth? who obeyes the Laws and orders of the
Church of England, they that did all things wrong, or I that opposed my self
lawfully against their unlawful Innovations; yet you have condemned me only
for doing my duty. But did you ever punish the wrong doers mine adversaries?
did you ever call them in question? did you amend any thing that was done
amiss in the Church? No verily, but you have assisted, cherished, and rewarded
them with great preferments; you have joined with them in persecuting me with
all rigor and extremity. As for example, Doctor Duncon, one of my
spightfullest persecutors has written a Treatise called A Determination in
defense of Altars, and bowing down before Altars, which is a Ceremony not
allowed by the Church of England, but forbidden by the Act of Parliament for
uniformitie: yet he proves it by many foolish reasons, amongst which this is a
principallone, the Altar is the most holything the Church of God has, therefore
it must devoutly be bowed unto. His words are these, or to this effect;
Sanctitas, and excellentia Altaris prae reliquis omnibus in Ecclesia: and
again, Altar est optima, praecipua and sanctissima pars universae
supellectilis Ecclesiasticae. The sanctity, the excellency of the Altar above
all other things in the Church. The Altar is the best, the noblest, the holiest
part of all Ecclesiastical stuff or implements.

And again thus he writes, The Latin Worthies (Heroes) term it Sacrum,
Sanctum, Venerandum Altar, sacred, holy, venerable Altar: and they make
comparison says he, Inter Altar apud Christianos, et Sanctum Sanctorum apud
Judaeos, illudq multis nominibus praeferunt.

Hinc etiam est quod Altaria septis et cancellis, undiquaque munire et vallare
consueverunt: ne laicorum aliquis propius quam par est, ad Altar? ccederet.

Heroes scilicet; rather Blasphemous wretches, which dare compare their false
Imaginary, Idolized Altar, set up in Churches by Antichristian Priests, in the
place of Gods holy Table, compare it I say, and in many respects prefer it
also before the sanctum sanctorum of the Jews, the inward most holy Sanctuary,
into which the High Priest alone might go, and that no more then once in a
whole year: read what Saint Paul writes, Heb. 9. 2, 3. to the 11.

And as the most holy inward Sanctuary, where the Arc of the Covenant, the
Tables of the Law, the 10 Commandments, etc. were placed, was divided from the
outward Sanctuary by a second Veil, so must our Priests have a holy Chancell
parted from the Church, with Railes, and within that Holy, Holy, Holy Sanctuary
or Chancell where the Altar that glorious S^at must stand enclosed with Rails
to keep our laiks from aproaching to near the Sacred Altar. Thus much, and
twenty times more, writes Bishop Neales Chaplain Duncon, in justification of
Altars, and Altar- cringings. I wonder that none of you Bishops, Deanes, and
Archdeacons, have taken this Duncon with his determination unto examination,
that it might be purged with fire, as many better Books have bin; I know some
of you have seen it, and perused it: The learned Bishop of Lincoln, in his
Holy Table Name and thing, writes, that lately there came to his hands a
certain Determination concerning Altars, a Treatise well Languaged, but of
poor stuff, poor^ God knows, hungry and ragged, nasty and scab'd, and
swarming with loathsome vermin, as by Gods help I shall make manifest to the
world hereafter, if no man else will take it in hand.

11. The Church of England commands, that all Monuments of Idol^try and
Superstition, Images, pictures, paintings, crosses, Crucifixes, Candlesticks,
etc. be defaced and abolished, that no memory of them remain in walls,
windows, or elsewhere. These I preached against, and for preaching this truth,
I have bin persecuted by them, who instead of defacing Images, they have given
them new faces, bravely painted and gilded, instead of abolishing them, they
have multiplied them, and renewed their memory in walls, windows, copes, etc.

12. They reject the Homilies, because they disallow Images, Altars, and other
Superstitious Ornaments, with Organs and chanting, without understanding: I
defend the Homilies, and the Doctrine of the Church of England taught in them.

13 They term their Images, and other Superstitious trinkets Ornaments of the
Church: but I with the Homilies, St. Bernard and Hemingius say they are
disgracements of religion, and impediments of piety; they are abominations in
the sight of God, and godly men.

14 They taking liberty to themselves to set up Altars and Images, and to
abolish the Sabbath day, the name whereof they cannot endure to hear; have
taken away the ten Commandments quite out of Durham Cathedral, because the 2.
forbids Images, the 4. enjoyneth the observation of a Sabbath; this they
have done contrary to the express words of 84. Cannon.

15 They have used Copes, and other superstitious Vestments falsely called
Copes, at their Altar, when there was no Communion, and after every Sermon to
say Prayers in Copes, contrary to the express words of the Advertisement, and
the 24, 25. Can.

16. They have Preached, and justified him that Preached in the Pulpit, and
sat in his stall wearing a Cope, and not a Hood, contrary to the
Advertisement, and the 25 Cannon; and they did Article against me, and censured
me at York, for blaming in Mr. Burgain of Durham, this notorious
irregularitie: but him they excused, they never called him in question.

17 They used in Durham and still they use, not decent, but sumptuous Copes,
embroidered with Images; and they have used py-bald, curtaild, ridiculous
Vestme^ts, even at the administration of the holy Communion, contrary to the
24. and the latin Canon. de officio Decani, which command decent Copes to be
used, never but at the Communion: they forbid all Vestments. superstitione
contaminatas, defiled with Superstition, that is, such as have Images on them,
or have bin used at Mass.

In these 7. points concerning the abolishing of the Monuments ^f Idolatry,
defacing of Images, rejecting the Doctrine of the Church of England in the Book
of Homilies against excessive cost upon Organs, Altars, Idols, which falsely
they call Ornaments of the Church, being indeed pollutions of Religion, and
abominations.

In taking out of the Church the Decalogue, because the 2. Commandment forbids
the bowing down to Images, and the 4. commands the keeping holy the Sabbath.
In using Copes at the Altar, when there is no Communion, and those not decent,
but either rascal Robe^, very fools coats or exceeding sumptuous, glittering
with Images: in preaching in a Cope, sitting in a Stall in a Cope to hear
Service, when Copes are forbidden, and Hoods enjoined. In all these 7. judge O
Bishop or High Commissioner, who is faulty, who transgresses the Laws and
Orders of the Church? which of us is conformable to the Church of England? who
deserves punishment, and who should be rewarded? I have observed all these Laws
and Canons, yet I have been punished with all rigor and extremity: my
persecutors of Durham and York having broken all Laws of the Church have never
been called in question; some of them have been advanced to high dignities, and
preferments. Is this Prelaticall Justice? is this Episcepall government? surely
the judges of hell, Minos and Radamanthus would never pronounce so injust
sentences.

18 The 49 Injunction commands that Music be not abused in the Church; that
the Common Prayer should be worse understood. That there should be modest and
distinct singing, to the intent all may be understood plainly, and the sense
perceived: But Durhamers have used excessive Music, both Isntrumental and
vocal, even at 6 a clock Prayer in the morning, used to be read plainly, and
the administration of Sacraments, whereby those holy actions have been greatly
disturbed. 19 The preface to the Communion Book commands Anthems to be cut
off, and Psalms are allowed to be sung before and after Sermons: But our
Innovators of Durham, have forbidden all singing of Psalms, till this last
year 1641. from 1629. all which time no Psalm has bin sung in Durham Church.

20 The Nicene Creed has been sung, not after the manner of distinct reading,
that the people might understand, and the people have bin compelled with
fighting and brawling to stand on their feet, though they could not repeat the
same Creed in an audible voice, as the 18. Canon appoints.

21. They took for Assistants at the Communion, the whole quire men and
Children which communicated not, contrary to the custom and practice of all
Cathedral Churches.

22 They chaunted or approved him that did sit in his stall, to sing prick
song, which both custom and Law forbids Preachers and Praebends to do; but
they would not suffer Psalms to be sung, that all the Congregation might sing
with them.

23 and 24 They took the Morning Prayer at 6 of the clock quite away for two
years together, a most impudent Innovation, contrary to all the Cathedralls of
England, and in this they violated many Laws and Injunctions, especially the
Injunction made by Commissioners under the great Seal of England, prime Eliz.
for the Church of Durham; and in so doing, they incurd the terrible crime of
perjury, because that morning-prayer was established by Law and custom, which
all took their oaths that they would observe.

25. They confounded and turned all forenoone services upside down, by saying
the whole ordinary service, with Psalms and Chapters read at six of the clock
in the morning, and saying a new found second service, without either Chapters
or Psalms between ten and eleven, the usual time in all Churches for the
ordinary service to be said.

26. They removed the ordinary service a whole twelve Mo^eth together from Ten
of clock to eight, and all that time they had three forenoon services:
afterward they placed the ordinary and most solemn service both Sundays and
working days, in the room of morning prayer at six a clock, and they called
the people thereunto by the ringing of six bells, to which not three persons
usually resorted, in Winter time especially.

27. They did not observe the time, place, order and fashion of rights and
ceremonies, as the 14. Canon prescribes, without adding or diminishing any
thing in matter or form.

28. They said evening prayer in the accustomed place always: but the Altar at
the East end of the Quire where they said their second service, is no accustom
d place for any service; but it is an Innovation in Durham, begun by Bishop
Neals Chaplains.

29 They made Chancels within Chancels, contrary to the Rubric. which says
chancels shall remain as they were in times past: a strange Innovation.

30 The Act of Parliament commands all Churches to be Uniform, but Durham
Cathedral was agreeable to none in their forenoone Services.

31 No rite, order, form or manner of saying Mattens, may be used in
Cathedral or Parish Churches, then what is appointed in the Book of Common
Prayer, and if any Person compel by deeds or threatenings, to say Prayers in
any other manner, let him be Indicted, Mr. Cousin and his Associates have
transgressed against this claus of the act for uniformity, oftentimes
notoriously

32 They suffer not the Preacher to dismiss the Congregation, but the Sermon
being done he comes down from the Pulpit, and another goes to the Communion
Table, and having said 2, or 3 Prayers, he says the Peace of God, and the
People depart, which is grounded upon a Rubricke misunderstood.

33 They have spoken, and Preached against the Religion established, terming
the Reformation of our Church a deformation, and the Reformers ignorant
Calvinisticall Bishops.

34 They took upon them to make new Orders for the observation of unlawful
Services and Ceremonies, for which they are Excommunicated.

And they have given to the Bishops transcendent Authority in ordering Church
matters, which notwithstanding is limited by the local Statutes of Durham
Church, and by the Cannons, his Office is to Preach, and not to hinder
Preaching etc.

35 They make Gloria Patri a fourth Creed, and therefore they enjoin the
Ceremony of standing, which is a Prayer, and a part of the Letany, at which
all must kneel.

36 They lighted on Candlemas Day more then 200 wax Candles, when none were
needful, the day being lengthened 2 hours, the 2 of February being equal to
the 18. of October. St. Lukes, on which Day no Church lighted Candles.

37 They constantly observe that unlawful Ceremony of turning faces to the
East, not allowed by the Church, and some when they officiate at the Communion
Table, look toward the East, turning their backs to the People, after the
manner of Mass Priests.

In these 20. from 17 to 37. mine Adversaries of Durham have offended, they
have violated above 40. Orders, Cannons. Injunctions, Rubrickes, not only in
Ceremonies, but in the most substantial parts of Gods Service and Sacraments.
yet which of them was ever punished, convented or Questioned before a Bishop or
other Ecclesiastical judge for so great and so many presumptuous
irregularities, and Innovations which have ^^^^throwne the whole frame of our
Church Discipline, and Government: I, that to my knowledge have Transgressed in
nothing, I that oftentimes offered the Comissioners Bishop Harsnet and his
Colleagues which censured me so cruelly; that if they would show me my error,
and in what I offended against the Church of ENGLAND in Doctrine or Ceremony,
I would amend and make satisfaction: But it is great Tyranny and Div^llish
oppression to kill a true Man, unless he will betray Truth, and renounce his
Religion.

O ye Bishops and other Spiritual Judges, how terrible have you been in
destroying painful Preachers, for not observing the Cross in Baptism and
other trifling Ceremonies.

But these monstrous Hell hounds of Durham and York, those Popish, Heretical,
^^rminian, Schismatic Innovators, and most pernicious corruptors of Religion
amongst us: you let them escape, nay some of you have abetted and assisted them
unpersecuting me and others living peaceably amongst you: you help these
Enemies of God to afflict and vex me: you honor and reward Wolves, and make
them strong to worry Christ's Sheep and Lambs.

Psalm. 94. O Lord God to whom Vengeance belongs, thon GOD to whom Vengeance
belongs, show thy self.

Arise thou Judge of the World, and reward the proud after their deservings,
and so forth to the 6 Verse.

FINIS.

