A Funeral-Sermon Upon Occasion of the DEATH OF Mrs. LOBB, Late WIFE of Mr.
Steven Lobb.

Preached by SAMUEL SLATER, Minister of the GOSPEL

Psalm CXII. 6. The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and Tho. Cockerill, at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside, and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey. MDCXCI.

To the REVEREND Mr. STEVEN LOBB.
Dear Brother,
GOD having made a great Breach upon you, by taking away her who was the
delight of your eyes; and I having seen the Body she left behind, laid to Rest
in its bed of Dust, was ^hen by you put upon this last Office of Love, in
Preaching ^o your People on that occasion; nor did I draw back; ^ut being that
very Evening seized by, and for some time ^ontinued under a Sharp Distemper, I
could not Study a New Sermon, but was forced to entertain you with one I ^ad
Preached in mine own Congregation, but a little before, upon the Death of a
Young Gentlewoman, Mrs. Susan Hatchman; the Text put into my hand, as what in
^eer Health she had chosen for that purpose: Well; it ^aving been Preached, you
earnestly desired the Publishing ^f it, and would needs have it from the Pulpit
sent to the Press; thereupon it is done; and I have enough, so it do much good.
I heartily sympathized with you; for indeed I love you; the good Lord sanctify
the Affliction, and sweeten ^t, and make it up to you. I said nothing in her
Commendation; while many do not deserve it, she did not need it. Her works
praise her, so do you, and the Tongues of them that knew her. I desire that he
who can, would fill up her room, comfort your heart, help you in your work, and
prosper it; and having been your God, be the God of your Seed, that those young
Branches may flourish in his Courts, and bring forth much precious Fruit in
their Season. I leave you where, I hope, I found you, under the healing wings
of the Sun of Righteousness, which are able to cure all Wounds, and to supply
all Wants; and so remain,

Yours in the best Bonds, SAMUEL SLATER.
November 20. 1691.
A Funeral-Sermon.
PHILIP. 1.23. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to
be with Christ, which is far better.


PAVL being a Prisoner at Rome, where that Monster of men Nero sat in the
Throne, sent by Epaphroditus this Epistle to the Saints at Philippi, with the
Bishops and Deacons, among other Reasons, to prevent their being offended at
his Sufferings, which had fallen out to the furtherance of the Gospel; his
Bonds being famous in Caesar's Court and other Places, which gave people
occasion of enquiring into the reason of them, by which means they came to
understand something of Christ, and the Christian Religion. Besides many of the
Brethren were by his Courage and Constancy encouraged to preach the word with
greater boldness than before. Some indeed preached Christ out of Envy to him,
that they might lessen his Interest and Esteem, and advance their own; But
others did it out of a sincere and holy purpose, to enlarge the Kingdom of
Christ, and to maintain and confirm what Paul had delivered; for which he also
now suffered, knowing he was set for the defense of the Gospel: And he
comforted himself with such things as these: That however, the work was carried
on, and the Name of Christ was as a Precious Oin^ment poured forth; and as for
himself, his afflictions should contribute to his Salvation, through the help
of their prayers, and fresh supplies of Grace from the divine Spirit, trusting
according to his former Hope and Expectation, that he himself should not
through any Terror be ashamed to own and stand to what he had preached; and
that Christ should be magnified in his Body; whethe^ it were by L^fe or by
Death; of which two, which to choose he knew not, but was in a strait about it,
as he says in the Text before us Wherein I shall take notice of, and offer to
your Consideration, thre^ things; and having with convenient brevity spoken to
them, I shall present you with some Doctrinal Conclusions, and shut up this
Discourse.

1. Here is Paul's J^dgment. 2. His Desire. 3. The Strait in which yet he was.
First, I shall consider his Judgment, which we have reason to coun^ solid, and
worthy of so eminent an Apostle. The Object about which it was exercised, is
the Future State of Believers, which they shall enter into, when their Places
here shall know them no more. A^ for their present State, that condition in
which they are, during their abode here, he had given his thoughts concerning
it, elsewhere; namely, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men most miserable. We might very well pass in the world
for a company of Fools and Madmen, should we keep under our bodies as we do,
and deny our selves the free use of those outward Comforts which others do
abound in; and expose our selves to so much Contempt and Scorn, so great Hatred
and Reproach, so many Losses, Crosses, Sufferings and Persecutions, if we had
not a firm and well-grounded Assurance of something, yea, enough in another
world, to make us an abundant amends and recompense for all the troubles and
vexations of this. So that he there readily yields, That as to present Temporal
Enjoyments, the condition of Wicked Men is of the two, more desirable; which
has been a great and sore Temptation to some Gracious and Holy Persons; as you
may see, if you please to peruse the 73 d Psalm, from the 1 st to the end of
the 14 th verse. But in the Text before us, he speaks of a Future State, into
which the Saints shall enter, when they take their flight, and moun^ up with
wings as Eagles, unto that delightful Place which God has prepared for their
Eternal Abode. And he gives us his Judgment of this State, as to Two Things.

1. The Nature of it. 2. The excellency of it. And both these are worthy of our
most serious and frequently-repeated thoughts.
1. The Apostle tells us what that State will be as to the Nature of ^t; of
which he does indeed speak very briefly, but very fully. From what he says, I
may with highest confidence conclude, That it is such ^ State as now deserves
to be the Object of the Saints Desire; and ^hen they are once entered into it,
it will be eternally their Delight. (...) is such a state as now they may well
long for, and hereafter they cannot but be satisfied with. Such a State, as
that the Faith and Assu^ance of it, may and does work in them Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory. Then raise your Thoughts and Conceptions to the highest
^itch that you can, and enlarge them to the utmost, and tell us, if you ^an,
what the enjoyment of it will do! But if you ask, What is that ^tate? He tells
you, It is a being with Christ: And that is Heaven in ^pitome. Can thou, O
Gracious Soul, give another fully to under^^and, how incomparably sweet it is
to have Christ here with thee? When he gives to thee but a look through the
Lattess; when he meets ^^ee at an Ordinance; when he affords thee a short Visit
and away; ^^re I am, thou will want words significant and large enough. And if
(...) short an enjoyment be so delicious, as all the world is nothing to (...),
what then will it be for thee to be with him? If David could say, ^sal. 23.
Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear ^o evil; for
thou art with me: Thou may well promise thy self thou ^^alt want no good,
when thou come to be with him. Know, O ^aint, the world will be well mended
with thee: For as you have it ^n the 16 th Psalm, In his presence there is
fullness of joy; and at his right ^and, pleasures for evermore. Three things may
here well engage our Meditations.

First, The Saints, when once gone from this dirty and trouble^ome World, shall
be with Christ in the same place. Now they are in ^ome sense parted and at a
distance, notwithstanding that Spiritual, Mystical, and Intimate Union which is
between them. 2 Cor. 5, 6. While we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord. Now we ^^e him not: We are upon earth; he is in Heaven; and the
Heavens ^ust contain him for a time, how long we know not; but at last ^hey
shall be together in the same place. One Earth could not long hold them;
therefore h^ said to his Disciples, John 16.7. It is exp^dient for you that I
go away: And so it was, that he might prepare place for them; and that he might
send the Comforter to them and that he might make Intercession for them. As for
his peoples sake he came from Heaven to Earth, to teach them, to fight for
them, to dy^ for them, to conquer their Enemies, to pay their Debts, to mak^
their Peace, to work for them an Everlasting Righteousness, and (...) purchase
for them an Everlasting Happiness; so for their sakes he r^turned from Earth to
Heaven, that he might keep the peace he ha^ made, and give out to them of his
fullness, and purchased blessing^ as in his Infinite Wisdom he see^ their
Necessities and Interest require* And when their work is finished, and they
prepared, they shall follo^ him; they shall away to Heaven also, and that shall
hold both hi^ and them to all Eternity: This he gave them the assurance of Ioh.
14.^* I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am, there ye
m^^ be also. This he also declared to his Father to be his Will concernin^
them. John 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given m^ be
with me where I am; -- for thou lovedst me before the foundati^^ of the world:
Which words of his plainly evidence his not loving distance between him and
them, longer than needs, and how mu^^ his heart is set for the closest and
fullest Communion: It was his joy that he went to the Father, and should be
with the Father, and (...) would have his people with him, q. d. I would be
with thee, and would have them with me; let us be all together; then my joy
wi^^ be full, and so will theirs too. Here the Lord stands at their righ^ hand,
therefore they shall never be moved, Psalm 16.8. And afte^ Death they shall sit
at his right hand, and therefore they shall be satisfied. Then they shall be by
him, and be daily his delight; rejoicin^ always before him.

2 dly, They shall so be with him, as to be the joyful spectators of his
Glo^ry, Men are very much taken with sights, for the Eye affects the heart and
fixing upon great and amiable Objects conveys to the Soul a great deal of
pleasure. How does the Eye of Faith by looking within the Veil, and beholding
him that is invisible, revive the spirits, and raise the Saint out of his
dumps, 1 Peter 1.8. Whom having not see^ ye love; in whom tho now ye see him
not, yet beliving ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. And if
believing do so raise and ravish them now in the midst of so many things to
afflict and depress them, what will the heavenly vision do, when they shall see
him as he is* Alas! the sights of Faith here, are weak and imperfect, they are
but (...) in a glass darkly, we s^e but the back parts; the most sanctified ^e
can at present bear no more. Thou can not see my face, said ^^d to Moses,
Exodus 33.20. that is not a thing to be done. Moses ^^uld not do that, tho he
was a most holy Person, and had been taken up into a familiar Converse with
God. When our Lord Jesus (...) his state of Humiliation and Abasement, did let
forth but one ^^am of his Glory, it struck the Soldiers down to the ground,
^^hn 18.6. As soon as he had said unto them, I am he, they went back^^rd, and
fell to the ground: they could not stand before such an ^^manation; but in
Heaven the Saints shall see, and be enabled to ^ar the sight, yea, to rejoice
in it; the glorified Eye shall be so ^^rengthened, as to fix upon that most
glorious Object, Psalm 17. ^ shall behold thy face in righteousness; not thy
back Parts, but thy ^^ce; there they shall see him as he is. That Prayer of
Moses, ^^ew me thy glory, shall then be fulfilled; they shall not only ^^e his
Goodness that passes before them now, the whole Earth is ^^l of it; but also
they shall see his Glory, that shall be manifested, ^t to the dazzling but
delighting of their Eye: This was part of ^^rist's Will, which shall not fail
of its accomplishment, John 17. ^^ther, I will that those whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am, ^^at they may behold my glory which thou have given
me: They love (...) look, and I love they should do so, therefore let them look
^^eir fill.

Thirdly, The Saints shall be with Christ, not only as Spectators of ^^s Glory,
but as Blessed sharers and comportioners with him in Glory. though much of
their Happiness consist in sight, the Heavenly Visi^^ being beatifical, yet
that is not the whole of it; for there shall be ^uition as well as Vision; the
same God who does here implant his ^race in them, will hereafter put a Glory
upon them, Psalm. 84. ^he Lord God is a sun and shield, he will give grace and
glory, each in the ^ost proper place and season for it; Grace on Earth, and
Glory in ^eaven: Grace in their Minority, Glory when they come to their ^^ll
Age and Stature. Our Dear Lord Jesus was pleased to come from Heaven to Earth,
and from the Bosom of his Father, to a ^abernacling among men; and while here,
he was at vast cost and ^harges as to purchase a People for himself, so all
good for that People, which he does gradually impart to them now; and when he
^ath them with him in the Mansions above, he will fill their Trea^ures, and put
them into the actual and complete Possession of all that Good which he
purchased for them: He himself is at the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, and
they shall be at his; he overcame (...) is set down upon his Father's Throne;
and when they have ov^^^come, he will grant to them to sit down upon his
Throne, Revela^^^^ He will come at the last and great Day in his Glory, and
when he (...) appear, they shall appear with him in glory, Colos. 3. It does
not yet ^^^pear, what we shall be; but when he does appear we shall be like
him, (...) we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. He shall shine forth with
(...) bright and beautiful Rays as the Eternal Sun, and they as the Fir^^ment
and the Stars; yea, their vile Bodies, or Bodies of vilen^ shall be made like
unto Christ's most Glorious Body, Philip. 3. N^^ O Saints! It is the matter of
your grief and complaint, that (...) have so much corruption in you, and so
little of Christ, and that (...) are so unlike him; a Conformity to whose Image
you ought to stu^^ and were predestined to, Romans 8. But there you shall be as
like (...) as ever you can look, you shall be satisfied with his likeness,
Psalm^ so satisfied with it, as not to desire more of it than you shall ha^^
there your Conformity to him shall be perfect both in Grace and G^^ry. Thus
much concerning Paul's Judgment of the Future State^ Believers as to the Nature
of it, It will be a being with Christ.

Come we now in the second place, to consider his Judgment^ that State, as to
the Goodness and Excellency of it, and that you ha^^ in these words, it is far
better: It is better then; whenever a G^^cious and Holy Person makes his last
and great change, he make^ good one, he changes so much for the better, that
he will never (...) any reason to repent of it. I pray therefore do you
moderate yo^ Sorrow, whom God has deprived of such Relations, whose God^^ness
you have no cause to call in question; be you satisfied as to the^ do not mourn
over them: Weep if you please, for your selves a^^ for your Children, but not
for them, because they do not lose (...) Dying, they are not at all the worse
for Dying; All things work togeth^^ for good to them that love God, so Paul
tells us, Romans 8. Yea, (...) speaks of it as a thing well known; and Death
does so work as well as an^thing else; it works notably for them, it does them
a great deal of se^vice and kindness; it is good for them that they Dye; It is
expedie^^ for them that they go away. You would fain have had your near an^
dear Relations staid here yet longer, and Loved and Lived with yo^ yet longer:
And why so? That you might have been pleased an^ delighted, that they might
have been more helpful and comfortabl^ to you: But is that fit? God has the
numbers of our Months with him and he has appointed us our bounds which we
cannot pass; and mus^ God alter his Decrees, and add to those Months, and
remove those ^ounds for you? Must the Will of God be crossed for you? Must not
Heaven be filled for you? Must the Happiness and Perfection of the ^aints be
deferred and put off for you? Must they stand here, after ^hey are fully ripe
for Glory, merely that you might be gratified and humored; or if not done, you
break out into discontent? Know ^y Friend, whatever thy dark and melancholic
apprehensions are ^or the present, it is better as it is; and if thou did
better under^tand the mind and will of God in what he has done, thou would
be ^ore reconciled to it, whatever thou do think might have been ^he
comfortable fruits of thy Relation's longer continuance here; it (...) better
as it is, for certain it is better for her. So our Apostle ^^ought as to
himself, and so he tells us in the Text, to be with christ is ((...)) not only
better, but far better; ^mulio magis melius) much more better. He speaks as if
he wanted ^ords, and thought he could not speak enough; it is much, very ^uch
better; it is a great deal better; or, as one Learned Man renders (...), it is
( infinitis partibus melius) infinitely better. But here the Question will be.

Qu. Than what is it better?

An. To that I Answer thus; It is better than any State that a ^hristian can be
in on this side the Grave, and of Heaven: Take it in ^^ese two things.

1. Being with Christ in Heaven, is better than any state here, when it is as
good as the World can make it. 2. It is better than the best State here, when
it is as good as his Spiritual and Gospel Enjoyments can make it; when he has
both the Fatness of the Earth, and the Dew of Heaven too; when he has both the
Comforts of the Creature, and also the Smiles of God.
First, It is better to be with Christ in Heaven, than any State here (...)
this World, when it is as good as Earth can make it, and ^here is the ^^llest
confluence of Creature-delights. Suppose a Saint seated upon ^^e upper ground,
having his Belly filled with hid Treasures, and re^^esh'd with waters of a full
Cup, swimming in all manner of De^^ghts; the Envy of some, and the Admiration
of others: Suppose ^^m possessed of a plentiful Estate, and blessed with sweet and
dear Re^^tions; let him have the Honor of a Crown, with Mines of Gold and
Silver, and every thing here contributing to his delight: Suppose him a Person
of a most even Temper of mind, and a most athletick, sound, heal^hful
Constitution of Body; so that no unruly Passions do transport him, no
Sicknesses discompose him, no Racking and vexing pains disease him, no
unexpected disappointment of his hopes, nor unkind denial of his desires do
Fret and Torment him, no clouds at all do Obscure his Day, nor threaten him
with a Storm; but all is well within, and all Serene and Calm round about him.
In a word, He can with Esau say, I have enough, my Brother; because he has
Health and Ease, Peace and Prosperity, and indeed more than heart can wish; yet
I say, to be with Christ in Heaven, is better than all this for if Moses did
esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, what
is the Glory of Christ? What price and estimate will you set on that? If David
reckoned that a Day in these his lower and outer Courts, were better than a
Thousand elsewhere what then is it to enjoy an Eternity? A constant and
uninterrupted abode for ever in the Mansions above, the Habitation of his
Holiness and Glory: Without all peradventure, that is an ignorant and dross
Soul, which once imagines Earth to be better than Heaven; Creature^ in all
their Beauty, comparable to God and Christ.

Secondly, It is better to be with Christ in Heaven, than in an^ State to be
enjoyed here, though it be as good as Spiritual and Gosp^^ Enjoyments can make
it; and if any thing does make it good indeed, if any thing do render it
grateful and delicious to an Holy Soul, i^ is these things; these are the best
and sweetest of all his Enjoyments these the Cream, the Flower and
Quintescence; were it not for something of these, Earth would be an Hell to
him, yea and s^ would Heaven be too, Psalm 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but
the^ and there is none upon Earth that I desire beside thee. Let the Ark (which
was the Symbol of God's presence, and the place before which Israe^ was to
Worship) be taken by the Philistines; and the good Wife o^ Phinehas thought it
was not worth her while to outlive so great loss; but being told that a
man-child was born unto her, she calle^ it Ichabod, and said, the Glory is
departed from Israel, for the Ark o^ God is taken, and died presently. It is
the Gospel, and Communion with God in the ways of the Gospel, that an
Heaven-born So^^ does value a Nation by, and it self by; these are the things
in which he places his chief Joy, and from which he fetches his stronge^^ and
most sovereign Cordials: The good man tells us, Psalm 84.1^^ That He had rather
be a doorkeeper, (or as the Margin has it, chu^^ rather to sit at the
threshold) in the house of his God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness;
he had rather choose to pick up the Crumbs under Christ's Table, than to sit at
the upper end of the Creatures Board, when it is furnished with the choicest
Dainties: Where is the experienced Christian that does not find himself at a
loss for a word, when he undertakes to tell others what God has done for his
Soul? Who can express, with how much ravishing delight, he sits under the
shadow of Christ at an Ordinance, and how sweet his Food is to his Taste! How
he enjoys himself when he is led into the Banqueting House, and there has he
the Banner of his Savior's love spread over him? How greatly is he ravished
when there is Peace spoken to him ^n a Sermon; that passes not only all
expression, but likewise all understanding? How is he raised up to the highest
Admirings and praises, when Divine Love is shed abroad in his Heart by the Holy
Ghost; and an interest in Christ, and the Covenant, is Sealed to him ^t a
Sacrament? or when he finds his Sails (after he had lain for a ^ime Becalmed or
Wind-bound) filled with a fair or fresh Gale from ^he Spirit, or his Soul
enlarged in Duty, so as to run the way of the Commandments; and in its Holy
motions made like unto the Chari^ts of Amminadib. When the Spirit of God darts
into him Beams ^f light; and by them so irridiates his Graces, that he can see
them ^o be what indeed they are; and bears such a plain and full Testimo^y to
his filial Relation to God, as he thereby is imboldened to go to ^he Throne of
Grace, and Cry Abba Father: Then indeed is his ^oul satisfied as with marrow
and fatness; and then he does with Triumphs sing; The lines are fallen to me in
pleasant places, and I ^ave a Goodly heritage: Yet to be with Christ is far
better than all ^his; and that upon a Threefold account, viz.

Upon account of, 1. The Purity of that State. 2. The Perfection of that State.
3. The Immutability of that State.


First, The Future State, when the Saints shall be with Christ in ^eaven, will
be a Pure State. In this life when things are at the best ^here is a mixture;
there is no Saint that has so bright a Day, as that there is not in it
something of a Cloud: He that is washed in ^he fountain opened for Sin and for
Uncleanness, and has made it ^he great part of his business to cleanse himself
from all filthiness ^oth of Flesh and Spirit: will upon a review, find there is
still need of washing his Feet: He is indeed made light in the Lord, and b^
shines before men; yet when his Candle burns most bright, it stand in need of
snuffing: Suppose him to be truly Gracious, yea eminently so; there have been
upon him plentiful effusions of the Spirit and out of the fullness of Christ he
has received Grace, yea Grace for Grace; yet after all this, there is in him
Corruption as well a^ Grace, Dross as well as Gold, and Flesh as well as
Spirit. The Apostle Paul, as far advanced as he was toward Heaven and Glor^
could not for his heart suppress his Complaints and Groans; bu^ must give
himself a little ease by uttering them, and telling God an^ Man, what to his
pain and sorrow he felt within, viz. A Law i^ his Members warring against the
Law in his Mind; which was (...) powerful as to be often prevalent, and bring
him into Captivity (...) the Law of Sin and Death, which was in his Members;
and he could not choose but in a pang of desire call and cry out for
deliverance, (...) a poor Gally-Slave would from his Chain and Oar, Romans 7.
(...) O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of the
death! They that have the Comeliness of Christ put upon them, an^ not without
something of their own Deformities; and may in the case say, as the Spouse did
in another, I am comely and black to^ comely as the Curtains of Solomon, yet
black as the Tents of Ked^^ And Oh! How do the thoughts and consideration
hereof ma^^ them ashamed and blush to lift up their faces toward God: But
(...) the Future State, they will be clean every whit, and without Spot, (...)
Blemish, or Wrinkle, or any such thing. Then there will be in the^ nothing to
offend God; nothing to offend themselves; nothing the shall be a cause of
displeasure to God, or of grief to them; nothin^ that shall fully their beauty,
or eclipse their light; nothing that sha^^ disturb their pleasant rest, or
retard their Holy motions: The Inh^^bitant shall not say, I am Sick, nor shall
he say, I am sinful; He sha^^ neither be Sick of Love, as the enamoured Spouse
was, nor Sick of Si^ as the humble and brokenhearted Penitent is. It is in
that Stat^ in which the Church and her Children shall be Clear and Glorious
(...) the Sun; here they are, and while here, they will be but as the Moon with
their Spots; which yet they are not, as some, proud o^

Secondly, That Future State in which the Saints shall be wit^ Christ, is a
Perfect State: Whatever some deluded Souls have an^ do fancy to themselves in
this World, there is no such thing as pe^^fection to be attained to here; tho
that be not above the desire an^ hope of the Babes in Christ, the meanest and
weakest Saints; yet i^ is out of the reach of the tallest, and best grown, and
improved Saints while here: It is the mark that they have in their eye and aim,
and at which they level; but when they have done their best, the best of them
do while here, shoot short, they cannot hit it; and while they are thankful for
seize, they must own and acknowledge defects and wants: There is a
dimness in their eyes, and so their ^nowledge is imperfect; there is a weakness
in their hearts, and so their Graces are imperfect; as a child, so they are
perfect as to parts, but not as to degrees; there is something lacking in their
Faith, and in their Love, and in every Grace: They are progressive in their
motions, going on and on every day, and from strength to strength, and yet at
the end of every day they find that they have further to go, and therefore had
need to gird up the loins of their mind; growth is the con^tant duty and
business of a Christi^n: That precept, 2 Pet. 3. Grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, does oblige the Saints as long
as they live; there is none here can say, ^hey are got from under the authority
and binding power of that Command; and therefore none here have arrived at the
measure of their stature: You know Paul had got much, he came not behind the
chiefest Apostles, yet he had not enough, nor was he satisfied; and what was
his cas^, is also the case of all the Saints while on this side of Heaven: Yea,
and observe this, you will find it always true, those of them that be the most
Holy, are the most humble and hungry; those that have most Knowledge, and most
of the Spirit, are of all others least in their own eyes, and furthest from
dreaming of a present Perfection; they are most free to own it, that they have
not already attained, and that they are not already perfect, Philip. 3, 12. But
what was their desire here, shall be their delight there; and all that which
they hoped for here, they shall enjoy there; they shall see Christ as he is;
clearly, immediately, face to face, as fully as humane Nature is capable of
seeing him; and there they shall be like him, as like him as they would be; for
a perfect Vision of him will produce a perfect assimilation to him: There it is
that God does fill his Peoples Treasures; and because he deals so bountifully
with them, there their Souls will enjoy a completeness of Rest; there it is
that they will for ever take up, because there is ( a n^ plus nultra) no
further they have to go, no higher that they can aspire.

Thirdly, The Future State in which the Saints shall be with Christ, shall be
for ever unalterable. Here, alas! There is very little of a consistency, the
best of men are subject to vicissitudes and changes: David indeed said, My
heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; but notwithstanding his fixedness, he
had his fluctuatings. Neither he nor his house was as a Morning without Clouds,
or the clear Sunshine. God lifted him up, and again cast him down; sometimes
he was in the heights, and sometimes in the deep, Psalm. 130.1. Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord. Here they are Travelers, and but in the
Wilderness, and therefore none have cause to wonder that they are frequently at
a loss; now for this, anon for that. How often do they find changes within
them; their hearts are not always in the same frame now lively, anon dead and
dull; now enlarged, anon straightened* now full of Faith, anon full of fears; now
they mount up with wing^ as Eagles, anon they lie like Logs, or creep like
Snails; and at other times they find a change upon them; their Bottle is empty,
and their ways bedged up with Thorns. Many, very many of these Changes are for
the worse, so that sometimes they are brought to a great loss, not knowing
themselves, nor state, but ready to conclude themselves a company of
Hypocrites. Their day is clouded, and the^^ Evidences blurred, and their Peace
broken. God withdraws the Beams that sometimes he darted in upon them, and
instead of chearing Smiles, they see nothing but angry and terrible Frowns. H^
withholds those gracious Assistances, that sometimes he was please^ to afford
them, and now they are so troubled, that they cannot spea^ as they should, nor
hear, nor pray, nor meditate as they should; the^ cannot do any thing that they
can savor, nor taste any sweetness i^ the Ordinances they attend; are as the
white of an Egg, and the Duties they perform, are to them Abomnination. From
the forme^ they go away disappointed, from the latter ashamed, and from both
disconsolated, and possibly under a Temptation of throwing of all. But in the
future state, there shall be none of this; no such afflictive Changes, there
shall be no Soul-sickness, no spiritual Infirmity or Weakness, no indisposition
of Mind, no angry hidings o^ God's part, no vexatious disturbances, no Weight
to depress, no Sin to beset, no Devil to assault; his Arm is neither long
enough, nor strong enough to through one fiery Dart among that blessed and
peaceful Company; the old Serpent cannot wriggle himself into that Paradise of
God. He that would not stay there to be happy* shall not return thither to be
troublesome; there shall be nothing to defile them, nothing to offend them.
They shall be always with the Lord, and always fit to be with him; always
singing Allelujahs, having their Souls ever in tune; some do conceive that
there shall be ^^ntinual Additions to their knowledge, tho never any want, yet
an ^^arging of their Capacities, and at the same instant a filling of ^^em too.
I do not contradict that Notion, nor will I dispute it, it (...) pleasant, the
day will declare it; but whatever further Additions ^ere may be, it is certain,
there shall be no Diminution, they shall ^^ld fast what they have. Their Sun
shall not go one degree back^ard, but being come to its Zenith, it shall
continue; and of that ^nowledge, and Happiness, and Glory, of which they are
there ^ade partakers, they shall lose none, but be so far immovable, as ^^lars
in the House of God, in a fixed and permanent Condition. So ^^ve I given you up
my thoughts concerning Paul's Judgment about ^^e Saints future State in the
other World, which is a being with ^^rist, and far better that the best Estate
they are, or can be in, on ^^s side of it.

We now proceed to consider the second thing observable in the ^^xt, that is,
the stirring or working of his Will and Affections in a ^^et Correspondency
with his Judgment; and this working of them ^s in a way of desire, Having a
desire to depart. As when good old ^^eon had seen God's Salvation, and got
Christ in his Arms, he said, ^^w, Lord, let thou thy servant depart in
peace. So did Paul here, ^^ing looked within the Vail, and seen something of
that which ^^d had there prepared for them that love him, He had a desire to
^^art. From whence, by the way, it will be worth our while to ob^^^ve this.

That Paul's Desires were, and so ours should be, under the com^^nd and conduct
of Reason: We should be rational in our affecti^^, and in our actions: He was
for that which was better; the ^^at and joint Cry of the many, was, Who will
show us any good? (...). 4. So that if it be good, let us have it, though it be
an infe^^^r good, an unsatisfying good; though it be a fading and transito^^
good. But a gracious Soul, who has been taught of God, ^^^^ghs, considers, and
compares things, and measures out his affe^^^ons to them, according to that
degree of Goodness which is in (...). Upon less and lower goods, he bestows a
smaller love, con^^ding wisely, That is enough for them, as much as they
deserve; (...) so his endeavor is to maintain, and to carry toward them with
(...) indifferency of Spirit, according to that Command, 1 Cor. 7. ^ 30. Let
them that have wives, be as though they had none, and they (...) weep, as
though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they ^^^iced not; and
they that buy, as though they possessed not. And then they bestow a greater
Love upon a better Good; and the deare^^ Love upon the best and highest Good.
It is good to have Communi^on with the Saints upon earth; and I love that,
says David, Psalm. 16* O Lord, my goodness extends not to thee, but to the
Saints, those excelle^^ ones, in whom is all my delight. He had a love of
Benevolence for others, but a love of Complacency for these: Upon others he
b^^stowed his Pity, upon these only he placed his delight. It is bett^^ to draw
nigh to God, and to have fellowship with him in Ordina^^ces: And David was more
pleased with that, Psalm. 27.4. One thi^^ have I desired of the Lord, that will
I seek after, that I may dwell in (...) house of the Lord all the days of my
life, to behold the beauty of the Lo^^ and to enquire in his Temple. He loved
the Habitation of God's House and the place where his Honor dwelt; but of all
things it is best (...) be in Heaven: It is better to be with him there, than
to be with (...) people here; better to see him face to face there, than to see
him the glass of Ordinances here; and therefore, says our Apostle, have a
desire to depart; a strong, ardent, and impetuous desire; I^ almost long to be
gone; were there not one thing in the way, I co^^^ be impatient of any
continuance here, in this dirty world.

Having a desire, (...); to depart; the Original Wo^^ has diverse
significations, and accordingly is diversely rendered; (...) it signifies to be
dissolved, or resolved; which is done when thi^ mixed or compounded, are
separated and divided into the seve^ principles or parts of which it did
consist. Man is the compou^^ made up of a Spiritual and Terrene part, the Soul
and the Body; (...) Death these two are divided, the Soul and Body are parted
the (...) from the other.

Again; the Word does signify to depart; so by our Learned Tr^^^slators it is
rendered in the Text. I have so long had mine abode h^^ and truly to me it seems
full long enough: I can very willingly move to another and better Country: I
am with all my heart rea^^ to take my leave of Persons and Things here: I wait
but for (...) word of Command, and so will draw up mine anchor, and lo^^ from
hence, I will hoise up and spread my Sails, and with all poss^^ speed make
toward another Port, that Haven of Peace and R^^^ which lies in the uppermost
Region.

Once more; This word signifies to return; and so, as some the Learned
conceive, Paul does here refer to that passage of S^^mon, in Eccles. 12.7. The
body returns to dust, and the spirit to God (...) gave it. If you please, we
will conjoin all these, and you may (...) ^ake them together. I know there will
be a Dissolution; my Soul and ^ody, which like two loving Friends have lived so
long together, and ^^ken part one with another in Weal and Woe, in Joy and
Sorrow, ^ust one day be parted; that knot which now most strictly holds ^^em
together, must be untied; and I am not in the least troubled at ^^at
Dissolution, since I am fully assured, That it will be followed ^^th a closer
Union, and fuller Communion between Christ and me. When once I have dropped this
mantle of Flesh, I shall be taken up to ^^e Father of Spirits. I know that I
must go from hence; this world (...) not my last home, nor the place of my
constant abode. I am but a ^^lgrim and Stranger here, as all my Fathers were;
and I am ready (...) be gone, so soon as the Messenger comes, that shall be
sent for me. (...) us pleased with the thoughts of my Journey, because it is
but a de^^rture from Earth to Heaven; from Friends, to a God; from poor ^^^^nty
and leaking Cisterns, to the Fountain of Being, the Spring^ead of Comfort, the
Infinite Ocean of all Delights. I must return; was sent by my great Creator to
act my part in the world; and ^^en that is done, and my time is spent, I must
go to him, to give (...) account how my time has been improved, and how my
part has ^^en acted. I must go from whence at first I came, and I am heartily
(...) of it, for then it will be better with me than it is (...): I care not
how soon, for the sooner the better; for ^^ough my body must be laid up in a
dark and lonely Grave, (...) there putrify and become meat for worms, and be
crumbled into (...), and so continue (for ought I know) hundreds of years; yet
(...) Spirit, my precious and Immortal Soul, shall return to God that ^^de it,
by whom it shall be graciously received, and welcomed, and ^^th whom it is best
to be. This was that which he desired. And here ^ould have you exercise your
Thoughts and Meditations, upon that ^^pression of his, I desire it; and shall I
offer you mine, which may lord you some Light and Assistance: Let us see
whether there be (...) something of Greatness in it; whether it be not a lofty
strain, (...) a pitch as every man cannot fly; no, not every Good man. (...)
so take these Three Things with you; 1. He does not speak of a bare Submission
in the case; nor, 2. Of being only contented to depart: But, 3. Of a Desire he
had to it.


First, He does not say, I submit to the will of God herein. If he ^ease to
call me away, and will not allow me a longer continuance ^^re, I submit, He
shall dispose of me. This indeed is unquestionably our duty, as in all other
things, so particularly in this. It is (...) revealed will of God, that all the
living shall die, only some (...) excepted, and those that shall be alive when
the Lord shall descend fr^^ Heaven with a shout, with the voice of an
Archangel, and with the tru^^ of God, shall not sleep but be changed, and
caught up into the cloud^ meet the Lord in the air, and so they shall ever be
with the Lord. 1 (...) 4.16, 17. Otherwise it is appointed for all once to die.
This is (...) Divine appointment, the standing and unrepealable Law of H^^^ven,
that all those who inhabit these houses of clay must go out them, and put off
these Tabernacles; and we must submit, we ou^^^ to do it; the will of God (who
is the supreme Governor and Le^^^slator) is to be the commanding and ruling
Law, and therefore th^^ must be no quarrel nor disputes, but yielding when
death knock^ our doors, and summons us: Whatsoever agonies and strugling^ in
nature at the time of dissolution, there must be no rebellion (...) our wills.
And such ought to be the frame and temper of our So^^ when it is the good
pleasure of God to make breaches in our Fa^^^lies, and to take away from us our
dearest and most desirable R^^^tions; a Child out of the arms of its Mother, an
affectionate (...) out of the bosom of her Husband. Though you greatly
delighte^ their company, and would have been very thankful if the threa^ their
lives had been spun to a greater length, yet when the wi^^ (...) God is made
known, and their time is come, you ought to stoop^ God: While the Child was
sick, David besought God, fasted, (...) lay all night upon the Earth, neither
would he eat bread, but w^^^ he heard it was dead, he rose from the earth,
washed and anoin^ himself, and changed his apparel, went into the house of God,
(...) worshipped, then to his own house, and did eat bread, 2 Samuel ^ In
dispensations of this kind there must be no discontent, no ri^^^^ and Swellings
of heart, no tearing your selves in your anger, no ^^^ing the reins upon your
passions, no extravagant expressions, no ^^^cessive sorrows, for even in that
there is a spice of rebellion; and such a time God in a special manner has his
eye upon you, and (...) very curiously observe you throughout, not only your
outward ^^^^portment, words and gestures, but also the inward frame of (...)
hearts; what order is there, and whether your Souls keep sile^^^ before him.
And if you will be unruly, as Bullocks unaccustomed the yoke, sinning in your
sorrow, and kicking at the hand (...) smites and wounds you, you may hear of it
afterward, and fee^ to your cost, for God does know how to repeat his blows,
and ^ultiply your wounds, and make deeper ones than he has yet done. therefore
it is your wisdom to submit to God, and hold your peace, ^ Aaron did when God
destroyed his two Sons with a most tremen^ous stroke in the very act of their
sin. This then is your duty, wis^om and interest; an humble yielding to God
does nearly concern ^^d highly become you. But holy Paul did not stop here. It
is not a ^^re submission that he speaks of, without all peradventure he was
^^me up to this; but then he went beyond it. Nay more,

Secondly, Paul does not say say here, I am contented to depart. It (...) true,
he tells us in this very Epistle, Phil. 4.11. That he had ^^arned in whatsoever
state he was, therewith to be content; and it must (...) granted that is a
great and excellent Lesson, and we should all of (...) beg of God that he would
teach it us, and be our selves studying ^^d conning of it. And they are all
very happy Men and Women, ^ho have taken it out, as Paul has done, for therein
they have ^^cured themselves from those inward Gripes and Convulsions with
which others are tortured, and have admirably provided for a com^^rtable
Enjoyment of themselves, whatever Changes and Afflictions ^^ey may meet with in
their passage through the World. We should (...) pray and labor, that we may
be brought to such a pass, as to (...) able to say, Here I am, let the Lord do
to me, and with me, what ^^meth good in his sight. If he does not see fit to
bring my Condition (...) to my Spirit, I will make it my endeavor to bring my
Spirit own to my Condition. I could indeed be glad to have a larger ^are in the
comforts of the Creatures, that so I might be the more ^ee from those
solicitous Thoughts and carking Cares that now (...) much oppress me. I could
be glad to enjoy a greater fullness, and (...) be placed in an higher Orb and
Sphere of Activity, that thereby I ^^ight be put into a better capacity of
being useful and serviceable in ^y Generation; but if my God will have me mean,
and low, and ^oor, I am content to be so, for he best understands my Temper,
^^d my Distempers; what will be my Advantage, and what my ^rejudice; what Sail
I can best bear, and what Condition I can best ^anage, therefore he shall choose
for me. I could be glad to live yet ^^nger in the World, and so see the good of
his chosen, and the ^eace of Jerusalem, and my Family comfortably provided for,
and ^y Children all brought home to God, disposed of in the World, and happily
settled; but if God will shorten my days, and cut asun^er the Thread of my Life,
before these things be effected; if God will have me to dye shortly, and so
break off the purposes of my heart, I am content. I will live at his ordering,
and I will dye t^ at his ordering. He knows what is best, and therefore what
(...) does, I will count so; whatsoever pleases him, shall please me, (...)
for no other reason, yet for this, Because it pleases him. But the great Man
Paul did not take up here neither. For,

Thirdly, He says, He had a desire to depart, or to be dissolve* What others
do fly from, his Soul did work out to, as a desirable O^^ject. What! barely to
submit to a departure, merely to be conte^^ed with it, is too low, and too
little. It would be a dishonor (...) God; if there were that, and no more, it
would be a disparagem^ to Heaven, and a base unworthy casting of Dirt and
Reproach (...) the Face of that Glory which is above; it would give People ca^^
to think the state of Saints in Heaven is no better than their (...) here; nay,
that it is not altogether so good; and of this our Apos^^^ would by no means be
guilty. Content to depart! yes, that I am, and abundantly satisfied about it,
that I do desire it. I long to have (...) Summons, Oh! when will that day come
that will close mine E^^ and on which Angels will come to carry my aspiring
Soul into (...) bosom of Abraham! I was once in Paradise in the third Heaven,
(...) what I saw, did so delight me, that I long to be there again, to (...)
fixed there, and there to take up my eternal abode; when, (...) when will it be
that my Father will send for me home, (...). I have an ardent and flaming
desire to depart. I stand upon Tiptoes, and am reaching out unto that state.
Never did Boy School more long to break up, and go to his Mother, than I do to
(...) to my God and Savior. Never did Bride or Bridegroom more (...) for their
Wedding Day, than I do for my Dying-day. These wo^ in the Original do, as
Learned Zanchy observes, signify more (...) barely to desire; for simply to
desire, may amount to no more than (...) a sudden Mot^on, a transient Flash, a
momentary Passion, which (...) Iona's Gourd, starts up on a sudden, and does as
quickly van^ Whereas, when the Apostle says, Having a desire, he does plai^
intimate to us, both the vehemence and permanency of the thi^ that his Soul
stood that way, it was immovably set for a Depart^^^ His desire was such, as
had a great strength and ardour in it, (...) which would last, and not abate
any thing until it was accomplish^^ I desire to depart, and shall go on to
desire it, until that wished-(...) day comes, in which I shall actually go; till
my Soul be set at liber^^ and upon its flight under the heavenly Convoy, to
that blissful pla^^ where my Lord and Savior is. So I have finished the second
th^^ observable in the Text. We now come to the third, which there in^^ed
obtains the first place, viz.

The strait in which at this time our Apostle found himself, (...). I am in a
strait betwixt two. The word, according to (...) Critics, signifies such a
straitning as is that of a City, when it is ^^sely besieged by a strong and
vigilant Enemy; so that there is no ^^tting out, nor coming in; such a
perplexity of mind as that a man ^^at an utter loss, not knowing what to do,
nor which way to turn (...). This was Paul's case, unto this loss was he
brought: He had two ^^ings before him, one of which must of necessity be, but
which of ^^em, considering his Circumstances, he should make choice of, he ^^d
not know. He was in a kind of AEquilibrium, the Scales did hang ^^en, and he
could not tell to which side he should incline.

Quest. But here it may be asked, How came this to pass? What ac^unt is to be
given hereof? Or what was it that did thus puzzle the ^^ostle, and reduce him
to so great a strait? Unto this I shall answer, ^st, Negatively; and then
Affirmatively. First, Negatively, and (...) in these three things.

First, Paul was not brought into a strait by the forethought of these ^^ins
and Agonies which dying Persons feel; those great difficulties there (...) in
shooting the Gulf. It is very hard and tedious for some to un^ess in the
Evening of their day, the Garment of Flesh goes hardly (...). The pangs of
Death are many and great in some poor Creatures. ^s true, it is not so in all;
there are those to whom an easy and com^^^table passage is granted: there are
no bonds in their death; they pass ^ough their day with a great deal of
comfort, and at night are ^ought to bed with a great deal of ease; they have
not any violent ^rows, nor strong Convulsions, nor mighty Wrestlings, but they
(...) away in a Sleep, and sweetly breathe out their precious and pre^^red
Souls into the Arms of God, the Bosom of Jesus, that Bed of ^ices, and pleasant
resting place. But it is not thus in all, no, no, (...) to some, yea, to many,
death comes like its self, a King of Terrors, ^^th a most grim and ghastly
countenance, handling them roughly, (...) the great affliction of the
Relations, who are forced to with^^aw, as unable to bear so dismal a sight; and
to the astonishment of (...)-standers, who cannot give the Narrative of it unto
others, with^^t mingling it with Sighs and Tears. How hard a matter do some ^or
Creatures find it to dye? Fain they would, but cannot: How ^^ng are they about
the work, before they can dispatch and finish (...)? How many a Sigh is fetched,
and Groan is spent, before they can send forth the last breath? Specially they
find it difficult to dye, (...) are called out to suffer Martyrdom; those who
are slain for (...) Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, which they hold,
(...) have felt the very worst that Death could do, the utmost of (...) Rage
and Fury, being put to the most exquisite Tortures that (...) Wit and Malice of
enraged Enemies, assisted by Hell its self, co^ possibly invent. Some being put
upon the Rack, where all their Bo^^ have been dislocated; and others upon the
Wheel, where all the Bones have been broken; and others made a Burnt-Sacrifice,
bei^^ committed to the fury of merciless Flames, and gradually consum^ in a
slow Fire, and at last reduced to Ashes; which human Nat^ could not have born
with that invincible Patience which they expre^^ had they not been supported by
the Divine Power, and had preci^^ Cordials given them by the Invisible and
Gracious Hand of the (...) Com^orter, which our dear Lord Jesus promised to
send his Chur^^ and People, that he might be with them; and who being a Spirit^
Wisdom and Love, will not fail to afford them the most Sovere^ refreshings, in
the time of their most pressing necessities. But the dying agonies did not move
Paul; we do not find him concer^ about them: As he made it his great desire to
live as God wo^ have him, holily, exemplarily and fruitfully, fighting the good
fig^ and keeping the Faith; so he was free to dye as God would h^^ him. That
God who did order and cut out the work of his (...) should choose the kind and
manner of his Death. I have indeed hea^^ some truly Gracious Persons say, They
were not afraid to be de^ because sure of an Eternal Happiness in the other
world; have their Evidences for Heaven so fairly written, that they could (...)
and read them; but for all that, they were afraid to dye, because the
difficulty of the passage: So was not Paul; for he did not at^ doubt of his
Care and Goodness, who having loved his own, lov^ them to the end, and in it
too. He did not in the least question, (...) the same God who was with him in
the Work of his Ministry, and the way he did take, would never leave him nor
forsake him, (...) be also with him in the valley of the shadow of death; and
therefore (...) there, he would fear no evil.

Secondly, Paul was not in any strait upon the account of any unce^^tainty
about his future State, not knowing what would become of hi^ or where his lines
would be cast next, or whither he should go a^t^^ Death. He was a wiser man
than not to secure (as the Proverb (...) the main chance; and I heartily wish
there were more of that (...) Wisdom to be found among the Children of Men; and
that they ^^uld live less for time, and more for Eternity. As for mine own
(...), it is to me no matter of wonder that some wicked men are said to dye; I
rather wonder, that any of them are not. Such as ^e lived all their days in a
total Neglect of God, and Disobedi^^ce to his known Law, and the commission of
Sin with greediness; (...) whom there is-left nothing, but a fearful
expectation of Fiery ^ignation, that shall devour them: they are many of them
self-^^ndemned, and what can they look for but a like sentence from the ^ream
Judge? if conscience within cast them as a company of Per^s worthy of Death,
and fit Fuel for the burning, they may well ^nclude the same from him who is
greater than Conscience, and ^oweth all things: Nor do I think it strange, that
some good men (...) unwilling to die, those I mean who are clouded and
benighted, ^^d in the Dark about their spiritual State, know not what to make
(...) themselves, but want their evidences for Heaven and Glory; ei^^^r never
knew they had any, or now they are so blur'd and blot^, they cannot read them;
they dare not go to God as their Fa^r; nor look to, and lay hold on Jesus as
one that loved them, and ^ve himself for them, and washed them in his Blood;
they are not ^e to fix the Anchor of their hope within the vail. How can he be
^ling to go, that knows not whither he goes? Such do understand ^ething of
Heaven and Hell, and consider what it is to lie in the bo^ of Abraham, and what
in a Bed of Flames; what to be satisfied ^h the love of God, and what to be
tormented with the divine Fu(...) what to sing Allelujah with Saints, and what
to roar with De(...). They consider the length of Eternity, what it is to enter
into (...) immutable State, and they cannot possibly be reconciled to Death,
(...) they know it will do them a kindness; they cannot be willing to (...)
with it, till they know it will carry them to a comfortable place (...) Rest
and Happiness. Would you be delivered from the fear of ^eath? Would you be able
to bid it welcome, and Triumph over (...) Then clear up your Evidences, that
you are turned from Darkness (...) Light, and from the power of Satan to God;
and that having ^en indeed born of the Spirit, and made Partakers of Grace, you
^^e likewise the Heirs of Glory; for they must of necessity be in a ^eadful
agony of Soul, who see and feel they must die, their Flesh ^nsumes, and their
Strength fails, and they have much ado to fetch ^eir Breath; they must die,
that Desease will carry them off; but (...) the same time they conclude, at
least, greatly fear they shall be damned, as well as die, and go down not only
into the Grave, (...) into the bottomless Pit, from which there is no
Redemption.

But this was none of Paul's case: He had been wiser for hims^^^ and God had
been better to him than that his great concern sho^^^ be so uncertain. He knew
that since to him to live had been Christ, (...) die would be gain; this he had
told the Philippians but a little be^^he did in the Text mention this his
strait. He also tells us in 2 Cor. (...) That he knew that if our earthly house
of this Tabernacle were dissol^^ we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal (...) Heavens. He should change a sorry Cottage for a
Glorious Pal^ And he also knew, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. That having fought a good fight,
(...) finished his course, and kept the faith, there was laid up for him a
(...) of righteousness, which he was sure God the righteous Judge would give
(...) at that day. All was safe, and he was sure, knowing whom he (...)
believed; and that he was able to keep that which he had comm^^ to him. And Oh
that all that read this Sermon would be persw^^ to bestow their care and pains
this way; give all diligence to (...) your Calling and Election sure, and by
your present faith and (...)ness, your humble, close and exemplary walking, so
order things that the testimony of your Consciences may be the matter of (...)
present rejoicing, and when you come to die you may be at no^ about it, but
ready at a call, counting the day of your death be^^ than the day of your
birth, and so going with gladness out of (...) world, into which you came
crying.

Thirdly, Paul was not brought into this strait by any jealousy (...)spicion
that he should lose by the change, and be a sufferer by his de^^^ture from
hence. He had no such thoughts as these, that it wo^^^ make more for his
interest to continue where he was; or that the^ move which he was to make at
death, would be to a more uncom^^^^table place; he had felt the burden of sin,
and met with the unk^^^^ness of the world, and had a great deal of hard usage.
He (...) that at death he should go not out of an Egypt into a Wilderness, out
of an howling Wilderness, and from among beasts of prey in^^ Canaan flowing
with what is inconceivably better than milk and (...)ney. Death indeed will be
to the detriment and prejudice of all (...) wicked of the world, profligate and
profane wretches, unsound (...) rotten hypocrites, lifeless formalists, who
having a form of go^^^ness deny the power thereof. It is highly desirable for
them to (...)tinue here; because whenever they die, dying what now they (...)
they are utterly undone. Many of them now have high places, (...) ^^t honor,
and plentiful estates, they are the worlds darlings, ^dled upon her knee: but
when once they die, they lose all: they (...) it behind, and carry nothing with
them but sin and guilt. Death (...) it comes, strips them to the skin; as they
came into the world, ^hey must go out naked; and there will be no merciful
compassi^^^te hand found to clothe them in the next. Here the rich Glutton
(...) deliciously every day, and had doubtless his bottles of wine, it (...) be
his Healths and Hazza's too; but in the next World, he ^^d not by all his
entreaties obtain of Father Abraham one drop of (...) for the cooling of his
tongue, though he was grievously Tor^ted in Flames. But though wicked men lose
all by dying, Paul (...) sure he should lose nothing; for he had told us
before, that to (...) to dye was gain; no loss at all, but great gain; it was a
very (...) bargain he should make; and in the Text he tells us, that to ^ith
Christ is far better; this he knew, he was sure of it, he had (...) the least
doubt in the case; he was sure he could leave nothing so (...) behind him, but
that he saw those things before him that were (...): What loss was it to Elijah
to drop his Mantle, as he was ^^nding and mounting to Heaven? Where he should
at his first en^ce be clothed with a Robe of Glory: God does by Converting ^ce
call his Elect and chosen people out of the world, so that the (...) knows them
not, owns them not, but hates and persecutes them, (...) they lose nothing by
it, for then he calls them out of darkness in^is mavelous light; then he
calls them unto his Kingdom and Glory. (...) does at death call them to come up
to another place, come up (...). He sends for them from all their beloved
Friends and Relati^here, from all their comfortable possessions and enjoyments,
so (...) these places shall know them no more; but then he calls them (...) the
Church militant, where they are often put upon hard service, (...) have their
conflicts and wounds, to the Church Triumphant, where (...) shall have their
Palms, and Thrones, and Songs of Praise. He (...) them from waiting at the
Posts of his door, and sitting at his ^^shold, to a lying in the Bosom of his
Everlasting Love: So that (...) can in none of these things find what we are
enquiring after, viz. (...) thing which had put this Holy man into a strait:
What then was it? ^^swer.

^ourthly, and Affirmatively, thus, The Apostle had two things be(...) him, two
Interests in his eye; and for each of them there were (...) strong and weighty
Arguments; by means of which, he was (...) a Needle between two Load Stones,
and by them drawn first one way, and then another: so that as he had said in
the forego^^^ Verse, Which of them he should choose, he wot not. If you ask,
W^^^ these two things were, you will easily understand by consulting (...)
context, take it thus: One thing was Dying, and thereupon a go^^^ to Christ,
and being with him, which he knew would be gain to (...) the other was an
abiding here, and continuing yet longer in (...) Flesh to attend upon his
Office as an Apostle and Servant of Je^^^ Christ, and to engage yet further in
the work of the Gospel; w^^^ he knew would through a concurrence of the Divine
Spirit and ^^^sing turn to the gain and advantage of the Church, by bringing in
(...) that were without, to the acceptance and obedience of Faith; (...) also
by strengthening, comforting, establishing and building up (...) higher in
Knowledge and Grace, those that had been alre^^ brought in. Now these two
things, the Apostle does according (...) the Wisdom and Grace given him of God,
compare togerher (...) one Scale of the Balance he laid his own Gain and
particular Adv^^^tage, which would be the infallible and immediate consequence
(...) his Death: In the other Scale of the Balance, he laid the Chur^^^ gain,
which he rationally concluded would be the desirable and ^^^py effect of his
Life and Ministerial Labors; and in his judg^^^ the Scales did hang even, so
even, that if a liberty of Elect^^^ Choice should by God be granted to him, he
should be at a very (...) loss, not well knowing to which side he should
incline, whi^^^ these two he should choose. And thus, good man, he was as a
p^^^prest and straightened between two things, and two affections co^^^ry the one
to the other: Namely, a desire of being present with (...) Lord, though absent
from the Brethren; and a desire of being ^^^sent with the Brethren, and helpful
to them; though in order the^^^ to, he must consent to a being for a time
absent from the Lord. (...) this case he scarce knew what to do: That ardent
and im^^^ Love which he did bear unto the Lord Jesus Christ, would pu^ upon
choosing and desiring a departure hence; for where the ca^^ is, there would the
Eagles be: and where Christ is, there would ^ Christian be: That principle of
levity which is in the spark, (...) not more naturally carry it upward, than a
principle of sa^^ Grace in the heart of a Believer does carry him out in
earnest d^^^ and longings to be with Christ: But then again, That sincere (...)
very great Love which he had to the Brethren, did produce in (...) an humble
and holy willingness to continue yet longer here: He (...) desirous to dye,
that he might enjoy Christ; but he had learned t^ (...) himself for the sake of
the Brethren. These two things had ^^ch weight and worth in themselves, and
such an influence and pow^^ upon him, that he was divided in himself, and knew
not well upon which he should fix his choice: Upon the consideration hereof, I
find ^e Learned Zanchy breaking out into this pathetical and admiring
^xclamation, O cor vere Apostolicum, in quo and Dei and proximi perfecta
vi^^bat dilectio: O Heart truly Apostolical, worthy of so excellent a ^aint, so
great a man as Paul, highly becoming so eminent an ^fficer, as an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, in which there was such a ^^re and vehement Flame, both to God
and to his Neighbor! ^^ere was indeed the Spirit of a Saint; here was a
Christian in his ^eauty and Glory; here was Love doing its perfect work, both
^ward Christ and to his Interest; toward first the Person of Christ, whom it
longs to embrace and enjoy; and toward the people ^f Christ, whom it is also
free to serve. Thus have I done with the ^ird and last thing in the Text, viz.
the Strait in which Paul was, and how he came to be brought into it; wherein
there is an evident ^^scovery of the excellency and nobleness of this great
man's Spirit: ^ut he was enlarged and set at liberty again, as you find in the
two ^erses immediately fellowing the Text, Nevertheless to abide in the ^^sh is
more needful for you; and having confidence, I know that I shall ^^ide and
continue with you all, for your furtherance and joy of Faith; ^^at your
rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me, by my ^^ming to you
again. This he knew would be, and so long as it was ^^r the Glory of God and
their good, he was very well pleased: ^^ne request indeed he had to make to
them, that while he continued among them, he might live comfortably among them;
that they ^ould not be his Grief, but Joy, while they prectice what he
^reached, and lived up to the Mysteries he revealed, and those ex^ellent Rules
he laid down, Verse 27. Only let your conversation (...), as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ. Thus have I with all the conveni^nt speed I could make, run
through those things which are con^^ained in this Scripture, and endeavored in
an expository way to ^xplain and open them to you. The only thing which
according ^o promise at our entrance into this Discourse, does remain ^urther
^o be done, is to draw up some Doctrinal conclusions from the ^hole, and
present them to you, which I shall with God's Assistance ^o, and in few words
dispatch every one of them, leaving you to ^nlarge upon them in your own
Meditations, and commending both them and you to the Divine Blessing for
improvement.

First, observe from these words, that Death is a departure, or going from
hence; Here you are now, and some of you have been so a long while, s^ long as
that others are weary of you, and possibly you are weary o^ the World, but you
will not be here always; there is a day comin^ which will be your last day
here, and there is not one of you can te^^ when that day shall come. In the
Morning the Sun arose upon S^^^dom, in all his Beauty and Splendour; but before
Night the City with all its Inhabitants were made a Sacrifice to
revenging-Justice and burnt to Ashes. How many Young ones are taken from us on
(...) sudden in their beauty and strength, when their bones are full o^ Marrow,
and their breasts of Milk; and in that Providence God dot^ speak to you that
survive, and gives you fair warning you had need be serious while you are
Young, for you m^^die while you are Young; there is great Reason why yo^ should
betimes be weaned from the world, from the sins, vaniti^^ and follies of it,
from the comforts and delights of it; for it man be you shall leave the World
while you are Young. Oh that suc^ thoughts as these may be repeated, and
frequently return upon o^ minds, and make due impressions; since you must be
gone from henc^ set not your hearts upon any of those things which are here;
thoug^ they seem never so admirable, and you have found them never so
d^^lightful, yet use them and love them as becomes them that are P^^^grims and
Strangers. Often think of leaving all, and so sit loo^ from all. While you have
these things in your hands, keep them o^ of your hearts, and provide for your
departure: He that mu^t g^ and that at a minutes notice, and cannot tell when
that will be, an^ is undone if he be unfit, had need lose no time, but speed
his pr^^paration as much as he can: It is the great Command and most Gr^^cious
Council of our dearest Lord, Be ye ready. Let other thin^^ alone, take no
thought what ye shall Eat and Drink, or wherewi^^ ye shall be Clothed; bestow
your thoughts, and care, and pai^ about this, that ye may be ready, fit to dye,
and fit to appear b^^fore your Judge: For any thing that you or I can tell, we
may D^^ presently, for the number of our Months is with God, not with u^^ our
Breath is in our Nostrils, and it may be stopped in a Moment: (...) every one
therefore set their houses in order, and let all labor to set their hearts in
order, as that though we should dye present^ yet we may dye preparedly, and go
to our Grave as a shock of Co^^ in its season: It is no matter at all how
quickly any of us dies, n^ of what disease, nor in what manner, so that we be
but fit to dy^ he that is prepared to dye, may very well be free to dye.

Secondly, When Gracious and Holy Souls go from hence, they go to Christ: It
was the joy of our Dearest Lord, when he had the prospect of his nearly
approaching Death, that he could say, Ioh. 17.11. Holy Father, now I am no more
in the world, but these are in the world, and I come unto thee. I must leave
the World; and I must leave these too, but I come unto thee: So it may well be
a matter of joy to a Godly man or woman, when the day of their departure is at
hand; when they must say, I shall be no more in the World, my dear Relations
and Friends I shall be no more with you; we have so many years lived
comfortably together, and in the Fear of God, and now we must part; yet a
little while, and ye shall see my face no more; and then they can say, Now my
dearest Jesus I come to thee. Alas! When Graceless and Wicked Wretches go out
of the World, they go to a company of ugly Devils and Damned Spirits; they had
a communion with Devils here, and that out of choice, and they shall have a
communion with them hereafter whether they will or no. But as for you, O
Saints, be glad and rejoice; you at Death shall go to Christ; and let the
consideration hereof promote your care of doing your present Duty: Now labor
for as great and intimate acquaintance with him as you can possibly get; now
let your hearts work and run out to him with the strongest vigor of an entire
affection; bid him most heartily welcome, and use him with utmost kindness
whenever he comes to you; when he does by his Spirit at a Dyty, at an
Ordinance, or any other time give you a Gracious visit, be sure to make much of
him, and rejoice in him, and be his joy, and then you may delight your selves
in this assurance, that when you go to him, he will bid you welcome, and to all
Eternity rejoice over you, as the Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride.

Thirdly, A being with Christ in Heaven, is the best of beings. This is the top
of the Saints perferment; this the highest round in the Scale of the Creatures
happiness; there is no imaginable life to be compared to a Life unto Christ in
this World, and a Life with Christ in the world to come; there is no Company
like unto his Company, no Presence that has in it such a fullness of Joy and
Pleasures for evermore, as are to be meth wit in his Presence, and his
Father's, and Spirit's: It is good to be with Saints, very good to sit under
Ordinances, but it is best of all to be with Christ in Glory. When our Lord
Jesus was transfigured upon Mount Tabor, and had there with him Moses and
Elias, with three of his Disciples, Peter in a Transport cried ou^ It is good,
Lord, to be here: But how good soever it was to be there, it is unspeakably
better to be with Christ now that he is glo^rified, and in Heaven, where he
has with him and innumerable com^pany of Angels, the general Assembly and
Church of the Firstborn As I said before, so I say again, Call to mind all the
Comforts tha^ this world is capable of affording you, and let there be the
fulle^^ confluence of them; suppose that every step you take should be upon
Roses, and every meal you sit at, should be a Splendid Royal Feast made up of
the Choicest Dainties, a Composition of Delights: Sup^pose all the days you
live should be Halcyon, and every night you sleep should be sweet to you; and
each morning as soon as you awak^ you should be entertained with glad tidings
of great joy; yet a^ these things put together, would not make up a life by the
thousandth part so sweet, as is a life with Christ. The Sunshine of the
Creature is nothing to the Shadow of a Savior; What then are hi^ Beams* What
his Glory? Paul tells you; It is far better: And upon this i^ follows, That

Fourthly, Death is desirable; not indeed for its self, because it is the fruit
of Sin, and a part of the Curse; but upon the account of (...) Consequences: As
Physic is not at all desirable for its self, being bitter and unpleasant, yet
it is desirable for the sake of that Health and Ease, which through the
Blessing of God it does produce in the Patient that takes it. Death has but a
bad look, a grim countenance, but yet it comes upon a good Errand; it has the
hands of Esau, which are very rough, but its voice is the voice of Jacob,
speaking Peace and Comfort to a Child of God. You see here in the Text, that
Paul desired it; and he very well understood himself; he knew there was
sufficient, yea, abundant reason for his doing so. It must be acknowledged,
That Death was at first threatened as a Curse, and since the Fall it has been
inflicted as the Punishment of Sin. But God for the great Love wherewith he
loves his People; and for the sake of his Son our dear Lord Jesus, has as to
them turned that Curse into a Blessing. That which was a part of the Curse, is
now the highway to all Blessedness, as matrers do now stand; not to dye would
be a loss, a prejudice to the Saints, Job 7.16. I loath it, I would not live
always; if I might I would not, i. e. here in this world; It is a very great
aggravation of the misery of the Damned in Hell, that they cannot dye, death
flees from them; tho they desire it and seek it, and earnestly call after it,
yet it will not come, nay it cannot; The hopes of Annihi^ation would be
grateful and pleasant to them; fain they would not be, but be they must whether
they will or no. But Death will come to a Child of God; would he not live
always? then shall not. Only to him Death comes in the fittest season, not till
work be done, and he be ripe for Glory; he goes to his Grave (...) shock of
Corn in its season. If Spiritual Death be taken away, ^^ch separates between
the Soul and God, Natural Death can do hurt, tho it does for a time separate
between the Soul and the ^^ly. Now from this Truth, two things do necessarily
follow.

first, That Death is not to be feared by a Believer: There are other ^^gs
enough which are the proper Objects of our Fear; and it would our ^olly not to
fear them: Of these things, Sin is one: Do not li^ to its voice, nor comply
with its motions, nor set your hand to work; though it come with the most
tempting smiles, and alluring ^rms, stand at a distance from it, and bid
defiance to it; for its (...) is more bitter than wormwood. God is another,
Jer. 10.7. Who ^^d not fear thee, O King of Nations, for to thee it does
appertain? It ^art of that natural worship which is due to him; fear him as
^^ldren a Father; rejoice at the remembrance of his Holiness, and (...) the
Lord and his Goodness; fear to break his Commands, and ^buse his mercies, and
thereby provoke him to withdraw from (...) his assistances and comforts, and to
set upon you the marks of displeasure. Your own hearts are another; if he that
trusts in his (...) heart be a fool, then to be afraid of our selves, and of
our own ^^ts is a special piece of wisdom. As the heart of man is knotty
^crabbed, so it is treacherous, deceitful above all things, and de^ately
wicked; therefore let us watch our hearts, and be jealous (...) our selves with
a godly jealousy. But be not afraid to dye. A ^^^istian ought to be at God's
ordering. Be willing to live as long as (...) will have you, though it be an
afflictive and troublesome life, ^^gh it be a sickly and painful life, though
it be a mean and poor (...) Job could say upon his Dunghill, in the midst of
outward and ^^^ard anguish, Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time, I
will (...) till my change shall come. Wait with patience; live out of a prin^e
of obedience to God, and then be willing to die when God will (...) you. Death
has lost its sting, and now you may play with it. (...) reconciled, and
therefore will not be unkind, nor do you a mis^f. It is your Father's servant,
and therefore cannot go beyond his ^^mission; the Scripture tells you, 1 Cor.
5.21, 22. Death is yours, ^ell as life. It is a part of your interest. You owe
a great deal to ^^th, as it puts an end to all your sins and sorrows, and as it
is a pas^^, though a dark one, to Heaven and Glory.

Secondly, The Death of those who died in the Lord, is not upon (...) account
to be bewailed by those their near and dear Relations that super^ them. Indeed,
as it is a loss to the Family and Friends, and to (...) Nation, and to that
part of the Church which is here, a sense of (...) and a sorrow for it is to be
allowed them, and commended (...) them; for it is no other than their duty. It
is a sign of a bad hea^ and of approaching evil, when the righteous perish, and
no man (...) it to heart, Isa. 57.1. Only that Sorrow is to be kept under
co^^mand, and within those bounds that Religion and right Reason (...) set it.
Tho over their Graves we may drop our Tears, we must (...) drown our selves.
But the more deeply sensible we are of our loss, (...) more careful and
diligent we ought to be, about the improving (...) making it up. Have we lost
much of the Creature? then let us lab^ to get so much the more of God and Jesus
Christ? There is not (...) loss here below, that we can meet with, but if we
will be foun^ the way of our duty, it may, yea, for certain it shall be repa^
and made up to us. But the Death of Holy, Gracious Persons, is to be bewailed
upon their account: They stand in no need of an^ our Sighs or Tears: Their case
does not call for it. Tho they di^ their Strength and Prime, in their Youth, or
in their consistent (...) yet they did not dye too soon. They lived as long as
God would (...) them, and that was long enough. They do not dye too soon, who
(...) they dye go to Christ. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that dy^ the
Lord. They are not miserable then, but happy, yea, more ha^^ than ever they
were before. When thou think, My Relation is d^^ follow that thought with
this, My Relation is blessed. Now she (...) indeed; now she is happy indeed.
The life she had here, (...) not deserve the name of a life, if compared with
that life which now has with Christ.

Fifthly, A truly, yea, an eminently Gracious Person may be in a (...) about
dying-work. When David was almost consumed with the (...) of God's hand, He
prayed, O spare me, that I may recover stre^^ before I go hence, and be seen no
more, Psalm. 39.13. When Hez^^ was commanded by the Prophet from the Lord, To
set his house order, for he should dye and not live; he turned his face to the
wall, (...) prayed and wept sore, Isa. 38.1. etc. Paul here was in a strait,
(...) that proceeded from a more noble Cause, than that of many* (...) was
brought into it by the dear love he bare to Christ and the Ch^^^^ But how many
are brought into it by a fond and foolish love to (...) world: They could be
willing to go to Christ, were they not lo^^ (...) leave their Earthly Comforts,
Relations and Possessions. They ^^uld live to see their Children grown up, well
disposed of, and pro^^ded for in the world; but they may live to see them their
Sorrow ^^d Shame, their Vexation and Torment. Others are in a strait, and said
to dye, because they do not know whither they shall go when ^^ey dye; they want
assurance of the Love of God, and their own ^^ernal Salvation; for which want,
they may possibly thank their ^^n supine carelessness and neglect, not having
given, as they ought, ^^^igence, yea, all diligence to make their Calling and
Election sure. ^^hers are in a strait, by reason of those severe Rebukes and
Wounds which they receive from their own Consciences: They have been off ^om
their watch, and Temptations from Satan or the world have ^oke in upon them,
and mastered them; and their own Corruptions ^^ve prevailed against them; and
their Consciences, instead of being ^^eet Comforters, prove their dreadful
Tormentors; by means where^^ they, poor Creatures, know not how to look God in
the face; ^^d so they know not how to look Death in the face: And indeed it
^^nnot but be very sad and dismal with any one who is in this condi^^on, and at
the same time thinks in good earnest, that his death is (...) hand: Therefore
let it be your work by utmost diligence and con^^nt care of holy walking with
God, to prevent such straits as these; ^^t weaned hearts; sit loose from the
world; do your duty; keep ^ur selves unspotted; commit your all to God; clear
up your Evi^ences; make up your Accounts; and get all things set in order, ^^at
when you come to dye, you may have nothing else to do.

Sixthly, The Interest of Christ and his Church should be preserr'd be^^re our
own particular Interest: Thus John the Baptist did, when some (...) his
Disciples told him, He to whom thou barest witness, baptizeth, and (...) men
come to him: They thought their Master's Glory would be ^^ereby eclipsed:
Observe now his Answer thereunto, John 3.^^, 30. The friend of the Bridegroom,
which stands and hears him, ^^joiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's
voice; this my joy therefore is ^^lfilled; he must increase, but I decrease.
They could not bring him ^etter and more welcome news. Our Apostle here judged
his abiding (...) the flesh was more needful for the Saints, in order to their
furthe^^ance in the way to Heaven, and the increasing of their Joy of ^aith,
and thence concluded, he should abide and continue with them, and was, upon
mature deliberation, free to do so. It ought to ^e so with us. We should be
willing to be kept out of our Rest, so ^ong as we have any more work to do for
God. We should be content to stay for our future Reward, so long as we may be
further service^ in the world. And indeed it is richly worth a B^lievers while
to (...) here until he has dispatched all that for which he was sent hith^ and
not to have Death put in its sickle to reap him before he be t^^ rough ripe.
You have a great deal of Reason to long for Hear^ because of the Company,
Happiness, and Glory, which are there be enjoyed; and because of that noysom
body of Death, which (...) you carry about with you; and because of the
Temptations, A^ctions, and various Troubles you meet with here. Yet be not
imp^^^ent; but all the days of your appointed time, do you as Job (...) wait
till your change shall come: You will lose nothing by stay (...) God's time;
which is in all things the best. The greater Service y^^ do for him either in
an active or passive way, the more weig^^ shall your Crown be.

Lastly, Whenever, and about whatsoever it is that we are brought (...) a
strait, it is our wisest way to commit the business to God, and leave the (...)
termination unto him. When the Scales do hang even in our Judgme^^ let God,
before whom all things are naked and open, have the tur^^ of them. It is said
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.5. That he died according to (...) word of the Lord; at the
Mouth of the Lo^d; so it is in the Hebr^^ Some read it, The Lord commanding
him. (...) Annotations ^^^der it, by the Ordinance of the Lord, or at the
Appointment of G^^ It is not fit that we should have the prolonging or
contracting of (...) Lives in our own hands; that Power is best and sa^est in
the hand that God whose right it is. The Church said, He should choose their
heritance for them; let us also say, He shall choose for us the time (...) our
continuance here, and of our departure from hence. If we w^^ to choose for our
selves, very few, if any, would choose well, but so^^ of us would dye too soon,
and others of us would live too long. Let therefore refer it to God: While he
is pleased to add to our day, us conscientiously mind our duty, living to the
best purpose that can, and serving our Generation according to the Will of God;
(...) then we may satisfy our selves with this, That we shall be sure to (...)
in the best time. In a word, Let every one of us be willing to (...) here,
until God send for us: And then the good Lord put us i^ such a frame, as that
when we are sent for, we may be willing to

FINIS.

