A SERMON Preached before the KING AT MONT-St.-ANDRE-Camp, JUNE 29. 1694.

By JAMES SMALWOOD, Chaplain to the Earl of RVMNEY, and HIS MAJESTY's First
Regiment of Foot-Guards. Fellow of TRINITY-COLLEGE in CAMBRIDGE.

Published now by the King's Command.

LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's Head, near the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. MDCXCV.

Mr. Smalwood's SERMON Preached before the KING, AT MONT-St.-ANDRE-Camp.

TO His GRACE THE DUKE OF ORMOND, etc.
MY LORD,
IT was Your GRACE's Goodness that first recommended me to Preach this Sermon
before the King, and therefore I presume, under your Protection, to recommend
it to the World: It is, I confess, a Hardship Your Lordship in this Case lies
under, that Your well-meaning and good Intention must be thus requited, and
that it was not enough that Your Grace did me the Honor that I should appear
before so Great a Prince; but that I must likewise lay my Infirmities and
Imperfections at Your Door now in Public: It is indeed an Inconvenience that
Great and Good Men sometimes bring upon themselves, even by the exercise of
their Virtues; when they cannot show a Favor, or do an Act of Generosity, but
oftentimes it is returned with troublesome and impertinent Acknowledgments; or
else Their Patronage must be made use of to screen the Weaknesses and Defects
of their Clients. However, my Lord, tho the Workmanship of this Discourse may
be but slight and ordinary; yet the Foundation and Ground of it, is firm and
strong; and this Advantage my Pen has, that it is engaged in the same Cause
with Your Grace's Sword.

My Lord, It has been my Good Fortune from Your very Childhood, to have had
Opportunities of observing all the Steps and Progresses of Your Greatness; The
very Dawnings of Virtue and Courage were discernable in Your Grace's tender
Years, which now shine forth Bright, and cast a Luster over the World; even
then those seeds of Valor and Magnanimity were easily to be seen which are now
grown up to full Maturity and Perfection; and Your whole Life, my Lord, has
rose by such regular Increases and Ascents, that it appears now like a complete
Piece of Building, the Basts Strong, the Superstructure Beautiful and Uniform,
the whole Fabric Perfect, and without a Flaw.

But, my Lord, within the narrow limits of a Dedication I must not think of
comprehending Your Grace's Life; only one peculiar Virtue, I, in common with
the rest of Mankind that ever knew You, cannot but mention, and that is, Your
constant readiness of doing Good.

That extraordinary Quality, that singular Goodness of Your own, was, my Lord,
the Occasion of this Discourse; and the Reason why it has not appeared all this
while in Print, when it was His Majesty's Pleasure, and the favorable Request
of that Honorable Auditory that heard it, that it should; was, because we
continued a long time after in the Camp, and since then, I, attending my Duty
abroad till now, had not Opportunity of being obedient to their Wills; being
re-minded by some Friends now at home, under the Safeguard of Your great Name,
my Lord, I venture it out in Public, nor do I fear any Censures under the
Umbrage of so great a Patron as Your Grace condescends to be to,

My LORD, Your GRACE's Most Obedient and Most Devoted Servant, JAMES SMALWOOD.

A SERMON Preached before the KING In the CAMP.
St. Luke 22. part of the 36. v. He that has no Sword, let him sell his
garment and buy one. The Context runs thus, And he said unto them, when I sent
you without Purse, or Scrip, or Shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said,
nothing. Then said he unto them; but now he that has a Purse let him take it,
and likewise his Scrip, and he that has no Sword, let him sell his garment and
buy one.
IN this Warlike Assembly, I shall not take upon me to Read a Lecture
concerning the Military Art, or to say any thing of the Discipline of War,
before those that understand it far better, than either opportunity has given
me leave, or my Profession requires: This absurdity, an Ancient Grecian Orator
was once guilty of before a great General, which was censured by a very
Judicious Author, as an improper and an assuming Action. I shall content my
self therefore to act within my own Sphere, and accordingly will endeavor,
from the Holy Scriptures in general, but more particularly from these words of
our Blessed Savior, to prove the lawfulness of the taking up of Arms by
Christian Men, at some times, and upon some occasions.

This is the main scope and drift of my present undertaking; To show, From
Christ's Command to his Disciples here in the Text, of selling their Clothes to
purchase Swords; That the Accoutrements of War are, in some cases, to be
provided before bodily Raiment; that Arms may not always yield to the peaceful
Gown; but that at some seasons of imminent danger, of homebred Insurrections,
or a prospect of Invasion, or Enmity openly declared; that then War and the
Instruments of it are to be sought; then the Bow and the Quiver is to be made
ready; then we must go, though like some of the Ancient Spartans, half-naked into
Battle.

But before I enter upon the Proof of this, I will clear one Objection, which
may with some color be laid before me at the very threshold, from the Opinion
of some very Learned and Able Expositors.

Dr. Hammond, Grotius, and some others, say, that these Words of our Blessed
Savior are not to be taken Literally, but Figuratively.

Our Blessed Lord and Master, was now near the time of his departure out of the
World; The Captain of our Salvation, was now about laying down the great
Commission he had received from his Father; and now when he was taking leave of
his Disciples, those Fellow Soldiers of his, those who had hitherto fought the
same good fight with himself, against all the Powers of the World, or the
Devil, those who under his care and conduct had served securely, and were
protected safely, to whom he had formerly upon their several great and
hazardous Expeditions, given Orders, to Provide neither Mat. 10. 9.
gold, nor silver, nor brass in their purses, nor scrip for their journey,
neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves; yet to them now he speaks
otherwise, he foresees, that now shortly far more calamitous and perilous
times would come, the conflicts they were to meet with both Corporal and
Spiritual would be great, the dangers they were to encounter inevitable; he
therefore Arms them now with an extraordinary Courage, and advises them to lay
in good Provisions: The Bridegroom himself would be absent, and they must not
expect any Personal Assistance or Subsistence from him; so that it would not
now be sufficient to shake off the dust of Mat. 10. 14.
their feet against a House or a City, that would not receive and entertain
them kindly, but they must supply themselves with all Necessaries requisite,
both for the Maintenance and Defense of their Persons; they must not only fill
their Purses and their Scrips* but they must provide themselves too of Weapons,
nay, they who had no Swords, were obliged to sell even their very Garments and
buy them.

By all this, say these Learned Persons, is nothing more meant by our Savior,
than that his Disciples should Arm their Minds, against all the Spiritual
Oppositions, and against all the Temporal Hardships they might meet with in the
World.

This perhaps might have been the Figurative meaning of our Savior, That now
he was going from the Head of his Disciples, They should put on a greater
firmness and resolution of Mind, Arm their Spirits with an undaunted Courage
and readiness to grapple with the severest Trials, and to surmount all
difficulties; and the Sword here in my Text, might possibly be used in the same
Sense by our Savior, that St. Paul uses the Sword of the Spirit, the Shield
Ephesians. 6.
of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, or any of the other parts of Armory, he
there furnishes out his Christian Warrior with. However, admitting this
Metaphorical acceptance of the Words, I see no absurdity or false Doctrine, in
taking the Text in the more obvious and literal signification: St. Augustine, I
am sure, a Father of no mean Authority, takes this very Text of Scripture, in
the plain and verbal importance, and makes use of it for an Argument against
the Manichees, a whimsical Sect of People, who decried all manner of use of
Secular Arms, as unjustifiable amongst Christian Men. And it may be presumed,
St. Peter that great Apostle, understood our Savior according to the Letter
too; for presently after the words were spoke, when he saw his Master fall into
the violent hands of the High-Priest's Servants, he drew his Sword, and with
it, gave a plain demonstration in what Sense he took the words. Nay, this was
not only St. Peter's apprehension of these Words, but it is to be supposed, of
all the Apostles likewise, for we find in the following Verse their joint
Answer: He that has no Sword, let him sell his Garment and buy one, says our
Savior, And they said, Lord, behold here are two Swords, And he said unto them
it is enough. However, thus much certainly may very naturally and very
agreeably too to the Doctrine of Christ, be inferred from this Text, That though
Spiritual Arms are the Christians commendable Weapons, in the Times of
Persecutions and Oppressions; and a fortified Mind is then always required; yet
even the outward Corporal Means of just Defense or Offense, are allowed
Christians as well as other Men.

This is a Position, that the strictest of our Savior Christ's Precepts, does
not contradict or disprove, for although Patience in Persecutions, long-suffering
of Injuries, love of very Enemies, are recommended to us as the most sublime
Christian Virtues; although by such Commands as this, Unto him that smites thee
on the one Cheek, turn the other; we are admonished to pass by all trivial and
accidental Injuries in common Conversation; although the first Methods of the
propagation of the Gospel, were gentle and peaceable, and the same Methods
ought still to be practiced in the Conservation of it: Yet did I never meet
with any so very Spiritualized a Casuist, that carried on the Doctrine of
self-resignation so high, but that it was always allowed, That when private
Men's Lives are in danger; and much more, when the Public Life of the State is
in jeopardy; and most of all, when Christianity it self is in hazard of being
subverted or corrupted, that then the free use of all Means of both Personal
and Public Security, were never Prohibited by our Savior.

This slender Objection being thus removed, I shall not scruple to take the
Text in a Grammatical and Literal Sense, and from it so considered,

I. First, I shall lay down this for a Positive and Uncontestable Assertion;
That notwithstanding all the Doctrines of Humility, Patience, Submission,
Forgiving of Injuries, Forbearance of Revenge, which the Gospel of Christ, and
the Writings of the Apostles so much press upon us, and which are the Spiritual
Weapons of our Warfare here in this World; yet still the Armor of the Body,
and the just use of material Weapons, is, and in all Ages of the World before
and since Christianity, was Lawful; nay, at some times, and in some conditions
of Affairs, War is necessary, and more the Duty of a Christian People, than a
slothful Peace.

II. Secondly, I will enquire at what Opportunities and Seasons Arms may be
taken up.

III. Thirdly, I will make it appear, that our present War is to be justified
by all the Reasons and Arguments that can be required for the carrying on of
any.

I. First, I am to prove the warrantableness of War amongst Christian People;
and one would think, I needed not to spend much time in making good that
universal and avowed Opinion; That all defensive and offensive Means of Safety,
which amongst all Men are allowable, are equally so to Christians, as to any
other part of Mankind.

That War was both practiced in the most ancient Seasons of the World, and not
only countenanced, but directed and in a manner proclaimed too by God himself,
is a thing plainly to be seen in many Places of the Old Testament; Moses was
commanded to raise Forces and to form an Army by God's own special Order;
Abraham commenced a War for the rescue of his Brother Lot; and many other
Instances might be produced out of the Old Testament; but let us look into the
New, the Precepts of which are far more obligatory to us Christians, and there
we shall find the Equity of Arms as much established amongst the Christians, as
they were made use of amongst the Israelites. For what did our Savior intend
by these Words, If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight,
that I should not be delivered to the Jews; what, I say, could our Savior here
mean, but that the taking up of Arms, at some Exigences of time, was a thing
not only practicable, but warrantable? If my Kingdom were of this World, that
is, if I did really pretend to erect any temporal and material Kingdom in this
World, any more than a spiritual Sovereignty over Souls; then, as it is
Customary with all earthly Princes in such Cases, rather than be thus used by
these Jews, would I raise an Army to defend my Person, and to revenge the
Injuries I have unjustly received at their Hands; then would I and my Army
fight, as it is the manner of all worldly Princes to do, whenever their
Dominions and Prerogatives are wrongfully invaded, or their Persons
ignominiously treated. This seems to me to be the Meaning and Purport of that
Text.

But may not this Countenancing of War seem a most preposterous and surprising
Doctrine for the Prince of Peace to deliver? How is this consistent with his
own Life and Conversation, which was nothing else but one continued Act of
Suffering? How comes He that endured all the Barbarous Usage, Buffetings,
Spittings upon, Scourgings, that was led like a Sheep to the Slaughter, and
like a Lamb that is Dummb? How comes He now to open his Mouth so angrily, and
to breath forth nothing but War and Battle? How is it, that He, who at another
time sends out his Apostles without any Equipage or the least Furniture, only
with this poor Commission, Go and teach all Nations, and lo I am with you, how
is it that now he recommends to them the Instruments of War, and makes Swords
such useful, such indispensible Companions of their Travels, that, rather than
want them, he bids them Pawn and sell their very Clothes to buy them? Nay, how
comes our Savior, here in my Text, to prefer Swords before Garments, which was
just before he was betrayed into the Hands of his Enemies, and looked as if he
intended some Opposition against them, yet presently after, when he was siez'd
by the High Priest's Officers, and Peter endeavored to rescue him, by wounding
one of them, He there alters his Mind quite, and rebukes Peter for drawing his
Sword with this severe Reprimand, Put up thy Sword into its Place, he that
takes the Sword shall perish by the Sword.

These two remarkable Sentences of our Savior, that in my Text, and this to
St. Peter, may at first hearing appear liable to contrary Interpretations; But
if we rightly consider them, we shall find they do not only not thwart or
invalidate one the other, but agree very well, and taking them both together,
we may learn from them the whole Christian Doctrine of War, and what use of
secular Arms the Gospel permits, and what it condemns.

1. First then, St. Peter out of an overhasty Passion, and an unseasonable
Zeal, when his Master was apprehended by the Ministers of the Chief Priests and
Elders drew his Sword and struck a Servant of the High Priest, and smote of his
Ear. This was done it is true, in defense of Christ himself, of the most Perfect
Innocence that ever appeared in the World, it was too upon a Man that was
performing a most unjust Act of Violence in it self, but what he was
Commissioned to do by Public Authority; our Savior therefore reproves St.
Peter for striking with the Sword without a sufficient Warrant, and blames the
Fact, as an illegal Attempt of a Private Man against a Public Officer set on
work by a lawful Magistrate: But we are not to conclude that our Blessed
Savior, by this Check given to St. Peter, did absolutely prohibit all manner
of using the Sword amongst Christians; if so, the Magistrate himself is
prohibited the use of it, who we are told by the Apostle, bears not the Sword
in vain, but indeed he cannot be said to bear it otherwise than in vain, if he
may never have the liberty to draw it.

2. Secondly, We must consider when our Savior gave this charge to his
Disciples, they were then launching out into the wide World, where they must
expect to meet with many Rubbs, and Dangers, therefore he advises them to stand
upon their own Legs, and be continually upon their Guard, that they should be
Watchful and Cautious, able to repel any Injury or Violence offered to them,
with Courage, and that therefore they should provide themselves of means
necessary and requisite thereunto; In the foregoing Verse he appeals to them,
and asks them, if they had any Complaints to make to him of his neglect of
them, or whether they had wanted any thing in his Service, which they freely
acknowledged they had not: He proceeds now he is leaving them, to bid them take
all Care Men can of themselves, to be sure always to have their Purses and
their Scrips in good Condition, and above all, to be well furnished with good
Arms, not to act the least Private Injury, but to defend themselves as much as
may be against all.

So that our Savior by the Check he used to St. Peter, does no more than
admonish all Private Christians to abstain from passionate, giddy, and
unwarrantable Quarrels, and not to confront Public Authority, leaving it
nevertheless lawful for superior Magistrates to unsheath their Swords in
Defense of General Rights.

And by the Words of my Text he intimates, that all Christians may justly make
Provision against all Difficulties and Dangers that may happen to be encountered
with in this World, and consequently against all wrongful Insults,
Encroachments, or Invasions, upon either their Persons or their Properties; so
that these two Texts are so far from contradicting one the other, that both
joined and considered together, make up an excellent Rule for the use of the
Sword.

The conclusion from both may be this; That although it is not lawful for every
Private Man to revenge Personal Injuries, or to make his own Sword the Judge of
Differences, which belong properly to the decision of the Magistrate, much less
to resist Public Justice, whether in a wrong or a right Cause; yet a Man's
Bodily Preservation and Defense from sudden Attacks, God has in some measure
committed to himself and his own Sword; And it is lawful, though not to offer
Injuries, yet to resist forcible Ones with Force; but chiefly it is lawful for
Men* to draw the Sword against Public Injuries, in assisting the Civil State
of which they are Members, whenever it calls for their Aid, being either
openly threatened from Abroad, or secretly undermined at home.

It was therefore a wrong determination of one of the Ancient Fathers, to infer
from our Savior's Command to St. Peter to put up his Sword, that it is
unlawful for Christians at any time to draw theirs, and that all Military
Employments are consequently criminal. This is an Opinion not only not to be
maintained by any Evangelical Writing, but it is really absurd in it self; for
what would that be but to make Cristianity a Prey to its insatiable, and a
Laughing Stock to its insolent Enemies? This were to prostitute the Lives and
Fortunes of Christians, to the outrageous Wills of their professed Enemies,
Turks and Pagans; This were the readiest means for Kings and Princes to become
useless Creatures; This were to deprive good Subjects of Opportunities of
exerting their Loyalty, and of rewards justly due to Them, who venture their
lives for their Church and Country when under any Oppression; Nay, this were to
blacken the Honor of all those ancient Warriors, who fought so valiantly for
the sake of Religion against Infidels and Barbarians.

If any Man shall object, that some of the Primitive Christians were of Opinion
that the use of the Sword was unlawful, and that therefore it is still so.

1. It may be answered, that it was not the general and established Opinion of
the Primitive Church, but of some particular Men, that affected an harmless
kind of Life, and were fond of being reputed the Fathers of some extraordinary
and more than Humane Opinions.

2. Some of the Primitive Chistians were so nicely Conscientious, that they
would not list themselves Soldiers, nor take up Arms, because some of their
Emperors, tho lawful, were Heathens, and their Consciences were so scrupulous,
that that they could not serve them, whilst others, and with as good a
Conscience, took the Military Oath, and did serve; with as good a Conscience, I
say; for the Military Oath at that time, tendered to those that were willing to
go into the Army, interfered not the least with any Principle of Religion, it
forced no Man to worship their false Gods, it was no Test of Conscience, any
farther than an Obligation to observe the Articles of War, to obey superior
Officers, to submit to Words of Command, and whatever outward Services Martial
Laws require.

We read, that some of the Jews desired sometimes an exemption from Military
Employments, lest their frequent being upon Duty might prevent their exact
Observance of all the Niceties of the Law; and they might be compelled
sometimes to bear Arms upon the Sabbath, or in their Marches to exceed a
Sabbath-Day's-Journey. So amongst the Christians, there were some perhaps, at
the beginning of our Profession, so very refined, that might upon a scruple of
Conscience, decline taking up of Arms: The Primitive Christians were enflamed
with a mighty Zeal to all Holy and Sublime Performances; the very Counsels of
the Gospel had with them the force of Positive Commands, and a great many of
them, out of a Pious Weakness, rather than Sound Judgment, like some of our
modern Sectaries, would do things that were never directly required in the
Scriptures; thus some of them thought it a Sin to Marry, because St. Paul
prefers a Single Life; some again, because our Savior says, Swear not at all,
chose rather to loose their Dues, than they would take an Oath in a Court of
Justice to maintain them. But this is no Argument against the generality of
Christians; what a few out of their exalted, or perhaps distempered Judgments
shall do, can never oblige all Mankind to the same Practice, without a positive
Precept for the same; if a Sick-Brained Man shall, because our savior checked
St. Peter for drawing his Sword, or because it is written, unto him that
smites thee on the one Cheek turn the other. If, I say, any wilful Person,
shall, out of his own misunderstanding of these Passages, resolve to bear all
Injuries and Abuses that can be offered him, this can be no Rule to Mankind, we
are prompted otherwise by the Law of Nature, and the Law of Christ did never
abolish that.

I would not be mistaken; the Law of Christ I assert, did never utterly
disannul and abrogate the Law of Nature; but this it does, it restrains and
corrects the Visciousness of it: The Law of Nature, and the Dictates of Reason
were Imprinted on the Hearts of Men by the Finger of God, and the Rules and
Precepts of the Gospel were drawn up by the same Hand, so that since the same
God was the Author of both, they cannot contradict each other, tho the latter
does govern and curb the Exorbitances of the former; every thing that Nature
prompts or provokes us to, is not to be done; because we have several
Evangelical Precepts against the corrupt Inclinations of it; But whatever
Nature directs, and the same is not only permitted, but to be maintained also,
and justified by the Laws of Christ, that certainly is Lawful and practicable
by Christian Men.

The Result and Inference from hence is this, That the taking up Arms upon a
just Account, and allowable Conditions, is Lawful, as a thing as well permitted
by the Law of Christ, as we are inclined and directed to it by the Law of
Nature.

And that Nature does direct Mankind to a Defense against all outward
Annoyances, and an Offense of those that manifestly declare themselves Enemies
to it, not only every Man's own Breast, but every Author in all Ages informs
us. This is a Law, says Tully, Non Scripta, sed Nata, etc. Not Orat. pro Tit.
An. Mil.
drawn up in Writing for us, but Born with us, which we have not learned or
acquired by Reading, but it was instilled into our very Beings, That, whenever
our Lives are in any Perils, either from treacherous Thieves and Assassines, or
from open Enemies, then all means of freeing our selves and obtaining Safety,
are Just and Honorable; This Principle was looked upon by the Romans so very
Just and Reasonable, that they transferred it into their Twelve Tables, and made
it Authentic by Law.

I would not be mis-apprehended; While I justify the War, and taking up of
Arms by the Law of Nature, I would not be understood to countenance all Acts of
Violence, or Rapine, or Bloodshedding, or that it were Naturally Lawful for
the Stronger Part of Mankind, to prey upon, or devour the Weaker; For this, tho
Mr. Hobbs has been pleased so to scandalize it, is not any part of the Law of
Nature, Humane Nature rightly disposed and undepraved, is not of that fierce
and brutal Temper, Do as you would be done by; Give every Man his Due, and such
like, are Laws of Nature; all which, tend to the Welfare and Quiet of Mankind:
Humane Nature is Gentle, and Tractable, and Courteous, and is so far akin even
to Christian Charity it self, that sometimes it can suffer long; nor will it be
easily provoked; But when the Man is justly provoked, and the furious Enemy
breaks in violently upon him, then it is, that Nature reaches out the Sword to
him, and Christianity forbids him not the use of it.

Thus far my First Proposition stands good, and thus far the taking up of Arms
is agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ.

II. Secondly, I will now enquire at what Seasons and Conjunctures of Time,
Arms may be most justly, and with truest Praise employed; and that

1. In respect of Private Persons. 2. In respect of Public States and
Governments.
1. In respect of Private Persons; A Private Man may unquestionably draw his
Sword when assaulted and put in danger of his Life; Murder or the taking away a
Man's Life upon deliberation and with a premeditated Malice, is both a very
heinous Sin, and very prejudicial to the Government; and therefore it falls
under the cognizance of the common Law; but if I am set upon unawars, and
brought to the unavoidable necessity of either being killed my self, or by
killing my Adversary to save my self, here not only Nature and common Reason
advises me to secure my Person, but the Law too acquits me of the Fact. In this
case, says the Heathen Orator, the Law connives and is silent, nor does it
expect Silent Leges inter Arma, nec se Expectari jubent, quum ei, qui expectare
velit, ante injusta Poena luenda sit quam justa repetenda. Pro Tit. An. Mil.
to be referred to, when a Man, tho he is willing perhaps the Law should be his
Judge, may wrongfully suffer, before he can legally right himself. Whenever
therefore any single Man is so straightened that his Sword must remove his
Adversary, before he can be sure of himself, there the taking away of the
Aggressor's Life, is as Commendable and Just as it is Natural. This is a Truth,
says the same Author, that Men of Learning are convinced of by Reading,
Uncivilized and Barbarous People are taught by the Power of Reason, all Nations
Practice by Custom, and even Brute and Irrational Creatures are guided to by
Nature.

But for Revenge of Injuries received, it is not Lawful for a Private Man to
have recourse to his own Sword; that is a Privelege not to be usurped by every
Single Person: It is therefore nothing else but a perfect Invasion upon Public
Athority, and an open trespass upon Justice; That too common Custom amongst us
of Men's doing themselves Right, as it is falsely Phrased, by Private Duels. It
is not only a Violation, but a rude Contempt of the Government to which they
belong, that Private Men should take the Sword of Justice into their own Hands,
and take upon themselves to redress those Grievances which they have recieved,
the doing of which, is the sole Business, as well as the undoubted Prerogative
of the Magistrate; and then that Military Men should upon every imaginary
Pique, or trifling Affront, every Shadow of Honor hazard their Lives one among
another, which might more Honorably be ventured in the Service of God and
their King, that brave and gallant Men should thus unprofitably fall, is not
only a great pity, but a great Damage and Dis-service too to the Cause they are
publicly engaged for; Julius Caesar tells us of Two of his Officers that had a
Quarrel, and that their way of ending the Dispute, was not in a single Duel
behind a Hedge, but by challenging and defying one another in an open
Engagement with the Enemy, who should approve himself then the braver Man; This
was Heroically performed and like true Romans: For they who were the most
Victorious Nation of the Ancient World, never practiced this mistaken way of
Honor, called Duelling: Nay, that very Nation of the modern World, that
principally introduced it, has now quite forgot it. The English methinks should
not esteem that a part of Bravery, which the Old Romans, whose greatness of
Mind they do in other things come up to, never thought so: But let us learn
from our very Enemies, for Virtues are to be appoved of even in them, as we
follow them in other Fashions, so to imitate them in this; but if that
Consideration will not take place with us, let us leave of this Vicious Custom
in very despite of them, that They may not by this have any Advantage over us.

2. As by Private Men for safety, tho not for revenge, the Sword may be justly
drawn, so much more by all in a Public Cause, and then not only for Safety,
but for Revenge. The repaying of Vengeance is a Privelege God claims to
himself, and to none in this World but to the Magistrate of Justice has God
committed that Power: The right of Punishment is Originally invested in
himself, tho he is pleased to commit the Execution of it to the Hand and
Management of Man: And as the Sheriff does inflict the Punishment on a
Malefactor, in the Name, and on the Behalf of the King, so does the King
himself derive his Power and Right of Correcting Wickedness, and Exercising the
Sword, from God: This is a Truth, that not only holds good in formal Processes
of Law against Murderers, Thieves, or any other Disturbers of the Civil Peace
and Societies of Men; but also in national Grievances and Oppressions: Whenever
any People or Government is either invaded or threatened; when national
Injuries are apparently designed or actually offered, when Ruin and
Desolation, like the Father of them, go about seeking whom they may devour, and
nothing can satisfy them till they are glutted with the Possessions of their
Neighbors round about them; in a Word, when the boundless Ambition of any one
Potentate shall thirst after nothing less than an Universal Dominion, then
certainly to put a Hook into the Nose of this rolling Leviathan, then to levy a
War, and to endeavor to put a stop to this swelling Torrent, then to draw the
Sword and to oppose this impetuous Furuy, is not only Lawful, but Necessary.

And certainly if there ever was any Cause, any time since Christianity was
first heard of, to which either Reason has more than ordinarily persuaded, or
Religion recommended, The use of the Sword, and the due Preparations for using
it, This of ours is the Cause, this the Time, which brings me to my Third and
last thing I proposed to show, which was,

III. Thirdly, that the War we are at present engaged in, has all the Arguments
to justify it, that can be required for the carrying on of any.

Some of the Doctors of the Schools tell us, there are Four Conditions
requisite to justify a War;

1. The Cause must be just, 2. The Authority must be lawful, 3. The Manner of
it must be fair, 4. The End proposed must be for the Public Good.
It would be too tedious to enlarge upon upon every Condition seperately. The
War now undertaken, and hitherto (blessed be God) successfully carried on by
the Confederate Christian Princes, was concerted and raised certainly upon the
justest Cause whatever, which was the vindication of both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal Rights: The Authority is unquestionable, which is founded on the
Unanimous Consent of so many Princes and Potentates, who are God's Delegates
here upon Earth: The Manner is fair, which is Defensive against the unjust
Incursions of one great Disturber of the Christian World: And the End proposed
is for the Public Good, which, it is to be hoped, may be an honorable and an
advantageous Peace.

This is the Nature of our Present Confederacy; the Grounds and Occasion of it
may be maintained by all the Laws of God and Man; the Methods it is supported
by and nourished are honest and equitable; and the Ends we aim at are every way
conformable to the Holy Religion of Christ, which prescribes Peace and Quiet,
Charity to Neighbors, and Good Will to all Men.

This indeed is the best, and the only true Cause, for which all good Subjects
are obliged in Conscience to fight, The Cause of God and their Country; the
Goodness of which appears from the several Interests united in it: For in this,
not only the Happiness of the Nations to which we belong our selves, not only
the Security of our own Persons is involved, but the Inheritances and
Possessions, the Honor and Interest of most of the Christians of Europe are
intermixed and woven: And that so mighty a Design should all this while be so
successfully carried on, that so many different Parties and States should join,
and as firmly combine as the Heart of one Man, This is a wonderful thing, and
must needs point out the Almighty Contriver of it; This is the Lord's doing,
and it is mavelous in our eyes: This is the Lord mighty in Battle.

The Success of King Cyrus when he went against Babylon, is very memorable and
remarkable: We meet with several Instances of an Almighty and Overruling Power
throughout that whole Expedition: For what was it else, but the Hand of God,
who governs and commands the Hearts of Men, that brought in so many Confederate
Forces to his Assistance, some of which were not only Allies, but even Subjects
to the Babylonians, without whose concurring help the whole Enterprise had
miscarried? That great Victory is not to be imputed to the sole Conduct and
Management of King Cyrus; or indeed, to the Strength of his Army, but to him,
to whom (as the Prophet speaks) All Nations are as the drop of a Bucket. He
that told Cyrus, I have girded thee, tho thou have not known me. He it was that
provided the Means and effected the Work; He set up the Standard, and blew the
Trumpet, and prepared the Nations.

We have great Reason to acknowledge the same Power with us too; He it is that
goes forth with our Armies to Battle, and protects us against all the close
and inveterate Designs of our Enemies; He it is that has influenced the
Councils of so many distinct Governments, to join their Forces against one
mighty Devourer of his Neighbors: And who may this potent Adversary, who may
this great Incendiary of Christendom be? Even he, who nevertheless is not
ashamed to bear the Title of the most Christian King.

And here I cannot but reflect upon what Spirit it must be that does actuate
this mighty Man, that no Laws, either Humane or Divine, can fasten any
Obligations on him: How many Treaties of Peace has he trampled upon and broke?
What Nation round about him has not He been unfaithful to? It were superfluous
to mention his Attempt upon Spain after the Pyrenean Peace; Munster, and
Nimegue, and his late Violation of the Truce agreed upon by his own Proposal
for Twenty Years, do all testify against him: And above all, his entering into
a League Offensive and Defensive with the Turk, the known and declared Enemy of
Christendom, at a time too when that Empire was in its Declination, shows
plainly how much his Ambition oversways his Faith and Honor, and how every way
deserving he is of the Title of the most Christian King.

Against this Man, if their Temporal Interests were not concerned, the very
regard to the Christian Religion would justly Arm all the Professors of it. But
the Consideration of Worldly Peace and Quiet, the Enjoyment of our proper
Possessions, the free Exercise of Trade, the Recovery of what has been forcibly
usurped, the requiring of Satisfaction for the Breach of Trust and Honor, as
well as the Vindication of our most Holy Religion; and many other
Considerations do concur to recommend and justify this present Cause of ours.

And This is a Cause, for which sure nothing but our own Sins can hinder God
Almighty in his due time more signally to appear: This is a Cause that I am
verily persuaded, and dare almost presage, will, whenever God's Chastisments
shall have wrought their intended Effects upon us, prove successful: To this
let every Man stretch his Arm; in This let all engage with Cheerfulness and
Alacrity; in This great numbers of our Countrymen have already ventured and
lost their Lives; One of our most D. of O.
noble Patriots most eminently hazarded his: For this it is that our most
Gracious KING does so often choose to harass and expose His Sacred Person. This
then, after so great an Example, all of us should in our several Stations
manfully maintain and stand up for: For this every True Englishman that has no
Sword, should, if need so require, sell his Garment and buy one; we having such
Laws and Liberties to defend, we having such a Church and Faith to contend for,
we having such a Faith's-Defender, whom we ought to serve with our Purses, our
Scrips, our Swords, our Lives.

FINIS.

