A PRESERVATIVE AGAINST Atheism and Error.

Wherein some Fundamental Points in Religion; VIZ.

1. The Essence, or Being, of GOD. 2. The Divine Authority of the holy
Scriptures. 3. The Majesty, Worth, Use, and Perpetuity of the Moral Law, or Law
of ten Commandments. 4. Our Lord Jesus Christ being the true Messiah.
Are, by way of Question and Answer, handled, and with much brevity and
clearness proved. To put a stop to that Current of Atheism, Ignorance and
Error, that runs in this evil day.

To which is added, A brief ANSWER to William Russel in a Book of his,
entitled, No Seventh-day-Sabhath in Christ's New Testament.

As also, A brief Word to the Dispute in Stone Chapel at Paul's, London.

By W. SALLER.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1664.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
AS Ignorance, Atheism, and Profaneness has always abounded in the World, so
never more than at this day; and not only so, but even amongst the zealous and
well meaning People of this Nation, there have been all subtle endeavors
used, as far as the temper of the People could bear it, to wheel them round
about to the Gates of Rome again. And these endeavors have not been without
great success, even in the Churches of Christ, corrupting their Principles, and
wounding the very heart of Religion amongst some of them. And besides this
mortal growing disease, there is a notorious carelessness in the most, of
preserving the Grounds of Religion in purity, either by preaching or
catechizing, insomuch as there is ground to fear our distempers will grow past
remedy, unless God, by some gracious means or other, put a stop to that Current
of Error, which through the Atheism of some, and Ignorance of others, is let
out, and runs with a mighty stream: the sense whereof has engaged me to
write these following lines, which I entreat thee to read and consider. And if
thou be not fully satisfied in every point, if I may know the reason thereof
in word or writing, or in any such way as becomes a person fearing God and
conscientiously willing to find out the Truth in Love; I shall do the best I
can to satisfy thee. But if I should be fallen upon by some railing Scorner,
or one whose Confidence out-runs his Understanding, and all sober men's also, it
is like I may take little notice of him. So commending my Lines to thy
consideration, and my prayers to the Lord for thy profiting; as also desiring a
share in thine, if thou be one that usest to call upon his Name,

I rest, Thy Friend and Servant in the Work of CHRIST, W. S.

A Preservative against ATHEISM and ERROR.
Question.

What do you judge is the needful work of the day?

Answer. The day calls for many needful works, and amongst the rest, this for
one, The laying down such foundations and principles of Religion and Godliness,
as may through God's blessing, recover Religion into its ancient Purity, and
preserve it therein.

Quest. What do you think of the many Catechisms that have been employed in
this service?

Answ. Many have done worthily in opening he Commandments of God, and in
showing the use of Christ's Ordinances; and several parts of Truth have been
usefully opened: but yet through their not knowing, or not considering, how the
world is overspread, partly with Atheism, and partly with Ignorance, have
missed of that which is the main, and said little, or nothing, to that which is
of most concernment.

Quest. What are those weighty Truths, or some of them, that should be further
spoken to?

Answ. This for one, namely, The undoubted and unquestionable Being of a God.

Quest. Do you judge that needful?

Answ. Yea: for it is not so long since Atheism appeared with an open face in
the Ranters; and how it appears in the lives of multitudes, is too manifest.
For how do men at this day, swear for or against any thing that stands with
their present advantage, and laugh at that in private as superstitious and
ridiculous, which they in public subscribe to, as if it were good and suitable
to the mind of God; with many like Abominations, which men could never
constantly run on in the course of doing, if they did from the heart believe
that there is a God: For what is more inconsistent with the Being of a God,
than to own and countenance such works of Iniquity?

Quest. How will you prove convincingly there is a God?

Answ. First, It is proved by the Creation of the World: for it is altogether
impossible for the visible Creation to give it self a being; I mean there is no
thing which the eye of man can behold, which could possibly give it self a
being; muchless could it give a being to any thing lose. As for example, Where
can any Man find a creature in heaven or in earth, endued with Reason and
Understanding, and so accomplished with Skill, to bring to pass such excellent
works as he himself can do, and yet could he not make himself. But it is
evident to reason, that the first of mankind must have their Being from God:
muchless could Man have stretched out his hand to the Heavens, and have set
them at such a wonderful distance from the Earth, and have stretched them round
about it, and so bespangled it with Stars, and have given a Being to the Sun
and Moon, and have commanded them to keep their course to all Generations:
neither could he have made the Earth and the Seas, and have stocked them with
such variety of Creatures, and bound them in a round lump together, and
commanded this bulkie massy piece to stand firm in the midst of the Heavens:
these and suchlike Works are too wonderful for any, but only for Himself, who
is in Mercy, Power, Wisdom, Foreknowledge, and all eternal Excellency,
Matchless and Infinite.

Quest. But may it not be objected by an Atheist, that all things are by Nature?

Answ. It may, and is so objected commonly; but the answer is ready at hand,
thus; If it should be supposed that all things are by Nature, yet then of
necessity this cannot be denied, that Nature must be accomplished with such an
Almighty Power, unsearchable Wisdom, and wonderful Love to the whole Earth, and
especially to Mankind, together with all those most glorious Perfections which
we commonly ascribe to God: for most evident it is, that He that wrought out
the Being, and Well-being of all things, is most richly furnished with the very
highest Perfections of all Excellency and Goodness; and this is no less than to
confess the Being of a God.

Quest. Have you any other proof that there is a God?

Answ. The works of Providence do further evidence the Being of a God; as
first, The constant Preservation of the whole Creation, that all the hosts of
Men and Beasts, Fowls, and all living Creatures, should be in a constant course
of Providence fed every day for thousands of years together; it evidently shows
the Fatherly-care, Faithfulness, Wisdom and Bounty of a God.

Again, if God does alter his wonted course at any time, and make the Heavens
Brass, and the Earth Iron, or bring other severe judgments; every considering
man may clearly discern, that the abounding Wickedness of the Sons of Men,
have provoked the Giver of all Goodness to take his Mercy away, and may well
read in all his strokes, a loud call to repentance. But further, if men do but
humble themselves under his hand, and return from their evil ways, how
graciously does he return to his ordinary way of showing Mercy.

Also, if we do consider his governing the World, it most wonderfully declares
his infinite and eternal Being. Take these instances, first, the Sun, Moon and
Stats, keeping so constant a course ordinarily from Age to Age: as also Day and
Night; Summer and Winter; Seedtime and Harvest, following each other in a
settled course. And if the Lord at any time alter the course of any of his
Creatures; as when the Sun and Moon stood still in Joshua's days, and came
back in Hezekiah's days ten degrees; the Red Sea divided in Moses's days, and
the River of Jordan driven back, or any like act done, it always was brought
to pass at such times, and for some such noble ends, as that it did always more
abundantly preach forth the Power, Grace, Wisdom, Justice, and unspeakable
Goodness of an Eternal God.

Quest. But how know you that these wonderful Works were done?

Answ. Manifest it is, that in no age, no not in this we now live in, can any
of the great Works of God get any credit in the world, till they are manifest
beyond all possibility of dispute: therefore there can be no ground for a doubt.

Secondly, Consider his Strength, Wisdom and Goodness, in governing the World,
so as that his poor People live in it. It is most manifest to all that do
consider it, that of them that love and fear God, and are the most conscionable
in minding and observing his Word, Works and Worship, that they are very few,
few, few, in comparison of the multitudes, numberless multitudes of
blasphemous-Atheists, Idolaters, profane, unjust, deceitful Covenant-breakers,
with other like workers of Iniquity! all setting themselves with open mouth to
devour this little Remnant, and diging to Hell for deep Counsels to destroy
them; and yet for all their unjust and cunning policies, and oft-times open
violence exercised against them, through the rich Goodness, divine Wisdom and
Providence of God, they have never yet been rooted out of the Earth; but
although they have been almost blotted out with the rage and persecution of the
World, yet has the Most High still preserved a little Flock of Lambs amidst a
world of wolves, who fain would, but never yet could, wholly devour them: which
plainly proves that there is a God that has more Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
than all their Enemies have strength or malice, who ever lives to take care of
them.

Again, the Signs that God often shows in the sudden and unexpected
overturning of their Enemies from time to time, is of a very convincing nature,
to prove that certainly there is a God that judges the Earth.

Quest. Seeing you have proved the undoubted and certain Being of a God, what
is the next weighty Truth that stands in need of proof?

Answ. The next Truth most needful to be cleared, is the holy Scriptures, to be
the Words and Counsels of God.

Quest. Is there any with us do deny them?

Answ. Yes, there is some do deny them; and more would, if fear or shame did
not stop their mouths, as appears by their works.

Quest. What Books do you mean by holy Scriptures?

Answ. The Writings of Moses and the Prophets, till Malachies days, committed
to the ancient Church of the Jews, and received by them: as also the Books of
the New Testament, from Matthew to the Revelation.

Quest. And wherefore do you reject those Books commonly called Apocrypha? do
you think the Spirit of God had no hand in the writing of them?

Answ. It seems too hard to conclude, that those that wrote those stories, had
no Light or aid from the Spirit of God in the writing of them; they might be
good men, and hand forth some truths, and useful things, as many doubtless have
done both in former and latter Ages, who, although we may make good use of
their Books, yet may we not receive them as infallible Prophets writings, but
receive, or reject, or suspend our judgments, as we see they agree or disagree
with the Word of Truth and clear Reason, or appear doubtful.

Quest. But is there reason to take this liberty with those Books; what are
your grounds to doubt of their infallability?

Answ. Clear it is, that however there are good Counsels in some of those
Writings, yet they seem to be written by some Jews in or after the captivity,
when their light in all probability was much dimmed, and not by the Prophets:
Also how far from the language and style of the infallible Spirit of God, those
Writings are (some of them) is evident: the Spirit of God uses not to
acknowledge infirmity, and a doing as well as he can, for he is perfect, and
therefore does nothing meanly. Again, as there be absurdities not fit to be put
upon the holy Spirit (as this for one, to go about to make us believe the Devil
will be frighted away with smoke) so also there is one stark lie, so rank that
a fool may discern it; the same person that says in one place, he is the Son
of Ananias, says in another, he is an holy Angel. There be other exceptions I
will not now spend time about; these may suffice to let you see some ground
wherefore I cannot own them to be of divine Authority.

Quest. But how will you prove that those books, known by the names of the Old
and New Testaments, are the infallible Words of God, and so the safe Rule to
lead men in the true Path of believing and obedience to Life everlasting?

Answ. First, They may be known by their noble style; as for example, When you
hear any persons express themselves judiciously, acutely, in excellent
Language, although you never saw them before, yet may you safely conclude that
they are persons of excellent breeding and quality, although they should appear
in never so mean a dress: So may it much more be concluded concerning the
Scriptures; their dialect has that Majesty, Holiness, Grace and high Wisdom in
them, most elegantly manifesting the perfections of a divine Being in them, and
declaring the judiciousness, faithfulness, and perfection of all his Intentions
and Proceedings with the sons of men, that it is not likely possible for any
gracious considering man, to call there Authority into question.

Secondly, The blessed Intention and scope of them, discover them to proceed
from the holy Spirit; all the Commandments, Threatenings, Promises, Warnings,
Counsels and Declarations contained in them, unanimously tending to advance
Godliness in the hearts and lives of men.

Thirdly, The several Doctrines and points of Truth contained in them, are so
wisely and holily compacted, standing in so sweet an Union together, and so
nessecarily depending one upon another, like the parts and members of a natural
body, most comely and beautiful, so that the highest commendations Christ gives
his Church, in that book of the Canticles, does much more belong to that Body
of Divinity held forth in the Scriptures, by which she is begotten and
conformed to his Image. Add to this the consideration of the Penmen thereof,
who being the Prophets and Apostles, and living in several Ages, yet without
jarr have brought forth this noble work; so that you may plainly see, they were
all guided by one and the same holy Spirit in the writing of them.

Fourthly, The Effects and lively Power of them in the hearts of men, declare
from whence they are descended; that which is spoken of their soul-searching
and powerful piercing nature, Heb. 4.12. every soul that seriously converseth
with them, finds true: He that in his old blind estate took his heart to be
good, when he comes to try it by the Scriptures, finds it so notoriously
filthy, that he abhors himself; and as it discovers sin, so it purges it
out, and makes the carnal heart spiritual, and brings it unto the Love of God
and Holiness, which before he hated, and works it up to the hatred of sin,
which before he loved; so that its transforming nature plainly shows it to be
the Words of God.

Quest. But may not other Books persuade men as well as that? how many are led
by other books into error?

Answ. Yea other books may overcome men's judgments, but not transform their
natures, from carnal to be spiritual, from earthlymindedness to be heavenly
minded, and to bring from the love of sin to the love of holiness, as this
blessed Book of the holy Scriptures does.

Fifthly, The constant fulfilling of the Prophecies of them, preach to all men
their ^nfallibility. God made good his Promise to Abraham, Genesis 15. as also
that to David, 2 Samuel 7.12. to the 17. Also his Threatenings to Jeroboam, 1
Kings 13.2. As also the Promises made in the 2d of Haggai, and 3d of Malachi,
concerning Christ's coming to the second Temple, which is now fallen. Also
Christ's Prophecy of the fall of this Temple, and of Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37, 38.
and 24.2, 19, 20, 21, 22. Luke 21.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. is also come to pass. As
also the Prophecy of Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. is, you see, fulfilled to a
tittle, with many more instances if need were, all proving their heavenly birth.

Sixthly, The unsupportable burden of a Conscience, which God wounds for
sin; The sealing Testimony of his Love by the Spirit to the soul of the true
believer; The gracious Answers to prayers made to God in the name of Christ,
with other like experiences, give to all gracious hearts most full assurance,
that the Scriptures were endited by the Spirit of God.

Seventhly, Jehovah himself has born witness of them, that they are his words
beyond all contradiction. 1. By declaring the ten Commandments with his own
Voice, with that terror as is expressed, Exodus 19. and writing them twice with
his own hand; these being the grand Law on which the whole Scriptures depend,
and being the foundation of all Religion, as by and by will appear. 2. The
wonderful Signs and Miracles wrought to confirm them; as the bringing Israel
out of Egypt through the Red Sea, and the Wilderness, and Jordan, by a pillar
of a Cloud by day, and a pillar of Fire by night, into Canaan, to the terror
of all the Nations round about. Also the Sun standing still, and coming back.
The Resurrection of Christ, which will be proved anon: and the Resurrection of
others by Christ, with other numberless Miracles; all preaching to the world,
that the Scriptures are the Counsel and Will of God.

Quest. But how shall we know that these wonders have been wrought, but by the
Scriptures own Testimony, or by the Church?

Answ. It may be known if this be considered, that the Scriptures have always
had, and to this day have, so many feigned friends and open enemies, either
flatly opposing them, or to their uttermost, secretly undermining and
disgracing them, or exalting humane inventions above them, in so much that no
sober Christian can doubt, but that if there had been possibility to have
denied the report of those Miracles in that day in which they are said to be
done, the World could not have wanted Volumes enough to have shaken the Faith
of the Christian World (so called) long before this day: but although they be
carpt at and undermined, yet may all that love them, challenge all their
enemies to produce one known and approved Author, that has undertaken to
reprove the report of those glorious Miracles; and if none can be found, then
have we the greatest assurance that can be desired, that they are certainly
true.

Eighthly, And lastly, They have a Testimony in the consciences and mouths of
those that like not to be ruled by them; and therefore make as little use of
them as possible they can in setting up Religion. You have a clear instance of
the Papists, to go no further. Evident it is, that as many Decrees, Canons,
Articles, Traditions and Ceremonies, as the Church of Rome has, yet with all
these and her Mass Book, Pope and Councils to boot, with all their pretended
infalliability, yet they cannot have a Religion without the holy Scriptures,
although it be a well-known truth that they love them not: For all those that
honor and obey them, and dare not transgress those blessed Precepts, are the
only grand Heretics with them. And as for such as conform to their abominable
Idolatries, and superstitious Inventions, pass for Catholic people with them,
although they be notorious transgressors of the Law of God: and yet if these
men did wholly cast off the Scriptures, as ill as they love them, their
Religion could not have a Being. I am neither insensible nor forgetful, that
there are both foolish and subtle endeavors by several sorts of men, besides
these; some of them I may meet with at another turn, others a reasonable
understanding will answer; and therefore I will go no further in this.

Quest. Have you not some other consideration about the Scriptures meet to be
opened? you spoke a little before of the Dignity of the ten Commandments, will
you prove those sayings?

Answ. I did so, and before I go further, I think it meet to do that work, for
now having proved the Scriptures to be of divine Authority, we may with all
boldness apply our selves unto them, as a safe guide in Religion. And first for
the Dignity of the ten Commandments, it is most evident that they are a
superior Law, on which all other Laws in the Scriptures depend. For this, see
Christ's own Testimony, Mat. 22.35. where giving us the sum of that divine Law,
consisting in Love to God and to our Neighbor, he tells us in express words,
that the whole Law and the Prophets hang upon it; and that this is not my own
exposition of the Text, but the Apostle Paul's, see Romans 13.8, 9, 10. as also
Jam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. how plainly does he there call this Law the Royal Law; and
that this is the Law there intended, plainly appears, by his naming some of the
Precepts of it expressly.

Quest. But these two Texts, Romans and James, seem to look to the second Table
more than the first; must we understand the whole ten is there intended,
although not expressed?

Answ. The whole Law is expressed truly in those Texts, although not so largely
handled; the Apostles business being to apply the second Table to those present
cases; but Love belongs to God as well as to our Neighbor; and the second Table
without the first, cannot be every tittle of the Royal Law; which yet appears
more clearly, if you consider that the way to prove our Love to men to be
sincere, is by our Love to God, and keeping of his Commandments, 1 John 5.2, 3.
And the Commands without limitation, are said to be the whole duty of man,
Eccles. 12.13. And David found the keeping of them all, the only safe way of
escaping shame, Psalm. 119.6. And in Psalm. 111. how vehemently he presses the
keeping of those Commands that are the work of God's hands, which none were but
only the ten Commandments, Exodus 20. these he wrote twice himself, Exodus 32.15,
16. and Deuteronomy. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And how Moses exalted them above all other Laws
of God, see Deuteronomy. 4.10, 11, 12.

Quest. But can you by some further opening the point, help our understandings,
that we may discern that the whole Scriptures do depend upon them?

Answ. Very evident it is in Reason, that this Law is of a Supreme Authority:
for observe, the judicial Law clearly depends upon it; for it is a Law
ordaining punishments for the transgressions of that higher Law. And as for the
Ceremonial Law, it depends upon it plainly; for it consists of shadows of
Christ, and the Grace that comes to the world by him; who came to redeem us
from the curse of that Law, Gal. 3.13. Heb. 9.15. And from these and other-like
Texts, we may clearly see that the whole Gospel depends upon that Law also:
for it being transgressed by all mankind, and no possibility therefore for any
man to have life by the Law, because it cursed every transgressor without
Mercy: and seeing all are gone out of the way, and are altogether become
abominable, Psalm. 14. and 53. and therefore no justification by the Law. And
therefore if God would be so gracious as to save man, there lay this necessity
upon him to give his Son to die, and through his Blood, to vouchsafe his Word,
Spirit and Ordinances, and whatsoever tends to justify or to sanctify man,
and so to fit him for Eternal Life. Likewise the whole Scriptures consisting of
threatenings for sin, committed against that Law, or declarations of the
judgments that have fallen upon the transgressors of that Law; or promises of
mercy to those that obey it, or repent for breaking it; or declarations of the
blessings which they have had, or shall have, that love or observe it; or some
or other such head of Doctrine is held forth in the whole Scriptures foam way
relating to that Law, that what Doctrine soever we hear at any time, that
bears not a good accord with that Law of the ten Commandments, we are taught
by the Prophet Isaiah, to believe that that Teacher has no light in him, Isa.
8.20. So that whosoever will but mind the Scriptures, and exercise his reason,
may very well discern they all depend upon that Law.

Quest. Will you show us how they be the foundation of all Religion?

Answ. First, That which has been said, is a full proof that they be the
foundation of all Religion; for if they be the ground of all Reproof,
Exhortation, Promises, and whatsoever else is contained in the Scriptures, then
must they needs be the foundation of all Religion, if Religion be to be learned
from the Scriptures, as sure it is, and they be the Counsels and Words of God,
as they have been proved to be.

Quest. But what if the Scriptures be the Words of God, may nothing be learned
from the Church; is there nothing in her power to order in manner of God's
Worship, or the time of it; is there no ceremony or custom lawful but what the
Scriptures warrant?

Answ. No, nothing is lawful in God's Worship, but his own certain
Appointments: He has by an express Law bound us to hearken to his Word, and
neither add nor diminish, Deuteronomy. 4.2. with many other-like Texts.

Object. But are we not as well commanded not to forsake the Law of our Mother,
as to obey the Commands of our Father, Prove. 1.8. and 6.20. and is not the
Church our Mother?

Answ. That Popish interpretation of those Texts, appears to be Idolatrous and
blasphemous: the admitting the Church to be a law-making Mother, if you compare
it with the words of Christ, Mat. 15.9. where the commandments of men, although
they were the Church, are condemned for vain worship. Also Paul tells us,
Christ is in all things head to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. and if that Apostle
understood himself, there can be nothing left for the Church to order or
appoint, in one kind or other, about God's Worship; but her work lies merely in
searching out what her Head by himself, or by his Ministry has appointed.

Quest. Who account you Christ's Ministry?

Answ. All the Penmen of the holy Scriptures, as well those that wrote the Old
Testament, as those that wrote the New, as appears, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12.

Quest. Can you make it a little more plain to our understandings, that the ten
Commandments are the ground and foundation of all Religion?

Answ. That I shall endeavor, and for that end consider, there must be a Law
binding all men to the observance of God's Will, before any sin can be
committed; and it must be a Law of such a nature, as renders the whole world
guilty before God, according to Romans 3.19. and no such Law can be found but the
ten Commandments.

Quest. Is it not more likely to be that Law, written in the hearts of all men,
spoken of, Romans 2. that brings the whole world under guilt?

Answ. True it is; but that Law written in the heart, is the very same Law; as
is plainly to be seen in that 2d to the Romans 14, 15. and so to the end of the
Chapter. The very same Law that the Jews boasted of, and preached, and shall be
judged by, it is that that is writ in the heart, and may be discerned by the
Light aforded to natural men. And the Gentiles come up to a more close
obedience of, than the Jews, and so have more praise of God, and be in his
account the better Jews: the only difference is, the one has it written in
letters easy to read, the other only as it is written in the heart: but the
Law is the very same that is given both to the one and to the other.

Quest. Was there no Religion in the world, till the ten Commandments were
given upon Mount Sinai?

Answ. Yea, from the very beginning of the world, but yet not before the ten
Commandments were given, for there could be none without them.

Quest. But how does it appear that the ten Commandments were given to Adam and
all his Posterity?

Answ. The Law could not stop every mouth, and bring the whole world under
guilt, if Adam, the Father of the whole world, were not under it, Romans 3.19.

Quest. Do you read of any other command to him, then to forbear the fruit of
the Tree, of knowledge of Good and Evil?

Answ. Yea we do, or may do; if through carelessness and inconsideration we over
look them not: For can it be reasonably thought, that God sanctified the
Sabbath for no use; which absurdity cannot be av^ided, if it were not for Adam
to keep: or that Cain sinned in killing his Brother, if there had been no Law
against Murder: or indeed that either Godliness or Righteousness was like to
flourish in the world, if any of the ten Commandments had been wanting. But
further it is clear, that the ten Commands are called the First Covepant o^
(...) the Old Covenant; Heb. 8. And in the 9th chap. 15. ver. there you have
the Cause of Christ's Death, rendered to be for the sins committed against that
first Covenant. So that it is evident beyond contradiction, that if Abel,
Enoch, and the godly Patriarchs of the first Ages of the world, had the benifit
of the Redeemers blood; for otherwise they could not be righteous by Faith,
then the New Covenant must needs be in force in Adams days: And I am sure no
man in his right mind, will say, that the New Covenant is older than the old
Covenant is.

Again, can it be any other than that holy Law which is so well known in the
Old Testament, that Paul does mean, when he makes the work of Redemption to
lie in delivering us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. and 4.4.5. Therefore
they do not want ignorance, that have so confidently affirmed, that the
Sabbath, which is one of the ten Words, was never given to the Gentiles,
neither by the Law of Moses, nor by the Law of Nature, nor yet by the Law of
Christ. Seeing it is so evident in reason to believe, that what was given to
the first Fathers of the world, was given to the World. And the curse of that
Law that did necessitate the Death of Christ for the World, must needs be the
Worlds duty, otherwise it could not curse them; but they show themselves what
skilful builders they be.

Quest. Seeing you charge these men so home, speak one word more for the
further clearing of this point?

Answ. First, Then it is evident to all men, that as many as were bound to be
circumcised, were bound to keep the whole Law. The reason is full in Paul's
words, beyond any reasonable man's doubt, Gal. 5.3. for if he was bound to keep
the whole Law, who was circumcised; albeit, there might be some circumcised,
who at that day, when Paul wrote this, it was not their duty, but their
ignorance so to be; How much more must they needs be bound to keep the Law, who
were bound to be circumcised, whether they were circumcised or no? except the
neglect of one duty discharged a man of all other due from him to his God,
which I presume no man will say. So that here remains nothing to do but only
this, namely, to prove, That all men before the coming of Christ in the flesh,
were bound to be circumcised: and if it had not been the Worlds duty as well as
Isreal's, wherefore should be Lord threaten to punish them for the neglect of
it, as he does? Jerem. 9.25, 26. Sure God will not punish them for that which
is no sin: and it can be no sin to neglect that which is no duty. Again, Paul
in drawing up his Charge against the Colossians estate, 2.13. before their
conversion, charge them with the uncircumcision of their flesh, which sure he
would not have done, if he had not known their neglect of it before Christ was
made known to them, had been their sin. Again, no man can be ignorant of this,
that strangers that were not of Israel, might partake with them in all the
Privileges of Religion acceptably, that ever read Exodus 12.48, 49. with
other-like places: and can any man be so brutish, as to think it was not all
the Gentiles duty as well as some of them; or to think that any of them could
have been accepted, if it had been voluntary religion, or will worship, so
plainly condemneds, Col. 2.18, 23. Besides it is manifest, that the very
Congregation to whom God proclaimed this Law in Sinai, consisted of a mixed
multitude of other People, as well as of Jews, Exodus 12.38. Numb. 11.4. Now
that these ten Commandments are the foundation of all Religion, is no way hard
to conceive; for because this Law was transgressed, and therefore could not
save man, therefore there was a necessity of our Lords Death to redeem man, as
may by comparing these with other-like Texts together be seen, Romans 8.3, 4. and
10.5. Gal. 3.10, 12, 13. Heb. 8.7, 8, 9. and 9.15. And because Christ has
redeemed us, therefore the Gospel is necessary to open to the Sons of men, the
benefits of his Death: For the raising of Faith in the soul, and the working of
us to repentance, and for the carrying on of the work of Sanctification, the
Ordinances of the Lord's Supper, Baptism, and the rest of his Appointments, are
necessary, as Preaching, Praying, and all other duties of Plety and Godliness:
the whole body of Religion has so natural a dependence, one part of Truth upon
another, and the whole of it upon that Law, as is clear and easy to every
considering man to understand.

Quest. But is not this Doctrine legal, and an exalting the Law above the
Gospel, in saying it is the foundation of Religion?

Answ. No by no means, no such thing will follow, no more than it will follow
that the first Adam is greater than the second Adam; or the darkness more
excellent than the light, although that was first created.

Quest. Explain this point as brief as you can.

Answ. Understand it thus, I call this Law the Foundation of Religion, because
if it be made void, all Religion of necessity must be made void with it. As for
Example, if it continue not to be a rule of holy and just living, then he that
neglects to observe it, sins not; and he that offends not this Law,
cannot be cuised by it; and he that is not cursed by it, cannot stand in need
of redemption by our Lord Jesus to redeem him from the curse thereof; and he
that needs no Redemption, needs no Redeemer; and he that needs not a Redeemer,
needs not the blessings that come by him, nor yet a Gospe^ nor Ordinances to
convey them to him: So that if you mind it well, you will see that all the
parts and prancies of Religion (...) with (...) Law; therefore as we love
Religion, and would see it prosper, let u^ be tender of the root. Our Savior
tells us, not one jor or tittle shall pass from this Law; and that he that
breaks one of the least of them, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 5.18, 19. And James will not allow the breach of it in one point,
but requires the fulfilling of it, Jam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11.

Quest. Does the Law stand in the same force and power now, as when it was at
first given, because the Scriptures speak of it, as old and done away, dead to
us, and we to it, with suchlike expressions which make some think, it does not
continue to be a Rule of life?

Answ. First, The Law continues the same in it self for ever, and is an
everlasting Rule of Godliness and Righteousness to all Generations, as has
been proved: nevertheless, the Law has no power to help our distresses, which
we lie in now since the Fall, but our help comes by our Lord Jesus alone. As
for example, It cannot justify us, not sanctify us; look Romans 3d, 4th and 7th
chapters, with many more Texts like them: It cannot now give us life, although
once it was ordained for that purpose, but it is now become the Ministration of
Condemnation, a killing letter, out of whose power there were no escaping, were
not its cursing Office taken out of its hands by Jesus Christ; look Romans 7. 2
Cor. 3. with other-like places: but I cannot now stand to discourse this at
large, it would require a Book of it self; nevertheless, I was willing to give
thee a little hint or notice of these things, to preserve thee from stumbling
at this holy Law, as many blind and ignorant souls do, who will not have it at
all; that because it will not serve them, therefore they will not have it
cendemn them, nor show them their sin; but this Office it will have in the
world to the end of it, Romans 3.20.

Quest. If the whole and every tittle of the Law be for ever binding, then the
fourth Command must be binding also; and that almost all men are against; some
think it abolished, and that we are bound to keep no Sabhath at all; others
think it partly moral, and partly ceremonial; others think the Church had power
to change it; others think the Apostles and Church in their days changed it;
others think that a seventh part of time at the will and pleasure of man, is
sufficient instead of it.

Answ. I answer in the words of the Prophet, The Lord knows the thoughts of
men that they are vanity, Psalm. 94.11. for there is no ground for any of these
thoughts, but the fourth Command is like its fellows, given at the beginning of
the world, and endures as long as the world endures.

Quest. Will you speak a few words to prove its Perpetuity in particular?

Answ. That I shall; but seeing there are so many Treatises extant, of so many
Authors, some dead, and some living, that have so fully proved it, and answered
all objections, I shall say the less, Brayborn, Ocford, Spitlehouse, Stenit,
with many others I omit to name now; yet notwithstanding I shall say something
heat; First, It was given in a day of Innocence, even the very first whole day
of Adams being in the world, which is enough to deliver it from all suspicion
of being ceremonial or changeable, but a sanctified season to worship God in,
and to commemorate the Work of Creation for ever.

Quest. The second of Genesis speaks of God's resting upon it, and sanctifying
it; but is it plain that he gave it to Adam, and so to the world?

Answ. For answer to this, when God sanctified the Sabbath, it must be for
Adam, or for himself: now it is so sorded to say, or to think, that he
sanctified a Rest for himself, that one would think that no man that is in his
right mind, would once imagine it. As for outward Rest, he cannot want, Isa.
40.28. and for inward Sanctification, he can have as little want of that; for
who that owneth a God, will not confess him to be perfect, now if he had no
need to sanctify it for himself, he did it for Adam, or for no use at all; but
to judge him so vain in his actions, is too great blasphemy for any to affirm
that has his reason, and does but use it.

Quest. Have you any thing more to strengthen this proof?

Answ. Yea, when the Lord gave it with the other nine, in the 20. of Exodus, he
placed it in the midst of his Law, and wrote it with his own hand, and put it
into the Ark with its fellows, and fenced it about with more Reasons to
preserve it from violation, than he did all the other six Commands following
it; and all those Reasons are of a moral nature, not one of them otherwise; so
that here is no occasion given of men's so stumbling at it, as they do; but that
the Duty is spiritual, and men's hearts carnal, and they love to be ruled by the
flesh.

Quest. But is there not ground to judge the Sabbath ceremonial from that 2d of
the Colossians?

Answ. Not at all, if men did with care read and consider the Scriptures; for
evident it is, that besides the New Moons, and holy Days, of which there were
many, there were four ceremonial Sabbaths in the seventh Month, as appears,
Levit. 23.24, 32, 39. which if considered, men would be wiser than to employ
that Text in that unworthy Service, to take away the Seventh-day Sabbath,
especially seeing the Sabbaths there mentioned, are of the nature of the New
Moons and holy Days, shadows of things to come; but the Seventh-day Sabbath,
appointed to commemorate the great Work past. But further, when God declared
his ten Commandments in (...) of any Sabbath, but the Seventh-Day, burgiveth
his People in this Command, as free leave to work the six days, as if he never
intended any other Sabbath should be kept at all, and yet by Moses, shortly
after gives command for them also. All which shows plainly the difference
between these two sorts of Sabbaths, the one to contitute a Law for ever, the
other a shadow till the time of Reformation only.

Quest. Seeing it is so opposed in the world, speak one word or two more for
its confirmation.

Answ. Our Lord Jesus has in the Now Testament, sufficiently confirmed it;
First in general, By telling that the Law, in which the Sabbath is included,
shall remain in every jot and tittle of it, till Heaven and Earth pass away,
and till all things be fulfilled: now we know many great things, spoken of in
the Law and Prophets, are not yet fulfilled; neither is Heaven and Earth in any
sense passed away, and therefore the Sabbath must remain by that Rule, without
the diminishing of one tittle of it, Mat. 5.17, 18, 19, 20. these Texts are of
a like import with that already named, Luke 16.17, 18. Jaws. 2.8, 10, 11. Rev.
11.19. and 12.17. and 14.12. Romans 3.31. Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. with many other.

Again, in particular to the Sabbath it self; If our Lord did not intend it
should continue after his Death, but he nailed to the Cross with the other
Ceremonies, what reason could there be for him to advise his Disciples to pray
that their flight might not fall out on the Sabbath, or at the fall of
Jerusalens, seeing it fell out sorty years after his Death? and wherefore
should be tell us it was made for man, and that He is the Lord of it, if it
have no being in his Dominions amongst the Children of men? Mark 2.27, 28. And
besides all this, does not the holy Spirit call it Sabbath; and how dare mortal
worms call it working day? For which way can it deserve the name of a Sabbath,
if it retain not the nature of a Sabbath? But this is an Age in which men are
bent to walk in their own ways, and neither believe nor do any thing that
crosses the flesh; otherwise how were it possible for men to find so many
evasions to keep off from so plain a Duty? which was the constant practice of
the Saints in the Primitive time, as may be seen, Acts 13.14, 42, 44. and
16.13. and 17.2. and 18.4. And it is observable, that in the former of these
Texts, Acts 13. Paul keeps Sabbath with Gentiles, and speaks not the least word
against their Practice, nor intimates nothing of a meeting any other day, an
evil that Paul would never have been guilty of, had he known any thing of the
abolishing or changing of the Sabbath Day; for how earnestly Paul contended
against the Gentiles observation of Ceremonies, cannot be unknown.

Quest. But is it not possible for the whole ten Commands to be observed,
although the Sabbath be transmitted from the seventh to the first day of the
week?

Answ. If the Lord, or any other by his Authority, had so done, I would not
have questioned his power or wisdom herein; but seeing he did it not, but it is
merely an invention of man, I must condemn it for a wicked and ungodly
Practice, of which the old Serpent was the principal Author, to cause the poor
Jews to stumble at the Redeemer of the World to this day.

Quest. Since Christ and his Apostles, and Primitive Saints observed it, what
is the reason that the Jews do not believe in Jesus Christ, seeing
Sabbath-Prophanation is one of their greatest Arguments they commonly urge
against Christ, and the Christian Religion?

Answ. There is no cause to wonder at their unbelief, nor at the reason of it;
for how can we expect they should search the New Testament diligently, to
inform themselves what the mind and practice of Christ and his Primitive Saints
was, when they who profess it to be their Rule, are so extreme careless in this
matter, that they suffer themselves to be couzened, some with another day, and
some with no day, instead of the Sabbath: now the poor Jews judging of the
Religion of Christ, by the lives of the generality of those that profess his
Name, cannot but stumble at him, and abominate that Religion that allows such
plain and notorious Wickedness, committed against the express letter of God's
most holy Law; and it cannot be expected in reason that they should repent and
believe, till a more general Reformation be found in the lives of the Gentiles,
that profess to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Quest. Well if such prejudices as they take at the Lord Jesus, should be
removed, how can it be clearly proved that Christ Jesus, the Son of Mary, who
was crucified by Pilate, is the true Messiah?

Answ. There are many infallible proofs of it; As first, The certain Time of
his coming, being so fairly pointed at by the Scriptuies; if Jesus be not he,
this will follow, not only that we must with the Jews look for another, but be
constrained also to cast off the holy Scriptures, received both by them and us,
and so shall be wholly at a loss to know what to believe or receive for truth,
in order to our eternal peace.

Quest. Name some of those Texts, and a little open them, for the sakes of the
poor Jews, and the blind World; who, it is to be feared, neither know Him, nor
in truth believe in Him, but ignorantly confess him, because it is the Religion
of the Times, and tradition and custom has taught them so to do.

Answ. The first Text is Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
and the Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him shall
the obedience of the Peoples (...). ^hiloh here is Christ, or the Messiah, and
so understood by the Hebrew Doctors, as well as by Christians. See learned
Ainsworth upon the place: And that he was to come according to Jacobs
Prophecy, at or near the time that the Kings and Governors of Judah ceased to
rule, is the manifest scope and intent of the Text: And although Judah had no
King after the Captivity, yet her Princes were still known, and by Permission
some of them bore Rule, as appears, Ezra 3.8, 9. Hag. 1.12. And evident it is,
the Heirs of the Crown of Judah, were well known to the coming of Christ, and
Christ known to be Heir apparent to the Crown of Judah so well, that when he
wrought that Miracle of feeding five thousand with five loaves, and two fishes,
John 6.14, 15. the people would by force have made him King, if he had not by
hiding himself avoided it; and that was a charge against him at his death, that
he was King of the Jews; but neither Pilate nor the Jews could deny but that so
He was; his right to the Crown may well be perceived, by what his enemies on
both parts say, in that 18, and 19, chapters of John. but since Christ, the
World, nor the Jews themselves, cannot find any Lawgiver or Prince that so
much as pretended a right to the Kingdom, but are so dispersed and broken, that
they are like to find none, till that Prophecy be fulfilled, Zech. 12.10. that
they look upon him whom they pierced, to whom the Peoples, that is, the
Gentiles, do gather, acknowledge or obey, according to this Text; and
impossible it is, that this Text can be fulfilled in any that is yet to come;
for the House of Judah has been without a Governor or Lawgiver this 1600
years at least, and so long ago, or longer, the Messiah must be come, or else
this Text must be blotted out of the Book of God: and if once Moses's writings
come into question, then farewell all Religion both among Jews and Gentiles. Now
as for our Lord Jesus, we know that all Prophecies of the Old Testament are
fulfilled in him; He is a Prophet like to Moses, most graciously opening and
confirming all the moral Laws; and in his own obedience unto the Death,
fulfilled all the ceremonial Laws; and the Laws he has added in the New
Testament, are so fully confirmed by many glorious Miracles, and are so holy,
just, and good, the end of them all tending to advance Love with Holiness:
Witness Baptism, the Lord's Supper, and the rest of his Appointments; so that
to his time, and in him, this Prophecy of good old Father Jacob is fulfilled;
but since him there has been no Lawgiver to the House of Judah, and therefore
the Messiah cannot be to come, unless we should reject Moses's writings, and
account them fables, which God forbid. The other two Texts are Haggai, the 2.7,
9. and Mal. 3.1. In the former of these Texts, you have a Promise made to
Zerubbabel, that the desire of all Nations should come, and that the Temple he
built, should be filled with Glory; yea, have greater Glory than the former
built by Solomon, although it were in comparison of it as nothing; yea, so
great a difference was there between them, for all outward glory, that the old
men that had seen the first House, lamented the meanness of this latter House,
as much as the young men rejoiced at its Glory, Ezra 3.12, 13. So that it is
evident to every indifferent and impartial man, that the coming of Christ to
that House while it remained, should be the great Glory promised to it.
Likewise the Promise in Malachi cuts off all cavels about the matter, for there
the Promise runs clear, The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
Temple, the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in. And if it be
considered, no man can doubt but that our Lord Jesus is the Christ, who did
come to that Temple, and by his Presence, and blessed Doctrine, made it
glorious, even while it was yet standing: for if these Texts be not fulfilled
in Christ our Lord, they never can be fulfilled at all; for the Promises were
made of his coming, to that Temple which Zerubbable built, and cannot be
understood of one that is yet to be built, although it should be built the next
month; for that can never be said to be done suddenly, that remains so many
hundred years undone, as it is since Malachi wrote; neither if the Messiah
should come to another Temple not yet in being, would it signify any thing as
to the fulfilling of any Promise made concerning that Temple, then which
Zerubbabel built; but the Promises were made to that Temple then known and in
being, if ever those Prophets intended their meaning should be known by their
words; and therefore we must own our Lord Jesus for the true Messiah and
Savior of mankind, or else reject Moses and the Prophets, or put out the eye
of our understanding and reason.

Quest. Have you some further proof of this great Truth?

Answ. The glorious Miracles which he did in the days of his flesh, and his
Ministers after him, so plentifully recorded in the New Testament, be an
evident witness of the truth of his being sent of God; Who, that is not
assisted with omnipotency, can give eyes to the blind, yea, to those born
blind; and cure such as are lame from the womb; cast out Devils by a word of
command; raise the dead four days dead, with cures of all kinds?

Quest. But may not an unbelieving person say, how shall the truth of all this
be known?

Answ. To which I say, where is the Book, the Author, or Record, that could
ever be produced, that has substantially discovered the falfity of the Records
of the New Testament? if not, we may be sure it is most true; for there never
wanted either malice or skill to have done it, if it could possibly have been
done.

Quest. Is there any further proof of this, because it is a point of great
importance?

Answ. The Prophecies that went before of him where he should be born, and of
whom, a Virgin of the House of David; what he should suffer, and by what hands;
how he should be numbered with transgressors, be pierced, his garments parted,
lots cast upon his vesture, and He sold for 30 pieces of Silver, which should
come into the Potters hands; with whatsoever was written in the Old Testament
of the Messiah, it was to a tittle fulfilled in our Lord Jesus, and that in the
very letter of it; so that here is no place left for our doubting, if malice
blind not our understandings.

Quest. Is there any thing more to be said to this point?

Answ. Yea, this may be further added as a proof in the case, The holiness and
unspottedness of his Life and Doctrine. As for his Doctrine it speaks for its
self, and lies fair to be seen in the New Testament; and as for his Life,
although many scandals were raised upon him, as if he were a friend of
publicans and sinners, a Devil, a Sabbath-breaker, yet no jot of this dirt can
stick to this spotless Lamb; for whosoever shall make the closest search and
scruteny into his actions, shall see that, that which seems most probable to be
true, is most false; how far are his cures on the Sabbath from breaking the
Sabbath? the man that he commanded to carry his bed, who had been 38 years
sick, was an action so far from breaking the Sabbath, that there was nothing
like that could have been done or said, that could have preached Christ so
convincingly to the Consciences of men, to be the Anointed of God, that they
might believe and be saved; so neither this nor any thing else can manifest the
least evil in him; but contrarily, his Life is so innocent, that in the face of
his greatest opposers, he could say, Which of you convinces me of sin? John
8.46.

Quest. Indeed Holiness is a glorious Argument, and much tends to stop an
enemies mouth; but if you have another, let us hear it?

Answ. I have two more, and the first of them is, The constant Experience of
all true Believers in all Ages; never did any person go to the Father by prayer
and supplication in his necessity, asking in Christ's Name, and according to
his Commandment believing in Him, that ever was disappointed of his hope. This
not only I have many hundred experiences of, but it is a general case; all the
truly Faithful since Christ to this day, can set their seal to this Truth.

Quest. Experience is a strong Argument, but let us hear your sixth and last?

Answ. My last is not my least, it is taken from that glorious Testimony that
God gave of him in his Death and Resurrection. First at his Death, The Darkness
that was from the sixth hour to the ninth; that is, from that you call 12 a
Clok, to that you call 3 a Clok in the afternoon, is a clear manifestation,
that God accounted his enemies cruelty against him, a blak action; for this
darkness could come from no natural cause, the Passover being always at a Full
Moon, and therefore in the North and North-East at that time of the day, far
enough from causing any Eclipse, and he died at the time of the Passover, all
this is beyond dispute. Secondly, The Veil of the Temple rent in twain, from
the top to the bottom, this being a hanging of Twenty Cubits long, where it
was by the Ministers of the Temple, Christ's deadly enemies, kept safe enough
from any hand of earthly man, none but a Messenger from Heaven could rent it;
again, the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, which could not be, but by an
omnipotent Power; all which made the Centurion and his Company, though in all
probability they were Heathens, being Soldiers in Caesar's Army, cry out, and
say, Truly this was the Son of God; and if Soldiers, who are commonly rude
persons, especially when they have such Masters as they had, if they could not
choose but see this, how much more should all men consider and take notice of
God's Testimony so gloriously born on his behalf. Thirdly, The Resurrection of
Christ proves it beyond exception.

Quest. Yea, but how shall that be proved clearly?

Answ. There be three evident proofs of it; 1. The witnesses of it are a
considerable number, not less than Five hundred at once, 1 Cor. 15.6, 7, 8. and
some of these died for this Testimony; and what their holy Doctrine and Life
was, is to be seen in the New Testament, and neither credit nor profit was to
be gained by this Testimony; besides two of these witnesses were such, as had
they not been extraordinarily convinced of the truth of it, would not have
believed it themselves: Thomas proclaiming his unbelief, till he felt and saw
the print of the nails, and thrust his hand into his side, which the Spear had
made, John 20.24, 25. And as for Paul, he persecuted this Testimony unto the
death, and had his hand in the blood of Stephen for it, not altering his bloody
purpose, till by a Voice and a Light from Heaven, he was smitten blind, and
unto the earth, and he made to know, that that Jesus whom he persecuted in his
People, was risien and ascended. 2. The miserable excuse that was made to blind
the Peoples understandings, that they might not believe he was risen, proves it
evidently; for he was laid in a Tomb which had a stone so great on the top of
it, that the good women were in care to get it removed, when they came to
anoint him. Also there was a strong guard of Soldiers set to watch, lest his
Disciples should steal him, who were so afraid of their own lives, that they
durst not meet but in the night, an unlikely company to steal their Masters
dead body from a band of Soldiers. But now to make the world believe that
these poor frighted men stole him away while they slept, is most impossible;
for who can believe that the whole Guard should be asleep all at once? or who
can believe his Disciples durst venture to roll off that Stone in the midst of
those Armed men, to steal his Corpse from them, they being set there on purpose
to prevent them from this act? muchless was it possible for them to be able to
give a just account whether he were stolen away, or risen again, if they had
been all asleep indeed; and it is not at all likely, that those armed Soldiers
ran from the Sepulcher to the High Priest in such a fear, because the Disciples
had stole him; but indeed because the Angel of the Lord terrified them away
from that fruitless work: Neither yet can it enter into any man's heart to
believe, that ever the Priests and Elders of the Jews, would ever go about to
persuade the Governor to peace and reconciliation with those Soldiers, that
had so much neglected their duty, to suffer him to be stole, if indeed he had
been stole, but they would much rather have persuaded him to take them, and
hang them up every man of them, for their negligence, if it had not manifestly
appeared, that Jesus, whom they caused to be crucified, was indeed risen again
from the dead. Thirdly, and lastly, Besides the wonderful Miracles his Apostles
did work in his Name; the Gifts bestowed upon them so suddenly after his
Ascension, according to the Promise made to them, the which we read of, Acts
2.1, to the 11. proves it clearly: for from whence could poor Fishermen,
ignorant and unlearned, at an instance attain such Gifts of Knowledge, Courage,
Utterance, as is there expressed, but that it must needs be by the Power of the
holy Spirit? To all which I only ask this question, I desire that the most
unbelieving Jews, will tell me what they expect from the Messiah they look for,
or what they can think he should be, that Jesus Christ is not? When this is
soberly answered, I will set Pen to Paper again, if the Lord please that I live
to see it; in the mean time, as one desiring the Salvation both of Jews and
Gentiles, I entreat all men to consider the main grounds of Religion, and to
get such sound Principles for the Foundation thereof, as will substantially
bear up the whole body of it.

A brief Answer to William Russel, in a Book of his, entitled, No
Seventh-day Sabbath in Christ's New Testament.
ALthough that which I have written already, is enough to stop the mouths of
all Opposers of God's most holy Law, yet because the ignorance and folly of men
is so great in this day, I shall add a few words to what I have written
already, upon the occasion of a late Book I have seen, entitled, The
Seventh-day Sabbath not Commanded by Jesus Christ in the New Testament; but I
desire thee, good Reader, not to expect that I should waste my time, or be at
the cost, to follow William Russel with a Reply to that green-headed Piece of
his, that consists for the most part of it, of Debates and Reasonings of
other men; but I shall apply my self to touch briefly some few passages
asserted by William himself.

And first, to that learned Assertion in the 12th page of his Book, where he
concludes, since his eyes were opened, that the Ten Words being abolished, as
the first Covenant, to do for Life, they cannot continue as a Rule of Life; the
distinction is so nice, that it is groundless.

To which I answer, It is well you confess them to be the first Covenant, and
once given for Life; the good Lord give thee and others Wisdom to take notice
of the time when it was so given, for it could never give Life; therefore it
must be in that day when it would have continued Life to eternity, if it had
been kept; and therefore be not so witless as to think, that when God gave his
Law at Sinai, as a Rule of Life, (for thy self confessest that so he did to
Jews and Proselytes) that then he intended it as a Covenant to do for Life; for
if he did, he must intend to condemn them all: for nothing is more evident,
than that they were all sinners; and impossible it is, that thou can deny it
to be against this Law they sinned: For thou affirmest in the 37 page of thy
Book, That the New Covenant was not in force till after the Death of Christ;
therefore they could not, according to thy judgment, sin against that
Covenant: and thy self confessest in the 23 page, That there is but two, a
first and a second; and that is the only Truth, almost, asserted by thee; for
such a piece of ignorance and folly, I think never saw the light. ever under
the curse of it, it is a poor privilege the Jew had above the Gentile; Mr.
Jves will not consent to this, I believe, for it takes away the main Pillar of
all his building: but your skill in the study of Divinity is well seen, when
this distinction is too nice for you: You are like to make good sense of the
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, and the Scriptures in general; therefore
for shame retract thy work, and buy a Catechism, and place thy self under the
Ministry of some guide, that is able to instrust thee in the main Points of
Religion at least, that thou be not a shame to thy self, and to all that are in
communion with thee. Compare these words with what is expressed in the 20 page,
namely, That under this Law, no believing Gentile can be, because it was given
to none but Jews and Proselyted Gentiles. Well, if this be all true, then the
rest of the world were under no Covenant at all. Oh rare Divinity! But
secondly, Take notice of your skill in distinguishing between Proselyted
Gentiles, and believing Gentiles, as if the Proselytes must needs be
unbelievers; if they believed not, what made them join themselves to the Lord
and his People? You Sabbath Breakers are excellent Logicians; but very silly in
the use of Reason. Oh lay by that vain deceit, that makes you swell with folly
and pride, and in humility search the holy Scriptures, and be not so absurd as
to believe, that nothing is New Covenant, but what is writ since the Death of
Christ, and given to the Gentiles, and that all given forth before, and that
has been committed to the Jews, must needs be Old Covenant; these and
suchlike Doctrines you would persuade us against the Sabbath withal: the Lord
send you all more wit. I have striven by writing and reasoning, all I could, to
put a stop to those swarms of Errors you have run into, to avoid
Sabbath-keeping; and I intended my Book, to see if you would consider it, and
intended to exercise Patience with you yet, being exceedingly unwilling the
world should know your folly: but your selves proclaim your own shame; and if I
should still be silent, the world would think that we were all alike; therefore
I can do no less than bear a Testimony against your folly, although I have
something else to do, than to follow you in your Wild-goose chase. Observe one
note more out of the 24 page, where he confesses, That all Adams unbelieving
Children are bound to observe the first Covenant, and shall be charged if they
break it. And here you may note by the way, how directly contrary he is to
himself, in the 12 page, and 20 page. But secondly, he says, That now since he
believed, he is none of Adams stock. To this I answer, That if he had good
store of Land, some body would soon be with the King to beg him. But secondly,
I say, Abel was a true believer, yet if he (...) honest man ^ and yet I believe
William Russel is as truly descended from Adam as he was. And in the 20 page he
denies, that the second Table of the Law was written in the heart of Adam, for
this reason; because he had no Neighbor. Now I say, no man need to wonder that
the Sabbath is denied to be naturally moral, if not any of the six last
Commands be; and sure I believe they were never written fairer in any man's
heart, than in Adams in innocence, Christ alone excepted: but it seems he does
not think the Lord wise enough to make a Law at once for ever, to bind all Ages
and Conditions of men, but that upon every change of condition he must give him
a new Law, or the old in a new form at least.

And in the 37 page, He denies Christ's Mediatorship to be of force till since
his Death. And in the 35 and 36 pages, he affirms, that, When the ten Words
were given at Sinai as a Rule of Life, they were also given to do for Life, and
the breakers cursed without Mercy. The very naming of these things, is enough
to reprove the folly of them. Sure the Judgment of God is upon this man's right
eye. What is become of Abraham, Moses, and all the Patriachs and Prophets, does
he think? Or, is there any other way to Salvation, than through
New-Covenant-Mercy. But now you see the man's heart, so willing he is to be rid
of the Sabbath, that rather than he will keep that, he will pack the Gospel and
it out of doors together; yea, his own received Principle, the Redemption of
all mankind by Jesus Christ. And this is his reason in the 38 page, wherefore
he does not keep Sabbath; namely, Because Christ, as Mediator of the New
Testament, has not commanded it; and he says, nothing but what he has so
commanded is his duty. Now observe the true consequence of these opinions; if
nothing be (W. R.) his duty, but what Christ, as Mediator, has commanded: What
necessity could W. stand in of his Death at all? for if Christ had not come to
bring him a Law to sin against, he had none it seems to sin against before, and
so could stand in no need of blood to cleanse him?

Again, if nothing be his duty, but what Christ has so commanded, then you
must know, that no part of the Old Testament, nor much of the New, is any part
of Williams Bible; and what need he have put himself to so much trouble, to
frame so many quibling arguments to help himself against Mat. 5. he might have
only said it was given forth before the Death of Christ, and it had been as
good as all those arguments, and a thousand more, but W. had forgot that
answer, or else he trusted more to his Logic, than to that answer: for those
that have good skill in that art, can prove that a Fox has eight legs, to him
that never (...) he may not know which is best to deny, the major or the minor,
yet can you never persuade him, that a Fox has more than four legs. And for
that Text, Mat. 5. and James 2, has more strength to prove the perpetuity of
the Sabbath, than all the Logicians in Bucks can take off: and that Mr. Ives
well knew, when, to rid himself of those Texts, he told his Antagonists, Those
Books did not belong to us Gentiles, but were written to the Jews, and belonged
only to them.

And I cannot but observe one passage more in the 54 page of his Book, where he
affirms, that, Our Saviors Doctrine and Practice, taught to do servile work
on the Sabbath, repugnant to the Letter of the Law of God. This passage would
make one think, that the man either knows not, or cares not what he says; for
if this were indeed true, we might well give over writing Books about Religion;
for there could be no possibility of Salvation neither for Jew nor Gentile. For
if Christ were a sinner, his blood could take away no sin; and a sinner he must
needs be, if he broke Sabbath, and taught others so to do, in a very high
degree, although the Sabbath had been but ceremonial; for there was no shadow
of the Law could be neglected; the smallest of all the Ceremonies, without sin,
till by Christ's Death they were abolished. But if William, had had so much
charity for his Savior, as to have judged him a better expounder of the Law
than the Pharisees, he had not fallen into this blasphemy: Is it not enough for
the Pharisees to lay that sin to his charge, but you must second it, to the
hardening of the poor Jews, and the destroying of the Faith of the Gentiles, as
much as in you lies: Therefore if the Sabbath-keepers be ignorant of Christ's
Mediation, as you tell your Reader they be, if they come to you for knowledge,
they are like to be well helped up.

As for your discourse about what is naturally moral, and positively moral, it
is not worth a dispute, there is so little between them; the one as truly
binding the Conscience as the other: but for the Sabbath, I have some reason to
believe that it is naturally moral. First, There was never any people
professing a God, but kept one day in seven for his Worship. And there is no
Precept of the first Table that men do come nearer to, ordinarily, that have
not the express Letter of the Law for their Rule. Secondly, The time is yet to
come, that ever I heard or saw any man dispute, or write, or preach, against
the Sabbath; but he at that very time, and in that very work, asserted some
thing that did plainly manifest that it was fairly written in his heart, or
else run himself upon this Rock, that he shamefully broke the fifth Commandment
to dispute down the fourth, as I could give instance if need were. But answer.

The first is, Wherefore I am so sharp in my Answer to W. Russel?

To this I say, I am taught of Solomon so to do in such a case, as this, Prove.
26.3, 4.5. 2. I was in fear he would greatly dishonor the Gospel when he was
going to print, and desired to see his Copy, and to reason with him first, but
he would not, and it is just to lash him that is past Counsel.

The second Question I expect, is, Wherefore I do not as well answer Mr. Ives,
as he?

To this I say, For his Book, Mr. Braborn has answered it; but for his
dispute, I have in part, and shall in a few words more, give some little
account of it, the naming whereof is answer enough. When he began, he denied
the Seventh-day Sabbath upon this account, That it was never given to the
Gentiles; neither by the Law of Nature, nor by the Law of Moses, nor yet by the
Law of Christ; and his whole discourse was to this effect; so that the Appendix
of his dispute is in those words; which to answer is enough; and truly the
answer to them is needless, if we lived in an Age where Wisdom is to be found.
For what man of any reasonable understanding, but must needs see that this
Arrow is shot at the heart of the Scriptures, as well as the Sabbath: the whole
Old Testament being as well denied to be a Rule of Life to the Gentiles, as the
fourth Commandment: for all men know, that as many as ever the Old Testament
was given to, the Sabbath was given to: and he all along throughout the whole
dispute, made it his business to deny the Sabbath was ever given to any People,
or the observation thereof required at their hands, save the Stock of Israel,
and those that Proselyted themselves, and came and lived in the Confines of
Palestina; and it was no slip of the tongue, nor an Arrow shot at a venture,
but his mind and intention to exclude all the Scriptures that ever were written
to the Jews, from being any Law or Rule of Life to us Gentiles, is manifest, in
that he denied the Gospel of Matthew, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
Epistle of James, only for that reason, because they were written to the Jews,
and so concerned not us Gentiles. And his exception against the Sabbath, was
not that which is common to some others; namely, that it was of a differing
nature from the other nine: but because it was Moses's Law, and therefore never
given to the Gentiles. I need give no answer to this, having said enough to
this point before, in the former part of my Book: neither when I began to
write, did I intend to meddle with disputes, but did think this Error so
sordid, that it would die of it self, and I had no pleasure to give it a
resurrection; but finding the contrary, that it is as a spreading Lepro^^ span^
there be yet some no wiser than to build upon this man, as an Or^^^^ therefore
I have given thee (good Reader) a true account of that Dispute, so much
magnified. Now for to follow these men with any further reply, than barely to
discover their Errors, I cannot see it reasonably to be expected, until first
themselves have declared what Books, or parts of Books, of the New Testament,
they do own as a Rule of Life to bind the Consciences of believing Gentiles,
that we may know by what Texts of holy Scripture the controversy shall be
decided: for if we should prove the Sabbath a duty from Matthew, the Acts, or
James, and they, or any of them, that deny the ten Commandments, should answer,
These Books were given to the Jews, and concern not the Gentiles, all our
labor is lost; but when you have called a Council, and agreed this among your
selves, then shall you have a fuller Answer, if it be needful, and required, if
I live to see it.

THE END.

