THE PROTECTORS PROTECTION: OR, The Pious PRINCE guarded by a Praying People. A
SERMON Preached at St EDMUNDS BURY in Suffolk, Upon the 13 October. 1658. Being a
Day set apart for Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, and seeking a Blessing upon
His Highness THE LORD PROTECTOR.

By SAM. SLATER M. A. Preacher of the Word there.

Suspicientes in coelum Christiani, manibus expansis quia in ^ocuis, capite
nud^ quia non erubescimus, denique sine monitore quia de pectore oramus,
precati sumus semper pro omnibu^ Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, Imperium
securum, domum tutam, exerci^us fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem
quietum, quaecunque Hominis and Caesaris vota sunt.

Tertul. Apol. London, Printed by T. I. for Will. Fisher, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Postern-gate, near Tower Hill. 1659.

To the Worshipful, THE JUSTICES of PEACE AND Other Inhabitants in St. Edmunds
Bury, who are Friends to the Churches Purity and Peace.
Worshipful and Beloved,
THe days, into which Providence has cast us, are ev^l, because they are days
of trouble, dark and cloudy, but especially because in them iniquity abounds,
and the lo^^ of many is grown cold. He that considers the m^^strous Atheism and
Profaneness of the Age, the ^^ghting of Ordinances, Opposition to Truth, (...)
of Ministers, notwithstanding the purity of the first, the clearness of the
second, the faithf^lness and i^dustry of the third, must say, We are fa^^ into
the dr^gs of Time. England may well (...) Gods goodness to her, in her manifold
De^^^erances, miraculous Preservation, outward Peace and Plenty, and
Gospel-enjoyments, (God has not dealt so with all Nations as with her, nor
with her at all times as now) but she has cause to be ashamed of, and blush at
the ingratitude, wantonness, fruitlesness, and bad returns of her children. Not
long since Providence frowned upon us, and seemed to threaten the laying of our
Vineyard waste, by taking away the principle Stake in its Hedge; had the Foxes
and wild Boars then broken in and devoured, it had been just: But in rich
mercy the Lord has again made up the gap, and raised up another to stand in
the breach. What duty you, and all owe unto him, the following Discourse tells
you, which was calculated for no ^ther Meridian than yours, prepared only for
your Table, intended only for your Direction and Instruction. The truth is, I
judge not my self sufficiently accomplished to walk abroad, if my plain dress
will please you my Friends and Neighbors at home, it is as much as I can
promise my self; and I can say to Gods glory, and your deserved commendation,
that hitherto you have given very friendly entertainment to my poor labors,
having learned to relish plain Truth, and to make much of the simplicity of
the Gospel, though it be not adorned and guarnish't with the gaudy and flanting
words of man's wisdom. Indeed your Town is not exempted from the common
condition of all great places; there are divisions among you, under which let
you and me groan. We have many enemies to the Churches purity, and we have some
that are but small friends to the Churches peace; some that would defile her
with their sinful mixtures, others that scratch her face, and fetch blood, with
their causeless separations; But blessed be God, that you have learned to
follow peace and holiness, and to judge, that these two are not inconsistent.
As for those who are godly, but differ from you herein (of what persuasion
soever they be) I shall pray for them, long after them, and wish that they were
like-minded with you, and shall wait till God shall reveal this unto them.

But since there are Divisions among us, it would be a wonder if I should not
meet with some opposition, or not taste of that bitter cup, which my Reverend
Fathers and Brethren have ha^ so large draughts of, nay, which my dearest Lord
and Master drank deeper of than any, though he spoke as never man spoke. I
thought the ensuing Sermon had been so harmless and inoffensive, as that it
might have past without a censure: It was not my design (neither when I
studied, nor when I preached it) to exasperate the spirits of any, my intention
was to kindle praying affections in all, not to inflame the choler of any one;
and I hope, those that peruse it* will think it has a Dove-like innocence, and
brings in its mouth an Olive Branch of peace. But he that does not like the
Cook, will find some fault with the Provision; if the Minister be not
acceptable, his Sermons will be unsavory* I will not say, that for this Sermon
I have been called A Sowe^ of Sedition, but because I there in spoke against a
lawless Liberty, calling it (as it is) An accursed Toleration, I have sat very
heavy upon the spirits of some. But if this is to be vile, I will (God enabling
me) be yet more vile. Not that I would call for fire from Heaven upon every one
that is of a persuasion different from mine, neither is my charity so
strait-laced, as to have a bosom open to none, but those that jump in judgment
with me. I know Christ prayed that his people might be one, as the Father and
he are one; and that prayer shall be answered, because God heard him always;
but I am apt to think that a complete oneness and perfect harmony will not be
the happiness of the way, but of the Country. I verily believe there shall be
a sweeter close among Christians here, and that there shall be fewer
differences than now, if any at all, and happy are they that live to see it; in
the mean while I condemn not every one that varieth from me, nor dare I say all
are out of the way that do not exactly tread in my steps. Questionless we must
bear one with another, allowance ought to be given in matters controverted und
of less moment. But what then, because flowers of several colors, and
different sizes ought to be continued and looked to, must weeds be suffered in
the Garden? Because we may, without breach of charity, differ about
Circumstantials, shall there be no hedge set about the Fundamentals?
Christians, can you think it is pleasing to God, that the Holy Trinity should
be spoken against, your Blessed Savior degraded, your Public Assemblies
forsaken, your Ministers made Antichristian? I beseech you, consult the Word,
and your own Consciences, and then tell me whether that would not be an
accursed Toleration, which should suffer these and such like things. What would
become of Religion if that should be granted? Surely the weeds, if let alone,
will in time, choke the Corn. They need not be watered, it is enough for them,
if they be let alone: If I desire they may be rooted out, I hope I am no enemy
to Church and State, neither to God nor Caesar, and yet for so doing I am
maligned, and have been evil spoken of once and again. So that being
necessitated to vindicate my self, and hoping these poor Labors may not be
altogether useless, I have been willing (contrary to mine own Genius) to send
them forth into the world, the blessing of God go with them. Something I have
added, I hope that will not offend, since no thing is diminished; you have one
or two passages twice ever, because I thought it a piece of honesty (publishing
my Notes upon such an occasion) to leave out nothing.

As for you, mine honored Friends, I have only to tell you, that I love you in
the Lord, desire your welfare, pray for, and shall rejoice in the prosperity of
your souls. And I do beseech you to walk worthy of the Lord in all
well-pleasing. Go on (as you have begun) to own God, his Cause, and Ministers;
whereto you have already attained, walk by the same rule, and mind the same
thing. Mark them which cause divisions, and avoid them, keep up an high esteem
of public Ordinances, and be constant in your attendance upon them; contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Hold fast that which you
have, and let no man take your Crown. Be humble and fruitful, study not to be
wise above what is written; credit the means you enjoy by your spiritual
increases, and exemplary conversations. And that God would bless you with
grace, peace and comfort here, and crown you with glory hereafter, is, and
shall be the prayer of

Your Servant in the Lord, Samuel Slater.
From my Study Ian. 24. 1658.
1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
I exhort therefore, that first of all Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions,
and giving of Thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty.
THe Parents of Timothy being religious, and having embraced the Christian
Faith, did (as in duty they were bound) train up and instruct their son in it,
from his very childhood, knowing, that what Principles children suck in
betimes, with their mothers milk, they carefully preserve for old acquaintance
sake, and carry with them to their graves. They made it their care to season
him with Gospel Truths, and to acquaint him with that way in which he ought to
walk; and their pains herein were so successful, as that Paul testifies this
of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15.
That he knew the Holy Scriptures from a child. Being thus in his childhood
instructed by his parents, he was in his youth entertained by Paul, who took
much pains with him, and built upon that foundation which was before laid. At
last being duly qualified for, he was admitted unto the Office of an
Evangelist, which was extraordinary, and not much inferior unto that of an
Apostle. He supplied Paul's absence in diverse Churches which were newly planted
by him, which trust he discharged with singular fidelity, thereby fully
answering that confidence which Paul had of him. Among other places, he was
left at Ephesus ( Paul going from thence into Macedonia) to make an end of
ordering and setting the affairs of that Church, which was already planted
there: And whilst he was thus executing his charge, the Apostle sends this
Epistle to him, which contains in it wholesome Directions, and strengthening or
comfortable Encouragements. In the beginning thereof, he charge him to lay a
restraint upon those who were over-busie in spreading of Doctrines, either
contrary to, or diverse from that which Paul had already preached among them;
and effectually to endeavor the rooting out of that false Doctrine, those Tares
of Error which Satan had by his instruments sown among them; and so to
maintain the Truth delivered, in its purity, the Church erected, in its beauty.
Afterward in the Epistle, he touches upon sundry points, some of universal
concernment, respecting all men, some having a more particular and limited
respect unto persons in such or such places and capacities. Thus he treats of
the duty of women, and enjoins them, modesty in apparel, silence in the
Churches: He shows what qualities are required in Bishops and Deacons, who are
Ecclesiastical Officers: And as our Savior would have Caesar have what was his
due, so his servant the Apostle, treading in his Masters steps, teaches
Timothy, and by him the Church at Ephesus, and not only them, but all that owe
part of that debt and duty, which we owe unto them, is Prayer for them; the
payment whereof he requires of all men in the Text. I exhort, that
supplications, etc. be made for Kings, and for all that are in authority.

This Exhortation (as Deodate.
some conceive) was ordered out, because in those days there were some Jude 8.
who bare no good will to Magistracy, but nourished this erroneous opinion,
That all civil Order was profane, and contrary to the freedom of the Gospel;
and that Kings and Princes were (qua tales) enemies to God and Religion,
inconsistent with the Gospel, and hindrances of that liberty which was
purchased by Christ; as if our Redeemer did not do enough for us, in breaking
the powers of Sin and Satan, and in pulling down the prince of darkness from
his seat, and in bringing a spiritual liberty from the law of sin and death
over unto his people, unless he also overturned the thrones of worldly Princes,
wrested their Scepters out of their hands, and plucked up by the roots the hedge
of all humane laws. A Principle which did not die with those of that age, or if
dead and buried with them, it was afterward raised out of the grave by the
Anabaptists, and it is at this day made much of, and kept warm in the bosom of
those whom we call, The Fifth-monarchy-men; who, I believe, are not yet such
desperate enemies to Power and Authority, but that they would welcome a Scepter
and Sword, if put into their own hands, since they plead for the Saints
governing the world, wisely making themselves of the number. Our blessed
Apostle, in order to the correcting of this foolish and erroneous conceit,
calls upon Timothy and all others, to pray for those that have the Sword of
Magistracy and Government in their hands; thereby teaching us, that we should
be so far from decrying them, opposing them, or rising up against them, that we
should by prayer beg Gods assisting them in the administration of that Trust
which is committed to them.

In the words you may take notice of these Parts. First, a Duty exhorted unto,
That Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made.
Secondly, the persons for whom Supplications, etc are to be made; and they are,
First, All men. Secondly, Kings, and all that are in authority. Thirdly, that
which we are to pray for, That under them we may live a quiet and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty.

I shall not spend time now in opening the words, and showing you what lies in
the womb of each phrase in them, since that will be done, in the handling of
the Doctrine which I shall draw from them, that is this:

Prayers are to be made for Kings and Governors, Doctrine.
for all that are invested with authority, and raised up to eminent place.

While Princes have their hands upon the Rudder, subjects should have their
eyes unto heaven; while they are consulting and caring for us, we should be
praying and wrestling for them. They are not too great, but that a weak
Christian may, and should carry them in his arms to the Throne of Grace:
outward advantages do not raise them above our prayers. Indeed those that sit
upon Christ's throne in heaven, and are crowned with the glory above, have no
need either to pray themselves, or that any else should pray for them; but they
that sit upon earthly thrones, and are clothed with majesty here, will see
cause, not only to ask for themselves, but to send others also to the Throne
of Grace, that they may speak a good word, and beg for them. Nor are they too
good for us to pray for. David was a man after Gods own heart, eminent for
piety and holiness, yet should the Church bless him in his exploits. If a
Prince be religious, he will be sure to meet with most temptations from Satan,
most oppositions from wicked men, and therefore should be most strongly
guarded. Though there be a good Joshua fighting in the valley, yet the
Amalekires may prevail, if the hands of Moses in the mount be not kept up. The
godliness of a Magistrate does encourage us to pray for him, since we go to God
on the behalf of his friend and servant, but it does not give us a Writ of
Ease, nor exempt us from our duty. Nor are any of them too wicked for us to
pray for them. Nero the Emperor, when Paul wrote this Epistle, and ordered out
this exhortation, he was an overgrown sinner, a monster, a beast rather then a
man, a desperate enemy to Christian Religion, and all its professors, yet pray
for him, says Paul. Good Princes cannot be without prayers, wicked Princes
stand most in need of them: pray for those that are bad, that God would make
them better; for those that they might never back-slide from God, for these
that they might return unto that God from whom they have already back-slidden.
Our charity ought to be comprehensive, and by our prayers we should promote the
welfare both of friends and foes, as our Lord and Master gave us commandment,
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despit^fully use you and persecute you, 5 Matthew. 44.
which precept he backed with his own example, begging pardon for them who
crucified him, 23 Luke 34 Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Indeed none are to be denied an interest in our prayers, those only excepted,
concerning whom we can upon good grounds conclude, 1 John 5.15.
that they have committed the sin unto death, the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, which certainly and positively to affirm concerning any man, is the most
difficult thing in the world, and not very far removed from an impossibility.

In the further prosecution of this Point, I shall observe this method.

1. We will enquire what kind of prayers must be made for Kings, and all in
authority.

2. We will show you what is to be the matter of our prayers, or what we ought
to pray for.

3. We will give you some reasons why we ought to pray for Kings, and those in
authority: and then in the last place make some improvement of the truth in a
way of Application. Of all which in their order.

First, what kind of prayers must be put up for Kings, and those that are in
authority? I might give an answer to this question in our Apostles own words in
another place, 6 Ephesians. 18. Praying always, with all prayer and supplication in
the Spirit. Pray at all times, to day and to morrow, while, and as often as you
have praying opportunities. In the morning sow your seed, and in the evening
hold not your hand: and so pray all prayers, Confession, Petition,
Thanksgiving: but we need not go any where else for an Answer to our Question,
since we have a full and satisfactory one in the Text. The Apostle here tells
us, we must make supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks.
Unto all which we shall speak in their order.

Princes and Governors with deprecatory prayers, which are in the Text called
Supplications. The word in the Original is (...), which, says Cameron,
signifies petitionem opis qua egemus ad avertanda mala, a desiring of succor
and help needful for the averting or keeping off those evils and mischiefs
which face and threaten us. Zanchy says, the word imports those prayers,
quibus mala deprecamur, ^am spiritualiae quam corporalia, tam temporalia quam
aeterna. i. e. by which we deprecate, or desire God to preserve us from evils,
both spiritual, which scatter their malignant influences upon the soul; and
corporal, which molest and are enemies to the welfare of the body; temporal,
which are inflicted in this life, and make our way uncomfortable; eternal,
which are reserved for the life to come, and make our end miserable; in a word,
these supplications are the calling in of God to be our shield, and buckler,
our fortress and strong tower, to keep us safe from what ever and whosoever
would deprive us either of being, or of well-being. Now, these supplications
are to be made for Princes and Rulers. Their thrones do not stand so sure, but
they may shake. Their interest is not so great, but they have some enemies.
Their designs and endeavors never so much for others good, but some in their
Realms may be desiring and contriving their destruction. Though David was a man
after Gods own heart, and chosen by God himself to be King, yet had he a Shimei
to curse him, an Absalom to rise up against him, and thousands in Israel to
back him in his unnaturalness and rebellion. Indeed very few of their houses
are as a morning without clouds. Sometimes the Sun of prosperity shines
gloriously upon their tabernacles, but anon again the day is overcast, the
heaven is black with clouds and wind, and there is a sound of abundance of
rain. Now, it becomes us to labor the preventing of those miseries which
threaten them, and the keeping off those evils which seem imminent over them,
and to hold that hand which would sacrifice them, and offer them up unto the
fury of their enemies. When there are any black clouds of trouble hanging over
them, we should labor to scatter them, and blow them away by our praying
breath. When judgments are breaking in like a flood upon them, and that with
so great a violence, as if there were no hope, but they would carry all before
them, then should we be all Noah's, Daniels and Jobs, standing in the breach,
and hindering the Inundation, begging God (who by his commanding and omnipotent
word sets bounds to the Sea) to say unto these waves, Be still, and either to
drive them back, as once he did Jordan, or else to limit them, saying, Hitherto
shall ye go and no further. We should not delight to see the Sword of Justice
and divine Indignation sheathing it self in the bowels of our Magistrates, and
washing away their miscarriages with their own blood, but rather endeavor to
stay the hand, and to ward the blow intended against them, in the mean time
washing away their offenses with our tears. 1 Kings 13.6.
If Ieroboams hand be withered, let the man of God pray for him that it may be
restored again, and not prejudice the whole. Thus we should put up deprecatory
prayers (called in the Text supplications) for Magistrates and Governors.

petitionary prayers for Kings, and all that are in authority. These are in the
Translation called Prayers, in the Original (...), which word signifies an
earnest and importunate desiring of that which is good: a seeking of mercy at
the hands of the Father of Mercies; we should have our buckets ready, not only
to quench those fires which are kindled, but also to draw those mercies which
are wanted. It is the duty of Christians, as to stand in the breach for the
keeping off evils, so to pave the way for blessings: they should shut the door
against troubles, and open it unto desired good: we ought to call in and invite
the blessings of God upon the heads of those whom he has set over us. Beg for
them direction, that God would guide their hand, while it is upon the rudder.
When the Israelites were traveling toward Canaan, God led them by a pillar of
a cloud by day, and of fire by night, they being unacquainted with the way, and
ready at every turn to step aside. The way in which Princes are to walk is no
beaten path, there are many windings and turnings in it, and if they have no
other guide then their own reason, or carnal wisdom, or worldly policy, they
will be often out, seldom in: we had need pray, that God would make his way
plain before their faces. Beg for them protection; as they are subject to
mistakes, so to dangers: the power of darkness laugh when they wander, and rage
when they go right: Satan will use his utmost wits to seduce them, and put them
in a wrong way; and if there he cannot prevail, he will lay his ambushes for
them; they cannot proceed in the path of Gods cutting out, but they shall meet
with opposition, the devil and all the powers of darkness will combine against
them: Therefore pray that God would be their Shield as well as their Sun; and
not only make their way plain, but also safe, hedging it about with his
careful and powerful providence. Beg for them prosperity, that God would not
only show them the way, and hedge it about, but also pave it with goodness,
and grant unto them, that while they walk in the way of duty, they may attain
the end of Gods glory, their comfort, the Gospels promotion, Religions
advancement, the Nations prosperity and peace, both temporal and spiritual. In
a word, beg of God for them, whatsoever may make their Reign and Government
comfortable unto themselves, serviceable to Religion, and beneficial unto us. A
full place you have in the twentieth Psalm, which Psalm throughout is very
pertinent to our purpose, it being a Prayer of the Church, in which (according
to what you find in the contents thereof) she blesses the King in his
exploirs, i. e. begs from God a blessing upon him in his undertakings: See the
2, 3, 4 verses, Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of
Sion: there they beg for him assistance of God, succor and strength. Remember
all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt-sacrifice, there she begs acceptance
and audience, attends him to the throne of Grace, backs his prayers with her
own, and, as it were does with her own hand, subscribe all the Petitions that
he draws; Grant thee according to thy heart, and fulfill all thy counsels; where
she prays for success and prosperity upon all his counsels, designs and
purposes, i. e. such of them as were according to the will of God, and framed
by that exact rule; such of them as made for the glory of God, and were
directed to that highest and most noble end; such of them as had a proper
tendency to the good and welfare both of the Church and State, the care of
which should lie very near the Princes heart; here was a most happy
conjunction, sweet reciprocations between a good King and a good People! David
a good King, much in care and prayer for his people, they again much in prayer
for him: here is a fair Copy for us to write after. And thus you see we are to
put up petitionary Prayers for our Governors.

We must put up intercessory prayers for Intercessions. The word in the
Original is (...), and says Arrtius, we make Intercession, quoties de injuria
illata querimur, Domino vindictam committimus, interdum and ad vindictam
solicitamus. i. e. when we complain of wrong and injuries that are offered
unto them, commit their cause to God, and their vindication, and also sometimes
solicit him to appear in their behalf, and for the avenging of their quarrel.
Thus the Church acted in the forementioned place, 20 Psa. 1. The Lord hear
thee in the day in trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob defend thee. Thus in
an hour of distress, and in the midst of threatening danger, they took their
Prince in the arms of their faith and prayer, carrying him to the Name of the
Lord which is a strong Tower, that in it he might be fafe. The same should we
do; if at any time trouble arise, and the Chief Magistrate in the Nation runs
an hazard, men of Belial rising up, who would lay his honor in the dust; in a
word, are there either foreign, or homebred adversaries at work (in a way of
open violence or secret contrivances) to bring about his ruin and overthrow,
it then becomes the Saints, who are Heavens Favorites, to desire God to own
him, hear his prayers, be his help, keep him safe under the shadow of his
wings, set him on an high place, out of the reach of his Enemies rage and
malice, and be himself his shield that should repel and quench the fiery darts
of his Enemies. Cornelius Alap tells us that intercession is, Interpellatio pro
aliorum salute, a putting in with God for the safety of others. Polanus tells
us, it is that prayer which the saints maks for others ( ut Deus ipsis bonum
aliquod conferat, aut ab ipsis malum aliquod auferat) that God would confer
some good thing upon them, or take away and remove some evil thing from them;
load them with his Blessings, or ease them of their Burdens; follow them with
mercy and goodness, and compass them about with songs of deliverance. This is
proper work for Gods people; it becomes them to be their Princes Saviors.
Darius made a decree, 6 Ezra, That expenses be given to the Jews for the work
of the Temple, and that they should be furnished with Bullocks, and Rams and
Lambs, for the Burnt-offerings of the God of Heaven. But why so? See verse. 10.
That they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God of Heaven, and
pray for the Life of the King and of his Sons; and if this were to be done for
an Heathen Prince in the time of his great prosperity, how much more ought it
to be done for Christian Princes, in the days of trouble and danger? You know,
when there have been either tumults, or rebellions, or insurrections at home,
or any invasions from abroad, and hostile appearings against the Rulers and
chief Magistrates of the Nation, it was the work of Sheriffs and Officers in
the State, to raise up the posse Comitatus, the Forces, and Trained Bands of
the several Counties (according as need required) on the Princes behalf against
his enemies. Truly, when that is done, all is not done, the greatest part of
the work is yet behind; it becomes Christians by prayer to raise up the posse
Coeli, the Powers of Heaven, and to call in the everlasting arms; Exurgat Deus,
Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered. But we procced. Therefore;

gratulatory prayers for Princes and such as are in authority over us.
Thanksgiving is a part of prayer, and it is the fourth thing called for here in
the Text. The word in the Original is (...), which signifies ( gratiarum
actionem pro acceptis beneficiis) a giving of thanks for benefits received,
which is a duty incumbent upon every Christian, in every condition, for every
mercy; for there is no condition in which a Christian can be, but therein he
finds mercy, if not comforting mercy, yet supporting mercy; if not delivering,
yet moderating mercy; if not so much mercy as he desires, yet more then he
deserves, and every mercy ought to be thankfully entertained. God cannot be
required for, yet he must be owned and acknowledged in the outgoings of his
goodness. We can, for all the favors we receive from God, pay him no other
way, and therefore here we should be liberal; God does not call for thousands
of rams, nor for ten thousands of rivers of oil, surely then none should grudge
him the calves of the lips. Now as this lies as a duty upon every Christian
thankfully to own Gods goodness in that dew which falls upon his own fleece, in
those blessings which are reached out to him, or his family, or relations in
particular, so is it their duty to bless God for that dew which falls upon the
ground round about, yea, though their own fleece be dry, and Providence orders
out a more sparing hand to them, as to their own private interest. And so to
come to the business in hand.

When the Rulers of a Nation have received from God signal and eminent Favors,
all under them should take their part, and join with them in a Song of Praise:
Thus did the Church, Psalm. 20.5. We will rejoice in thy salvation, in the Name
of our God we will set up our banners, the Lord fulfill all thy petitions. Thy
deliverances, and conquests, and victories shall be our joy, thy prosperous
successes shall be seconded with our triumphs, we will lift up our banners.
Ingrediemur urbem erectis vexillis, we will enter the City with Trumpets
sounding, Drums beating, Colors flying, as after an happy and glorious
Conquest. Thus the mercies, and blessings, and deliverances which are
vouchsafed unto them, should be set upon our score, and we for them should
acknowledge our selves Gods debtors, paying the interest of praise, as if the
principal had been in our own hands. This is exceeding acceptable to God: that
Sacrifice savours best, unto which every one contributes something, then do we
make the sweetest melody in the ears of heaven, when all join together. And it
is exceeding rational in it self, reason requires that we should thankfully
acknowledge those Mercies which we taste the sweetness and reap the benefit of.
Mercies to the Rulers of a Nation are National mercies, they have not a
private, but public influence. The clouds indeed may empty themselves more
plentifully upon them, but yet some of their drops distill and fall upon the
smallest and meanest spot of the Land. It is true, the Oil of divine Goodness
may be most liberally shed upon the head of a Nation, but it does not stay
there, no, it descends to the very skirts of the garments. The same
providential dispensation which blesses them with prosperity, does reach out
unto us peace: that Mercy which gives our Princes to set their feet upon the
necks of their enemies, keeps those enemies from setting their feet upon our
necks. It is true, the Cup is put into their hands, and they have the most
hearty draughts, but since every one of us sips of it, let us look up. Of this
more hereafter. So much may suffice to be spoken of the first thing. What kind
of prayers must be put up for Princes, and all that are in Authority.
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings.

The second thing which we are to enquire into, is this: What is to be the
matter of our prayers? or, what ought we to beg of God for them? Some things by
way of direction have been scattered already up and down in this Discourse,
which for your help, you may gather together and bundle up; But we shall not so
content our selves, therefore in general, we should pray that God would pour
out upon them a spirit of Government. When Samuel had anointed Saul, it is
said, God gave him another heart, 1 Samuel 10.9. that other heart was not a
sanctified heart, not a renewed heart, not an heart furnished with the saving
graces of Gods spirit; for notwithstanding all his professions, and good
conversations, he was a wicked profane wretch, he carried a foul heart under a
fair face. But God gave him an heart fit for rule, an heart endowed with
Heroic virtues and Princely qualities. Such an heart we should beg for the
Chief Governor of the Nation, that as he has high employment, so he may have a
raised and noble spirit: He that governs a State, had need of another kind of
heart then he that drives a plow: pray for him that God would give him grace.
He ought to be religious himself, who would promote it in his subjects. He is
not like to destroy all the wicked of the Land, who does not himself walk
within his house with a perfect heart. I do not think that Dominion is founded
in grace; and an irreligious Prince ought to be dethroned. I believe Saul was a
lawful king, though no holy man, and Judas a true Apostle, although false to
his Master. He that has not grace in his heart, may yet hold a Scepter in his
hand; but doubtless Holiness is the most sparkling jewel in the Princes Crown:
and he is like to rule best, who has the law of God in his heart. Pray, that
God would give him directions from above, hold his hand, steer his course, make
his way plain before his face, so guide him with his counsel, as that this rule
might be managed according to Gods will, and all things ordered according to
the prescript of the Word. Thus in Psalm. 72.1. Give the King thy judgments, O
God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings son. By judgment and righteousness
(says Mollerus upon the place) both here, and many other places of the Psalms,
you must understand such a rectitude and straitness, in which there is no
swerving from honesty and equity, no giving way to lust or passion, no
tyrannical actings; but an approving and encouraging of that which is good, a
condemning and punishing that which is evil. And so David prays here for
Solomon, that God would teach Solomon his duty, what he owes to his subjects,
and how he ought to administer the kingdom; that so his Government might be no
other then a copying out of Gods Judgments and Righteousness, that as God does
most wisely, holily, and justly govern the whole world, so Solomon might that
part of it which was committed unto his charge. The same should we pray for our
Princes and Governors, and more particularly for him whom God has now set over
us: So much in general. But let us return again to the Text, which is not only
a precept, but the praying man's directory, and here Paul tells us, we should
pray for those that are in authority, that under them we might lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; So that we should pray, that their
Government may be wisely directed to the attaining of these three ends; Peace,
Piety, Honesty. Of all which in their order.

We should pray that under them we a peaceable life. Pacem te poscimus omnes:
there is such incomparable and taking beauty in Peace, as there be few or none
but are enamored with it: it needs no Encomiums, carrying its commendation in
its very name. And since all desire it, it becomes all to pray for it: follow
it with endeavors and prayers, and that is the way to get it, they that would
have it on earth, must seek it in heaven, at the hands of that God, who is the
Prince of Peace, who can command it, yea if need be create it. We live like
Heathens if we do not often go to the Throne of Grace, in those addresses among
other Petitions we ought to make some for peace, that God would grant us to sit
under our own vines and fig trees, none making us afraid. Thus they prayed for
Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.6, 7. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper
that love thee; peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.
Prosperity is the daughter of Peace, sucks her breast, and has all its
nourishment from her. If Peace the mother dies, Prosperity the daughter will
follow her, and both shall be intombed together: if the neck of Peace be cut
asunder, the head of Prosperity falls to the ground. The Israelites were by the
express commandment of God required to pray for the peace of Babylon, the place
whither they were carried captive, Ier. 29.7. Seek the peace of the City,
whither I have caused you to be carried captives, and pray unto the Lord for
it, for in the peace thereof, shall ye have peace: and if they were to pray for
Babylon, shall not we pray for Zion? if they were commanded to pray for the
peace of the Land of their Captivity, how much more should we pray for the
peace of the Land of our Nativity. Pray that we might lead a quiet and
peaceable life. A quiet life, from inbred commotions and domestic jars: a
peaceable life, free from foreign invasions. Our former sufferings under civil
discords are (as one would think) sufficient motives to the practice of this
duty: the late flames have devoured much, and we are all as brands plucked out
of the burning, let us be earnest with God that another fire may not be kindled
among us. Surely they that do (as we do) know what war means, how dreadful
sounds in our ears the roarings of the Canon, the sighings of the prisoners,
the groans of the dying, the complaints and sobs of widows and orphans have
been, what it is to lie open to the incursions of a bloody and enraged enemy:
in a word, what it is to live in fear, of having near and dear relations broken
in pieces, of being stripped of all our comfortable enjoyments, of being turned
out of house and home, of being deprived of liberty, yea, life it self; surely
they, that know these things, will look upon Peace as a Mercy worth the praying
for; Blessed be God the fire is at present quenched, the storm is laid, and we
enjoy a sweet serenity, an happy calm. Indeed our peace is little less then a
miracle: who is there that seriously considers the state of affairs, the many
enemies which we have abroad, the desperate heart-burnings and animosities
which are among our selves, that does not stand and wonder that England is in
quiet as it is at this day, through the goodness of our God? Brethren, let us
admire and be thankful that we have peace; let us pray and be humble, that this
peace may be continued. You cannot but know that there are those among us who
would have it otherwise; vipers that would eat through their mothers bowels, so
they might but make a way to their own designs. Are there not some who have
said, They would be glad to see all in confusion, and things will never be well
till it comes to that; thereupon rejoicing when Professors divide, and
differences among them heighten. There are Salamanders which love to live in
the fire of Commotions and Dissentions; some that think it best fishing in the
troubled disturbed waters of a shatterred State; and I wish such were not to be
found among us: but observe, who are they, most of them such as having nothing
to loose, care not who fall, since they know they themselves can be no lower;
nay hope that their neighbors ruin will be their own raising; being so low
already, they would get a little higher, by making us their footstool. Others
of them, yea all the rest, or if not all (for I would not be uncharitable) yet
most are men of no conscience, no piety, no friends to the power of godliness,
but would prostitute Religion, Gospel, Liberty, the Nations peace and
prosperity to their own wills. I am persuaded all true Christians, all wise men
desire to sit down in quiet, and to sail upon a smooth sea, and can cordially
say with David, We are for peace.

We should pray that under those who a godly life. It is an happy Nation, whose
Rulers are not only Patres Patriae, the Fathers of the Country, but also
Nutritii Ecclesiae, the Nursing Fathers of the Church. Defender of the Faith
was the most glorious part of our English Kings Title. That people have double
cause of thankfulness, whose Magistrates care is to preserve the peace of the
Nation, but chiefly to secure the purity of Religion. We read of such
Governors in Israel, they had a Moses who fed them with the Law of God, the
food of life, which is sweeter then the honey or the honeycomb; a David who
would not give sleep to his eyes, Psalm. 132.4, 5.
nor slumber to his eyelids, until he had found out a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the God of Jacob; 2 Samuel 7.9.
who could take no content in his own house of Cedar, so long as the Ark of God
dwelt within curtains: 2 Chronicles. 19.4.
a Iehoshaphat, who went out through the people, from Beersh^ba to Mount
Ephraim, and brought them back unto the Lord God of their fathers: 2 Chronicles. 28
3, 4, 5.
an Hezekiah, who took care for the restoring of Religion, and carrying forth
the fil^hiness out of the holy place; 1 Chronicles. 34.3 7.
a Josiah, who wrought a glorious Reformation among them, purging I^dah and
Jerusalem from the high places, and the gro^es, and the (...) images, and the
(...) images, ^^^^ing down all the idols throughout the Land. How should we
pray that our Rulers might tread in their steps, and follow their examples;
purging our superstition, extirpating errors and heresies, beating down
profa^^ness, advancing godliness, setting up the pure worship and service of
God, promoting Religion. Oh what an amiable sight is it to see Piety and
Prosperity walking together, Righteousness and Peace kissing each other! Indeed
Brethren, it is infinitely better to enjoy the Gospel without peace, then to
enjoy peace without the Gospel, since it is better, and more desirable to go
to heaven in a storm, then to hell in a calm. That peace is dearly bought which
is paid for with the loss of the Gospel. Religion is the glory of a Nation. We
read, how that good woman the wife of P^ine^as, hearing that the Ark was taken,
with very grief fell in travail, and gave up the ghost, before whose death,
neither the birth of a man-child, nor the cordial and comfortable words of the
women then present with her, could any whit support her sinking heart, or
revive her dying spirits, but she cries out, The glory is departed from Israel,
because the Ark of God was taken; yea, she doubles her compassionate Complaint,
and was willing to spend her last breath in that sad groan, The glory is
departed from Israel, for the Ark of Go^ is taken. So that the Ordinances, and
Gods Gospel presence were ever accounted the beauty and honor of a people. Were
every stone in the fields a diamond, were our streets all of pure gold, were
every beggar a prince, every fool as wise as Solomon, every weakling as strong
as Sampson, yet for all that if Religion were gone, we might name the Nation
Ichabod, and say, The glory is departed from England. Religion is the strength
of a Nation. As by the Ark great things were wrought for Israel; before it the
waters of Jordan were divided, the Idol Dagon laid flat on the floor, the
strong walls of Jericho demolished, their enemies could not stand before it.
What the Ark was to them, that is Religion to us; in that lies our strength,
not in our Armies, or Navies, or Castles, or Confederates. There is a strong
City which has Salvation for walls and bulwarks, into it enters the righteous
Nation that keeps the Truth. Therefore let us pray for our Prince and Rulers
under him, that they may smile upon Holiness, and encourage men that walk in
the ways of God, and maintain public Ordinances* and root out whatever is
contrary to Godliness and sound Doctrine; and not bear the sword in vain,
suffering it to rust in the scabberd of sloth and negligence, but draw it and
use it in the defense of Truth and Piety. We had need be earnest with God to
this purpose, and pray hard for, believe it, Religion lies bleeding and
gasping; I think I may safely say, it was never opposed more, never suffered
more in this Nation for this hundred years, then it does now: how is the Land
overspread with false doctrines, and with vicious practices? Never more
Heretics crying down the Truths of the Scripture then now. Never more sons of
Belial deriding and making a mock at the power of Godliness, and strictness of
Conversation then now. And truly these two usually go hand in hand, and seldom
or never are parted; error in judgment leads to profaneness in life; when men
have once put out the light of Truth, and debauched their understandings, it is
no wonder to see them falling into and wallowing in the mire of all wickedness.
Now then in order to the suppressing of profaneness, there must be a
suppression of error, and in order to the suppression of error, we ought to
pray that our Magistrates would take care of two things.

glutted, and stomach sick, and spues out of its mouth books and pamphlets,
stuffed with dangerous doctrines, and damnable heresies, and it is sad to see how
greedily poor ignorant and seduced souls lick up the vomit. There is base
Copper Coin minted, with the stamp of Truth upon it, and by it thousands of
souls are cheated to their everlasting undoing. It would be happy for England
if this abuse were rectified; for as reverend Master Perkins says, It cannot
but be a great hinderance to the true Religion, that such books may be
publicly sold to any one that will buy them, without due consideration had
whether the party have gifts to discern between truth and falsehood. In the
Popish Church (says he) they are more careful, for they permit not a man to
read an Heretics Book (as they call us Protestants) without leave, and that
under a great penalty. Again pray,

Secondly, that a cursed and abominable toleration darling, and the wind must
not blow upon it, under the beautiful pretext of Christian liberty. Many plead
for a lawless licentiousness of preaching, printing, professing what every one
pleases. Surely these men will not allow the same liberty in other things,
would they have men do what they list, without control? so that any should
come, and blemish their Reputations, rifle their Houses, seize on their Goods,
take away all their Estates, and none say, why do you so? if they will not
allow this, and yet plead for a toleration of every thing, though never so
contrary to Religion, I shall take leave to tell them, be they who they will,
that they love their belly better than their God; and prefer their own private
interest before the interest of Christ. The same holy Mr. Perkins says, It is
not lawful to grant any man or people the liberty of their own conscience in
matters of Religion, permitting them to profess what Religion they will; for if
this be allowed, how should false prophets be avoided? The Governors of a
Nation should in this imitate the good King Josiah, who assembled all Judah,
and caused all his people to hear the word of the Lord, and to stand to that
Religion, which by the Book of God was made known unto them, as you may see in
2 Chronicles. 34.30, 31, 32 verses, The King went up into the House of the Lord, and
all the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Priests and the
Levites, and all the people great and small: and he read in their ears all the
words of the Book of the Covenant that was found in the House of the Lord. And
the King stood in his place, and made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after
the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes,
with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the Covenant
which are written in this Book, and he caused all that were present in
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it: he did not leave them to themselves, to
back-slide and apostatize from God if they would, but he caused them to stand
to it, and it is said verse 33. He made all that were present in Isr^el to
serve, even to serve the Lord their God. Lastly,

We should pray for those that are in authority, Chamier says the word
signifies (castitatem, severitatem, gravitatem, morum honestatem, etc.) a
kind of severity, chastity, honesty of manners, gravity, modesty, such as is to
be found in well educated youths and virgins. Aretius says it signifies (
familiae decorum, and gravitatem in vestitu, in cessu, sermon, factis, totaque
vita) a comeliness and order in the family, decency and gravity in habit,
behavior, words, actions, and in the whole course and conversation. The word
is used, 1 Timothy 3.4. one that rules well his own house, having his children in
subjection ((...)) with all gravity; and so 2 Titus 2. That the aged men be
sober, ((...)) grave. In a word, it signifies a seemly and gracious Carriage,
opposed to all lightness, vanity, or viciousness in gesture, speech, apparel,
countenance, deeds, or conversation, such a kind of deportment as may strike a
kind of awe and dread upon bystanders. So that we ought to pray, that
Magistrates may set themselves to suppress all abuses and exorbitancies
whatsoever, not only that which is contrary to godliness and piety, but also
which bids defiance to morality; that they may look to the keeping of the
second, as well as of the first Table* (...) so order things in the
Commonwealth (the oversight whereof is committed to them) as that every one
may keep the place in which he is set, do the work which belongs to him, keep
within his due bounds and limits, not debauching any by his bad example. And
thus much may suffice to be spoken of the second general head, what we ought to
desire of God for our Prince and Governors, viz. That he and they might be so
directed and assisted from above, as that under their Rule, Peace may be
enjoyed, which issues in the Nations prosperity, Holiness may be countenanced,
which tends to Gods glory, and Honesty encouraged, which is big with advantage
both unto our selves and others. We now proceed to the third thing propounded,
which is to lay down some Reasons, why we ought to pray for Kings and all that
are in authority. And all that I shall say, will be reduced unto these three
things. Gods will. Our duty. Their necessity calls for this at our hands. God
would have it, we owe it to them, they need it. Of all which as they lie before
us.

First, It is Gods will that we should pray argument enough with a gracious
soul, who ever calls God Lord, must do what ever he commands him. Lord, what
will thou have me to do? said Paul. He did not question or deny the doing of
that which God would have. He that has Gods Law written in his heart, will,
nay cannot but delight to do Gods will: if the way be shown, he has feet to
run it. Now it is the will of God that we should pray for our Rulers. He
requires this of us. There is Gods preceptive will, and there is his permissive
will. By his permissive will many things come to pass which are against his
preceptive will. God forbids all sin, even the least, and yet there could be
none in the world, unless he did permit it. Now a bare permission is not
sufficient to warrant an action: but God does not only permit, but also
requires, that we should pray for our Magistrates. We have leave to do it, we
may if we will, nay it is expected and looked for; it is work that is cut out
for us, and unless it be done, we can never look our Master in the face with
boldness and comfort. This is clear from the Text, I exhort that prayers be
made for all men, for Kings, etc. (...). I invite or call you to it. I beg it
earnestly of you. The word imports not a bare or naked wishing and advising of
a thing, but a vehement entreating, an acting with great fervency, and many
beseechings, as some Cri^icks observe. Thus Paul exhorts them to this duty, and
you must consider that herein he acts as an Apostle, as Christ's Messenger and
Ambassador, as one appointed by God to make his will known unto his people, so
that God does by him exhort us to do it: This voice of Paul is as much as if
there had been a voice from heaven, and we are as much bound to obey this call,
as if there had been an Angel sent on purpose to bring this message to us. He
that hears you, says Christ, hears me, and he that hears me, hears him
that sent me. Again, as God requires this of us, so he approves it in us, verse
3. for this is acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. (...), it is good:
the word signifies honest, beautiful, excellent: it is a choice work, full of
beauty and comeliness, hereby you will approve your selves honest men, adorn
your profession, and make the excellency of your spirits to appear. And
acceptable, very pleasing unto God, that which he takes abundant delight and
contentment in. Such sacrifices are of a sweet smelling savor, so be it they
are offered up with pure hearts, and clean hands. You need not fear that God
will cast these petitions out of doors; no, no, you shall be very welcome, when
you come upon such errands. Christ our Savior is so far from opposing civil
Government, and earthly Princes, as that your praying for them is exceeding
acceptable unto him.

It is our duty to pray for our Rulers and Honest men will pay their debts,
this is no less; and though we pray for them fervently, with all our hearts,
and our desires of their good is the common cry of all within us; though we
pray for them continually, and in every one of our approaches to God, yet we
must say, It was no more then our duty. This is no matter of choice, not left
to our selves whether we will do it or no, if we neglect it, they may put in
their Bill against us in Gods Court, and recover damages. Prayer is a debt
which we owe unto our Governors upon a threefold account.

First, we owe it unto them as they are men. The Apostle here would have
prayers made for all men, for men of all Nations, Jews, and Greeks, Barbarians,
Scythians, men of all sorts, whether they be high or low, rich or poor,
honorable or base, good or bad, yet as they are men, pray for them. For all
men, even your enemies, that hate you and persecute you, and speak all manner of
evil of you, and do all manner of mischief to you. For this we before gave you
Christ's precept and pattern, let me show you how others of the Saints being
acted by the same spirit, have done the same thing. Moses stood up in the gap
for those that showed little love to him. The children of Israel murmured
against him and Aaron, Numb. 14.2. yet he prays for them, verse 19. Pardon I
beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, according unto the greatness of thy
mercy. Miriam and Aaron speak against him, Number. 12.1. yet if she be leprous, he
will desire God to work a cure, verse 13. He cried unto the Lord, saying, Heal
her now, O God, I beseech thee. The ungrateful Israelites reject Samuel, were
weary of his Government, chose them another Head; yet he will wish them well
still: if he may not exercise the power of a Prince, he will not fail in doing
the office of a Priest: if he may not give Laws to them, he will put up Prayers
for them, and give wholesome instructions to them; he will be their Counceller,
if not their Commander. 1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid that I should sin against the
Lord, in ceasing to pray for you, but I will teach you the good and the right
way. Though David's enemies rejoiced in his adversity, yet when the wheel was
turned, when Providence favored him and frowned upon them, he was so far from
trampling upon them down, as that he could run to God for them; so far from
rejoicing in, as that he had tears to shed over their calamities, 35 Psalm. 13,
14. As for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sack cloth, I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom, I behaved my
self as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down heavily, as one
that mourns for his mother. Stephen was earnest with God for his persecutors,
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.

Thus we should pray for all men though wicked, though haters of God, though
enemies to us, yet they are men. Men who were made for the enjoyment of, and
communion with God, and if they be strangers to it, the more to be pitied and
prayed for. Men, whose hearts are in the hand of the Lord, so that he can turn
them as the rivers of water. Men, who may (for ought we know) belong to the
election of grace, and so in due time be effectually and savingly wrought upon.
For God has his number among the worst, and Divine Grace loves to show it self
omnipotent in conquering the greatest, proudest, and most stubborn enemies.
Thus pray for all men; Princes are but men, and therefore pray for them.

Magistrates; Men in place of Power and Authority, there is not the meanest
servant in a family, not the Groom in the Stable, the Scullion in the Kitchen,
but he should be cared for; provided with necessaries when well, and looked
after, when sick; but all in the house, one and other should contribute toward
the good and advantage, comfort and contentment of him who is the Master
thereof. If he be ill, the whole family suffers, and is out of order, and
therefore they do all desire his recovery, and are willing to run and go,
thinking no pains too much for him. And so it is in the natural body; there is
not the meanest member, but it shares in the care of the other members, if one
member suffer, says the Apostle, all the members suffer with it; but they will
all much more join together and unite their forces, and act for the good and
welfare of the Head. So it is in a nation, the Body Politic; the meanest and
lowest persons in it should be prayed for, and their good should be studied and
promoted; you do, or at least should look after the poor in your parishes who
live upon alms, whose miseries are not felt by others, whose death would be no
loss to others, when they being sick and weak, put up their Bills in our
Assemblies, and beg our prayers, it is our duty to remember them, and to set in
with God for them, and spread their conditions, distempers and wants before the
Lord, how much more then ought this to be done for him who is the Head of this
Body, from whom the whole has guidance and direction

Thirdly, we owe it to them as our Benefactors; golden pipes through which
precious and comfortable mercies are conveyed to us. I know this age affords
those among us, who will not subscribe unto me herein, but overlook the mercies
which they receive, because they do not like the hand by which they are sent. A
discontented spirit possesses the minds of too too many, which either blindes
their eyes, so that they will not see the blessings which they enjoy, or
hardens their hearts, so as not to own and be thankful for what they see. Very
few are truly affected with Gods goodness, or truly thankful for National
mercies. Certainly there is never a gracious and considerate person in England,
but will readily acknowledge that many things are out of order, and for this
they groan, and wish it otherwise. For the divisions among Brethren, for the
errors, heresies and blasphemies that abound among us, for the want of an
established Government in the Church, according to the mind of Christ, and for
other things, good hearts mourn. And on this behalf such as bear good will to
our English Sion, pour out their souls before God in prayers and tears. Yet let
us not be so peevish children as to throw away what we have, because we have
not all we would; nor wish our selves in Egypt again, because we have not as
yet the possession of the promised Land. Thus to do, is the ready way to
provoke God to shut us out thence with an Oath, and to swear that we shall
never enter into his rest. Hereby we shall not prevail with God for what we
want, but provoke him to deprive us of what we have. Doubtless, if we will act
ingeniously and as becomes us, we cannot but confess, that God has made our
present Rulers instruments of much good to us and the whole Land. That we have
peace and protection, is something, there are those that would have swallowed
us up quick. That we may sit under our roofs in quiet, and enjoy our own, none
to make us afraid, is something: there are those who would have stripped us of
all, and rejoiced to see us begging our bread from door to door. The Saints in
the 11 Heb. who wandered up and down in sheepskins and goat skins destitute,
afflicted and tormented, would have set an high price upon this mercy. That we
enjoy the Gospel, and have liberty to meet together, and worship God in season
and out of season, is something, they would have thought it so, who walked in
darkness, had not the word of God powerfully preached among them, and could not
without danger repair to those places in which it was so preached. In a word,
that we may (if we will) have Ordinances purely administered, the holy separated
from the profane, is something, they cannot but think so, who do remember what
a burden unto their consciences unlawful mixtures, not long since, were.
Questionless, Brethren, these are mercies of no small magnitude: We have prayed
for them, and wept for them, and fasted for them, and spent much blood and
treasure for them, and it would be an argument of an heart very much out of
frame, should we now slight and undervalue them. Those blessed Saints that are
gone before us, and are now in Heaven maintaining an everlasting sabbath, would
have blessed God while they lived, if they had but enjoyed that which we do now
enjoy, and therefore we have reason to do so too; And by way of expressing our
thankfulness, let us pray for our Magistrates, who have been a means of
bringing over these good things to us. And as for those mercies which we want,
let us pray for our Magistrates, that through their means, they may be
supplied; as for those things that are amiss and out of order among us, let us
pray for our Magistrates, that by their means they may be rectified, every
stone of stumbling taken out of the way, the work of Reformation completed,
and the Head-stone of the spiritual Temple brought forth with shoutings,
crying, Grace, grace unto it. By all that has been spoken, you may plainly
see, that to pray for Kings and such as are in authority, is a piece of duty,
and no more then what we owe unto them, as they are men, as they are
Magistrates, and as they are Benefactors. The third and last Reason is this.

narrowest sphere of activity, and whose work lies within the smallest
compass, but is constrained always, but more especially at some times to call
in the help of his Fellow Christians, and see cause to rejoice and bear up his
spirit with this, that he has a stock of prayers going in other hands, that
Saints all the world over are praying for him; But those who are placed in an
higher and larger sphere, who have greater work and more public employment cut
out for them, have much more need of prayers, Thus Ministers in the Church, who
are the Guides, Overseers, Pastors, Leaders of the flock of Christ, have need
of prayers. Paul, though an Apostle, a man singularly learned, eminently
gifted, furnished with a great measure of grace, extraordinarily assisted from
above, yet could not be without prayers; and therefore he does most earnestly
beg them in sundry of his Epistles, Ephesians. 6.19. 1 These. 5.25. and Romans 15.30.
Now I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love
of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your prayers to God for me.
Pray for me, I say, pray for me, I say, quoth Father Latimer. Pray for me, pray
for me, for Gods sake pray for me, said holy Bradford. Ministers should have a
special interest in their peoples prayers, for they have great need of them,
and so have Magistrates too. As they cannot be without subjects, so neither can
they well be without praying subjects: that prince is not like to live well, nor
reign well, not like to do his duty, nor to be a blessing to the nation, who is
shut out of the prayers of the Saints. The Head in the natural body cannot say
to the meanest member, I have no need of thee, some way or other it may be
useful and serviceable to it. Truly so the Prince who is the Head of the Body
Politic cannot say to the meanest subject, I have no need of thee: he that is
the foot in that body, may go to heaven, and fetch a blessing from thence upon
him. A Prince has as much need of praying subjects, as he has of grave and
^udicious Counselors, or of numerous and valiant Armies, or of strong and
potent Navies. Nay, let me tell you, great persons have more need of prayers
then any men in the world. Great expenses do call a good purse, and large
Revenues to bear them out. An Earl or Nobleman must have a greater estate then
an ordinary Farmer, since he must keep a greater house, and live at an higher
rate. Oh the expenses of Princes are more then most men dream of, they are
continually laying out, and so had need that some should be by prayer
continually laying up for them. But we shall by sundry particulars make this
evident to you.

employment is great. Many men are apt to envy them the Crown, because it is
made of gold, but they little consider, that it is lined with care, and is
heavy enough to make their heads ache: It is true, Diadems and Scepters are
glittering things, and they dazzle the eyes of those that see them, but believe
it, they make their hands weary that sway them. The burden which lies upon
their backs is weighty, and so they cannot be without good supporters. Diogenes
in a tub had more quiet and ease than Alexander in his throne. They are full of
thoughts in the day, and cares in the night, their rest is broken while we
sleep sound and securely. You that are parents and masters of families, and
have but a few to provide for, do yet feel that a burden, and are many times at
your wits end. But what is your charge? alas, nothing to that of Magistrates
and Rulers of a Nation, who are the Fathers of the whole Country, and have
many thousands, yea, millions to look after. If it be a hard matter to steer a
Cock-boat, what then is it to sit at the helm of a Ship? Solomon was very
sensible of the great trust that was committed to him as King of Israel, and
the weightiness of that work unto which he was engaged, and therefore when God
granted him liberty of asking what he should give him, he asked not long life,
nor riches, nor the life of his enemies, but wisdom, 1 Kings 3.9. Give thy
servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between
good and bad, for who is able to judge this thy so great people? and if their
work be so great, and wisdom so absolutely necessary for them in order to the
doing of it, it becomes us to be continually begging of God that wisdom for
them. The Hands of our Moses being thus engaged, may soon grow weary and fall,
sure there is need of many Aarons and Hurs to hold them up. If in all things,
then much more in things of great weight and concernment, we ought by prayers
and supplications to make our requests known unto God.

Princes stand in need of your prayers, because temptations are many. Great
places are filled with great snares: there are snares in honor, and power, and
prosperity, in a full and raised condition, yea, they themselves are snares,
though not in themselves, yet through the corruption that is in man. So that it
is a very hard matter to stand high, and the head not be light and giddy: for a
man to be raised above his brethren, and yet to consider that he is but dust,
vanity in a greater letter. Philip of Macedon was sensible of this, and
therefore would have one every morning to put him in mind of his mortality,
saluting him with Memento te esse hominem, Remember thou art but a man. It was
in a special manner given in charge to the Israelites, that when they had eaten
and were full, they should not forget the Lord. And so Agur prays, Prove. 30.8,
9. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me,
lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Fullness breeds
forgetfulness. Trap.
Every grain of riches has the vermin of pride and ambition on it. Many in
their low estate could serve God, who being exalted resemble the Moon, that
never suffers an Eclipse but at her full. An Agur full fed may grow wanton:
Solomon's riches did him more hurt then his wisdom did him good. A great estate
is many times a great hinderance, and like a shoe too big for the foot, keeps
men from running in the way of Gods commandments. And as great places and
enjoyments are snares, so be they accompanied with great and manifold
temptations, when persons are set upon the pinnacle, they may then look to have
the devil assaulting them. It is true, there is no estate nor condition which
is altogether free from temptation. Satan will be nibling at the heels of poor
men, private men; therefore our dearest Lord bids his disciples, and in them
all his people, one and other, to watch and pray that they enter not into
temptation; but though these boisterous winds may shake the lowest shrubs in
the wilderness, yet the tall Cedars are most of all exposed to their rage and
fury. The poorest vessel cannot promise it self a safe passage, it may be set
upon, the devil will keep his hand in, and rather play at small game then stand
out; but he does chiefly lie in wait for the rich merchant ships, where he
promises himself the greatest booty: he grudgeth Christ a fisherman, and
desires to have Peter that he might winnow him as wheat, but however, he will
labor to make sure that none of the Rulers believe in him. If he dan draw the
Chief in a Nation to his will, he knows he will not come alone, others will
follow; For, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, the people generally
will dance after the Princes pipe: if once he has great men for the
first fruits, he promises himself (as well he may) a very large harvest among
the inferior sort, there is no question but the outworks will yield, when the
Royal Fort is taken; therefore his main battery is planted against that, and
though he will fight against both small and great, yet his chief strength is
drawn up against the King of Israel. Cut off the head, and the body will fall
alone. And truly when I have seen the miscarriages and eccentrical motions of
men in high place, though I cannot warrant them, but desired to mourn under
them, and do freely confess them to be just matter of sorrow and lamentation;
yet when I have also considered what temptations they are liable to, and how
busy the arch enemy of mankind is about their thrones, I have been so far
from wondering that their miscarriages have been so many, as that I have rather
seen cause to bless God, that they are no more. Now brethren, many and great
temptations do loudly call upon us for many and earnest supplications. Since
their way lies through so many enemies, pray that God would guide them with
his counsels.

difficulties are numerous. They have not only many enemies to pass through,
but also many mountains to go over; their way is uphill, and though some may
look upon it as plain and pleasant, yet is it paved with thorns and briars, and
may sooner prick their fingers, then open their passage. We that sit at home
can spy faults, and say this thing is amiss, and the other is not right, and
think it is an easy thing to mend what is out of order, but did we see with
their eyes could we look through and through the state of things, we should
soon change our judgments. The skain of affairs is exceedingly snarled, and an
ordinary wisdom or patience will not serve for the unwinding of it. Phaeton
thought he could guide the Chariot of the Sun well enough, and rule the horses
at his pleasure, but he set the world on fire: when a person is sick, and near
unto death, a little child may see and say, he is so, but it is not so easy
to cure the disease, to purge out the ill humors that feed it, and restore
health unto the Patient. Kitchin-physick is very useful, but it will not serve
every turn: there are many diseases in a Nation which will puzzle and nonplus
the wisest Physicians; yea though they know what is very good, and a proper
remedy, yet the body is so weak and distempered, as that they scarce dare
administer it. We can quickly see all is not right (he is blind that does not)
but the making all right is not a thing so soon done. In a family, where there
are many to foul, the Mistress and servants will tell you, that they find it
hard enough to make all clean. Many times good Princes (whose hearts are right,
and long to see an happy settlement both in Church and State) find so much
confusion, and so great perplexities, as that they are almost discouraged,
ready to cry out, We know not what to do. They are not seldom reduced to so
great dilemma's, and have such knots before them, a^ that notwithstanding all
their wisdom, and after all their most serious and deliberate consultations,
they do not well know how to untye them; and truly when they know not what to
do, we should do well to have our eyes unto God. If any men in the world (as I
said before) do lack wisdom, then Princes do, and therefore we should ask it of
God, who gives unto all men liberally and upbraideth not. In doubtful cases
they ought to consult Gods Oracle, and we ought to pray, that when they
propound their doubts to him, they may not return without resolution and
satisfaction. Again,

they are but men. Indeed they are men in an higher place, men in a greater,
letter, men of larger signification then others, yet they are but men still. It
is true, the Lord has said they are Gods, because they be his Vicegerents,
are clothed with his authority, and because they are to act for God, to do his
will, and to seek his glory, and because they should act like God, holily,
justly, righteously, without fear or favor, without partiality; but they are
such Gods as are full of imperfections, men that not only live in houses of
clay, clothed with mortality, but men that carry about with them a body of sin
and death. They are men subject to like passions with us, men encompassed with
infirmities like us, men full of sin like us, they are frail men, vain men,
erring men, not only vanity, but a lie; men that confidence is not to be
placed in: Stars indeed of the first magnitude, but which may be drawn down
from heaven; they are men that have need of direction, help, and succor from
above. Indeed some of the Roman Emperors would needs be accounted and
worshipped as Gods, but therein they were worse then beasts, as bad as devils.
Now since they are men, they are liable to mistakes: It is not in man to direct
his steps, if man be left to himself to make choice of his own way, he will
never walk in Gods way. Adam was a perfect man, had no sin, yet he found out
many inventions: God left him to his own power and free will, and immediately
he lost himself, cut his own throat, and all his childrens too, and ever since
his fall, his posterity knew not how to reconcile themselves to their own
happiness. Now, Humanum est errare, error is natural unto man; and to forsake
the royal way of holiness and righteousness, is (as one phraseth it) triste
mortalitatis privilegium, the sad privilege of mankind. When man fell, he so
lamed himself, and broke all the powers of his soul, as that he cannot stand
one moment, unless the hand of Omnipotency be graciously pleased to hold him
up. And this is the condition not only of some, or of many, or the most men,
but of all: thus it is with the greatest, the highest, the noblest, the best.
Though David was after Gods own heart, yet but a man, and so through infirmity
he fell foully, and brought thereby not only a sword upon his house, but also a
plague upon Israel. Now so long as they are weak men, in a state of
imperfection, they have need of prayers. Indeed when once men come to be
perfect, they shall pray no more: in heaven prayers are turned into praises,
supplications into admirations; it is as vain to pray for, as it is to pray to
Saints above, unless it be for the resurrection of their bodies, which are left
in the grave as silver in a refining pot, and being purified, thoroughly freed
from all dross and corruption, shall at the last day be raised up, and reunited
to their souls. But for men in a state of imperfection, full of infirmities,
subject to failings, prayer is absolutely and constantly necessary. But then
lastly

their miscarriages are of dangerous consequence to the whole. A good prince is
a common good, the whole nation fares the better for him; whereas a wicked one
is a public evil, the whole land suffers by him. When those that are in
authority be gracious, men fearing God, the righteous increase, they swarm like
an hive of Bees in a warm sunny day. If he that is godly sit in the throne, you
may easily guess who shall be the Favorites at Court, whereas when the wicked
rise, a man is hidden, a good man, an holy man, a man set for God lies close,
has no heart to appear, keeps within doors, not finding it safe walking
abroad. Thus David fled from Saul, Elijah from Ahab, Obadiahs Clients from
Iezebel, Jeremiah from Iehojakim, Joseph and the Child Jesus from Herod, those
Worthies of whom the world was not worthy, from Antiochus, and other
persecuters; and the Christian Church from Antichrist. She fled into the
wilderness from the face of the dragon, 12 Rev. 14. so that she was not to be
sought in tectis and exteriori pompa, sed potius in carceribus and speluncis,
in palaces of worldly pomp, and among the great ones of the earth, but in dens
and caves, and dungeons; so that a miscarrying Prince is a plague to a Nation.
A distemper in any part of the body should be timely looked to, and care taken
for the speedy removal of it, since none knows what it may issue in, if
suffered to get strength; but if a distemper seizes once upon the vitals, it
is incurable, and threatens destruction, dissolution to the whole. I may
compare the chief Rulers in a Nation, to the Vitals in the body, if that they
be distempered, the Land is well near mortally sick, sick unto death. If the
whole head be sick, and the whole heart faint, wonder not, if the next news you
hear be, that from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no
soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrified sores. Woe to thee, O
Land, when thy King is a child, says Solomon, Eccles. 10.16. Here is not
meant a child in years, Josiah was so, and also our Edward the Sixth, and yet
it was well with the Land in their days; But by child here understand a weak
and wicked King, that lets loose the golden reins of Government, is acted by
his lusts, and carried by his passions, which way soever they will drive him.
Woe to that Land, whose Prince is a profane wicked person, a careless person, an
heady wilful person. Woe to that Land, whose Prince is not directed by the
spirit of God, nor curbed by the fear of God, nor constrained by the love of
God. Woe to that Land, whose Prince has neither grace in his heart, nor God in
his eye. Evils in Princes are the worst and greatest evils, because they have
the strongest influence; if the Pilot miscarry, the Ship is lost. Thus you see
it clearly proved to you, that Princes have need of prayers; and so have we
done with the Reasons, and finished the Doctrinal part. Give me leave to speak
something, though but a little, by way of Use

And here I might justly take up a bitter complaint of, and order out a sharp
reprehension unto those who neglect this piece of their duty. Some out of a
profane spirit, who spend days, weeks, and months, and years without prayer,
they enjoy many mercies, but they were never of their seeking: If God will do
good to themselves or others, he may, but he shall never be desired by them.
How many are there that shut prayer, and the whole worship of God out of their
houses and closets, and they that will not pray for themselves, will never be
suitors for others; if they will not beg their own lives, the lives of their
souls, at the hands of God, they will not beg their Princes peace and
prosperity: But let such men know, God has wrath, pure wrath, fierce wrath,
full vials of wrath to pour out upon the Heathen, that know him not, and upon
the families that call not upon his name. God does not hear from them now, but
one day they shall hear from him, yea a terrible sound shall be in their ears,
and the terrors of the Almighty shall make them afraid. Others neglect this
duty out of a private spirit, who do indeed pray, and make conscience of it
too, dare not omit it, but they extend their care no further then themselves,
their thoughts are wholly taken up about their own private interest. They can
pray for blessings upon themselves, and upon their families, but that is all,
and so things be well at home, they care not how they go abroad. Paul
complained of this in the 2 Philip. 21. all seek their own things, and not the
things which are Jesus Christ's: the things of Christ are shouldered out, and
the interest of the Church is not studied, self-interest, like Aarons rod
swalloweth up all other, and drowns the glory of God and the public good; but
this spirit is below a man, Heathens will condemn it. It is said of Cato, Lucan.
that he did (toti genitum se credere mundo) look upon himself as born for the
whole world, the care of the Community lay upon him. This spirit is below a
Christian, and unworthy of the Gospel, which teaches us to look, not every man
on his own things, but every man also on the things of others; Timothy is said
naturally to care for the Churches welfare. This spirit is hateful to all men;
he that is wholly shut up within himself is an odious person, and the place he
lives in longs for a vomit to spue him out. In a word, this spirit is condemned
by reason it self, what do thou think will become of thy Cabin, if the Ship
miscarry? It is not like thy Closet should stand, when the house is burnt down.
Others there are who utterly lay aside this duty out of a froward and
discontented spirit, who like Flies feed upon the sores of Magistrates, thereby
hindering a cure, but will not go to heaven for a plaster that they may be
healed; they do not like the hand which sways the Scepter, nor the things that
are done by him who sits in the throne, and therefore they will not so far
befriend him, as to give him a room in their Petitions: They will shut him out
of their prayers, because they cannot approve all his doings; and yet they may
find fault where there is none, and look upon that with an evil eye, which in
it self is matter and ground of thankfulness. Let persons that are guilty of
this neglect, from what principle soever they act, know, that they have little
sense of the mercies which they enjoy. Were Gods goodness to us in our
Governors eyed, and the blessings which by them we receive laid to heart, and
seriously considered of, they would work another frame of spirit in you. Such
as these are small friends to our English Zion, the Nation is much beholding to
them, is it not? how can it be thought they should spend their estates, shed
their blood, hazard their lives for the Nation, who will not be at the cost of
a few prayers for its prosperity: I might also tell them, that they will have
little thanks for their forbearance at the last, and that if the Nation
miscarry, its ruin may be laid at their doors. If the wrath of God breaks in
upon us like a sea and drowns all, it was because you came not up to stand in
the gap: If God departs from England, and carries his Gospel, and spiritual and
temporal Mercies along with him, we may thank you, and such as you are; he
would have stayed, if he had been but more desired. But I shall wave those
things, and proceed to an Use of Exhortation. And,

Let me prevail with you to set you upon this work: Use.
Oh pray for your Governors, and in a more special manner for him, whom God has
made Chief over you, and by his providence called to the supreme place of
Magistracy in the Nation. God has been pleased of late to make a sad breach
among us, taking away from us our former Pilot, the late Renowned Protector,
who, when he had fought the Nations Battles, carried us through the wilderness,
preserved us from the rage and fury of our enemies, and brought us within sight
of the promised Land, gave up the ghost, laid down his leading-staff and his
life together, with whose fall the Nation was shaken; his death covered all the
faces of sober and considerate persons with paleness, and their hearts with
sadness, as if Peace, and Prosperity, Reformation, the Gospel, all lay drawing
on, and would be buried in the same grave with him. But, blessed be God, Divine
Grace vouchsafed to cast an eye toward us, and to visit us in our low estate;
there is another Pilot placed in his room; while he directs the course, let us
fill the sayls with our praying breath. Moses, it is true, is dead, but we have
a Joshua succeeding him, let us pray, that what the other happily begun, this
may more happily finish, and bring the accomplishment of all your right-bred
hopes: and what they said to Joshua, let us say unto his Highness, According as
we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee, only the
Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses, Josh. 1.17. My Brethren, let us
leave disputing, and quarreling, and complaining, and finding fault, our work
lies elsewhere: these proceedings will but roil our own spirits, and prejudice
the Nations welfare. In times of public danger, and so in times of public
distempers and disorder, prayer is of an excellent use: it is in season at all
times; men ought always to pray, and not to faint, but it is most especially in
season in such times. Is any man afflicted? let him pray: Is the Nation
afflicted? let all pray. If the Ship is like to be broken with a tempest, then
let every one of the heathenish Mariners cry unto his God: We are called out
unto this work this day, our Governors have now put an opportunity into our
hands to such a purpose, they do invite us to the work, they desire and beg it
at our hands. Let us not loose the price that is in our hands, let us not fool
away, nor idle away, nor wrangle away praying opportunities. Let us not be deaf
to the cry of Englands Necessities, nor to the call of Englands Rulers, but let
us up and be doing, and the Lord will be with us. You that never prayed before,
pray now, you have been strangers to the work, and careless of the Nation long
enough already. You that have prayed formerly, continue your acquaintance with
that work still, and double your forces now. Blessed be God, something has
been already done this day among us here, and we are not alone; there is a
sacrifice almost upon every Altar; throughout the Nation there are those that
be putting to their helping hand, and are tugging for mercy, let us join with
them, and pull hard; God is not yet gone, oh pray that he would not depart out
of our Coasts: We are not yet past hope, pray that God would give us to see the
desire of our hearts: Our disease is not incurable, though it may puzzle the
wisest men, yet it cannot nonplus the infinitely wise God; oh pray that God
would be our Physician, and undertake for us. Our Prince rises gloriously,
pray that he might not set in a cloud: Our hopes concerning him are great, pray
that they may not be blasted. Who knows what we may do, if we would but do what
we can; grant that there is but a peradventure, yet let that prevail. The
Nation may be lost, but let not that dishearten you, for it may be saved, and
let that encourage you. Jonah preached, yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
overthrown, here was great ground of fear; that judgment being denounced by
the Prophet upon the commandment of the Lord, but, says the King, let man and
beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, etc. but why so?
the sentence is gone out, has the Lord said it, and shall he not do it? nay,
but who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, that we perish not. Thus here: Our sins are very many, our breaches very
great, God is highly provoked, the clouds over our heads are thick, yet who can
tell, but that mercy may triumph in the Nations welfare? who can tell, but God
may have thoughts of good and pe^ce concerning us? A drowning man will catch
hold of any thing for the saving of his life, could we see but a spirit of
prayer poured out among us, I would not question but that God would open the
bottles of his mercy, and rain down upon us a blessing in abundance. I will
here lay down something by way of direction, and then by way of Motive and so
conclude. By way of direction take only these two things. Pray Fervently and
Constantly.

First, pray fervently. You must fire the head. Therefore call forth all your
powers, muster up all your forces, all your praying graces, all your praying
affections, and go to the throne of grace as strong as you can. It is the
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man that avails much. If the Child
do only wrangle a little, it may ly still in the cradle, and be neglected, but
if once it cries fiercely, and cannot otherwise be pacified, then will the
Mother draw her Breast. See that what you desire be good, and that your end in
desiring it be right, and then cry mightily. Luther said, Vtinam semper eodem
ardore orare possem; would to God I could always pray with the same
Earnestness, and Fervency, for then I should always have this answer, Fiat
quod velis. Be it unto thee even as thou will. They that would return
Hon^urably, must set out Valiantly; wrestling with God is the only way to
prevail like Princes; oh therefore be earnest: There are many to hinder, and
if you would obtain, you must be importunate. Englands sins do abound, and they
are as so many middle walls between Gods ear and your Prayers, you must cry
aloud if you would be heard. They lie as so many rubs in the way of mercy, lay
out all your strength for the removing of them. When a Peoples transgressions
are many, and their prayers are cold, reason will tell us, that their
expectations must neds be low, no sacrifice will be accepted but the male in
the Flock. If you offer to God the Blind, and the Lame, cold, dead, formal
prayers, they are so far from being a sweet smelling savor, as that they are
like the Cutting of a Dogs neck, or offering swines flesh, an abomination to
the Lord. Let all, says the King of Nineveh, cry, yea cry mightily unto God.
We can never think, that God should be prevailed with by those prayers, with
which we our selves are not at all affected. The Church complains in the 64
Isa. 7. There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to
take hold of thee. No wonder. If God does not rise to our help, if we do not
stir up our selves to take hold of him, dull and sleepy prayers are never like
to awaken Gods arm. But then

hour, but of a life; not only of a fasting day, but of every day. It is not
enough to send out one messenger to Heaven, but we must speed away one after
another. If a petition be sent to Court, and none to follow it, it will come to
nothing, the thing will not be granted: he that faints in prayer, will fail of
mercy. When an Army beleagures a Town, they do not give over at the first or
second repulse, nor leave it unless a surrender be presently made, but there
they lie week after week, and storm it time after time, and never give over
till they are Masters of it. Thus when we besiege the Throne of Grace with our
prayers, we must not be discouraged, though we do not presently obtain, nor be
put out of heart with the first or second refusal, but continue the work, and
renew our requests. Shrink not back like cowards in war, but stand your ground:
Prayer must be redoubled and reinforced, like those arrows of deliverance, 2
Kings 13.19. Smite five or six times, and though you seem to strike a rock, yet
give not over until the waters gush out: 1 Kings: 18 43, 44.
go up to the top of the hill, and though you see nothing, yet go again and
again, a cloud will appear at last. The woman of Canaan prayed on, though often
denied, and reproached too. Jacob kept his hold, when his thigh was lamed, and
would not let the angel go until he had blessed him, he would sooner die then
be denied. God expects we should wait upon him, and it is good manners in us so
to do. Indeed God does sometimes prevent his peoples prayers, and answers
before they call, sometimes he meets them; and while they are upon the way he
falls upon their necks, and kisseth them, but at other times he defers the
grant, and sends them away without that which they come for; he will hear often
from them, before they shall hear once from him; but it does not become them at
such a time to be so short breathed, as to cast the duty off: No, multiply your
requests till God does magnify his goodness. You have, it may be, prayed many
times against such and such burdens, and yet you groan under them; against
such distempers, and yet you do not see the healing of them; against such
abuses, and yet they are not removed; but what of all that? will you therefore
give over, and pray no more? seek God no more? what would this be but to loose
all your labor, and wilfully to throw away all your former prayers, and truly
they are too good to loose. Give the Lord no rest until he give in unto you an
answer of peace. The Merchant does not lay aside his Calling, because he has
made a bad Voyage; etiam post naufragium t^^tantur maria, though he has
suffered shipwreck he will try again. God hid his face from the house of Jacob,
yet would Isaiah look for him, and wait upon him. Those Mercies are fullest and
fairest, and taste sweetest, which are longest looked for. So much may suffice
for Direction, take these following Motives.

First, You will do your duty; I hope this will of God, that which he requires
and approves, calls for from you, and accepts in you: It is that which you owe
to them as they are Men, as they are Magistrates, and as they are instrumental
causes or means of conveying many and choice Mercies to you. Now it becomes
Christians to make conscience of duty, yea of every duty: Our obedience ought
to be of equal length and breadth with the revealed will of God; we must not
pick and choose, doing this, and leaving that undone, but every precept must
pass current, which has Gods name and authority instampt upon it: then are we
Christ's disciples indeed, when we do whatsoever he commands us, and then shall
we not be ashamed. It is sad to see how Professors do their work by halfs, some
are very observant of first-Table-requiries, but neglect the second; others
strict in their walking up to the commands of the second Table, but slight
those of the first. Some rob from man, that they may do sacrifice to God,
others neglect Gods altar, and serve men's tables, both which are an
abomination. Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God the
things which be Gods: If you would have a perfect reward at last, look to it
that you perform a perfect obedience now: besides, I am sure, duty is both safe
and sweet, that way is hedged about with protection, and paved with
pleasantness, and in the walking thereof we may groundedly expect both security
and comfort.

Tertullian says, Tertul. ad Scapu.
Christianus nullius est hostis, nedum Imperatoris, quem sciens a Deo suo
constitui, necesse est ut and ipsum diligat, etc. A Christian is an enemy to no
man, much less to the Emperor, but knowing him to be ordained of God, it is
necessary that he love, and reverence, and honor him, and desire his
prosperity: And, says he, Sacrificamus pro salute Imperatoris, sed Deo nostro
and ipsius, sed quomodo praecepit Deus pura prece. We offer up sacrifice for
the Emperors health, but only to him who is both his God and ours, and in
that way which he has commanded, by pure prayer. And so Athenagoras in his
Apology for the Christians has these words, Nos pro Imperio vestro preces ad
Deum fundimus, and ut filius in regno olim parenti succedat, ut Imperium
vestrum magis magisque semper augeatur, denique omnia ex animi sententia
eveniant, oramus. i.e. We pour out our prayers to God for your Empire, and
entreat of him that your Son may be your Successor in the Throne, and that
your Territories may be more and more enlarged, and all things answer the
desire of your hearts. Let us be followers of them, who by faith and patience
have inherited the promises. If they prayed for Heathen Princes who persecuted
the Truth, how much more should we pray for Christian Princes who own the
Truth, and smile upon its most strict professors? Let us show our selves to be
as good Christians as they, by our being as good subject^.

Thirdly, you may in this way promote God may do, secret things belong to him,
and we cannot look into his bosom, nor be acquainted with his counsel; but we
know what prayer has done, and how great and unexpected things have been
brought to pass by it: there is a kind of omnipotency in it, it has helped at
a dead lift: and when others have been found Physicians of no value, prayer
has wrought a cure. England has many enemies, both at home and abroad, ever
had since the first Reformation, and never more then at this day, yea, its own
children are risen up against her, who are now seeking its ruin, and endeavor
the under-mining of us: what they could not formerly do by force and power,
that they would now do by wit and policy; but prayer can do more for us, then
they can do against us. As it has broken the bow and the spear of the stout
warrior* so has it turned the counsel of wise Ahitophel into foolishness; it
can turn the valiant man into a Coward, that he shall not find his hands; and
the wise man into an Idiot, that he shall have his brains to seek. Christians
in their Assemblies, and Families, and Closets (if they will do but their duty)
may fill their Rulers and Counselors with wisdom, and strike rheir adversaries
with blindeness, so that they shall not see their way, nor know how to bring
their wicked and bloody devices to pass: I will assure you, let things be how
they will, your adversaries never so high, your selves never so low, if you can
but keep the Trade of Prayer going, the advantage is incomparably on your side.
I will se^ one believing praying Christian, against a thousand enemies because
prayer engages heaven, and brings in the help of Almighty power. And so, would
you have your Magistrates good, pray for them, this may prevail not only for
temporal, but spiritual blessings also upon them. The Kings heart is in Gods
hand, he can turn it as rivers of water, would you have it set right, desire
him to do it: God has given in many a soul to the prayers of his people.
Praying subjects are most likely to make prudent and pious Princes.

Fourthly, while you pray for your Magistrates, their good, you promote your
own. Let God but sanctify, direct, govern, and protect them, you will find
the advantage of it. If you will but peruse the History of Israel, and
diligently observe it, you shall find, so long as they had good Kings that
served God, and studied an approving of themselves to him, it went well with
the whole Nation, they had peace and plenty, victory over their enemies, and
the blessings of God did abound among them. But if God forsake the Rulers of a
Nation, withdraw from them his Spirit and Grace, give them up either to
blindness or madness, to follow their own counsels, and to fulfill their own
lusts, you shall soon in your families and the Nation feel the smart, and taste
the bitter fruits of it. When the Kings of Israel and Judah were wicked, all
went to ruin, the Nation lay bleeding, and the people were sometimes oppressed
by their own Princes, at other times spoiled and led captives by their enemies.
So that in praying for them, you seek and further your own welfare.

Fifthly, you pray for Religion while you too much for the maintaining and
preserving thereof: and truly that cannot be safe, unless we have Religious
Governors; they that are of the synagogue of Satan will not build, or repair,
or maintain Gods temple. If you would not have a lawless liberty granted to
others, pray that your Governors may be strict themselves; if you would not
have others infected and poisoned with errors, pray that your Governors may
embrace the Truth, and be valiant for it. The Generality of Christians are
State-Christians, are not so deeply dyed, but they can change their color,
when they once see it out of fashion. It has been all along seen, that the
Religion of a Nation has been according to the Governors of a Nation: if they
be holy, then the true Religion thrives, and prospers, and flourishes under
their s^adow; but if they be corrupt, the door stands open to error, heresy,
and indeed, what not? It is true, in the time of wicked Ahab, God told Elijah
he had yet seven thousand knees that had not bowed to Baal, but the generality
were idolaters; and these that kept themselves pure, did also keep themselves
so private, as that the good Prophet looked upon himself as the only man left
that did own God and his cause: We need go no further then our own Land for the
proving of this. Let a godly King Edward come to the throne, and there shall be
an happy Reformation begun, the Nation shall become Protestant, superstition
and idolatry shall seek corners and fly the Land; but if a wicked Queen Mary
be advanced, she shall carry England back to Rome, or rather bring Rome into
England, and Popery shall set up its Crest again. If there be no good blood at
Court, there will be little found in the veins of the Nation.

Lastly, in this way you will bring your Nation, how ever it should fare with
Religion, what ever should happen to that Cause in which you have engaged,
though all things should return to their former state, nay though you should be
brought into a worse condition then ever you were in, yet this may stay and
comfort your hearts, when you can say, O Lord thou know, I have not been
wanting to my duty, there is many a prayer now upon the File in Heaven, which I
have put up for England; there is many a tear now in thy bottle, which I have
shed for England. This will be a cordial to you in a day of trouble, and at the
hour of death, if you have done your duty, you may rejoice, let God do with you
and the Land what he pleases.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, be pleased to correct these Errors of the Press, viz page 8
l. 18. for (...), read (...), page 10. l. ult. for (...), read (...).


