ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE EIGHT THESES Laid down, and the INFERENCES, Deduced from
them, in a DISCOURSE ENTITLED Church Government. PART. V. Lately Printed at
OXFORD.

They went out from Us, because they were not of Us: for if they had been of
Us, they would (...) no doubt have continued with Us; but they went out that
they may be made manifest, that they were not all of Us. 1 John 2. 19.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno 1687.

Imprimatur.

IO. VENN Vice-Can. Oxon.
Iun. 2. 1687.
To the UNIVERSITY READER.
THESE Papers neither have, nor need any other recommendation, then that of the
Cause which they maintain. They are extorted by the importunity of those
Adversaries, who have endeavored to wound us in all our nearest concerns, The
Honor of our University, the Authority of our Church, and the Rights of our
Sovereign. The Laborious Author of the Discourses spared no pains to shake the
foundations of our Religion; and the designing Publisher has with no
inconsiderable expense, endeavored a farther advantage from them, by casting a
reproach npon these Seminaries of our Education. But it is justly hoped, that
their designs against the University will prove as successless as their
attempts on the Church; Of which we know, that though the Rains descend, the
Floods come, and the Winds blow, yet it cannot fall, for it is founded upon a
Rock. The hopes of our Enemies abroad have been entertained, and the solicitude
of our Friends awakened by the news of our Oxford Converts daily flocking into
the bosom of the Roman Church. But we hope All men are by this time convinced
that they deserve as little consideration for their Number, as they do regard
for their accomplishments. No one need to be alarmed at the Desertion of Six or
Seven Members, who shall consider their dependence on One who by the Magazines,
which He had stored up against Us, shows that He has not now first changed his
Complexion, but only let fall the Vizour. Nor ought we more to regard the
Insinuations of those, who tell us of the secret Promises of such as have not
openly Professed, as having no other ground but the confidence of the Reporters.
But be it as it will, God covers us with his Feathers, and under his Wings will
We trust; We will neither be afraid of the arrow that flies by day, nor for
the Pestilence that walks in darkness: But we least of all fear any danger
from this praesent attempt of our Author, since the Regal power seems engaged
with our Church in one common defense; For she is no farther concerned in this
present Controversy, then as she is accused to have been too great a friend to
the Praerogative of the Crown. And certainly that Doctrine which invades the
just Rights of the Prince, can hope but for few Proselytes amongst those, who
have constantly defended them in their Writings, asserted them in their
Decrees, and upon all occasions vindicated them with their Swords. For We do
not lie open to the imputation of a conditioned and distinguishing Loyalty, who
have showed our readiness to imitate the glorious examples of our Fathers, and
were prepared (had not God's good Providence prevented our service) to have
transcribed that Copy lately at Sedgmore, which they set us formerly at
Edgehill. And in truth our steady fidelity to the Prince is so unquestionable,
that our Enemies have been pleased to ridicule what they could uot deny, and
have made Passive Obedience bear a part in our Character, when the Muse has
been inclined to Satyr.

As for our Author and his Theses there is nothing here advanced which was not
in King Edwards time fully answered by Protestant Writers; and had he written
in Henry the 8th's Reign, he might have received a Reply from a Roman Catholic
Convocation; So vain is it to urge Us now with the stale pretenses of a
Foreign Jurisdiction, which our Ancestors of the Roman Communion ejected with
so Universal a consent, and which our Fathers of the Reformation resisted even
unto death; I mean those Glorious Prelates, who here dying seal^d the truth of
our Religion with their Blood, and left it as a Legacy to us their Children, by
us to be conveyed to the Generations yet to come.

Animadversions on the Eight Theses etc.
AS that Person, who would prove himself a genuine Son of the Church of
England, had need of more Sincerity then this Editor showed, whilst He professed
to be of Her Communion; so one, who has the ambition of appearing a potent
Enemy against her, had need of greater Strength then he has either produced of
his own, or borrowed from others, since he has been her declared Adversary. Had
he continued still to dissemble his Faith, and affected an aequilibrium betwixt
both Churches, His writings would have been more suitable to such a Character;
where the attentive Reader will find the Church of England but weakly attacq'd,
and that of Rome as faintly vindicated. But since some Motives have prevailed
with him to assume the Name of another Church, as that which he has left has no
great cause to lament the loss of such a Member, so that which He would seem to
have fled to will have little reason to boast that She has gained a Proselyte.
For how plausibly soever He may discourse of Church-Autority, He abounds in too
great a Plerophory of his own sense, to submit himself either to a Convocation
at home, or Council abroad; and although he would appear an Enemy to Luther, he
seems at this very time to be drawing up a novell Scheme of Doctrines, and
modelling to himself a new Church.

Hence it is that in one of his Treatises he has deserted the ancient Plea of
Transubstantiation, upon which the Tridentine Fathers founded their Adoration
of the Host; and from which all the great Champions of that Church have
constantly deduced it. Hence his modifying the Council's Sacramentum into Res
Sacramenti, his prescinding from the Symbols, his certain inferior cult only
due to them, his stripping them even of the Schoolmens latricall, qualified,
secondary, improper, accidental coadoration; and such other his abstractive
Notions of that Worship, as do indeed befit a Nominal Philosopher, but have no
agreement with the avowed doctrines and practices of the Roman Communion. Hence
it is that in the Discourse we are now upon, We read nothing of the Dominus
Deus Papa of the Canonists; Nothing of the Vicar of Christ; the Holy,
Apostolic, and Infallible See which their former Writers have endeavored to
establish Iure divino; Nothing of the Supreme Pastor, Governor and Head of
Christ's Church, the Successor of S. Peter, and other Titles which even our
Representers of late (whose business it has been to mollifi^) have furnished
us with; No not so much as of the modest Bishop of Meaux's Primacy of S.
Peter's chair and common Center of Catholic Unity; but instead of these we are
told of a Western Patriarch, one who pleads the Prescription of some Years for
his Authority, and thinks himself hardly dealt with, page 21^
that because He claims more then his due, that which is his due should be
denied him. Hence it seems to be that He is so wary in giving us his own
Opinions; that He disputes so much, and affirms so little; that he bounds all
his Positions with so many limitations that they seem contrived on purpose for
subterfuges; and that He very cautiously ventures not any farther then He
thinks, though falsely, the Authority of our Writers will bear him out. Hence those
Concessions (which will perhaps by that Party be judged over-liberall) That
Images,. 117.
and so the veneration or worship of them were very seldom, if at all, used in
the Primitive Church. That the public Communion was then most commonly, if not
allways, administered in both kinds unto the People. That the Divine Service
which then, as now, was celebrated usually in the Latin or Greek Tongue, was
much better in those days then now understood of the Common people. That the
having the Liturgy, or Divine Service, or the Holy Scriptures in a known tongue
is not prohibited, nor the using of Images enjoined; nor the Priest's
administering, and the people's receiving the Communion in both kinds, if the
Supreme Church Governors so think fit (and we say they ill discharge the
Office of Church Governors, who do not think fit our Saviors Institution
should be observed) declared unlawful by any Canon of any Council. Ancient
Council he means, for latter Councils have declared these unlawful. These are
large grants from a Romanist, and which give a great shock to their so much
magnified pretense of Universal Tradition. Had this Author lived in those Ages
when the Secular Prince countenanced the beginnings of Reformation, He would
have scarce lost any thing for his too rigorous adhaesion to the C. of Rome.
For he thinks it probable that had the Reformation only translated the former
Church Liturgies and Scriptures into a known tongue;. 118.
administered Communion in both kinds, thought fit not to use Images; changed
something of practice only without any decession from the Churches Doctrines,
the Church Governors would have been facile to license these. Where by the way
it seems something unintelligible how they should change practice without
decession from Doctrines, if Doctrines enjoined such Practices, page 2.. 2.
and if according to him, Errors in practice allways presuppose some Error in
matter of Faith. But at least we may expect He would have outwardly complied,
since he notes, That some outward compliance at the first, page 140.. 123.
of those Bishops, who made an open Opposition afterward, might be upon a fair
Pretense, because the first Acts of the Reformation might not be so
insupportable as the latter. Where it is worth our Observing, that the very
first Act, which gave life to the Reformation, was shaking off all manner of
Obedience to the Sea of Rome, then which I believe his Holiness, contrary to
this Author's Sentiments, thinks no Act more unsupportable.

These things considered, We could not have had a more easy Adversary then
this Gentleman, and the Church has less reason to fear his open Opposition,
then had he still continued in her bosom. For it seems not to be his Province
to publish what is Material against us, but to publish Much. But, God be
thanked, our Religion is not established upon so weak a basis, as to be
overthrown by a few Theses unprov'd, and falsely applied. Nor is it any wonder
if that arguer does not convince, who uses for Principles Conclusions drawn
from Praemisses, which the world never saw, and then assumes such things as
every one acquainted with History is able to contradict. Certainly his
University-Readers will not be very fond of the Conclusion of that Syllogism,
whose Major is a petitio principii, and Minor a downright fals-hood in matter
of fact. They no doubt are surpised to find Consequents come before their
Antecedents, and Church Government part the 5th to have stepped into the World
(somewhat immaturely methinks) before the other four. But the Lawfulness of the
English Reformation was to be examined, and it would have took up too much time
to show why he imposed upon us such a Test.

It might therefore be thought seasonable enough to examine the Truth of his
Theses, when he shall be pleased to communicate to us whence they are inferred.
In the meanwhile, it may not be unuseful to consider what disservice he had
done to our Cause, had his success aequal'd the boldness of his attempt. After
all his Theses and their Applications, his Correspondent Alpha's and Beta's,
his perplexed Paragraphs, his intricate Paratheses, and his taedious Citations,
what Doctrine of the Church of Rome has he established, or what principle of
Ours has he disproved? Should we grant that the Clergy only have power in
Controversies of Religion, that the Secular Prince has no Authority to reform
Errors in the Church, that our Princes did wrongfully usurp such an Authority,
and that our Reformation was not the act of the Clergy; will it hence follow
(which yet is to be proved by this Author, e're he can persuade us to entertain
any favorable Opinion of Popery) That the second Commandment ought to be
expunged out of the Decalogue? that Idolatry is no Sin? or worshipping of
Images no Idolatry? that Transubstantiation is to be believed in despite of
Sense, Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity? the Service of God to be administered
in an unknown tongue, as it were in mere contradiction to Saint Paul? and the
Communion to be celebrated in one kind notwithstanding our Saviors, Drink ye
all of this. It is indeed our happiness, that the Reformation was carried on by
the joint concurrence of the Civil and Ecclesiastical power; that We are united
together by common Rules for Government and Worship agreed on by the Bishops
and Presbyters in Convocation, and made Laws to us by the Authority of the
Sovereign: We are allways ready to prove that the Church of England being a
National Church, and not Subject to any foreign Jurisdiction, owed no
Obedience to the Bishop or Church of Rome, and therefore might without their
leave reform her self, and that accordingly our Religion is established by such
Laws as want no authority either Civil or Ecclesiastical, which they ought to
have. This is a Plea which we shall be allways prepared to justify; and a
Blessing for which we thank God, and for the continuance of which we shall
never cease to pray. But now had those which we esteem corruptions of the Roman
Church never been cast out, or were they reestablish'd (which God in his mercy
forbid) by as good authority as that by which they are now abolished; Yet even
then we could not submit to such Determinations, and being concluded by an
antecedent Obligation to God durst not obey even lawful authority commanding
unlawful things. He therefore that would gain a Proselyte, who acts upon
prudent and Conscientious principles, in vain entertains him with Schemes of
Church Government, since the things contested are such as no Government in the
world can make lawful; It would be more rational to show (were not that an
attempt long since despaired of) that the particular doctrines and practices to
which we are invited, are agreeable to the word of God; or that it does not
concern us, whether they be, or not. For if either it may be proved, that the
Errors of the Church of Rome were so great, that there was a necessity of
reforming them, that every National Church has a right to reform her self, that
this right of the Church of England in particular was unquestionable, that she
used no other then this her lawful right, and that accordingly the Reformation
was effected by the Major part of the then legal Church Governors: Or if in
failure or this (which yet we say is far from being our case) it may be proved,
that where evident Necessity requires, and the prevailing Errors are manifest,
there the Civil power may lawfully reform Religion without the concurrence of
the major part of the Clergy, for Secular Interests averse from Reformation; Or
if lastly, supposing no such Reformation made by lawful authority, but the Laws
which enjoin such erroneous Doctrines, remaining in their full force and
vigor, every private Christian can plead an Exemption from his Obedience to
them, by proving them evidently contradictory to the known laws of God; if any
one of these Pleas are valid, all which have by our Writers been proved to be
so beyond the possibility of a fair Reply, then Nothing which is aimed at in
these Papers can affect us, and though the author would have showed more skill in
proving his Question, yet he had still betrayed his want of prudence in the
choice of it.

By what has been said, the Reader will be induced to think that these Papers
do not so much concern the Church of England, as the State; and that a Reply to
them is not so properly the task of a Divine, as of a Lawyer. The Civil power
is indeed manifestly struck at, and an Answer might easily be fetched from Keble
and Coke. He may persuade himself that he acts craftily, but certainly he acts
very inconsistently, who erects a Triumphal Statue to his Prince, and at the
same time undermines his Authority; in monumental Inscriptions gives him the
glorious and astonishing Title of Optimus Maximus, and yet sets up a superior
Power to his. If neither Loyalty nor gratitude could persuade him to speak more
rever^ntly, yet out of wariness he ought to have been more cautious in laying
down such things, as seem to have an ill aspect on his Majesty's proceedings.
For it may seem very rash to deny,. 5. p. 12.
that the Prince can remove from the Exercise of his Office any of his Clergy
for not obeying his Decisions in matters of a Spiritual Nature, when a Reverend
Prelate suffers under such a Sentence;. 7. p. 14.
to assert that the Prince, ought not to collate to Benefices, where the Clergy
have Canonical exceptions against the Person nominated, whilst a Friend of his
thus qualified enjoys the benefit of such a Collation; to find fault with the
Reformers that they gave their Prince leave to dispense with Laws and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical,. 28. p. 36.
when he himself is in that case most graciously dispensed with. How far the
Regal power extends it self in these cases, especially as it may be limited by
the municipal laws of the Realm, I am not so bold as to determine; but where
such Rights are claimed by the Sovereign, and actually exercised, there it
becomes not the modesty of a private Subject to be so open and liberal in
condemning them. But then above all he renders his Loyalty justly questionable,
when he tells us it is disputed by the Roman Doctors, and leaves it a Question,
Whether in case that a Prince use his coactive Jurisdiction in Spiritual
matters against the Definitions of the Church,. 16. p. 20.
then the Pope has not also virtually some Temporal coactive power against the
Prince? namely to dissolve the Princes coactive Power, or to authorize others
to use a coactive power, against such a Prince in order to the good of the
Church? Now I appeal to the judicious Reader, whether the substance of that
infamous Libel, which was part of a late See Sidney's Trial.
Traytour's Indictment, and which was written by way of Polemical Discourse, as
he pleaded, might not if managed by this Author's pen have been thus warily
expressed; Whether in case that a Prince use his coactive Jurisdiction in Civil
matters against Acts of Parliament, then the Parliament has not also virtually
some temporal coactive power against the Prince; namely, to dissolve the
Princes coactive power, or to authorize others to use a coactive power against
such a Prince in order to the good of the State? Such bold Problems as these
ought not to be left undecided; and one who had any zeal for his Prince, would
scarce let the Affirmative side of the Quaestion pass without affixing a brand
on it.

These Expressions among others He might well be conscious would be offensive
to any SIR of known Fidelity and Loyalty to his Prince; and therefore such
person's good Opinion was to be courted in an Epistle Apologetick^ But
certainly it was expected that the kind Sir should read no farther then the
Epistle; for if he did, he would find himself miserably imposed upon. The
Author in this Epistle praeacquaints him with these things.

1. That there is nothing touched in this Discourse concerning the Temporal
Prince his Supreme power in such matters, as it is dubious whether they be
Spiritual or Temporal, but only in things which are purely Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical.

2. That he knows not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to
the Prince, but which, or at least the chiefest of which, all other Christian
Princes except those of the Reformed states do forego to Exercise.

3. Nor of any, but which the Kings of England have also foregone before Henry
the Eighth.

Now I shall humbly beg leave to undeceive the unknown Sir, and to represent to
him that in all these he is misinformed. As to the first, 1. That there is
nothing touched in this Discourse concerning the Temporal Prince his Supreme
power in such Matters as it is dubious whether they be Spiritual or Temporal
but only such as are purely Spiritual and Ecclesiastical.

Now if by dubious he means such things as He does not doubt, but they are
Spiritual, then this does not reach our case; because We may doubt whether some
things are not Temporal, which He doubts not but they are Spiritual; But if by
dubious He means such things as are doubted by no body but that they are purely
Spiritual, then are we agreed; since neither do We allow the Temporal Prince
any power in things of which We our selves doubt not but they are purely
Spiritual. That there are some Powers merely Spiritual, appropriated to the
Clergy and incommunicable to the Prince, no true Son of the Church of England
will deny; but now although the substance of those Powers be immediately from
God, and not from the King, as those of Preaching, Ordaining, Absolving etc.
Yet whether these are not subject to be limited, inhibited, or otherwise
regulated in the outward Exercise of them by the Laws of the Land, and the
Authority Regal is the thing quaestion'd. This cannot perhaps be better expressed
then in the words of the Reverend Bp. Sanderson; The King does not challenge to
himself as belonging to him by Virtue of his Supremacy Ecclesiastical the power
of Ordaining Ministers, excommunicating scandalous Offenders, or doing any
other act of Episcopal Office in his own Person; nor the power of Preaching,
Administering the Sacraments, or doing any other act of Ministerial Office in
his own person: but leaves the performance of all such acts of either sort unto
such persons, as the said several respective powers do of divine right belong
to, viz. of the one sort to the Bishops, and of the other to the Priests.
Episcopacy not prejud. to Reg power. p 22
Yet does the King by Virtue of that Supremacy challenge a power as belonging
to him in the right of his Crown, to make Laws as well concerning Preaching,
Administering the Sacraments, and other acts belonging to the Function of a
Priest, as concerning Ordination of Ministers, proceeding in matters of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance in the Spiritual Courts, and other acts belonging to
the Function of a Bishop: to which Laws as well the Priests, as the Bishops are
subject, and ought to submit to be limited and regulated thereby in the
Exercise of those their several respective Powers; their claim to a Ius
Divinum, and that their said several powers are of God notwithstanding. Now to
apply this; That the deciding Controversies of Faith, and Excommunicating
Offenders, etc. are the proper Province of the Clergy, we deny not; but that
the indicting Synods in order to such Matters, or making Laws to regulate the
Exercise of them are purely Spiritual, is not so undoubted as He would persuade
us. Again, that the Spiritual Authority which is to be exercised in the
Episcopal or Sacerdotal Functions can be derived from none but those spiritual
persons who were invested with that Authority, and power of delegating it to
others, is willingly allowed; but that collation to Benefices can be the act of
none but the Clergy will not be hence inferred. For the Spiritual Authority it
self, and the application of it to such an Object are very different things.
The power by which a Clergy man is capacitated for his Function is derived from
the Bishop which ordains him; but the applying this Power to such a Place, the
ordering that the Ecclesiastical Person shall execute that Authority which he
derived from the Church in such a peculiar part of the Kingdom is not without
the reach of the Civil Jurisdiction; and therefore Collation to Benefices (in
the sense this Author understands it) should not have been reckoned by him
amongst those things of which it is not doubted but they are purely Spiritual.
Another power of which he abridges the Prince, and by consequence would have to
be esteemed purely Spiritual, is the deposing from the Exercise of their Office
in his Dominions any of the Clergy for transgressing of the Ecclesiastical
Canons. Now that the Secular Prince should have an Obligation from God over all
Persons in all Spiritual matters to bind them by Temporal Punishments to the
Obedience of the Churches or Clergy's determinations, and decrees (as he words
it) and yet that the Exercising this power, their performing what they are
obliged to by God, should be without the reach of their Authority, seems to me a
paradox. That the Christian Emperors in the Primitive times challenged such a
power is plain from the undoubted testimony of the Learned Petrus de Marca.
Cura principum Christianorum olim non solum Haereticorum ^uroros compressi,
contumacia Episcoporum aut Clericorum adversus Synodorum sententias rebellium
ab externa potentia repressa; sed etiam Principum studio prohibiti Episcopi ne
legibus secularibus vel Canonibus violatis injuriam subditis inferrent De
concord. l. 4. cap. 1. par. 2.
Who tells us, that by the care of Christian Princes, Heretics were represt,
the contumacy of Bishops and Clergymen against the Decrees of Synods punished,
and Bishops restrained from oppressing their subjects by the violation of the
Canons. If we inquire how the Princes secured the Keeping of the Canons;
Canonum custodiae duobu^ modis prospiciebant Principes, tum delegatione
Magistratuum, qui ve^arent ne quid contra Canones tentareture, tum exactis
poenis a contumacibus si quid perperam gestum effect. ^b par 4.
He tells us they did it by these 2 Methods. 1st. By delegating Magistrates to
see they were observed. 2ly. By punishing those who were guilty of the breach
of them. And he particularly mentions Deprivation inflicted by the Secular
power for violation of the Canons. In manifestissima violatione, canonibus
factam injuriam iis poenis Principes ulsciscebantur, quae legibus irrogatae
erant, nempe expulsione a sede. Deturbationem enim illam quae vacantem
Ecclesiam redderet sui arbitrii esse putabant; non autem regradationem vel
dejectionem ab Episcopali dignitate, quae erat poena mere Ecclesiastica. Ib.
par. 6.
For that, they thought removal from the Sea within the reach of their
Jurisdiction, though not Degradation, which is a punishment merely
Ecclesiastical. (Which neither did the Reforming Princes ever think in their
power to inflict.) And he Ibid.
there gives instances of Bishops so deprived. And indeed this seems to be a
Necessary branch of power, which naturally flows from his being Custos Canonum,
which he is proved by this Author at large to be. How far the Prince may
abridge himself of this power by the laws of the Land, I meddle not; it
suffices to show that it is not originally a power merely Spiritual. And from
this and the former Instances the Reader will be able to judge the truth of
that assertion, That there is nothing touched in this Discourse concerning such
Matters, as it is dubious whether they be Spiritual, or Temporal.

Come we now to that other assertion of his, That he knows not of any
Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to the Prince but which (or at
least the chiefest of which) all other Christian Princes except those of the
Reformed States do forego to exercise.

Now if by the chiefest, which he excepts, he means preaching the word, and
administering the Sacraments, Excommunicating, and absolving; neither do the
Reformed States challenge the Exercise of these; and as for others it will
appear that the Princes of the Roman Catholic Communion extend their Supermacy
as far as the Reformed.

And here it may not be improper to instance in that right which the Kings of
Spain enjoy in Sicily, which seems to extend even to those Spiritual powers
which our Author calls the chiefest. Hist. of Eccl, Rev by a Learned Priest in
France. p. 116.
And this I find ushered in by a Roman Catholic Writer with an assertion quite
opposite to that which is laid down in this Epistle. It even surpasses (says
he) that which Henry the Eighth of England boldly took when he separated from
the Church of Rome. The King of Spain as King of Sicily pretends to be Legate a
latere, and born Legate of the H. See; so that he and his Viceroys in his
absence have the same power over the Sicilians as to the Spiritual that a
Legate a latere could have. And therefore they who execute that Jurisdiction of
Sicily for the King of Spain have power to absolve, punish, and excommunicate
all sorts of persons, whether Laics or Ecclesiastics, Monks, Priests, Abbots,
Bishops, and even Cardinals themselves, that reside in the Kingdom. They
acknowledge not the Popes Authority, being Sovereign Monarchs as to the
Spiritual. They confess that the Pope has heretofore given them that
privilege: ( So that his Holiness it seems thought even those chiefest Powers
of the Church alienable) but at the same time they pretend that it is not in
his power to recall it; and so they acknowledge not the Pope for head, to whose
Tribunal no Appeal can be made because their King has no Superior, as to the
Spiritual. Moreover this right of superiority is not considered as delegate,
but proper; and the King of Sicily or they who hold Jurisdiction in his place,
and who are Laymen take the title of Beatissimo and Santissimo Padre
attributing to themselves in effect in respect of Sicily what the Pope takes to
himself in regard of the whole Church; and they preside in Provincial Councils.
As for the title of Head of the Church which taken by the Reformers so much
offends our Discourser, this Critical Historian farther observes; It was matter
of great astonishment that in our age Queen Elizabeth took the title of Head of
the Church of England. But seeing in the Kingdom of Sicily, the Female succeeds
as well as in England, a Princess may take the title of Head of the Church of
Sicily, and of Beatissimo and Santissimo Padre. Nay it has happened so already
in the time of Iean of Arragon and Castile the mother of Charles the 5th: So
that this Critic concludes that it may be said there are two Popes, and two
sacred Colleges in the Church, to wit, the Pope of Rome, and the Pope of
Sicily, to whom also may be added the Pope of England.

What Jurisdiction Spiritual the King of France challenges will best be learnt
from the Liberties of the Gallican Church, published by the learned Pitthaeus
and to be found in his Works. Two of them which seem to come home to our
purpose are these.

Le Rois tres-Chrestiens ont de tout temps selon les occurrences and necessitez
de leur pays, assemble o^ fait assembler Synodes o^ Conciles Provinciaux and
Nationaux, esquels enter autres chooses importantes a conservation de leur
estat, se sont aussi traitezles a^faires concernans l'ordre and discipline
Ecclesiastique de leurs pays, don't ils ont saict fair Reigles, Chapitres,
Loix, Ordonnances, and Pragmatiques Sanctions sou^ leur Nom and autorite: and
s^en lisent encor aujourd huy plusieurs es recueils des ecrets receus part
Eglise Universelle, and aucunes approuvees par Conciciles generaux.
The most Christian King has had power at all times according to the
occurrences and necessity's of his own affairs, to assemble or cause to be
assembled Synods or Councils Provincial and National; and therein to treat not
only of such things as tend to the preservation of his State, but also of
affairs which concern the Order and Discipline of the Church in his own
Dominions; and therein to make Rules, Chapters, Laws, Ordinances, and
Pragmatick sanctions in his own Name and by his own Authority. Many of which
have been received among the Decrees of the Catholic Church, and some of them
approved by General Councils.

Le Papen envoy point en France Legates a latere avec faculte de re^ormer,
juger, conferer, dispenser, and tells autres qui ont accoustume d'estre
specifiees par les Bulls de leur pouvoir, si non a la postulation du Roy
tres-Christien ou de son consentement: and le Legate n' use de ses facultez qu'
apres avoir baille promise au Roy par escrit sous son sein, and jure par ses
Saints Ordres de n'user desdites facultez e's Royaume, pays, tertes and
Seigneuries de sa suje^tion si non tant and si longuement qu'il plaira au Roy;
and que si cost que le dir Legate sera adverty de sa volonte' au contraire,
ils'en desistera and cessera Aussi qu'il n'usera des dites facultez si non pour
le regard de celles don't il aura le consentement du Roy and conformement a
iceluy sans entreprendre ny fair chose au saints decrets Conciles generaux,
Franchi^es, Libertez, and Privileges de L'Eglise Gallicane and des Universitez,
and estatez publiques de ce Royaume. Et a cette fin se presentent les facultez
de tells Legates a la Cour de Parliament, ou else sont veus, examinees,
verifiees, publiees and registrees sous tells modifications que la Cour voit
estre a fair pour le bien du Royaume: suivant lesqnelles modifications se
jugent tous les process and differents qui surviennent pour rai^on de ce, and
non autrement.
The Pope cannot send a Legate a latere into France, with power to reform,
judge, collate, or dispense, or do such other things which use to be specified
in the Bull of his Legation, except it be upon the defire or with the
approbation of the most Christian King. Neither can the said Legate execute his
Office until he has promised the King in writing under his seal, and sworn by
his holy Orders, that he will not use the said Legantine power in his Kingdom,
Countries, Lands and Dominions any longer then it shall please the King; and
that so soon as he is admonished of the Kings pleasure to the contrary he will
cease and forbear; and that whilst he does use it, it shall be no otherwise
exercised then according to the consent of and in conformity to the King,
without attemping any thing to the prejudice of the Decrees of General
Councils, the Franchises, Liberties, and Privileges of the Gallican Church,
and the Universities, and public Estates of the Realm. And to this end they
shall present the Letters of their Legation to the Court of Parliament, where
they shall be viewed, verified, published and registered with such Modifications
as that Court shall think fit for the good of the Realm; and all processes
shall proceed according to such restrictions, and no otherwise.

In these two Liberties, we find the Authority of the French King farther
extended, and the Papal power more limited, then our Author can be contented
the Regal Jurisdiction should be enlarged, and the Patriarchal confined by the
Reformed. What power the most Christian King claims in confirming Canons we may
learn from Petrus de Marca De Conc, l 6. c^ 34. par. 2. Nunquam discedere
oportet ab hac certis^ima Regula, deliberationes Ec^lesiae Gallica^ae
considerari non posse a^^ter quam vel^t conssilium Regi datum, ^asque
execu^ioni non posse ma^dari absque consensu and confirmatione ej^s
who lays it down for a Rule which never fails, That the deliberations of the
Gallican Church can be looked upon no otherwise then as Counsel given to the
King; and that they cannot be put in execution without his consent and
confirmation. And he there says, that the King may praeside in Councils as
Tanquam caput, comme Chef Ibid.
Head. An ex ^o quod ^uprema Canonum pro^ectio ad Regem pertiner, sequatur cum
jubere posse ut observenture, non expectata etiam senten^ia Ecclesiae
Gallica^ae.
And in another place proposing to himself this Quaestion, Certum quidem est
carum constitutionum obseruationum sore sanctiorem, si conderentur cum generali
Cleri consensu; quoniam unusquisque ^am rem obtinere modis omnibus cupit quam
ipso suo judicio comprobaverit. N^hilominus aeque certum est Regem ex sententia
Concili^ sui, quod auget aut minuit prout ei luber, posse latis edictis
decernere ut ^ano^es observenture, ac circumstantias and modos necessarios
addere ad saciliorem eorum executionem, sive etiam ad veram eorum mentem
explicandam, eolque accommodare ad utilitatem Regni lib. 6. c. 36. par. 1.
Whether, since the supreme protection of the Canons does belong to the King,
it thence follows that He can command that they be observed without expecting
the sentence of the Gallican Church? He answers, * that it is indeed certain
that the Observation of them will be the more sacred, if they be made with the
Universal consent of the Clergy, because every one desires that that should
take place, which he himself approves of: But then, that it is aequally
certain, that the King with the advice of his Council, may by his Edicts
decree, that the Canons be observed, and may add such Modes and Circumstances
as are necessary for the better Execution of them, and accommodate them to the
Interest of the State. This Authority he confirms from the Examples of the first
Christian Emperors, and the former French Kings, and adds expressly Utuntur
adhuc eo jure Reges Christianissimi. ^b par. 3.
That the most Christian Kings still use that right. And now methinks the
revising of the Canons by the Kings of England, especially when humbly besought
to do it by the Clergy, should not be an Invasion of the Churches rights, when
the French Kings even without such Interposition of the Church, exercise the
same Right, and yet do, according to our Auther, leave to the management of the
Clergy all power in Spirituals. I might here insist upon Collation of
Benefices, which the French Kings challenge by right of the Regale; but I shall
choose rather to mention the assembling of Councils, because a French King in
the last Century seems to have doubted whether his Clergy might convene without
his consent; as appears from that bold Speech of his Ambassador in the Council
of Trent, which because it gives us some insight into the freeness of that
Synod, I shall beg leave to transcribe the latter part of it from Goldastus
Collect. Const^tut. Imperial. T. 3. p. 373 Pi^ quarti imperium de^ractamus,
quaecunque sint ejus judicia and sentenciae rejicin^us, respui^^us, and
contemnimus. Et quanquam, Pures Sanctissimi, vestra omnium Religio, Vita, and
eruditio magnae apud Nos semper suerit and erit Autoritatis, cum tamen nihil ^
vobis^ sed omnia magis Romae, quam Tridenti agantur, and quae hic publicantur
magis P^^ Quarti placita, quam Conci^ii Tridentini decreta jure aestimentur,
denunciamus and protest amur quaecunque in hoc conventu, hoc est, solo Pii nutu
and voluntate ^ecernuntur and publicantur ea neque Regem Christianishmum
probat^rum^ nequ^ Ecclesiam Gadicanam pro de^reto O^cumenici Concilii
habituram. Interea quo^quot estis Galliae Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates,
Doctores, Theologi, Vos omnes hinc abire Rex Christianissimus jubet, redituros
ut primum l^eus Optimus Maximus Ecclesi^e Catholic in General (...) Counciliis
antiquam sormam and libert^tem restituerit, Regiautem Christianissimo suam
digni atom and Majestatem.
We refuse to be subject to the Command of Pius the 4th, All his judgments and
decrees we refuse, reject, and contemn; and although, most Holy Fathers, Your
Religion, Life, and Learning was ever and ever shall be of great Authority with
Us, Yet seeing You do nothing, but all things are managed rather at Rome, then
at Trent; and the things that are here published are rather the Placita of Pius
the 4th, then the Decrees of the Council of Trent, We denounce and protest here
before You all, that whatsoever things are decreed in this Assembly by the
will and pleasure of Pius, neither the Most Christian King will ever approve,
nor the French Church ever acknowledge for the Decrees of an Ecumenical
Council. In the mean time the Most Christian King commands all you his
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Doctors, and Divines to depart hence; then to
return, when it shall please God to restore to his Catholic Church the ancient
methods and liberty of General Councils, and to the Most Christian King his
Honor and Dignity. Now I leave it to the Reader to judge whether any Reformed
States ever assumed to themselves greater Authority over the Ecclesiastics,
then this R. Catholic Prince, or Whether ever any Protestant expressed himself
with greater warmth concerning this Council, then that Protesting Ambassador.
It might be easy to show how much power the Venetian Republic exercises in
Spirituals, had not this been done so lately by another Pen. But what has been
said may suffice to evince, that this Epistolographer imposed upon the
credulity of his Sir, when he told him, that he knew of no Ecclesiastical
powers denied to the Prince but which (or at least the chiefest of which) all
other Christian Princes, except those of the Reformed State, do forego to
exercise.

But our Discourser perhaps presumed his Friend a Stranger to sorreign affairs,
and therefore thought he might the more securely use a Latitude in his treating
of those; it remains therefore to examine whether he has been a more faithful
Relator of our own History, and what truth there is in his last Epistolary
assertion, that he knows not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse
denied to the Prince, but what the Kings of England have foregone before Henry
the 8th. Now whatever in relation to a power in Spirituals is in this Discourse
accused of Nov^lty seems easily reducible to these two Heads:

1st. A Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical denied to the Western Patriarch: as
appears by our Princes taking away all manner of Foreign Jurisdiction,
prohibiting all appeals to the Sea of Rome, all Bulls from it, and in general
all Intercourse with it.

2ly. The same Supremacy invested in the Sovereign; as appears by King Henry's
assuming the title of Head of the Church; by the Kings making Ecclesiastical
Laws; by that Synodical act of the Clergy not to assemble or promulgate any
Canons without his leave; by that power granted to the King to visit
Ecclesiastical persons, and to reform Errors and Heresies; by his collating to
Benefices without consent of the Clergy; and by hindering Excommunications in
foro externo.

Now in Answer to this charge of Novelty; It is confessed that the Pope did for
some Years usurp such a superiority; but then, as it is granted that he did de
facto claim such a power, so that it did de jure belong to him is denied; and
not only so, but farther we affirm, that he neither from the beginning
challenged such a power, nor was he afterward in so full possession of it, but
that our Princes have upon Occasion vindicated their own right against all
Papal, or, if he pleases, Patriarchal Encroachments. And here waving the
dispute of right I shall confine my self to matter of Fact, that being the only
case here controverted.

Where 1st of the Supremacy of the Western Patriarch. That when Austin came
over to convert the Saxons, no such Supremacy was acknowledged by the British
Christians is evident from the celebrated Answer of Dinoth Abbot of Bangor to
Austin requiring such subjection. Notum sit Vobis etc. Spelm. Conc. p. 1^8.
Be it known unto you that we are all subject and obedient to the Church of
God, and the Pope of Rome; but so as we are also to every good and pious
Christian, viz. to love every one in his degree and place, in perfect Charity,
and to help every one by word and deed, to attain to be the Sons of God; and
for other Obedience I know none due to him whom you call the Pope, and as
little do I know by what right he can challenge to be Father of Fathers. As for
us we are under the rule of the Bishop of Caerleon upon Uske, who is to
overlook and govern us under God. This is farther manifest from the Spelm. A.
C. 601.
British Clergy twice refusing in full Synod after mature deliberation to own
any such subjection. That appeals to Rome were a thing unheard of till Anselms
time appears from the application of the Bishops and Barons to him to dissuade
him from such an attempt; Inauditum in regno suo esse and usibus ejus omnino
contrarium, quemlibet de Principibus and praecipue Te tale quid praesumere,
Eadm. p. 39. 30.
telling him it was a thing unheard of in this Kingdom, that any of the Peers,
and especially one in his station should praesume any such thing. That Legates
from Rome were for 1100 Years unheard of in this Kingdom, we may learn from a
memorable passage in the same Historian concerning the Archbishop of Vienna
reported to have the Legantine power over England granted him A. C. 1100 Quod
per Angllam auditum in admirationem omnibus veni^, Inaudi^um scilicet in
Britannia cuncti scientes quemlibet hominum super se vices. postolicas gerere
nisi solum Archiepiscop^m Cantuariae. Ead. p. 58. 41.
The News of which being come to England was very surprising to all people,
every one knowing it was a thing unheard of, that any one should have
Apostolical Jurisdiction over them, but the Archbishop of Canterbury. And the
event of that Legacy was suitable, Quapropter sicut venit, ita reversus est a
Nemine pro Legaro susceptus, nec in aliquo Legati officio sunctus. Ibid.
for as he came, so he returned, being taken by no one for a Legate, nor in any
thing discharging the office of a Legate. That the Church of Canterbury owned
no Superior Bishop to her own but Christ, appears from her being called, Ger
Dorob. Coll. Hist. Angl. 1663. 24. Col. 1615. 60.
Omnium nostrum matter communis sub sponsi sui Jesus Christi dispositione; and in
another place, Matter omnium Anglicanarum Ecclesiarum, quae suo post Deum
proprio laetatur Pastore. That appeals to Rome were prohibited in King Henry
the 2ds time is manifest from the famous Capitula of Clarendon, amongst which
this is one Article. If any appeals shall happen they ought to proceed from the
Archdeacon to the Bishop, and from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and if the
Arch Bishop shall fail in doing Justice, the last Address is to be made to the
King. That Doctrines prejudicial to the Popes power were then publicly
maintained, appears from these Propositions amongst others censured by Becket.
1st. That none might appeal to the Sea Apostolic on any account without the
Kings leave. 2d. That it might not be lawful for an Archbishop or Bishop to
depart the Kingdom and come at the Popes Summons without the Kings leave. 3d.
That no Bishop might Excommunicate any who held of the King in capite, nor
Interdict his Officers without the Kings leave. Which propositions so censured
are selected out of the Capitula of Clarendon; to the Observation of which all
the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastics (even Becket himself
amongst the rest, tho^ afterward falling of) had obliged themselves by a
solemn Oath, acknowledging them to be the customs of the King's Predecessors;
to wit, Henry the 1st his Grandfather, and others, and that they ought to be
kept inviolable by all. To what party the Bishops were inclined in these
differences betwixt the King and Becket we cannot better learn then from
Baronius, whose severe animadversion on these Praelates, (wherein^ he teaches
us what Kings are to expect if they displease his Holiness, and how dreadful
his Fulminations be when they come out with full Apostolic vigor) the Reader
may peruse in the Episcopi Angliae suffraganei Sancti Thomae literis ejusdem
sui rchiepiscopi Apostolica legatione fungentis exagitati, resilientes, haud
(ut par erat) parere mandatis. salubres admon^tiones ^uscipere, Catholicae
Ecclesiae u^i^^tati consulere, vendicantes ea^^ a ^^iserrima servitute
studuerunt, sed ex adverso oppositi pro Rege contra ipsum ser^ptis, verbis,
sactisque repugnant, ac tantum abest ut (quod eorum muae^i erat, ad quod and
suis cos literis exci^averat ipse Sanctus) adversus Regein pro Ecclesia
starent, redarguerent, and comminarentur; ostentantes qu^e in arcu sagittae
paratae era^t ad ferie^dum. censuras nimirum Ecclesiasticas ab Ecclesia ^omana
Apostolico vigore prodeuntes, ut potius adversus ^undem pro Ecclesiae liberate
pugnantem Sanctissimum Virum bella cierent, telis oppe^erent jurgiorum, in
scandalum omnium ista audientium Episcoporum Orthodoxorum. B. r. An. A. C. 1167.
Margin. A like warm Expostulation upon these proceedings we meet with in
Stapleton ( de tribus Thomis, in Thoma Cant.) Quid aliud hic Henricus secundus
t^cte postulavit, quam quod Henricus Octavus completa jam malitia apert^u
surpavit, nempe ut supremum Ecclesiae caput in Anglia esset?
What did this Henry the 2d tacitly demand, but that which Henry the 8th
afterward openly usurped, viz. to be Supreme Head of the Church of England?
and again Quid hoc est aliud, nisi ut Rex Angliae sit apud ^uos Pap?
what was this, but that the King of England should be Pope over his own
Subjects? So that according to this Author, Henry the 8th was not the first of
that name who pretended to be Supreme Head of the Church. It would be too
tedious here to recite the several Statutes made in succeeding Reigns against
the Popes Encroachments, viz. the 35 of Edw. 1 25 Edv. 3. Stat. de
provisoribus. 27 Ed. 3. c. 1. 38 Ed. 3. c. 1. 2. 4. stat. 2. 2 Ric. 2. c. 3. 12
R. 2. c. 15. 13 R. 2. stat. 2. cap. 2. 16 R. 2. c. 5. 2 Hen. 4. cap. 3. 2 Hen.
4. cap. 4. 6 Hen. 4. cap. 1. which speaks of horrible mischiefs and a damnable
custom brought in of new in the Court of Rome. 7 Hen. 4. cap. 6. 8. 9 Hen. 4.
cap. 8. 3 H. 5. c. 4. Which see collected by Rastal under the title of
Provision and Praemunire. fol. 325. It may suffice to add the Opinion of our
Cokes Inst. l. 4. c. ^4.
Lawyers that the Article of the 25 of Hen. 8. c. 19. concerning the
prohibition of appeals to Rome is declaratory of the ancient laws of the Realm;
1. Eliz. c. 1.
and accordingly the Laws made by King Henry the 8th for extinguishing all
foreign power are said to have been made for the Restoring to the Crown of
this Realm the Ancient right and Jurisdictions of the same. Which rights are
destructive of the Supremacy of the Pope, as will farther appear by our 2d
Inquiry, how far the Regal power extended in Causes Ecclesiastical? Where

1st. As to the title of Head of the Church, we find that Tw^sd c. 5. par. 2.
King Edgar was reputed, and wrote himself Pastor Pastorum, the Vicar of
Christ, and by his Laws and Canons assured the world he did not in vain assume
those titles; Chap. 5 par. ^4. c. 6. par. 8.
That our Forefathers styled their Kings Patrons Defenders, Governors, Tutors,
and Protectors of the Church. And the King's Regimen of the Church is thus
expressed by King Edward the Confessor in his laws. Rex quia Vicarius summi Regis
est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut re^num terrenum, and populum Domini, and super
omnia Sanctam veneretur Ecclesiam ejus, and regat, and ab injuri^sis de^endat.
Leg. Edv. Conf. apud Lamb. Where it is plain that he challenges the power of
Governing the Church as being the Vicar of God, so that it was but an Artifice
in Pope Nicholas the Second to confer on the same King as a privilege
delegated by him, what he claimed as a right derived immediately from God Vobis
and posteris vestris Regibus Angliae committimus advocationem ejusdem loci, and
omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum, and ut vice nostra cum Concilio Episcoporum
statuatis ubique quae j'usta sunt.
. To you (says that Pope to the Confessor) and your Successors, the Kings of
England we commit the Advowson of that place, and power in our stead to order
things with the advice of your Bishops. Where by the way if we may argue ad
hominem this Concession gives the King of England as much right to the
Supremacy over this Church, as a like Grant from another Pope to the Earl of
Sicily, gives the King of Spain to his Spiritual Monarchy over that Province.
But the Kings of England derive their Charter from a higher Power. They
challenge from St. Peter himself to be 1 Pet. II. 13.
Supreme, and from St. Paul that Romans XIII. 1.
every Soul should be subject to them. And the extent of their Regal power may
be learned from St. Austin who teaches us In hoc Reges, sicut eis divinitus
praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in Regno suo bona jubeant,
mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiamu
quae pertinent ad divinam Religionem. Aug. contra Crescon. 1. 3. c. 51.
that the Divine right of Kings, as such, authorizeth them to make Laws not
only in relation to Civil Affairs, but also in matters appertaining to divine
Religion. In pursuance of which.

2ly. As to the power of making Ecclesiastical Laws; That the Kings of England
have made Laws not only concerning the External Regimen of the Church, but also
concerning the proper Functions of the Clergy, namely the Keys of Order and
Jurisdiction, so far as to regulate the Use of them and oblige the Persons
entrusted with them to perform their respective Offices, is evident to any one,
who shall think it worth his leisure to peruse such Laws yet extant. A
Collection of the Laws made by Ina, Alfred, Edward, Ethelstan, Edmund, Edgar,
Ethelred; Canutus, and others we have, published by Mr. Lambard, in which we
meet with Sanctions concerning Faith, Baptism, Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
Bishops, Priests, Marriage, Observance of Lent, appointing of Festivals, and
the like. And here it may not be unseasonable to urge an Authority which our
Editor cannot justly decline; I mean Mr. Spelman jun. in his Book de Vita
Alfredi written by him in English but Published in Latin by the Master of
University College in Oxford, in the Name of the Alumni of that Society. This
Author, speaking of the Laws made by King Alfred in Causes Ecclesiastical,
makes this Inference from them. Hae leges hactenus observationem merentur, quod
ex iis. constat, etiam illis temporibus, Reges Saxonicos Alfredum and Edvardum
sensisse se Suprematum habere tam in Ecclesiasticos, quam in Laicos, neque
Ecclesiam, quae in ipsorum ditione esset, esse quid peregrinum, vel Principi
alicui extraneo subditam, domi autem Civitatis legibus solutam, quod Anselmus,
Beckettus, aliique deinceps insecuti acriter contenderunt. Vita Alfr. lib. 2.
par. 12.
These Laws do therefore deserve our particular Observation, because from them
it is evident that the Saxon Kings Alfred and Edward were of Opinion that they
had a Supremacy as well over Ecclesiastical persons as Laymen; and that the
Church which was within their Dominions was not out of their Jurisdiction, or
subject to a foreign Power and exempted from the Laws of the Country, as
Becket, Anselm, and others afterward fiercely contended. And again; Exipsius
(Alfredi: legibus constat vel Suprematum illum Romanum is it is quidem temporibus
nondum eo modo; quo posterioribus saeculis, sase extulisse, scilicet ut
Christiani Principes angustius reg^arent; vel si eatenus pertigerit, non tamen
eo usque se ei adjeci sse Alfred. lb.
From his (King Alfred's) laws it is evident either that the Roman Supremacy
was not yet risen to that height as in after Ages, so as to lessen the
Jurisdiction of Christian Princes, or if it was, yet that King Alfred did not
so far subject himself to it. Nay so far was King Alfred from paying any such
Subjection that we are told Rex viam ingressus est, qua universali isti
Imperio, quod crassis temporibus recens extruxerant (Pontificii) and absolvere
deproperarant, ruinam and excrdium minaretur. l. 3. par. 98.
He found out a way to ruin and destroy that Universal Empire which the
Romanists in those dark Ages had newly founded and were hastening to finish.
Which is spoken in reference to his restoring the second Commandment expunged
out of the Decalogue, of which thus that Author; Neque hoc sane penitus
omittendum, videtur, quod inter Decalogum recitandum secundum quidem Praeceptum
de sculptilibus non faciendis ex usu secundi Concilii Niceni ante centum annos
celobrati suo loco plane praetermissum est. Veruntamen ut ex ipso Sanctorum
Bibliorum contextu quod deest suppleretur, post decimum quod dicimus mandatum
aliud insuper ad justum Numerum absolvendum, adjicitur. Non tibi facies Deos
aureos. Quod, cum ab ipso Rege subjungitur, Ecclesiam jam tum corrupti dogmatis
arguit, rectae autem confessionis Regi testimonium perhibet. l. 2. par. 5.
And here it may not be passed over, that in reciting the Decalogue, the second
Commandment concerning the not making of graven Images was according to the use
of the 2d Nicene Council, which was celebrated an 100 Years before, in its
place omitted. But that this defect might be supplied out of the context of the
Holy Bible, after that which we call the Tenth Commandment, another was added
to complete the just Number, in these words, Thou shall not make to thy self
any Gods of Gold; Which being added by the King himself as it does argue the
Church to have been corrupt in her Doctrine, so it is a testimony of the Kings
Orthodoxy. From which one Instance it is plain that, contrary to the
pretensions of our Author, King Edward the 6th was not the 1st that took upon
him to Reform Liturgies; for King Alfred here restores the Decalogue to its
primitive Integrity: to judge what is agreeable to the word of God; for He
supply's the defect, which he finds in the Missal, from the Scriptures: to
judge contrary to the Determinations of the Church; for the Church is here said
to have been corrupt in that Doctrine in which the King was Orthodox; to alter
the Constitutions of General Councils because repugnant to the law of God; for
this Omission of the Commandment was ex usu secundi Concilii Niceni, and the
Worshipping of Images here forbidden was introduced by that Council which the
Romanists acknowledge General. These passages cited I take to be some of the
perperam scripta which the Publisher of that life mentions in the Errores
(Authoris) retinuimus, and perperam scripta medicari potius, quam tollere
maluimus.
Praeface. And accordingly we find that whatsoever is advanced against the
Papal Authority in the Text is qualified in the Comment, and it is plain that
King Alfred was a greater Adversary to the power of the Pope then his Alumnus
the Annotator; so that it is matter of surprise to find him appear in the
Frontispiece of this Treatise of Church Government, who was so great an Enemy
to the Anti-regal designs of it.

3ly. As to the power of calling Synods, we need no more to clear this point
then the very words of the Statute by him urged. 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. Where it is
said, that the Kings Humble and Obedient Subjects the Clergy of the Realm of
England had acknowledged according to the truth that the Convocation of the
same Clergy is, always has been, and ought to be assembled only by the Kings
Writ. Which is farther evident from the ancient from of calling and dissolving
Synods by a Writ in each case directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, as may
be seen in Dr. Heylin Ref, Justif. p. J. C. 2.
The Clergy did indeed before this act of King Henry 8th promulge and execute
those Canons by their own authority, which they here promise not to put in
Execution without the King's consent. But since no such Canons could be put in
ure till made; nor be made but by the Clergy assembled, nor the Clergy be
assembled but only by the King's Writ; this executing of Canons did in effect
as much before this Statute as after depend upon the King's pleasure.

4ly. As for visiting Ecclesiastical persons, and reforming Errors and
Haeresies by proper Delegates, this is a necessary consequence from the
Supremacy they challenged. Without such a Power how shall the Confessor regere
Ecclesiam, and ab injuriosis defendere? If such a Power as this be inconsistent
with the Principles even of Roman-Catholiques, Whence is it that we find
Articles sent from Queen Mary to Bp. Bonner to be put in Execution by him and
his Officers within his Diocese? Whence is it that we find a Commission
directed to some Bishops to deprive the Reformed Bishops? But to speak of
former times, if our Kings had not such a Power, Whence is it that in King
Henry the fourth's Reign upon the Increase of Lollardy We find the Clergy thus
petitioning that Prince in the Names of the Clergy and Praelates of the Kingdom
of England, Quatenus inclytissimorum progenitorum and antecessorum vestrorum
laudabilia vestigia gratiose considerantes dignetur vestra ^egia celsitudo pro
conservatione dictae Ecclesiae Anglicanae ad Deilaudem etc: super novitatibus
and excessibus praedictis in praesenti Parliamento providere de remedio
opportuno Tw. c. 5. par. 19.
That according to the Example of his Royal Praedecessors He would find out
some remedy for the Haerefies and Innovations then praevailing? Whence is it
that we find a Commission from that King as Defender of the Catholic Faith to
empower certain Persons to seize upon Haeretical Books, and bring them before
his Council, and such as after Proclamation be found to hold such Opinions, to
be called and examined before two Commissioners, who were of the Clergy. lbid.


5thly. As for Collation of Benefices. Our learned Lawyers assure us that all
the Bishoprics are of the King's Foundation, and that they were Originally
Donative, not Elective; and that the full right of Investitures was in the
Sovereign who signified his pleasure therein per traditionem baculi and annuli
by the delivery of a Ring and Crosier Staff to the Person by him elected and
Nominated for that Office. Cokes Instit. l. 3. S. 648.
Accordingly we find in the Statute of Provisors Ed. 3. A. 28. the King called
Advower Paramount of all Benefices which be of the Advowrie of people of Holy
Church. And it is there said, That Elections were first granted by the King's
Progenitors upon a certain form and Eondition, as to demand License of the King
to choose, and after Election to have his Royal Assent, and not in other
manner. That if such Conditions were not kept, the thing ought in reason to
resort to its first Nature.

Lastly as for Hindering Excommunications in foro externo, It is one of the
Articles of Clarendon; That None that hold of the King in capite nor any of his
Household Servants may be Excommunicated, nor their Land interdicted, unless our
Lord the King, if he be in the Kingdom, be first treated with, or his Justice,
if he be abroad; so that he may do what is Right concerning him. And amongst
the Articuli Cleri. c. 7. It is complained that the King's Letters used to be
directed to Ordinaries that have wrapped their Subjects in Sentence of
Excommunication that they should assoil them by a certain day, or else that
they do appear and answer, wherefore they excommunicated them. This short
account, however imperfect, may suffice to show that the Regal power in
Spirituals challenged by King Henry the 8th was not quitted by his
Predecessors. And if the Reader desires a more full account of these things I
shall refer him to Dr. Hammond's Dispatcher Dispatched. c. 2. Sect. 5. Bishop
Brambal's just Vindication c. 4. Repl. to the Bishop of Chalcedon c. 4. Sch.
guarded c. 12. Sect. 3. as also to Sr. Roger Twisden in his Historical
vindication of the C. of England in point of Schism; which Learned Author has
by a through insight into History, Law Books, Registers, and other Monuments of
Antiquity enabled himself to give full and ample satisfaction to every
unpraejudic'd Reader concerning this Subject; and to convince him that this
Author knew very little either of the English History or of his own Book, if He
knew not of any Ecclesiastical powers in this Discourse denied to the Prince,
but which were foregone by the Kings of England before Henry the Eighth.

As for what he adds, that no more Supremacy in such Ecclesiastical matters, Ep.
as are delegated by Christ to the Clergy and are unalienable by them to any
Secular power, can belong to the Princes of one time or of one Nation, then do
to any other Prince of a former Time, or a diverse Nation, We willingly
acknowledge it, since no such powers belong to any Prince, at any time, or of
any Nation. But then there is a Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters delegated
by God to the Prince, which may be invaded by a Forreigner under a forged
pretense of his being Head of the Church; and here Secular Laws may be made for
the protection of such Rights, and for the punishment of those who shall either
invade them, or vindicate such Invasion. And that person who under praetext of
maintaining the Churches rights shall impugn the just Authority of his Sovereign
may be more a disloyal Subject in these days, when this Authority is by the
Laws vindicated from Foreign Usurpation, then he would have been in those
days, when such Usurpation was tolerated, and connived at.

Having dwelt hitherto on the Epistle, and discovered so much Insincerity in
that, which yet was to bespeak the Reader's good Opinion of the ensuing
Discourse, We have no great reason to expect any fairer dealing in the
prosecution of his design. And here I shall be excused if I be the shorter in
the Examination of his Theses, both because they are such as being proposed
only and not proved, it lies in our power to accept, or reject them at
pleasure; as also because they have already undergone the Censure of a Noble
Pen, and have not been able to abide a fair Trial. Some of them are so
ambiguously expressed that they may be either true or false according to the
different construction they are capable of. The fals-hood of others is
self-evident; But then for the better vending of these, some truths are
intermixed according to the policy of Luther's Antagonist observed by his
Biographer Consid. concerning Luther. 48. p. 90.
, Who, to make his bad wares saleable, diligently mixeth some small stock of
good with evil, so to make this more current, and all easily swallowed down
together by the imprudent and credulous.

Another Artifice much practiced by our Author is that he lays down his
Propositions in general terms, but afterward restrains them by such
limitations, which if adhered to would make them utterly disserviceable to his
Cause; but then when they come to be applied, the These are referred to at large
without any regard to such limitations. Thus when in his first Thesis he has
proposed That it is not in the just power of the Prince to deny giving the
Ministers of Christ license to exercise their Office,. 3. p 4.
and their Ecclesiastical Censures in his Dominions, He means he says in
general, for he meddles not with the Prince, his denying some of them to do
these things whilst he admits others. Now if this Restraint be observed, then
all which he would establish from this Thesis will come to Nothing. For he will
not, I believe, presume to say that the Reforming Princes ever laid a general
Interdict upon all the Clergy to prohibit them the exercise of their
Ecclesiastical Functions. This is an Act which the Reformation detests, and
which we leave to the charitableness of the Universal Pastor, who by Virtue of
our Savior's Command of Pasce oves; challenges to himself a power of depriving
the flock of all Spiritual food. Thus again,. 5. p. 12.
When in his third Thesis he has asserted that the Secular Prince cannot eject
from the exercise of their Office in his Dominions any of the Clergy, nor
consequently the Patriarch from any Authority which he stands possessed of by
Ecclesiastical Canons, He restrains such Canons to those only that cannot
justly be pretended to do any wrong to the Civil Government. Now he knows that
all Canons which would obtrude upon us a foreign usurped Authority are by us
pretended (whether justly or not, they will best judge who impartially weigh
our Reasons) injurious to the Civil Government. Another Limitation of this
Thesis is that the Civil power may judge,. 8. p. 16.
and eject, and disauthorize Spiritual Persons for Moral and Civil Misdemeanors
damageable to the Commonwealth; But this Limitation is forgot when from this
Thesis He would prove the ejection of the Bishops, in Queen Elizabeth's time
unlawful; For their Deprivation was for refusing the Oath of Supremacy made
first by Roman Catholics in King Henry the 8th's time, and revived by Queen
Elizabeth; so that the Justice of it depends merely on the Right of the Civil
power to make Oaths for the better security of their Government, and to impose
such Penalties as are expressed in the Law on the Violators; and if such Refusal
be damageable to the Commonwealth (as it was then judged) then the Deprivation
of those Refusers will be justifiable according to his own Principles. Thus
again in his 8th Thesis When he has laid down, That as for things of mere
Ecclesiastical Constitution,. 14. p. 18.
Neither National Synod, nor Secular power may make any New Canons contrary to
the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of former Superior Councils, nor reverse those
formerly made by them. He restrains it to those only as neither the Prince can
show some way prejudicial to his Civil Government, nor the National Synod can
show more prejudicial to their particular Church, then the same Constitutions
are to the rest of Christian Churches. (Where by the way methinks it should
suffice if they were aequally prejudicial, for one Church is never the less
wronged because another suffers.) Now we desire no more then the benefit of
this limitation; for if the Prince may reverse such Constitutions when
prejudicial to Civil Government, and the National Synod when praejudicial to
their particular Church, and each of these are Judges of such praejudice, (for
neither does AEquity admit, nor does He appoint any other Arbiter) then each of
these have as much power granted them as they challenge, which is only to alter
such Constitutions as are prejudicial to them. Having praemis'd thus much in
general, and cautioned the Reader against this piece of Sophistry, which runs
through the greatest part of this Discourse, I shall now proceed to a
particular survey of his Theses.

As for the first and second, I shall at present grant him that favor which he
seems to request of all his Readers, i. e. suppose them to be true, and shall
content my self only to examine what Inferences he deduces from them. And here I
cannot but commend his Policy for setting his Conclusions at so great a
distance from his Praemisses, for they are commonly such as would have by no
means agreed to stand too nigh together.

From his first and second Thesis, that the Clergy have power to determine
Controversies in pure matters of Religion, and to judge what is divine truth,
what are Errors; and that they cannot alienate this Power to the Secular
Prince;. 22. p. 29.
he infers That that Synodical Act of the Clergy in K. Henry the Eighth's time,
whereby they promise not to Assemble without the King's Writ, nor when
Assembled to execute any Canons without the King's consent, is unlawful. Now it
is to be observed that the Clergy neither do deny that they have a Power to
determine Controversies in pure matters of Religion, which is what the first
Thesis would prove; nor do they transfer such a Power on the King, which might
be against the Tenor of the second. The utmost which can be deduced hence is,
That the Clergy did for prudential motives limit themselves in the Exercise of
one branch of their Spiritual Power; and it will be difficult for this Author
to prove that He, who has a power jure divino, may not by humane Laws be
limited in the Use of it. Husbands have a power over their Wives, Fathers over
their Children, and Masters over their Servants by the Law of God, and yet this
power may be regulated by the Laws of the Land.. 27. p. 36.
Thus the Priest has a power to bind and loose from our Savior's Commission,
and yet according to this Author, before the Reformation the Inferior Clergy
might not exercise any Church Censure contrary to the Commands of their lawful
Spiritual Superior. Thus also if a General Council have power to determine
matters of Faith, then according to his Principles they have power to convene
in order to such Determination, and this power of theirs is unalienable; and
yet the Romanists will not allow that such Conventions may be made at pleasure,
but that the hic and nunc are determinable by the Pope, who only has power to
indict Councils, and to give Authority to those decrees, which yet derive their
power from the Council's being infallible, and from the Holy Ghost assisting
them.

Another Act, which from the same Thesis he accuses of Injustice,. 25. p. 31.
is the Clergy's beseeching the King's Highness that the Constitutions and
Canons Provincial and Synodal, which be thought prejudicial to the King's
Prerogative Royal, or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or to
be otherwise overmuch onerous to his Highness and his Subjects may be committed
to the judgment of his Highness, and of 32 Persons, 16 of the Temporalty, and
16 of the Clergy of this Realm to be chosen and appointed by the King's
Majesty, and that such Canons, as shall be thought by the more part of them
worthy to be annulled, shall be made of no value, and such other of the Canons
as shall be approved to stand with the Law of God etc. shall stand in power.
Now it is to be considered that the Laws, which the Clergy here desire may be
revised, are of a far different Nature, and therefore the Inspection of them
may well be committed to different Judges. Some of them were supposed
prejudicial to the King's Praerogative Royal, or repugnant to the Laws of the
Realm, and here the Lay-Commissioners, being persons of the upper and lower
House of Parliament (see the Stat.) were the best Judges; Of others it was to
be inquired Whether they were agreeable to the word of God or not, and here the
Clergy were ready to give their Determination. And although they both acted in a
joint Commission yet no good reason seems assignable why both Lay and
Ecclesiastical Judges should be appointed, but that, the matters to be examined
being of different cognizance, those which related to Civil Affairs should be
determined by the Temporalty, those which were of a Spiritual Nature by the
Spiritualty. And if so, then the deciding of these matters is not transferred
from the Spiritualty to the Temporalty, but from one part of the Clergy to
another. And this He himself, after all his descants upon this Act, confesses,
For,. 26. lb.
whatever sense the words in the Praeface of this Act were or may be extended
to, I do not think the Clergy at first intended any such thing, as to make the
King or his Commissioners Judges of matters of Faith or Divine truth: and for
this Opinion of his He gives us his Reasons in that, and the subsequent pages.

Another Act, which is by this Author judged contrary to his first Thesis, is
that Statute of King Henry the eighth which orders that no speaking, holding,
34. p. 39.
or doing against any Laws called Spiritual Laws made by Authority of the Sea of
Rome, which be repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, or the King's
Praerogative shall be deemed to be Haeresie, from which he infers that the King
and Parliament undertake to be Judges of Haeresie. Now the King and Parliament
do not here in my Opinion take upon them to decide matters of Faith, but only
to Enact that in such a case the Subject shall not suffer the Punishment
usually inflicted on Haereticks; Whether such speaking or doing be Haeresie or
not, they have power to ordain that it shall not be deemed so i. e. the Speaker
shall not suffer as an Haeretick. Something parallel to this we have in that
Statute of much concernment (to use our Author's expression of another Act)
made 23. Eliz. c. 1. Wherein it is enacted that The Persons who shall withdraw
any of the Queens Majesty's Subjects from the Religion established by Law to
the Romish Religion, shall be to all intents adjudg'd as Traitors, and shall
suffer as in cases of High Treason, and the like of Persons willingly
reconciled. Where without disputing whether every such Reconciler, or
Reconciled, is necessarily for that Act ipso facto a Traitor, all that is here
enacted is that he shall suffer as such; For it is undoubtedly within the reach
of the Civil Power to ordain where they will inflict or not inflict their
Secular Punishments, without being accountable for this to any Authority under
God's. And it seems very hard that if a Subject expresses himself, or acts
against such Laws of a Forreigner as are repugnant to the Laws of his own
Country, there the Prince cannot exempt him from a Writ de Haeretico comburendo
without invading the Churches right.

Another Act condemned by Virtue of his 1st and 2d Theses is The Convocation's
granting to certain persons to be appointed by the King's Authority to make
Ecclesiastical laws,. 43. p. 56.
and pursuant to this, 42 Articles of Religion published by the Authority of
King Edward in the 6th Year of his Reign. Now not to engage my self in a
dispute Whether these Articles were not really what in the Title praefix'd they
are said to be? Articuli de quibus in Synodo London, A. D. 1552. ad tollendam
opinionum dissentionem, and consensum verae Religionis firmandum inter
Episcopos and alios eruditos Viros convenerat, Regia autoritate in lucem editi,
I shall only accept of what is by him granted that de illis convenerat inter
Episcopos and alios eruditos Viros qui erant pars aliqua de Synodo London..
166. p. 187.
So that here is only a part of the Synod employed in drawing up these
Articles, and not any Jurisdiction Spiritual transferred from Ecclesiastial
persons to Secular, which was by him to have been proved.

Another Inference, which he deduces from these Theses, is the Unlawfulness of
the Oath of Supremacy.. 185. p. 214.
Now how far the Regal Supremacy is by us extended, will best be learnt from
our Articles. Art. 37.
The King's Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other his
Dominions: Unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is not or
ought not to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction. So far for the extent of
this power; but now for the restraint. Where we attribute to the King's Majesty
the chief Government, by which Titles we understand the minds of some
slanderous folks to be offended, We give not to our Prince the ministering
either of God's word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions
also, lately set forth by Q. Elizabeth do most plainly testify, but that only
Prerogative which We see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy
Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and
degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the Stubborn and evil doers. It is
therefore by our Author to be proved that they who give no more to their
Prince, then has been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scripture by
God himself, do alienate to the Secular Governor any Authority or Office which
they (the Clergy) have received and been charged with by Christ, with a command
to execute the same to the end of the World; which being a Contradiction I
leave it to him to reconcile.

That by this Oath, or any other Act of Queen Elizabeth a greater Power was
either assumed by herself, or given to her by Others, then is consistent with
that Authority that is given by our Savior to the Church will be very difficult
for any Reasonable man to conceive who shall have recourse to the Injunction of
this Queen to which this very Article refers us; Sparrow's Collection page 83.
Land. 1684.
Where she declares that she neither does nor ever will challenge any Authority,
but what was challenged and lately used by the Noble Kings of famous memory
King Henry the 8th, and King Edward the 6th, which is and was of Ancient time
due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; that is, under God to have Sovereignty
and Rule over all manner of Persons born within these her Realms, Dominions,
and Countries, of what Estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be;
so as no other foreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them.
And if any Person that has conceited any other sense of the form of the said
Oath, shall accept the same Oath with this Interpretation, sense, or meaning;
Her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such in that behalf as her good and
Obedient Subjects; and shall acquit them of all manner of penalties contained
in the act therein mentioned, against such as shall peremptorily and
obstinately refuse to take the same Oath. So that it is evident from this
Injunction that it is no way here stated what Authority belongs to the Church,
and what to the Civil Magistrate, farther then that the Queen (as justly she
might) challenged what was due of Ancient time to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, and neither did nor would challenge more; but what that was, is not here
determined; and she is content without such Determination, if any Person would
take this Oath in such a sense as only to exclude all foreign Jurisdiction
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil.

Another Act which He finds repugnant to his 1st. page 36
Thesis is King Henry the 8th's claiming a right that no Clergyman, being a
Member of the Church of England, should exercise the power of the Keys in his
Dominions in any Cause or on any Person without his leave and appointment. But
it is to be remembered that the Ecclesiastical. Censures asserted to belong to
the Clergy in the first Thesis have reference to the things only of the next
world; but the censures here spoken of, are such as have reference to the
things of this world. The Habitual Jurisdiction of Bishops flows, we confess,
from their Ordination; but the Actual exercise thereof in public Courts after
a coercive manner is from the gracious Concessions of Sovereign Princes.

From the 1st and 2d Thesis he farther condemns the taking away the Patriarch's
Authority for receiving of Appeals, page 99.
and exercising final Judicature in Spiritual Controversies, as also the taking
away the final judging and decision of such Controversies not only from the
Patriarch in particular, but also from all the Clergy in general, not making
the Archbishop of Canterbury or Convocation, but himself or his Substitutes
the Judges thereof. For which he refers us to Stat. 25. H. 8. 19. c. But in
that Statute I find no mention of a Patriarch, or Spiritual Controversies, but
only that in causes of Contention having their commencement within the Courts
of this Realm no Appeal shall be made out of it to the Bishop of Rome, but to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and for want of Justice in his Courts to the
King in Chancery; Upon which a Commission shall be directed to such Persons as
shall be appointed by the King definitively to determine such Appeals. Here is
nothing of determining Controversies in pure matters of Religion, of deciding
what is Gods word, and divine Truth, what are Errors in the faith or in the
practice of Gods Worship, and Service, nor any of the other Spiritual powers by
him enumerated in the 1st Thesis; Or if any such Quaestions should be involved
in the Causes to be tried, Why may not the Commissioners, if Secular, judge
according to what has been praedetermin'd, by the Clergy? or let us suppose a
case never yet determined, How does he prove a power of judging in such causes
transferred on secular Persons, since if Occasion required, the Delegates might
be Persons Ecclesiastical?

But not only the Acts of State and Church, but the Opinions of our Doctors are
to be examined by his Test, p 240.
and therefore from the same Theses he censures that Assertion of Dr. Heylin
Heylins Ref. Justified, part. 1.. 6.
that it is neither fit nor reasonable that the Clergy should be able by their
Synodical Acts to conclude both Prince and People in Spiritual matters, until
the stamp of Royal Authority be imprinted on them. Now it is plain to any one
that views the Context, that the Dr. speaks of such a concluding the Prince and
people in matters Spiritual, as has influence on their Civil rights. For he
there discourses of the Clergy under King Henry obliging themselves not to
execute those Ecclesiastical Canons without the Kings consent which formerly
they had put in Execution by their own Authority. But the Canons so executed had
the force of Civil Laws, and the Violators of them were obnoxious to Secular
punishments. The Dr. therefore very justly thought it unreasonable any should
be liable to such Punishments without His consent, who only has the power of
inflicting them; Nor is this inconsistent with our Authors first Thesis (had he
at so great a distance remembered it) which extends Church-Autority only to
Ecclesiastical Censures, which have reference to things not of this, but the
next World.

These are the Inferences which I find deduced, from his first and second
Theses in the several parts of this Discourse, which had they been as
conclusive, as they are false, yet I do not find but that his own party (if
that be the Roman Catholic) had suffered most by them. For if the Supremacy
given to King Henry was so great an Invasion of the Churches right, what shall
we think of that Roman Catholic Clergy, who so Sacrilegiously invested him
with this Spiritual power? If that Synodical Act was betraying the trust which
the Clergy had received from Christ, what shall we think of those Pastors, who
so unfaithfully managed the Depositum of their Savior? If denying the Popes
Authority was so piacular a Crime, what Opinion shall we entertain of those
Religious Persons in Monasteries, who professing a more then ordinary Sanctity,
and being obliged by the strictest Vows of Obedience so Burn Ref. ^. 3. p. 182.
resolutely abjured it? What of those Learned in the Convocatis undique dictae
Academiae Theologis, habitoque complurium biorum spatio ac deliberandi tempore
sasatis ampl^, quo interim cum omni qua potuimus diligentia, Justitiae ^elo,
religione and conscientia incorrupta perscruta remur tam Sacrae Scripturae
libros quam super iisdem approbatissimo's Interpretes, and eos quidem saepe and
saepius a ^obis evolutos, and exactissime collatos, repetitos, and examinatos,
deinde and disputationibus solennibus palam ac public habitis and celebratis
tandem in hanc Sententiam unanimiter omnes convenimus ac concordes fuimus viz.
Romanum Episcopum majorem aliquam Jurisdictionem non habere sibi a Deo collatam
in sacra Scriptura in hoc Regno Angliae quam alium quemvis Episcopum. Antiq.
Oxon lib. 1. page 259.
University, who after a solemn debate, and serious disquisition of the cause,
so peremptorily defined against it? What of the Ref. 1. 2. p. 142.
Whole Body of the Clergy, whose proper Office it is to determine such
Controversies, and to judge what is Gods Word, and divine Truth, what are
Errors, who in full Synod so Unanimously rejected it? Page 2.. 2.
What of the leading part of those Prelates, Ibid. p. 137.
Gardener, Bonner, and Tonstal, who Wrote, Preached, and Framed Oaths against
it? What of the Ibid. p. 144.
Nobles and Commons, Persons of presumed Integrity, and Honor, who prepared
the Bill against it? What lastly of the Sovereign a declared Enemy of the
Lutheran Doctrine, and Defender of the Roman Catholic Faith, who past that
Bill into a Law, and guarded the Sanction of it with Capital punishments? If
all these acted sincerely, then it is not the Doctrine of the Reformed, but of
the Romanists which is written against: If not, we seem to have just
praejudices against a Religion which had no greater influence over its
Profesors, then to suffer a whole Nation of them perfidiously to deny that,
which if it be any part, is a main Article of their Faith? But to return to our
Author, what shall we judge of his skill in Controversy who from Principles
assumed gratis, draws Deductions which by no means follow, and which if they
did follow, would be the greatest Wound to that cause which he pretends to
Patronize? But because he has offered something under this first Thesis, why
the Prince should pay an implicit Obedience to his Clergy, I come now to
consider it. He tells us therefore that the Prince professes Himself with the
rest of the Christians as to the knowing of Spiritual Truths a Subject and
Scholar of the Church; and he earnestly claims a Supreme power and confesses
an Obligation from God over all Persons in all Spiritual Matters to bind them
upon Temporal Punishments to Obedience of the Churches (or Clergy's)
Determinations and Decrees. But here he either willingly misrepresents, or
ignorantly mistakes our Principles; For the Prince claims a supreme power over
all persons, to bind them by temporal Punishments to the Obedience not of the
Churches, but of Christ's Laws; or of the former, no farther then they are
agreeable with the latter. But, says He, if the Prince means here only where
himself first judges such their Decrees Orthodox and right, this power is in
effect claimed to bind all persons in all Spiritual matters only to his own
Decrees; whilst he praetends an Obligation both of himself and His Subjects to
the Churches. But, what if the Prince judge such Decrees neither Orthodox nor
right? Must he here give them the Authority of Civil Sanctions? This is to
establish Iniquity by a Law; and a power is claimed in effect to bind all
persons to the Decrees of the Clergy, whilst, as has been said, He praetends an
Obligation of Himself and Subjects to the Laws of Christ. But he goes on and
tells us, That all Texts of the New Testament do ordain Obedience of Churchmen
to the Pagan Princes, that then Reigned, no less then to others. From which I
suppose he would infer an exemption from Obeying the Prince in Spiritualibus.
But supposing that all Texts do aequally ordain Obedience to Princes Pagan, and
Christain, yet the Obedience to a Christian Prince will be of greater latitude,
since because he professes the true Religion, his Commands in Spirituals not
contradicting our Saviors will exact our Compliance. Obedience in licitis is
all the Subject ow's to a Prince either Christian or Infidel; but the Christian
Prince will oftener challenge my Obedience, because he more rarely transgresses
the bounds of licita. If as he adds, all Princes are obliged with the Sword
which God has given them to protect and defend his true Religion, and Service
in their Dominions, whenever it offers it self to them; Since many Religions
offer themselves, it becomes the Prince to take Care which is the true; and not
to take, whatever is offered; which would be utterly destructive of our Authors
Principles. As for the Acts of Ancient Councils obliging even without the
Emperors consent, We own their Obligation over their proper Subjects, so far
as they were agreeable with the Laws of Christ, and his Apostles; and urge the
Authority of Emperors no farther then as adding their Civil power to the
Spiritual Power of the Church. And here we challenge no other Power to our
Princes, then was exercised by Christian Emperors, that is, to call Synods,
and to have a liberty of confirming, or not confirming their Decrees by Civil
Sanctions. As for what he cites out of our Writers, all amounts to no more then
this, that there are some Offices peculiar to the Church; Which neither do we
deny, nor did our Princes ever invade these Functions. But because from hence
He would insinuate that the Prince has no power at all in Causes
Ecclesiastical, and in his Citations from these Writers comes up to that
Character which the Book of Educ^ Ox. 1677 p. 86.
Book of Education gives us of the SLY, the CLOSE, and the RESERVED, who take
notice of so much as serves to their own designs, and misinterpret and detort
what You say even contrary to Your intention; I shall as briefly as may be show
that their Concessions are far from giving any Countenance to his Cause. Bishop
Andrews does indeed say (as all other of our Church) Potestatis mere
Sacerdotalis sunt Liturgi^e, Conciones. i. e. dubia legis explicandi munus;
claves, Sacramenta, and omnia quae potestatem ordinis consequuntur; But then
there are other Ecclesiastical powers which he challenges to the Prince; viz.
In ^^s, quae Exterioris politiae sunt, ut praecipiat, suo sibi jure vindicat,
Tort, p. ^80.
To have Supreme Command in the exterior Polity of the Church; Custos est non
modo secundae Tabulae, sed and primae. p. 381.
To be keeper of both Tables; Quodcunque in rebus Religionis Reges Israel
fecetunt, id ut Ei faciendi jus sit ac potestas. Ib.
To exercise all that Power which the good Kings of Israel did; Leges
Autoritate Regia ferendi, ne blasphemetur Deus, ut jejunio placetur Deus; ut
festo honoretur. Ib.
To make Ecclesiastical Laws; To Delegandi qui de lege sic lata judicent Ib.
delegate Persons to judge in causes Ecclesiastical; To Siqui in Leges ita
latas committant, ^tsi, Religionis causa sit, in eos Autoritate Regia
an^madvertendi Ib.
punish the breach of those Spiritual Laws; To Non ut totus ab alieno ore
pendeat, ipse a se nihil dijudicet. Ib.
learn the will of God not only from the Mouth of the Clergy, but also from the
Scripture; To Omnibus omnium ordinum jus dicendi. Ib.
have authority over all Persons; To Abiathar ipsum, si ita meruit, Pontificatu
abdicandi. 382.
eject even the High Priest if he deserve it; To Excelsa diruendi. i. e.
peregrinum cultum abolendi. Ib.
pull down High Places Sive in Idololatriam abeat Vitulus aureus; sive in
Superstitionem Serpens aeneus, utrumque comminuendi. Ib.
; and to Reform the Church from Idolatry and Superstition. These He claims to
appertain to the Prince Haec Primatus apud nos jura sunt, ex jure divino. Ib.
Iure Divino.

The next Author is Dr. Carlton. He amongst other rights of the Church reckons
Institution and Collation of Benefices, which this Writer marks with Italian
Characters, and makes much Use of. But this Apostolical Institution and
Collation by the Bishop alluded to, does also involve in it Ordination, even as
the Ordination (which is observed by himself Page 13.
from the Bishop) signified also Institution in the charge and cure. But the
Collation challenged by our Princes is of another Nature, and signifies no more
then the Nominating a Person to be Ordained to such an Office, or presenting a
Person already Ordained to such a Benefice; And the right of Investitures
(which is the same with such a Collation) is by this Bishop Jurisd, Reg. Ep. p.
137.
asserted to Emperors. This being cleared which was by him on purpose
perplexed, If we take the extent of the Regal power from this Bishop, He tells
Id. p. 10.
us, That Sovereign's as Nursing Fathers of the Chu^^^ are to see that Bishops
and all Inferior Ministers perform their faithful duties in their several
places, and if they be found faulty to punish them.

His next Author is Mr. Thorndike, Who is as large as any one in the
Vindication of the Churches rights; and Yet He tells us Epilog. page 391.
, that No man will refuse Christian Princes the Interest of protecting the
Church against all such Acts as may prove praejudicial to the common Faith. He
holds (as this Writer with great concern Church Government, page 390.
observes) that the Secular power may restore any law, which Christ or his
Apostles have ordained, not only against a Major part, but all the Clergy and
Governors of the Church; and may, for a Paenalty of their opposing it,
suppress their power and commit it to others, though they also be established by
another Law Apostolical. Thus that considerative man, who held not the Pope to
be Antichrist, or the Hierarchy of the Church to be followers of Antichrist
Church Government, page 391.
.

Bishop Taylour (his next Author) does with the rest assert, that the Episcopal
Office has some powers annexed to it, independent on the Regal; But then he
farther lays down these Rules, Ductor Dub. 1. 3. c. 3. r. 4.
That the Supreme Civil-power is also Supreme Governor over all Persons, and
in all Causes; Ibid. r. 5.
Has a Legislative power in Affairs of Religion and the Church; Ibid. r. 7.
Has Jurisdiction in causes not only Ecclesiastical, but also Internal and
Spiritual; Ibid. r. 7. n. 9.
Has authority to convene and dissolve all Synods Ecclesiastical; Ibid. r. 8.
Is (indeed) to govern in Causes Ecclesiastical by the means and measure of
Christ's Institutions, i. e. by the Assistance and Ministry of Ecclesiastical
Persons; Ibid. r. 8. n. 6.
but that there may happen a case in which Princes may and must refuse to
confirm the Synodical decrees, Sentences, and Judgments of Ecclesiastics; Ibid.
1. 3. c. 4. r. 8.
That Censures Ecclesiastical are to be inflicted by the consent and
concurrence of the Supreme Civil power.

The next Author cited is the Learned Primate Bramhal; and We have here reason
to wonder that one Who praetends to have been conversant in his Writings, dares
appear in the Vindication of a Cause, which the Learned Author has so long
since so shamefully defeated. As for the right of Sovereign Princes, This
Archbishop will tell Bp. Br. Works Tom. 1. p. 88.
him, That to affirm that Sovereign Princes cannot make Ecclesiastical
Constitutions under a Civil pain, or that they cannot (especially with the
advice and concurrence of their Clergy assembled in a National Synod) reform
errors and abuses, and remedy Encroachments, and Usurpations in Faith or
Discipline, is contrary to the sense and practice of all Antiquity, and as for
matter of Fact He will instruct him, Ibid. p. 76.
that our kings from time to time called Councils, made Ecclesiastical Laws,
punished Ecclesiastical Persons, saw that they did their duties in their
calling etc. From this Bishop's acknowledgment, that the Bishops are the proper
Judges of the Canon, this Author that He may according to the Language of a
Educ. p. 98.
modern Pen, as well waken the Taciturn with Quaestions, as silence the
Loquacious with baffling fallacies, takes Occasion briskly to ask whether this
Bishop does not mean here that the Bishops may both compose and execute Canons
in the King's Dominions, and use Ecclesiastical Censures by their own Authority?
But see, says He, the Bishops deprived of the former power in the Reformation.
To which I answer that the power of which they were deprived in the Reformation
was only of such an executing the Canons as carried with it pecuniary and
corporal Punishments, and this power the Bishop has told him they could not
Exercise by their own Authority. And here it were to be wished that our Author
in reading this Bishop's Works had made use of his advice, Ibid. p. 156.
To cite Authors fully and faithfully, not by halves, without adding to, or new
moulding their Autorities according to Fancy or Interest.

The next Advocate against Regal Supremacy is King Charles the First; But if we
may take a draught of that Blessed Martyr's Sentiments from his own
Portraiture, F. I. K. B (...). Adv. to the Pr. of Wales.
He did not think his Authority confined to Civil Affairs, but that the true
glory of Princes consists as well in advancing Gods Glory in the maintenance of
true Religion, and the Churches good; as in the Dispensation of Civil power
with Justice, and Honor, to the public Peace. Ibid. cap. 17.
He thought himself (as King) entrusted by God and the Laws, with the good both
of Church and State, and saw no reason why he should give up, or weaken by any
change, that power and Influence which in right and reason He ought to have
over both. He thought himself obliged to preserve the Episcopal Government in
its right Constitution, ( not because his Bishops told him so, but) because his
Judgment was fully satisfied that it had of all other the best Scripture
grounds, and also the constant practice of Christian Churches. He was no Friend
of implicit Obedience, but after he has told the Prince, Adv. to the Pr. of
Wales.
that the best Profession of Religion is that of the Church of England, adds I
would have your own Judgment and reason now seal to that Sacred Bond which
Education has written, that it may be judiciously your own Religion, and not
other Men's Custom, or Tradition, which you profess. He did not give that
glorious Testimony to the Religion established in the Church of England, that
it was the best in the World, not only in the community as Christian, but also
in the special Notion as Reformed; and for this reason required and entreated
the Prince as his Father, and his King, that he would never suffer his Heart to
receive the least check against, or disaffection from it; till he had first
tried it, and after much search, and many disputes thus concluded.

These are the Sentiments of our Authors, in which if I have been overlong,
the Reader will excuse me, that I choose rather to intermix something useful
from these great Pens, then to entertain him altogether with the Paralogisms
and prevarications of this Writer. There is nothing that remains considerable
under this first Thesis, but his Sub-sumption, that whatever powers belonged to
the Church in times of persecution, and before Emperors had embraced
Christianity, are, and must still be allowed to belong to her in Christian
States. Which I conceive not altogether so Necessary that it must be allowed,
and I am sure by our Authors it is not. As for Convening of Councils (the power
of greatest concern) Bishop Sermon. of the right of Assemblies.
Andrews to this Quaestion ( What say you to the 300 Years before Constantine?
How went Assemblies then? Who called them all that while?) returns this Answer.
Truly as the people of the Jews did before in Egypt under the tyranny of
Pharaoh: They were then a Church under persecution, until Moses was raised up
by God a Lawful Magistrate over them. The cases are alike for all the world. No
Magistrate did assemble them in Egypt, and good reason why; they had none to
do it. But this was no bar, but when Moses arose, authorized by God, and had
the Trumpets by God delivered to him, He might take them, keep them, use them,
for that end, for which God gave them, to assemble the Congregation -- Shall
Moses have no more to do then Pharaoh? or Constantine then Nero? See also Field
of the Church. 1. 5 C. 52.
Dr Field.

His Third Thesis is, That the Secular Prince cannot Soave Hist. of Conc. Tr.
page 77.
depose or eject from the exercise of their office in his Dominions any of the
Clergy, nor introduce others into the place of the ejected. But the Quaestion
here is not, Whether the Prince can eject any of the Clergy from the Exercise
of their Office, but, Whether he can depose any for not Exercising it? While
the Clergy faithfully discharge their Office, the Prince ought to protect them;
and if for this they suffer, no doubt but they are Martyrs. But it is possible
they may abuse their power, and then it is to be inquired, Whether Civil Laws
may not inhibit them the Use of it? This Author holds the Negative, and tell us
1st. They cannot eject them at pleasure, without giving any cause thereof. But
he does not pretend that the Reforming Princes ever ejected any without a Cause
given. And therefore he adds 2ly, Neither may Princes depose them for any Cause
which concerns things Spiritual; but with this Limitation, without the consent
of the Clergy. I could wish he had here told us what he meant by things
Spiritual. For things, as well as Persons Spiritual are of great Extent. (d
Pope Paul the 3d told the Duke of Mantua, that it is the Opinion of the
Doctors, that Priest's Concubines are of Ecclsiastical Jurisdiction.) But he
gives us his reason for his assertion Because it is necessary that a Judge to
be a competent one have as well potestatem in causam, as in Personam, and the
Prince as has been mentioned in the 1st Thesis has no Authority to judge such
Causes purely Spiritual. Now the power denied to the Prince in the Is It Thesis
is to determine matters of Faith. But may not the Prince judge whether an
Ecclesiastic deserves Deprivation without determining a Matter of Faith? May
not he judge according to what has been already determined by the Church? Or
may not he appoint such Delegates as can determine matters of Faith? Or are all
the Causes, for which a Clergyman may be deprived, merely Spiritual? By Virtue
of this Thesis he proves the Ejection of the Western Patriarch unlawful. page
37.
Now was not this Matter of Faith already determined by the Clergy? Had they
not unanimously decreed, That he had no more Authority here, then any other
foreign Bishop? And can the King be said here to have acted without the
consent of the Clergy? And yet that matter of fact is applied to this Thesis.
As for the Ejection of the Bishops in King Edward's time; is not that confessed
to have been for not acknowledging the Regal Supremacy? page 70.
But this was a matter which wanted no new Determination, for the
Church-Autority had decided it in their Synod in King Henry's Reign. But it is
said, the Judges were not Canonical, as being the King's Commissioners, part
Clergy, part Laity. But neither was the cause purely Canonical; for denying the
Supremacy was not only an infringment of the Canon, but also a Violation of an
Act of Parliament. As for the Bishops, Bonner and Gardener, they were accused
for not asserting the Civil power of the King in his Nonage. Nor do they plead
Conscience for not doing it, but deny the Matter of Fact Burn. His. Ref. part.
2. I. 1. p. 127. 165.
The same Objections were then made against their Deprivation, as are reassumed
by this Author now; and therefore it may suffice to return the same answers.
That the Sentence being only of Deprivation privation from their Sees, it was
not so entirely of Ecclesiastical Censure, but was of a mixed nature, so that
Laymen might join in it; and since they had taken Commissions from the King
for their Bishoprics, by which they held them only during the Kings pleasure,
they could not complain of their Deprivation, which was done by the King's
Authority. Others who looked farther back, remembered that Constantine the Emp.
had appointed Secular Men to enquire into some things objected to Bishops, who
were called Cognitores, or Triers; and such had examined the business of
Coecilian Bishop of Carthage, even upon an Appeal, after it had been tried by
several Synods; and given Judgment against Donatus, and his party. The same
Constantine had also by his Authority put Eustathius out of Antioch, Athanasius
out of Alexandria, and Paul out of Constantinople; and though the Orthodox
Bishops complained of their particulars, as done unjustly at the false
suggestion of the Arrians, yet they did not deny the Authority of the Emperors
in such cases. Ibid. p. 127.
But neither is the Archbishop of Canterbury by this Author allowed to be a
proper Judge; and that, because He did not Act by his Canonical Superiority in
the Church, but by the Authority he jointly with the rest received from the
King; As if he had ever the less the power of a Metropolitan, because He was
also the King's Commissioner. By this way of arguing the Decrees of Ecumenical
Councils will be invalid, because they were called to determine Controversies
by the command of Emperors. But how Uncanonical soever King Edward's Bishops
are said to have been, He does not except against Queen Mary's Bishops, though
they in depriving the Reformed, acted by Commission from the Queen. As for the
Bishops ejected in Q. Elizabeth's time, it has been already said it was for a
Civil cause, i. e. refusing the Oath of Supremacy; which why it should be
lawful in her Father's time, and unlawful in here is; why it should be contrived
by Roman Catholics in that Reign, and scrupled by the same Roman Catholics in
this; Why it should be inoffensive, when expressed in larger terms, and
scandalous, when mitigated; whence on a sudden the Refusers espied so much
Obliquity in that Oath, which they had all took before probably either as
Bishops or Priests in the reigns of King Henry the 8th, and Edward the 6th;
whence this change of things proceeded, unless from secret intimations from
Rome, or their own Obstinacy, will not easily be conjectured. As for his Note,
that what is said of the other Clergy, may be said likewise of the Patriarch,
for any Authority which he stands possessed of by such Ecclesiastical Canons, as
cannot justly be pretended to do any wrong to the Civil Government. He has been
often told by our Authors, that Patriarchs are an Humane Institution; That as
they were erected, so they may be dissolved by the Prudence of Men; that as
they were erected by leave and confirmation of Princes, so they may be
dissolved by the same; that the Bishop of Romes Patriarchate does not extend
beyond the sub-urbicary Churches; that we are without the reach of his
Jurisdiction, and therefore that the power claimed over us is an Invasion; that
did not Popes think fit to dispense with themselves for Perjury, having sworn
to keep inviolably the Decrees of the Eight first General Councils, they would
not in plain opposition to the (...) Can. 6. (...) Can. 7. Here the Council
decrees that Ancient Customs should prevail; that the Privileges of all
Churches in their distinct Provinces should be kept inviolable. We desire the
Bishop of Rome's Patriarchate over the Britannic Churches should be proved to
be an Ancient Custom; and if not that the Privileges of these Churches may be
preserved.
Nicene and The Fathers of the Ephesine Council having decreed that the Cyprian
Prelates should hold their rights untouch^d and unviolated, according to the
Canons of the Holy Fathers, and the Ancient Customs, Ordaining their own
Bishops, and that the Bishop of Antioch who then pretended Jurisdiction over
them, (as the Bishop of Rome now does over us) should be excluded, add farther.
(...) etc. Cone. Ephesians. Can. 8. Let the same be observed in other Diocesses, and
all Provinces every where, That no Bishop occupy any other Province, which
formerly and from the beginning was not under the power of him or his
Predecessors. If any do occupy any Province, or subject it by force, let him
restore it. Now we plead the Cyprian Privileges, and desire we may be exempted
from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome till it is proved that He or His
Predecessors did from the Beginning exercise any power in these Churches.
Ephesine Canons pretend to any Jurisdiction over us; That they so invading
ought to be judged by a free Ecumenical Synod if such an one could be had; but
that this Remedy being praecluded us, Each National Church has liberty to free
her self from such Usurpation; that the Church of England pleads the benefit of
this Right; and her Sovereigns having power to transfer Bishoprics, might
remove the Patriarchate from Rome to Canterbury, and justly exclude any
foreign Praelate from Jurisdiction within their Territories; But that the
power claimed by the Pope (however mollified by the Novices of that Church) is
more then Patriarchal, and that it is not our Rule (which this Author so much
dislikes) but Pope Leo's the Ep. 54.
1st, that propria perdit, qui indebita concupiscit. This plea of a Western
Patriarchate is fatally confounded by that one plain Period of Bishop True Dif.
part. 2.
Bilson. As for his Patriarchate, by God's law he has none; in this Realm for
Six Hundred years after Christ he had none; for the last 6 Hundred years
looking after greater matters he would have none; Above or against the Princes
Sword he can have none; to the subversion of the Faith, and Oppression of his
Brethren he ought to have none; He must seek farther for Subjection to his
Tribunal; this land owes him none.

So much for the first branch of this Thesis; the 2d is, that as the Prince
cannot eject, or depose the Clergy, so neither can be introduce any into the
place of those, who are ejected, or deceased without the concurrence of the
Clergy. If by the concurrence of the Clergy, he means that the Person assigned
by the Prince to any sacred office cannot execute it till he be ordained by the
Clergy, No one will deny it; Or if he think that the Ordainer ought to lay
hands on none but whom he esteems fit for the discharge of so sacred an Office;
here also we agree with him; But how does it follow that because Ordination,
which is consecrating Men to the work of the Holy Ministry, is the proper
Office of the Clergy, the Prince may not recommend to the Church a fit Person
so to be consecrated, or assign to the Person already consecrated, the place
where he shall perform that Holy Work? As for the Canons by him alleged, they
being Humane Institutions are not of AEternal Obligation, but changeable
according to the different State of the Church. If the 31st Apostolic Canon,
which excommunicates all who gain Benefices by the Interest of Secular Princes,
and forbids the People to communicate with them, still oblige; then we are
exempted from Communion with the Bishop of Rome. How comes the latter part of
the 6th Canon of the Nicene Council which concerns the Election of Bishops
still to be valid, and the former part, which limits the Jurisdiction of
Patriarchs, so long since to be null? Why must the C. of England accept the 2d.
Nicene Council in matters of Discipline, which the Petr. de Marc. l. 6. c. 25..
8.
Gallican Church rejected in matters of Faith? Were the Canon of the Laodicean
Council, here cited, pertinent to the purpose, as it is not, (it being directed
only against popular Elections) yet why must that be indispensable, when
another Canon, which enumerates the Canonical books of Scripture, has so little
Authority? It is plain the manners of Elections have varied much in the diverse
States of the Church. The Apostles and Apostolical Persons nominated their
Successors; afterward Bishops were chose by the Clergy, and the people; after,
by the Bishops of the Province, the Metropolitan ratifying the choice; In
process of time Emperors, when become Christian, interposed and constituted and
confirmed even Popes themselves Marca de Conc. Imp. and Sac. cap. 8.
. Nor is this Power of Princes repugnant to Holy Scripture, in which we find
that 1 King. c. 2. v. 35.
King Solomon put Zadok the Priest in the Room of Abiathar; That 2 Chr. 19. 11^.
Jehosaphat set Amariah the Chief-Priest over the People in all matters of the
Lord: That He v. 8.
set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the Chief Fathers of Israel,
for the Judgment of the Lord, and for Controversies. As for his alleged
Inconvenience, that, if temporal Governors can place, and displace the Clergy,
they will make the Churches Synods to state divine matters according to their
own minds, and so the Church will not be praeserv'd incorrupt in her Doctrine
and Discipline, They who maintain the just rights of the Prince are not obliged
to defend the abuse of them; there is perhaps no power ordained for our good,
which may not be perverted to mischief; were this right of placing and
displacing left to a Patriarch or a Synod, yet either of these might so manage
their trust that a corrupted majority of Clergy might state divine matters
according to their own minds, and so the Doctrines of Christ be changed for the
Traditions of men. But to these objected Injuries which the Church may suffer
from a bad Prince, we ought to oppose the benefit she receives from the
Protection of a good one; Nor is it more true that Constantius an Arrian, by
his unjustly displacing the Orthodox Bishops, procured Arrianism to be voted in
several Eastern Synods, then that the succeeding Emperors by justly displacing
the Arrian Bishops procured the Nicene Faith to be received in succeeding
Synods. But for these mischiefs, which a National Synod is liable to, our
Author has found out, as he thinks, a Remedy in his

Fourth Thesis, That a Provincial, or National Synod may not lawfully make any
difinitions in matters of Faith, or in reforming some Error, or Heresy, or
other abuse in God's Service contrary to the Decrees of former Superior Synods,
or contrary to the judgment of the Church Universal of the present Age Showed
in her public Liturgies. But there is a Thesis in our Bibles, which seems to
me the very contradictory of this. For says the Prophet expressly, Hos. 4. 15.
Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah Sin. Though ten tribes continue
corrupted in their Faith, yet let the remaining Tribe take care to reform her
self. For that Judah had sinned, and consequently was here commanded to reform
is plain from the words of Scripture, where it is said, that 2 King. c. 17. v.
9.
Judah kept not the Commandments of the Lord her God, but walked in the
Statutes of Israel which they made. But this argument of National Councils
reforming without the leave of General has been managed with so great Learning
and Demonstration by Archbishop Laud in his Discourse with Fisher, and his
Lordship's Arguments so clearly vindicated by the Reverend D. Stillingfleet,
that as it is great Praesumption in this Author to offer any thing in a cause
which has had the Honor to have suffered under those Pens, so neither would it
be modest in me to meddle any farther in a Controversy by them exhausted. I
shall therefore proceed to his

Fifth Thesis, That could a National Synod make such Definitions, yet that a
Synod wanting part of the National Clergy unjustly deposed, or restrained; and
consisting partly of persons unjustly introduced, partly of those who have been
first threatened with Fines, Imprisonment, and deprivation, in case of their
Nonconformity to the Princes Injunctions in matters purely Spiritual, is not
to be accounted a lawful National Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and valid;
especially as to their establishing such Regal Injunctions. Now how this is
pertinent to our case I can by no means conjecture. For it has been showed that
neither were the Antireforming Bps. unjustly deposed, nor the Reformers
unjustly introduced. But what he means by the Clergy's being threatened with
fines, imprisonment, and Deprivation in case of their Nonconformity to the
Prince's Injunctions may be learnt from another passage in his Discourse, where
he tells us that the Clergy being condemned in the Kings Bench in a Praemunire
for acknowledging the Cardinal's power Legantine, and so become liable at the
King's pleasure to the Imprisonment of their Persons, and Confiscation of their
Estates, page 26.
did to release themselves of this Praemunire, give the King the title of
Ecclesiae and Cleri Anglicani Protector, and Supremum caput. Which Act, says
he, so passed by them, that, as Dr. Hammond acknowledges, It is easy to
believe that Nothing but the apprehensions of dangers, which hung over them by
a Praemunire incurred by them could probably have inclined them to it. But here
we have great reason to complain of the unpardonable praevarication of this
Author in so foully misrepraesenting Dr. Hammond. Which that it may be the more
perspicuous, and that the Reader may make from this Instance a true judgment of
this Writer's sincerity, it will be necessary to transcribe the whole passage
as it lies in the Doctor. Sch c 7.. 5.
Though the first act of the Clergy in this was so introduced, that it is easy
to believe that nothing but the apprehension of dangers which hung over them
(by a Praemunire incurred by them) could probably have inclined them to it, and
therefore I shall not pretend that it was perfectly an Act of their first will
and choice, but that which the Necessity of affairs recommended to them, Yet
the matter of right being upon that occasion taken into their most serious
debate in a Synodical way, and at last a fit and commodious expression
uniformly pitched upon by joint consent of both Houses of Convocation, there is
no reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess, their fear
being the Occasion of their Debates, but the Reasons and Arguments observed in
debate, the causes, as in all Charity we are to judge, of their Decision. Thus
the Doctor. Now this Prevarication is the more culpable, because it is not an
Original, but copied from Mr. Sergeant, whom this Writer cannot but be
praesumed to have known to have falsified it. For Bishop Bramhal (in whose
writings we find him very conversant) had detected this mis-quotation in Mr.
Sergeant, and severely Reprimands him for it. His words are so applicable to
our Author, that I cannot excuse my self the Omission of them. Bp. Br. Worcester.
Tom. 1. p. 360.
He cites half a passage out of Dr. Hammond, but he does Dr. Hammond notorious
wrong. Dr. Hammond speaks only of the first Preparatory Act which occasioned
them to take the matter of right into a serious debate in a Synodical way; he
applies it to the subsequent Act of renunciation after debate. Dr. Hammond
speaks of no fear but the fear of the Law, the Law of Praemunire, an Ancient
Law made many ages before Henry the 8th was born, the Palladium of England to
preserve it from the Usurpations of the Court of Rome; but Mr. Sergeant
mis-applieth it wholly to the fear of the King's violent cruelty. Lastly, he
smothers Dr. Hammond's sense expressed clearly by himself, that there is no
reason to doubt, but that they did believe what they did profess, the fear
being the Occasion of their debates, but the reasons or Arguments offered in
debate, the causes (as in all charity we are to judge) of their Decision. He
uses not to cite any thing ingenuously. This Author must be thought to have
read these passages, and yet ventured the scandal of promoting this Forgery,
though without the Honor of being the first Inventor of it. Such practices, as
these, require little Controversiall skill, but much forehead; and we have
seen a Machine lately publicly exposed for this laudable Quality of imbibing
whatever is blown into it is Mouth, and then ecchoing it forth again without
blushing. Whether this be not our Author's Talent, let the Reader judge; as also
what Opinion we ought to have of his Modesty, who after all this has the
confidence to desire us to read, together with these his Observations on the
Reformation, Dr. Hammond of Sch. c. 7. (the very Chapter whence this is cited)
least, says he, I may have related some things partially, or omitted some
things considerable in this Matter. As for this Objection of the Clergy's being
awed by fear in this Act, he himself has unluckily cited a passage from the
(then) Lady Mary, which shows the vanity of it. ^p. 142.
I am well assured (says She speaking of Edward VI. in her Letter to the
Council) that the King his Father's Laws were consented to without compulsion
by the whole Realm both Spiritual and Temporal. I shall say nothing more to
this Thesis but oppose another to it, That could an Ecumenical Synod make
definitions contrary to the word of God, yet that a Synod wanting the greatest
part of Christian Bishops, unjustly excluded, and consisting partly of Persons
unjustly introduced, partly of those who have been first bribed with Money, and
promises of Church praeferment, or praeengag'd by Oaths to comply with the
Usurpations of a praetended Spiritual Monarch, is not to be accounted a lawful
Ecumenical Synod, nor the Acts thereof free and valid, especially as to their
establishing such usurpations. This is a Thesis, which needs no Application. I
proceed to his

Sixth Thesis. That the Judgment and consent of some Clergymen of a Province,
when they are the lesser part, cannot be called the judgment and consent of the
Whole Clergy of the Province. This Assertion, that a lesser part is not aequall
to the Whole, is the only thing which looks like Mathematics in the whole
Discourse; and the Reader may hence be convinced that our Author does sometimes
travel in the Educ. p. 119.
High road of Demonstration. But here we desire it may be proved, either that
the Reformation was not effected by the major part of the Clergy, or that a
minor part judging according to truth are not to be obeyed rather then the
Major part judging contrary to it. In the mean time it is easily replied, that
the judgment and consent of some few Bishops ( Soave Hist^ Conc. Tr. p. 153.
suppose 48. Bishops, and 5. Cardinals giving Canonical Authority to books
Apocryphal, and making Authentical a translation differing from the Original)
cannot be esteemed the judgment and consent of the Catholic Church.

7th. Thesis. That since a National Synod may not define matters of Faith
contrary to former Superior Councils, much less may any Secular Person define
contrary to those Councils, or also to a National Synod. The defining matters
of Faith we allow to be the proper office of the Clergy; but because every one
must give an account of his own Faith, every one is obliged to take care that
what he submits to the belief of, be consistent with his Christianity: I am
obliged to pay all submission to the Church-Autority, but the Church having
bounds, within which she ought to be restrained in her Determinations, if she
transgresses these Limits, and acts against that Christianity, which she
professes to maintain, I may rather refuse obedience, then forseit my
Christianity. If in a cause of this moment I make a wrong Judgment, I am
answerable for it at Gods Tribunal, not because I usurped a right, which was
never granted me, but because I misused a Liberty which was indulged me. This
we take to be the case of each private Christian; and farther, that the Prince
having an Obligation not only to believe a-right, and Worship God (as is
praescrib'd) himself, but also to protect the true Faith and Worship in his
Dominions, ought to use all those means of discovering the Truth, which God has
afforded, viz. consulting the Pastors of the Church, reading the word of God
etc. And that, having discovered it, He may promulgate it to His Subjects by
them also to be embraced, but not without the use of that Judgment and
Discretion which to them also is allowed. If here it happens that the Civil and
Ecclesiastical power command things contrary, there is nothing to be done by
the Subject but to enquire on which side God is; and if God be on the King's
side by a direct Law in the matter, He is not on the Churches side for her
Spiritual Authority. Thus a good King of Israel might 2 King. 38. 22.
take away the High places and Altars, and say unto Judah and Jerusalem, Ye
shall Worship before the Altar at Jerusalem, because such a Command was
justifiable by the Law of Moses; Nor is it any Praejudice against it, 2 King.
23. 9.
That the Priests of the High places refused to come up to the Altar at
Jerusalem. Thus might King Alfred restore to the Decalogue, and to its
Obligation the Non tibi facies Deos aureos, though Veneration of Images was
commanded by the second Nicene Synod. And though the Councils of Constance and
Trent had thought fit to repeal Our Savior's Institution, yet King Edward
might revive the Ancient Statute, Mat. 26. 27.
(...).

As for his Eighth Thesis it has already been proved to be Felo de ^e, and that
the limitation destroys whatever the Proposition would have establish^d. When
the Gallican Church shall have received all the Decrees of the Council of
Trent, and the Roman Church observed the Canons of the first General Councils,
When the Western Patriarch shall have rechang'd his Regalia Petri into the old
regulas Patrum; it may then be seasonable to examine, How far National Churches
are obliged by things of mere Ecclesiastical Constitution.

I should now proceed to examine the Historical part of his Discourse; but that
I understand is already under the Consideration of another Hand, from which the
Reader may shortly expect a satisfactory account. But I may not omit for the
Reader's diversion a Grammatical Criticism which our Author has made upon the
little particle as. It is enacted the 32d. Hen. 8. 26. c. page 38.
That all such Determinations, Decrees, Definitions and Ordinances, as
according to God's word, and Christ's Gospel shall at any time be set forth by
the Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors in Divinity appointed by his Majesty, or
else by the whole Clergy of England, in and upon the matters of Christ's
Religion etc. shall be by all his Grace's Subjects fully Believed, Obeyed, etc.
Upon which he makes this learned Note. Whereas under the Reformation private
Men are tied only to obey and believe the Definitions of Councils when they are
set forth according to God's word. i. e. when private Men think them to be so,
yet here this Liberty was thought fit to be restrained, and private men tied to
believe these Definitions when set forth as according to God's word. i. e. when
the setters forth believe them to be so. To obey a thing defined according to
God's word; and to obey a thing defined, as being according to God's word, are
Injunctions very different. Now a little skill in Honest Walker's particles
would have cleared this point, and a Schoolboy that was to turn this passage
into Latin, would have known that as is put for which; Accordingly Keble
abridging this Statute makes it run thus, All Decrees and Ordinances which
according to Gods word, etc. But this it is for people to meddle in
Controversy at an Age when they have forgot their Grammar. Notwithstanding
therefore this Aristarchus, We still retain the Liberty of believing and
obeying only such things, which be defined according to God's Word. For which
we are much blamed in the Conclusion of this Discourse.

p. 260.
In rejection of the Church's Judgment (says he) let none think himself
secure in relying on the Testimony of his Conscience or judgment. But what
reason soever he may have to undervalue the Testimony of a good Conscience, we
think it advisable from St. Paul, 1 Timothy c. 1. v. 19.
to hold faith, and a good conscience which some having put away, concerning
faith have made Shipwreck; Of whom are -- But says he, let none think himself
secure in any of these things, so long as his Conscience witnesses still to
him this one thing, namely his Disobedience and Inconformity to the
Church-Catholic. But our Consciences do not witness to us any disobedience to
the Church-Catholic, but only to that Church which falsely praetends to be
Catholic. He means to the Major part of the Guides thereof. But the cause has
not yet been decided by Poll, that we should know which side has the Majority.
Let him know that his Condition is very dangerous, when he makes the
Church-Guides of his own time, or the major part thereof, incommunicable-with
in their external profession of Religion; There was a time then, when to
believe the Consubstantiality of the Son was a dangerous Condition; and this
perhaps made Pope Liberius externally to profess Arrianism. When for the
maintaining of his Opinions he begins to distinguish and divide between the
doctrine of the Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Church. But why not
distinguish, where the Church her self distinguishes, and says, Christ indeed
in the Scriptures instituted so, but I institute otherwise; as in the case of
denying the Cup. Between the Doctrines of the Catholic Church of the former
ages, and of the Catholic Church of the present. But here again the Church her
self distinguishes, when She tells us that Conc. Constable. Sess. 13.
licet in primitiva Ecclesia sub utraque specie Sacramentum reciperetur, Yet
now the contrary Custom habenda est pro lege quam non licet reprobare. Between
the Church's orthodoxness in Necessaries, and non-necessaries to Salvation. If
there be no difference betwixt these, why does a Guide in Controv. Disc. 1. c.
6. par. 56.
Friend of the Author tell us of an Obedience of Assent in the one, but of
Non-contradiction only in the other? When he begins to maintain the Authority of
an Inferior Ecclesiastical Judge against a Superior. But what if this be only
where the Inferior Judge agrees though not with his immediate Superior, yet with
the Supreme? Or of a minor part of the Church-Guides against a Major. But that
is not a case yet fairly decided. When they grant that God has given them,
beside the Scriptures, guides of their Faith. But those Guides themselves to be
guided by the Scripture. And that they have in their judgment departed from
those Guides. i. e. the major part of them. But this we would have proved.
Which in a Court consisting of many is the legal Judge. Guides and Judges are
different things; but we hope when this Court sits, the Judges will consult the
Scripture, the Statute they are to go by, and if they judge according to that,
they will judge well.

These are the Doctrines of blind-Obedience which this Author so studiously
inculcates. For since Doctrines are taught us different from Scripture, we are
advised to use another way of discerning Doctrines, then what the Gospel
prescribes. Our Savior bids us, Mat. 16. 6. 12.
Beware of the leaven. i. e. the doctrine of Pharisee's, though sitting in Moses
his Chair. We are now advised to embrace all the doctrines of those that sit in
the Chair of S. Peter. Christ bids us, Mat. 24. 4.
Take heed that no man deceive us though coming in his Name. We are now told that
they who come to us in the Name of Christ cannot deceive us. St. Paul says,
Gal. 1. 8.
that If an Angel from Heaven preach to us any other Doctrine then that which
he preached, Let him be accursed. Now, if we do not embrace whatever a
Patriarch from the West preaches, though never so contrary to the Gospel, we are
concluded under an Anathema. The Apostles tell us, that they 2 Cor. 1. 24.
have no Dominion over our Faith; but their Successors exercise a Despotic
power in requiring a servile Obedience to all their Dictates. S. Paul's
practice was to Gal. 2. 11. 14.
withstand Peter to the face, When he saw that he walked not uprightly
according to the truth of the Gospel; but St. Peter's Successor pleads that in
no case he may be withstood, because it is impossible, but that he should walk
uprightly in the truth of the Gospel. The inspired Divine bids us Rev. 18. 4.
Come out of Babylon, that we may not partake of her Sins; Our modern
Theologists advise us to come back into Babylonia apud Joannem Romanae ^rbis
figura est. Tertuladv. Marc. I. 3. c. 13.
Babylon, for that She only is impeccable. Roma quasi secunda Babylon^a est.
Aug. de Civit^ De^. I. 18. c. 2.


FINIS

