A FUNERAL SERMON.

Delivered upon Occasion of the Death of that Worthy Gentleman John Marsh, Esquire
Who lived at Garston-Hall in Watford Parish in the County of Hartford; And Died
in the Lord, and was Buried September. 16, 1681.

By Samuel Slater, Late Minister of the Gospel at Edmunds-Bury in Suffolk.

Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their Beds, each one
walking in his uprightness. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible
and Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1682.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To my Honored Friends, Madam Marsh, and her Pious Son and Daughters.
AT the Motion and Desire of your (since Deceased) Father and Husband, my
Worthy Friend, I did, after the Solemnization of his Funeral, deliver the
following Discourse to you in Private. And in order to Common Good, I have here
made it Public. The Father of Mercies accompany it with his Blessing upon you,
and all others into whose hands it shall come, that thereby Love to and Faith
in Christ may be promoted, together with Holiness of Life and Comfort at Death.
That you may not be unmindful of that King of Terrors at his greatest
distances, nor terrified by him in his nearest approaches. I was greatly
pleased to see your gracious Deportment under that Afflictive Providence, which
deprived you of one so desirable, and that you were duly affected with your
Loss, yet sweetly submissive to your God. Though the Cup was bitter, you did
not faint nor murmur. It was indeed a Mercy that you enjoyed him so long, for
he was full of Days, and had a flourishing old Age. And it may be a Comfort,
that you shall see him again in Heaven, where you shall Eternally rejoice
together in God. That your Souls may prosper, your Graces increase, your
Comforts abound, your Days may be filled with Mercy and Duty, and your selves
at last received into Glory is the Hearty Prayer of

Your Friend and Servant in our dear Lord Jesus, S. Slater. December. 22, 1681.
Errata corrigenda.
PAge 13 line 16, for primative read privative: p. 14. l. 12. for places r
praises. l. 22. for Son r Sun. p. 20. l. 10. for lusted r likened. p. 22. l. 6.
dele thus. p. 23. l. 31. dele that. l. 36. after am l, r that l. p. 26. l. 20.
for him r them. p. 30. 1. 14. for Judges r Judge. l. 37. for Lords and Gods r
Lord and God. p. 34. l. 34. for their r the. p. 35. l. 16. for in r is. p. 36.
l. 10. for not r now.

LUKE 2. 29, 30. Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according
to thy word.
For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.

THESE are the words of Holy Simeon, who is supposed to be the Son of Hillel,
and Chief of the great Synedrion, and Father of the Learned Doctor Gamaliel, at
whose Feet, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul was educated. Concerning
whom the Sacred Scripture testifies, that he was a Just and Devout man, i. e.
Godly, and Righteous, Wary, and Cautious; A man that managed his Life, and
ordered his actions with that due circumspection, as evidenced his sedulous
care of approving himself to God.

This good man waited for the Consolation of Israel, viz. the incarnation, or
coming of the Son of God, the promised, and longingly expected Messiah; in whom
all our comforts are laid up, if we be Israelites indeed. That Jesus alone can
be our Consolation, who is our Salvation. It is only under his shadow we can
sit with great delight, because under that alone we can sit in safety. Those
men and Women that seek their comforts out of Christ, will find themselves
under miserable disappointment. And by how much the higher they are raised in
hopes and expectation, by so much the lower they will be plunged into sorrow
and vexation. I do earnestly beseech you, Christians, to remember this, that
Christ is the Consolation of Israel, and improve it for your Souls advantage.
Especially I speak this to you, my Friends, who are most nearly concerned in
the late stroke of Providence, and do now mourn under the smart thereof. Learn
whither you should repair for support and healing; even to this Jesus, who to
this day, yea, for ever continues to be the Consolation of Israel: and in whom
you may find abundantly enough to sweeten this bitter Cup.

This Simeon who thus waited, was well rewarded for his Faith and Patience,
having this assurance given him, that he should not see Death, until he had
seen the Lord's Christ. He should not see Death until Christ was born. Christ
should come upon Earth before Simeon should go to Heaven: From whence you may
learn this truth. That waiting upon God is not in vain: much time may be spent
in it, but it will not be time misspent. God is not wont to send a waiting
Soul mourning away. Such an one may come to God with a tear in it is Eye, but
sooner or later, it shall go from him with a smile upon it is Countenance. Thou,
O mourning, drooping Christian, do not see Christ now, he covers himself with
a Cloud; well, sink not under discouragement, but let patience have it is
perfect work, and do thou charge thy Soul to wait on, I am persuaded, before
thou see Death, thou shall see Jesus; Christ will manifest himself unto thee;
however, as soon as Death has closed thy bodily Eyes, thou shall both see him,
and thy self with him in Glory.

Well. Simeon having waited long, though not too long, came into the Temple,
which did then exceed in Glory, for there he met with Jesus. And having met
with him, he toook him up in his arms; and he was a most blessed arm-full;
doubtless the good old man was glad he had got him, and his heart did leap
within him. He never before embraced so great and glorious an Object. And I
tell thee, O Christian, who have got Christ in thy Heart, and do hug him in
the arms of thy Faith, thou have as much reason to rejoice, as Simeon did, when
he had him in his arms: for it is Christ in you the hope of Glory. If he be
formed in you, you shall be saved by him.

Having taken Christ in his arms, what did the good man do? Oh! he blessed God,
and truly he had reason. How could he be without his Song, when he had got him,
who was his strength and Salvation. We have cause to bless God for Creatures,
for our Health, Strength, Estates; and Relations, because we are less than the
least of these, but we have infinitely more cause to bless God for Christ,
because he is a gift of the dearest love, and of the greatest excellency. All
Earthly comforts come from the hand of God, but Christ comes from the

Some part of that which Simeon spoke upon this occasion, you have in the words
of the Text, in which take notice of these two things.

1. Simeons humble petition and request to God. Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according to thy word.

2. The ground or reason of this his request, for mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation.

This Scripture being chosen by our deceased Brother for his Swan like-Song; I
shall present you with those several Observations I have made upon it, and
briefly touch upon them, and so pass to that which I purpose most to insist
upon.

Doct. 1. Every Godly man is God's Servant. So Simeon styled himself here,
Lord, let thou thy Servant. And so did David, Psalm. 116. 16. O Lord, truly
I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant. He gloried more in his being Gods Servant,
than in his being King of Israel.

Wicked men are the Slaves of Corruption, and Vassails of Satan, the Scriptures
says, they serve diverse Lusts, and truly that is an hard task: if a man cannot
well serve two Masters, how shall he serve diverse, many.

Their service is mere drudgerie and bondage. Two things may justly discommend
it; viz. they have dirty works, and they shall have dreadful wages; their works
foul them, and their wages undo them.

But you, O Saints, are the Servants of God, and you are so upon a threefold
account, besides that of your Creation.

First, Upon the account of your Redemption, which was brought about by the
power of Christ, who rescued you out of the clutches of sin and Satan. Luke 1.
74. He has delivered us out of the hands of our Enemies, that we might serve
him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our
lives.

Secondly, You are Gods Servants upon the score of purchase, that Jesus who
purchased Heaven and Glory for you, has also purchased you for himself, and
the price which he laid down, was no less, than that of his own Blood: and
therefore it is your unquestionable duty to glorify him in your Souls, Bodies,
and Spirits. 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Thirdly, You are Gods Servants by virtue of Covenant; you have chosen one
another, he has chosen you for his people, and you have chosen him for the
Lord your God; an agreement has been made and Indentures sealed Ezekiel 16* 8
I entered into Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.

Use. Remember and seriously consider then, whose you are, and unto whom you
belong. Study and acquaint your selves with your Masters will, and knowing it,
apply your selves immediately to the performance of it; let your life be a life
of obedience to God; and whatsoever your hand finds to do, as the matter of
his Will, be sure that you do it with all your might, knowing that your labor
shall not be in vain: and that it is most highly reasonable you should be as
industrious about the work of God, as you have been about the work of Satan, as
diligent for your best Friend, as your greatest Enemy; as industrious for the
saving of your Souls, as you have been for the damning of them. And for your
encouragement and quickening, consider.

1. First, That in the service of God there is perfect freedom, his Yoke is
easy, and his burden light. You are never so much your own men, as when you
are Gods servants: You are so his servants, as that you also are his Children:
Your work is cut out by the hand of a most tender Father, and therefore it
should be done with the Heart and Spirit of a Child. David resolved to run the
way of God's Commandments.

2. As you have the noblest work, so you shall one day have the most glorious
rewards. You may now do your work with singing, you shall then receive your
reward with admiring. When you have done the work of Servants, you shall be
instated in the inheritance of Sons, where Christ is, there shall his Servants
also be, to behold his Glory, and to share with him in it, for the Apostle
assures us, that he and his people shall be glorified together. And their work
is not so difficult, nor are their sufferings so pressing, but that their
future Crown will unspeakably excel them for its weight and splendour.

Doct. 2. I Observe. That Gods Servants must be at Gods dispose, and not at
their own. Lord, let thou thy Servant depart. I dare not stir without thy
order, thou did send me hither, and here I must stay, until thou shall please
to send for me hence. I am weary of being here, Lord will thou dismiss me, and
give me leave to be gone. It is Gods unquestionable right to order out as he
pleases concerning us, and that in these things.

1. God may cut out for us what work he pleases, and lay it either in active
or passive obedience as he thinks good: Whatsoever his Will is, we must not
dispute, but obey it, and so be like those ministering Spirits, the Angels above
who do his pleasure, yea, all his pleasure.

2. It is Gods right to carve out our allowances, either a full, or a scantie
condition; abundance, or want to set us in a Palace, or upon a Dunghill, to
cloth us in Scarlet, or in Canvas, to give us comfort or afflictions: We must
be wholly at Gods finding. Feed me, said good Agur, with food convenient for
me, he did not prescribe to God, but left God to judge what was so.

3. It is fit that God should measure out our time for us, and bestow upon us a
longer or a shorter day of life; we do not live, nor do we die at our own
pleasure, or at the will and pleasure of men, but God. He is not only our Lord,
but also the Lord of our time. So David cheerfully acknowledged, my times are
in thy hands, to make them cloudie, or serene, halcyon, or tempestuous, to
prolong, or to contract them, as seems good to him. It is an indubitable part
of Gods Royal Prerogative to order concerning us; and it is the unquestionable
duty of our place to submit to his Orders. Whatsoever he commands, we must do,
even as did the Centurions servants; if he said to one of them, Go, he went, if
he said to another, Come, he came. Reason good we should do so, for all the
Commandments of God are Holy, and Just, and Good; And an Universal Cordial
Respect to them will evidence our sincerity, and secure us from shame And
whatsoever God does, we must accept not only kissing his Hand when it sweetly
seeds us, nor only his Arm when it graciously supports, but likewise his Rod,
when it does smartly lash us. There ought to be no discontents, no quarrelsome
murmurings, nor immoderate excessive sorrows, when he blasts our sweetest
Comforts, or kills our dearest Relations; yea, though he should do it with a
violent stroke, for he may do what he will with his own. When he destroyed
Nadab, and Abihu by fire in the very act of their sins, Aaron their Father held
his peace. He saw that God was provoked by them, and angry with them, and
therefore concluded it his wisest course to be quiet. It is indeed extreme
madness for the Clay to say to to the potter, why do thou so, or for the
creature to contend with his Creator. Such contendings procure us heavier blows.

3. Doct. We may learn that Death is a departure; Lord! let thou thy
Servant depart. When a man dies, he removes; He does not then go back again
into nothing, but into another Place, and into another State. Christ called his
Death a going away. Joh. 14. 28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away.
So Joh. 16. 7. It is expedient for you, that I go away, for if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you. Our Death also is a going away.

Those that make the longest stay here, must be gone at last. A wicked man when
he dies, departs out of his warm Climate, and pleasant State, from his Friends
and Riches, from his Comforts and Delights, into Miseries and Torments, which
are Intolerable and Eternal. And it is no wonder if such a man play loath to
depart, and Death be unto him a King of Terrors. But when an Holy Gracious
Person departs, he leaves all his sins and enemies, all his troubles and
sorrows behind him, and he goes to a better place, and better company, and
infinitely better delights: He enters into peace and into rest, and into the
joy of his Lord. He gets off from the stormy troublesome Sea of this World,
where he was so frequently endangered, and baths himself in those Rivers of
pleasure, which are at God's Right Hand for evermore.

Use 1. Let the consideration hereof quiet us, under those Breaches which Death
makes in our Families and Relations. Though it be very afflictive to think, my
dear Husband is gone, my tender Father is gone, my loving and faithful Friend
is gone; Yet this will lighten and sweeten that affliction, if we think whether
he is gone, from Earth to Heaven, from Troubles to Joy and Glory, from us to
God, Christ, the Spirit, Angels and Saints above. Oh Blessed, and Everlastingly
making Exchange.

Use 2. Let the consideration hereof quicken us, the good Lord grant that we
all may frequently and seriously think of this our departure, and industriously
bestir our selves in order to a full preparation for it. Oh let us get our work
done before we go; Christ did so: Joh. 17. 4. I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do, and now come I to thee. Mind; follow, finish that for
which you came into the World, before you are called out of the World. Oh! get
your evidences full and fair, that when Death siezeth upon you, you may lay
hold upon Eternal Life. Make sure of Heaven before you come to leave the Earth.
How sweet was it for Christ to tell his Disciples, I go to my Father, and to
your Father, to my God, and to your God.

Doct. 4. We may from hence learn this Lesson; That a departure in peace is
exceeding desirable. This was the subject matter of Simeon's desire and
prayer. Lord, let thou thy Servant depart in Peace; He would go out in a
calm, neither in a stink through sin, nor in a storm through fear, but in an
holy peace. This promise was made to Abraham, the Father of the Faithful; Thou
shall go to thy Fathers in peace: That is, with a quiet, pacate and comfortable
Spirit, with joy and satisfaction, without any trouble for what he should part
with, and without fear of any thing he should meet with. And you find Psalm. 37.
37. The Royal Prophet bids you, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright,
for the end of that man is Peace. Whatever troubles he is encountered by, in
his way, he has Peace at his end.

A wicked man may dye in Stupidity, but not in Peace, he may then be secure,
but he is not safe, though he then have no trouble, yet he has cause enough of
trouble. My God says there is no Peace to the wicked, neither in his Life, nor
at his Death. Such an one dies in sin, and therefore he cannot dye in Peace,
But now a Godly man, whose heart is sprinkled from an evil Conscience, has
Peace in his Death, usually he has Peace with his own Conscience, that
befriends him, witnesses for him, speaks comfortably to him, and is an
excellent Cordial at a dying hour; Always he has peace with his God, they are
Friends; he is Reconciled to God, and God to him; Moses dyed at the mouth of
the Lord; God kissed him home.

Use Well my Friends, I am confident you all desire such a Death, you would
willingly go out of the World in peace. Oh, let it not be only the matter of
your desire, but likewise of your endeavor, use means in order thereunto, and
follow these directions.

1. Make your peace now; Cease your enmity against God, throw down your weapons
of Rebellion, and return unto your duty. How can those persons rationally hope,
that God should be a Friend to them when they dye, who are enemies to God while
they live, now, now, seek peace and ensue it.

2. Make have to Christ, make sure of Christ, get unto him, He, and he alone is
the peace, and the Prince of peace, there is no peace to be had out of Christ.
Let him says God, lay hold upon my strength, that is upon Christ, that he may
make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. Have a care that you be
not found in your sins, nor in your selves, nor in your own Righteousness,
trusting in that; No, no, says Paul. Phil. 3. 8, 9. I have suffered the loss
of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found
in him.

3. Look after a sanctifying change in your hearts and natures, follow Peace
and Holiness; Holiness both of inward Disposition, and of outward Conversation;
Grace ushers in peace, purity and peace go together, the work of Righteousness
is peace, and the effect of Righteousness is quietness and assurance for ever.
By the study and practice of Holiness you may lose your peace with some men,
but you will keep up, and maintain your peace with God, yea, and with good men
too. Prove. 22. 11. He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips,
the King shall be his Friend.

Doct. 5. We may from these words gather this instruction. That a truly
gracious man, may very well be willing and free, and forward to dye. Thus good
Simeon was here, he prayed for Death; Let me depart, let me be gone out of this
World; Do thou Lord send for me, that I may come to thee. And not only so, but
he also prayed for a quick dispatch, a speedy dismission, as one that was in
have to be gone: As you may learn from that particle Now, now let thou thy
Servant depart; He did full well know, that he must dye one day, that was
certain and unavoidable, the Chambers of the grave are prepared for all the
living. but he would dye presently, now O Lord! now without more ado; now
without any longer tarrying. A wicked man does not care how long Death stays;
he puts that day far from him, because he looks upon it as a very evil day; But
good Simeon did not care how soon Death came, he looked for it, yea, and he
longed for it, he thought it was too slow paced, and its motions toward him
not quick enough; He knew Death would do him a good turn, and therefore he was
a voluntier in dying.

And I must say this, supposing that a Godly man have no cloud upon his Spirit,
and no flaw nor blurr in his Evidence, supposing that God shines upon his Soul
with the bright and comfortable Beams of his love and favor, and that his own
Conscience does speak comfort to him plainly, I know no reason, no solid,
substantial reason why he should be backward, and unwilling to dye, unless it
be serviceableness and usefulness in the World: If once a Christians work be
done, what should he stay here for? If once he be full ripe for Glory, why
should he stand any longer? It is not worth his while to continue here, were it
not that he may do good in his place, and be helpful to others, and yet
farther serve the interest of Gods name and glory, and upon that account he
ought to deny himself, and be willing to wait yet longer for his Rest and
Crown. Thus it was with Holy Paul: Phil 1. 23. I have a desire to depart, and
to be with Christ, which, is far better; It was better for him, he knew he
should mend himself; But says he, ver. 24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh,
is more needful for you. They would need his company, and his labors, his
counsels, and his comforts, and upon that account he submitted. Ver. 25. Having
this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all, for your
furtherance and joy of Faith. And he was content so to abide.

Indeed there is not any reason at all, why a wicked man should be willing to
dye, he can promise himself no good by it; It does not come Peaceably to him,
it brings it is sting along with it; He dies to dye, his Natural Death is a
passage to Eternal: He loses all by Death, and gets nothing; Therefore I say,
there is no reason at all why he should desire to dye. And there is but one
reason (I mean which is worth any thing, and which is not easily answered,) why
a truly Godly man should be willing to live? And that is serving his Generation
according to the will of God. But I am sure, there are a great many weighty and
cogent reasons; why such an one should be willing to dye, and not only submit
to Death, but also welcome it, and long for it, of which I shall speak more by
and by.

Doct. 6. A Sixth Instruction, which these words do most freely afford us, is
this; That though a Godly man be never so desirous to dye, yet it is his duty,
and will be his business to stoop, and submit his will to the will of God. Thus
it was with this holy man, he was willing and desireous to dye, he even longed
to be gone: Lord, let thou thy servant depart, but he would not go without
license, he would stay Gods time.

Though Heaven be never so desirable, and this World never so troublesome,
though the Country be never so pleasant, and the way thither never so tedious:
Be our sicknesses, pains and crosses never so great and heavy; Be our enemies
never so furious and violent, our dangers never so eminent, our persecutions
never so sharp and bitter, our temptations never so fierce and fiery, we must
in patience possess our Souls, and be content to bear them, till God shall
please in his own time to command for us, a deliverance out of them. Let our
conditions be never so dark and dismal, we must not escape by opening the door
with the Devils Key, nor break out of Prison by offering violence to our own
lives.

Job had very dreadful exercises, his State was sad and deplorable; He was
stripped of all his outward enjoyments, bereaved of his beloved Children, smitten
in his body with sores and inflammations, his Wife was a cross to him, and his
Friends cruel; God himself carried as his enemy, and set him up for a mark to
shoot at; He had but one comfort left him, that was the Testimony of a good
Conscience; Yet he was resolved to wait all the days of his appointed time,
until his change should come. He would not make more have than good speed. As
long as God was pleased to tarry, holy Job was well pleased to wait. We should
write after so fair a Copy, so to do is both our wisdom and our interest: For
God is wiser than we, his Wisdom is infinite, and his time is always best. He
that goes to his grave in Gods time, goes as a shock of Corn in its season.
God always plucks his fruit, when it is ripe and fit to be gathered; He will
not pluck it sooner, and it shall not hang any longer.

Doct. 7. The seventh Doctrine which these words afford us is this. Gods
promises are to be pleaded by us. Thus in the Text; Now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace, according to thy word; There is the argument that he
uses for the enforcing his Petition. He had received a Revelation from God,
that he should not see Death, i. e. that he should not die, he should not taste
of Death, though he saw the Death of others, yet he should not see his own
Death, until he had seen the Lord's Christ, the Messiah, or the Lord's anointed
one, namely, Jesus the Savior. And now, says He, Lord, now that I have seen
him, do thou graciously grant me my dismission. Be it unto me according to thy
word.

Have you a word, O Christians, a word of promise, blessed be God you are rich
in them, God has abounded in promises to his people. You have words of
inestimable value, words better than Gold, better than man's bonds, words that
are suitable to, and cordial in every condition, into which providence can cast
you. Now then, what is your duty with reference to these words, but to make use
of them. It is pity they should lie by neglected, as useless. Fetch them out as
you have occasion, and live upon them, that when you are rich in promifes, you
may not be poor in comforts. You do deal disingeniously with God, and
unworthily with promises, unless you use them.

Q. If any one should propound this question, What is that right and proper use
which we should make of promises?

A. I Answer, Turn them into Faith and Prayer, make use of the promises as food
for your Faith, and matter for your Prayers. Promises are the Life of Faith, by
these things men live, said good Hezekiah, and they are the strength of Prayer.
So then,

1. You must believe the promises. Set to your Seal that God is true, and
faithful, that his Word is settled in Heaven, that all his promises are in
Christ yea, and in him Amen: i. e. of a most sure and certain accomplishment;
and accordingly do you hope in them, and rejoice in them, and rely upon them as
security enough; cast your selves upon the word, do not question it is truth, do
not doubt of its accomplishment, but firmly expect the making of it good,
whatever the Devil, and Carnal Reason, and Flesh, and Blood suggest to the
contrary. As long as you have the assurance of a promise, fear not Enemies, nor
Difficulties, nor Dangers, but keep your way, and go on. though there be Lions
in it, and other Ravenous Beasts, worse than they.

2. Your business is to plead the Word, and urge it, and beg of God, that he
would be pleased to fulfill it. We never improve promises as we ought, until we
turn them into Prayer, and press God with them. Thus David did, 2 Samuel 7. 27.
Thou O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy Servant, saying, I
will build thee an house, therefore has thy Servant found in his heart to pray
this Prayer unto thee. Thus Simeon did here, let me depart according to thy
word: and you frequently meet with these expressions in Psalm. 119. Remember
thy Word unto thy Servant upon which thou have caused me to hope. As long as
that word was remembered, David knew, he himself should not be forgotten. -- My
Soul cleaves unto the dust, quicken thou me according to thy word. -- My Soul
melts for heaviness, strengthen thou me according to thy Word. -- Oh, let thy
mercies come unto me, even thy Salvation according to thy word. -- I entreated
thy Salvation with my whole heart, be merciful unto me according to thy word.
You see how good David was at it. He had a mind to be answered. He could not
endure to meet with a denying God. A gracious Soul had rather lose his Comforts
upon Earth, than his Prayers in Heaven. One of the saddest groans that ever
such an one did utter, is, Lam 3. 8. When I cry and shout, he shuts cut my
Prayer. Now David to prevent that, he strengthened his cause as much as he
could, and so did bottom his Prayer upon, and back it with a promise; then he
knew himself sure of acceptance and answer; for God could not deny David's
Prayer, but he must in so doing deny himself too, and falsify his own word:
and therefore observe, how he gets hold, and keeps it, and wrestles. Psalm. 143.
1. Here my Prayer O Lord, give ear to my supplications, in thy faithfulness
answer me. The good man had the Covenant and Promises at that time in his Heart
and Eye, and thought he, now I may be bold, for I am sure enough; whom ever he
does send away with a repulse, he cannot me; he is a faithful God, and therefore
he will answer me, and that according to the desert of my heart; in thy
faithfulness answer me. And truly, Christians, thus we all should do, if we
would act wisely and advantagiously for our selves. Search the Scriptures, and
see what promises speak appositely to your case, and take them, and carry them
by Faith in Prayer unto God, and there put them in suit. Lord, I want Faith,
Patience, and meekness; I am in such a difficulty, called out to such works,
assaulted with such temptations, environed with such and such and such dangers,
and thus and thus have thou spoken, Lord make good thy word unto me thy
Servant. This, this is the way to obtain, and as Princes to prevail with God,

Doct. 8. The Eighth Doctrine which these words afford us, is this. That Christ
is God's Salvation. Good Simeon had been delighted with the sight of Jesus, and
now says he, mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. He is the Savior whom God
has chosen in his Wisdom, raised up in his Love, and sent with Authority. He
is not only willing to save, and mighty to save, but he is also authorized, and
commissioned for it.

All our Salvation comes from Christ, both our Salvation from Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal Evils. Our primative Salvation from Sin, and from Wrath,
comes from Christ. He delivers us from the guilt of Sin, by his Righteousness
imputed to us, and from the dominion of Sin, by the power of his Spirit and
Grace, and from the damnation which was due to sin, by the sacrifice of
himself, which he offered unto the Justice of his Father. He rescued us out of
the hands of Satan, as a tempter, so that his fiery darts shall not mortally
wound us, and as an Accuser, so that his charges shall not take place, nor
prevail to our condemnation. He does redeem his people from all their
Iniquities, and from Death, and Hell, and he will never leave working, until he
has redeemed them from all their distresses.

And all our positive Salvation does likewise come from Christ. It is he that
reconciles us to God, that does make, and keep the peace between God and us. He
does give us our title to Heaven, and our fitness for Heaven, and our
possession of Heaven. He gives both Grace and Glory. He does first infuse the
principle of Grace, and then adds the Crown of Glory* He it is that by his
Spirit first breaths into them the breath of a Spiritual Life, and then imparts
to them that Life more abnndantly, and then at last advances them to, and
rewards them with Eternal Life.

The Scripture calls him the Captain of our Salvation, and the Author of
Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him.

Use. 1. Oh, how should we admire the goodness of God in giving Christ to us,
and for us; and how should our Mouths be filled with his praises all the day.

Thus it was with good Zacharias, in Luke 1. 68. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who has visited, and redeemed his people, and has raised up an horn
of Salvation for us in the house of his Servant David. Specially you that have
found, and experienced his Salvation begun upon you; that whereas he is a Stone
of stumbling to others, he is a Stone of support, a Foundation-Stone to you.
And whereas he is a Rock of Offense to Thousands, He is a Rock of Salvation to
you. Surely upon this score most enlarged places are due to God, and comely for
you. That man that cannot be thankful for Christ, can be truly thankful for
nothing. That heart is cold indeed, which this exceeding Riches of Grace will
not warm, melt, and inflame.

Use. 2. Look carefully to it, that you do not fail of this grace of God, that
you do not neglect this great Salvation. Do not slight Christ, do not stand at
a distance from him; for there is not Salvation in any other. There is no name
under Heaven which is a strong Tower, in which you may be safe, but only his:
No Wings under which you can find healing and security, but only the Wings of
this Eternal Son of Righteousness; therefore be willing to accept of his help,
and that upon his own terms, which are most just and reasonable. If ever he
save you, he will not save you in your sins, but from your sins. He will be
sin's Death, if he be your Life. He will sanctify you, as well as well as save
you. He will Rule you, and Govern you, as well as save you. He will bring you
to his Foot, if ever he bring you to his Throne. God the Father has exalted
him to be a Prince, as well as a Savior, and he will be both, or neither.

Use. 3. Be sure to fly to this Jesus in all your dangers, and distresses.
When your Enemies without you are furious, and fears within you are high, so
that your hearts are almost overwhelmed. then run to this Rock that is higher
than you. When you find Corruptions are stirring within you, and you know not
how to master them; and when you find Temptations are violent upon you, and you
are not in your own strength able to resist them, then go to Christ, and beg ye
of him, that he would be your Salvation. Thus Paul did, when he had a Thorn in
the Flesh, and a Messenger from Satan buffetting him, then he besought the Lord
thrice, and had this assurance, that Christ's grace was sufficient for him, and
Christ's power should be made known in his weakness. And that gracious answer
which was given to Paul, may be an encouragement to you, and all the people of
God, to take the same course in the time of their need, and as this is a most
proper course, so it is most prevailing, for the Lord is good to them that wait
upon him, and to the Souls that seek him. And if you will consult your own
experiences, they will tell you, that you get most of your comforts, and most
of your victories upon your knees. And our Lord Jesus himself, by his own
example directs you to this means; For when Peter was to be Tempted, then
Christ prayed.

But there remains one thing more, very observable in the words, upon which I
shall more largely insist than I have done upon all the foregoing points. The
sight which this good man, old Simeon had of Gods Salvation was the reason, why
he was so willing and ready, and desirous to depart, and take his last farewell
of this World. From hence I offer to your consideration this truth.

Doct. 9. Those that have had a sight of Gods Salvation, may very well be
desirous of Dissolution, and think long till that happy day comes, which will
convey them into the other World. Some men wish for Death merely in a fret, or
discontented fit* They meet with disappointments and crosses, and troubles,
their estates fail them, their trading grows dead, their friends unkind. A Ship
at Sea is cast away or taken by Pirates, they are vexed at this and the other,
and hereupon they are weary of Life, and now, whether they be fit or no, they
would fain dye, thus it was with passionate Jonah, when that a Worm had smote
his Gourd, that it withered, and the Sun darted his scorching beams upon his
head, that he fainted, he wished in himself to dye, and said in his have, that
it was better for him to dye than to live. Poor man, he had been put out of
sorts, and did then quite forget himself.

But this is very ordinary among people, as if every trouble of life should
make life it self a burden. And as if, though our comforts be consumed, it were
not still of the Lords mercies that we our selves are not consumed; And
certainly, as ordinary as it is, it is exceeding sinful; It speaks a woeful
impotency and weakness of Spirit, yea, and there is in it a Spirit of rebellion
against God, when men would live no longer than God uses them as they
themselves please, and orders all things concerning them according to their own
mind and humor. If we did but seriously consider the Sovereignty of God, and
that as we are his creatures, we must be at his dispose, we should see reason
enough to submit to him, and be silent under all his providence. How great and
how heavy soever our Cross is, we should carry it patiently, and be content to
bear it, so long as our God will have us.

But now a sight of Christ, and of Gods Salvation by Christ, is a just and
justifiable ground of such a desire, so that still it be with submission to the
will and good pleasure of that God in whose hand our lives are. In the
handling of this point I shall do these three things.

1. I shall show how or in what vvays a Soul may see God's Salvation.

2. That one who has had the sight of Gods Salvation, may very well be
vvilling and desireous to dye.

3. And then improve it by way of use and application.

First, What is it to see God's Salvation, or in what vvays does a man or
woman see this blessed sight. Unto that I shall return this fourfold answer.

1. There is an ocular vision, or a sight of God's Salvation with the eyes of
the body. This sight those Saints had, who savv Christ, when he was here
upon Earth, and Tabernacled among men, and who beheld his glory as the glory
of the only begotten of the Father; This sight Simeon had, when his Parents
brought him into the Temple, then Simeon took him up in his arms, and said,
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation; And upon that sight he was raised, and his
heart so ravished, that he was vvilling immediately to set sail for the other
World; His Soul was ready to take its flight, he thought he had lived long
enough, and had seen enough of these inferior objects, he cared not for
beholding the vanities of the World any more. Jesus in his svvathering bands
did outshine Princes in their Robes and Thrones. And having once got a sight of
him, he thought there was nothing else upon the face of the Earth worth seeing.
Having seen Christ upon Earth, he had a mind to go see God in Heaven.

Now this sight we cannot have, and we need not have it now. In this respect
the Lord Jesus is gone out of our sight The Heavens do contain him, and so they
must, until the time come, wherein there shall be the restitution of all
things. And there is not any necessity of our seeing him in this manner, we are
no losers by his absence. It was expedient for us that he went away, for it was
upon his going, that the Comforter came, who is to abide with us for ever. All
the work which Christ had to do upon Earth, was finished before he went away:
what remains further to be done, he can do it in Heaven, as he sits upon his
his Throne, at the right hand of his Father. And his bodily presence would
contribute nothing at all to our advantage and comfort. We have a great deal
more cause to please our selves with the thoughts of his being in Heaven, by
which we see that justice is satisfied, yea, that he entered there as our
Forerunner, to make way for us, and to take a place up for us, and that he
does there ever live to make intercession for us And upon these accounts,
though now we see him not, yet believing, we may very well rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory. For so in those dreadful days of Persecution,
the Primitive Christians did as you may read in the 1 Pet. 1. 8.

II. Therefore there is a mental, or intellectual Vision. A seeing of Gods
Salvation with a spiritual Eye, the Eye of the Soul, the Eye of Faith, which
can see things remote, yea, at the greatest distance both of time and place. It
is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. Heb.
11. 1. Faith can wade through the greatest difficulties, and look through the
thickest Clouds, and grossest darkness, it can see within the Vail, and behold
those invisible glories which are there.

That Speech of our Savior to his Disciples, is applicable to our present
purpose, and richly worth your Consideration. John 14. 19. Yet a little while,
and the world sees me no more, but ye see me, because I live, ye shall live
also. The profane, wicked, and unbelieving world should see him no more; they
indeed did then see him, and were offended at him, they slighted and rejected
him, because of his outward meanness, yea, they hated him with a perfect
hatred, they conspired his Death, and were never quiet, till they had seen him
cruified, and breath his last. Well says Christ, ere it be long, these
wretches shall see me no more. Since I am such a burden to them, I will ease
them of that burden. Since I am their torment and vexation, since I am an eye
sore to them, I will be gone, and they shall see me no more, they shall be
troubled no more with the sight of me, and they shall be honored no more with
the sight of me. But says Christ to his Disciples, you see me; that is, you
shall see me. The Present Tense is put for the Future, to show the certainty of
the thing. As you see me now, so you shall see me hereafter. And that not only
with your glorified Eye, with which you shall behold me, when we meet together
in my Fathers Palace, where you shall be like me, because you shall see me as I
am, but also you shall see me with a Spiritual Eye, even that of your Faith,
after my ascension into my Kingdom, you shall so see me.

And it is observable, that Christ did call upon poor lost Sinners to take this
sight of him long before his incarnation, and appearance in the Flesh. Thus in
Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth, for I am
God, and there is none else. Now when he thus commanded, and invited all the
ends of the Earth to look to him, you must understand it thus, that they were
to look to him with this Eye of Faith, and that before he came to take upon him
our Nature; and so again that excellent place, which respects us Gentiles. Isa.
65. 1. I am sought of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that
sought me not. I said, behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called
by my name. In the same way still they were to behold him, namely by an Eye of
Faith.

And it was with this sight, that Abraham saw him Hundreds of year before he
was born. Our Savior you know speaks thus to the obstinate and quarrelsome
Jews, John 8. 56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, he saw it, and
was glad. He saw Christ's day, or Christ in his day, by an Eye of Faith. Now, my
Brethren in the same manner that Abraham, and others under the Old Testament
saw Christ before he came in the Flesh, true Believers now in New Testament
times may and do see him, though he be ascended into Heaven, and has carried
his Flesh with him thither. It is by Faith we see Christ, by Faith we apply him
to our own Souls, and by Faith, that we eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, and
fetch from him Life and Strength, Grace, Peace, and Comfort.

There are two things which Faith is furnished with, and both of singular use.

First, Faith has a long hand, that can reach a great way. One of the Mighty
Monarchs of the World was called Longimanus, or Long Hand. Above all Creatures,
Faith does best deserve that name, there is nothing out of its reach; it can
take, and lay hold upon prophecies and promises, though they shall not be yet a
great while accomplished. Heb. 11. 13. These all dyed in the Faith, not having
received the promises, but having seen them afar off, they were persuaded of
them, and embraced them: as far off as they were, these Saints by Faith got
them into their arms, and hugged them Babylon is yet standing, and triumphing,
but the Believers Faith looks into the Prophecy, and says, Babylon the great
is fallen, it is fallen. This longhanded Grace can reach Heaven, it can lay
hold upon the hope that is set before it; it lays hold upon Eternal Life;
nothing is too hard for Faith, to him that believes all thing are possible,
and nothing is too high for Faith.

Secondly, Faith has a quick, strong, and piercing Eye, it can see up to
Heaven and it can see into Heaven; you find in Acts 7. that Stephen was stoned,
yet when those stones were showred down upon him, and at the last beat the
breath out of his body; yet they could not strike out the Eye of his Faith: but
that was quick still, and saw as well as ever; as you read verse 55. Stephen
being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the
Glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. It was doubtless to
him a most sweet and comfortable sight, when he saw Devils incarnate upon
Earth, working his ruin; then to see God incarnate in Heaven, beholding his
Faith and Patience, appearing on his behalf, and standing ready to receive his
Soul.

Faith has indeed an Eye, like the Eye of an Eagle. They say, an Eagle can
behold the Sun in its greatest splendour and brightness, it can glare upon the
Sun, and by that she tries her young ones whither they be genuine, or no; Now
Faith can look Christ in the face, it can behold the Sun of Righteousness in
the highest Heavens, who is ten thousand thousand times brighter than the Sun
in the Firmament. The Evangelist tells us John 1. We beheld his Glory as the
Glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. The true Believer may and does by
Faith see Christ in Heaven more clearly and steadfastly than he can see the Sun
in these lower Heavens: For this Sun does dazzle, and weaken, and blind the Eye
that dwells too long upon it; for it is too eminent an object for the Organ.
But now the Sun of Righteousness does clear, and fortify, and strengthen the
Eye of Faith, so that the more he looks, the better he sees, the more able he
is to converse with the object, because he is thereby more assimilated, and
lusted to it. 2 Cor. 3. 14. We all, with open Face, beholding as in a glass,
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

3. There is a sight of Gods Salvation by the virtue, or help of inward
experience. The gracious Soul sees the Harvest in the seed, the Topstone in the
Foundation that is laid, the greatness of the design in the greatness of the
preparation. In short, he sees that which God intends for him by that which God
has been already pleased to work in him. He does both see and feel Salvation
begun in the Soul.

For, my Brethren, we are to know this, and seriously consider it, that
Salvation is not a thing wholly future, it is not only after Death, and in the
other world, but it is a thing present. Heaven is to be had here, as well as
hereafter, and he that is not saved here, shall never be saved. He that does
live an utter stranger to Heaven in this world, shall never enter into Heaven.
The perfecting and completion of the work is reserved for the next life, but
the inchoation and beginning of it is here, even here the Saints Conversation
is in Heaven, there be their thoughts and affections; they walk with God, and
have fellowship with Christ.

As soon as ever a man is sanctified, he is saved. When Grace is first planted
in the heart, Salvation is begun. When Christ went home with Zacheus, he told
him, Salvation is come to thine house to day. When Christ comes to any heart,
Salvation comes along with him. Grace is glory in the Infancy and Bud: and as
Grace does thrive and grow, and improve in the heart, so the work of Salvation
is carried on; therefore gracious renewings are in Scripture called glorious
changes. We beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord are changed into
the same Image, from glory, to glory; i. e. from Grace, to Grace, from lower,
to higher degrees.

The Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 5 When we were dead in sins, we were quickened
together with Christ, by grace ye are saved. If quickened, and made partakers
of Spiritual Life, the life of grace and holiness, then saved. There is Heaven
and Salvation in the smallest quickenings, as there is the total sum or bargain
in the earnest, and the crop or harvest in the first fruits.

Observe also that place in the 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has saved us, and called us
with an holy calling. If you be effectually called then you are actually saved,
not only in spe, but in re, not only saved in hope but in deed. That person who
is turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, is passed
from Death to Life, he is out of reach of eternal dangers; The same calling is
to virtue and glory, and fo far as that call does carry a man on in virtue, so
high, full so high does it advance and raise him up in glory.

So that when once you do experimentally find this change wrought in you, sin
Crucified and Mortified in you, and Holiness Communicated to you. If you find
that you are taken off from the old stock, and ingrafted into the Lord Jesus
Christ, that you are in any measure (though never so small) made partakers of
the Spirit, Life and Grace of Christ, then you may sit down in peace, and
heartily rejoice, for your eyes have seen God's Salvation. A renewing change is
a saving change, and my brethren consider how much this should commend Grace to
us: Oh how should they desire it, and beg it, and use means for it, who have it
not, and you that have it, how thankful should you be, and how should you
admire and bless God for it, since there is Salvation in it, there is a
blessing in a cluster, fullness in Spiritual hungerings, Heaven and Glory in
brokenness of heart.

Fourthly and Lastly. There are the sights of Heaven in a way of assurance, and
this is the sight of, or the looking to the perfecting and completion of this
most great and blessed work of Salvation. By assurance the believing Soul sees
the matter brought to an issue, and the top stone laid in the building, which
reaches as high as Heaven. The poor Christian in the midst of enemies and
dangers, and from his low condition, from his Dunghill or Cottage, can look
upon all the glory and happiness above, and as great as it is, lay hold upon
it, and claim it, all this is mine; This God is my God for ever and ever;
Heaven will be my Everlasting home, and the Kingdom there my portion, even as
the Proto-Martyr Stephen, in a shower of stones which fell about his ears,
could see Heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and could
comfort himself with such thoughts; Thus Jesus stands yonder as my Friend, my
Advocate, and shortly I shall be there with him.

To the producing of this Assurance in the heart of a Christian, especially in
an high degree, in its fullness, there is required not only the work, but also
the witness of the Spirit. The work of the Spirit in Sanctification, drawing
the divine image upon the Soul, breathing into it Spiritual Life, and
implanting in it a gracious and holly nature, and then irradiating and shining
upon those graces, that the Soul may see them, and see them to be what they
are, the true grace of God, he does bear witness to his own work, so that the
Soul can say, the Finger of God was here; This is not Flesh and Blood, this is
more than nature, this is grace indeed. This you read of in Romans 8. 16. The
Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit* that we are the children of
God. There is the Testimony of our Spirits, our Consciences, and the Holy Ghost
does super-add his; And in the mouth of these two witnesses the thing is
Established, and the Believer is satisfied, and cries Abba Father.

Take notice of that Prayer which Paul put up. Romans 15. 13. That they might
abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. So that good hope through
grace, and the abounding of that hope, the fullness of Assurance is no other
than a divine work, brought about by the powerful operation of the Spirit of
God; The Resurrection of Christ from the Dead is the ground and reason of our
hope* And the Holy Spirit of Christ is the Author of our hope. Now then lay
these things together, that person who sees Christ by Faith, who does
experience an inward change, and who has the assured hope of Heaven and Glory,
may very well say, that his eyes have seen God's Salvation.

And the man that has been blessed with such a sight, may very well be free
and willing to depart out of this World, to bid farewell to present comforts
and enjoyments, and welcome Death in its nearest approaches. And this is the
second thing unto which I am now to speak, and he that considers what has been
spoken concerning this sight, will easily see there is enough in it alone to
produce such an effect. But besides that there are four other sights which will
contribute exceedingly toward such a willingness in such a person.

1. This man sees enough in the World to render that bitter to him; There is
Wormwood enough laid upon the breast of the Creatures, and he tastes it. Here I
shall not take notice of those outward troubles and afflictions, in which he
finds great exercises for his Faith and Patience, though these are the
principal and only things, about which the carnal unregenerate heart is
concerned. If there be no cloud upon his Tabernacle, no thorn in his side, nor
gall in his cup, he sings a lullaby to his Soul, and concludes all well.

But sin, sin is that which sowrs and imbitters all to a Godly man, both other
men's sins, and his own sins, without doors and within.

First, Other men's sins, that wickedness which the World lies in; Oh, it goes
to his very heart to see the profaneness and abominations of those among whom
he is constrained to converse, and how that blessed and most holy God, whom he
so dearly loves, is neglected, abused, dishonored and affronted by them. Upon
this account it was that good Jeremiah's Soul wept in secret, and Rivers of
Tears ran down David's eyes, and just Lot was vexed from day to day with the
filthy Conversation of the wicked. Such men cannot take their rest here,
because the place is so shamefully polluted, and the villainies of others are
such a stink in his Nostrils.

Secondly, That which does yet much more pain him is his own sin, a foul World
without, and a wretched heart within, the plague of that which is not perfectly
cured, the sin that dwells in him, the pravity and corruption of his nature,
the old man, that he cannot possibly shake off, that troublesome old man,
together with many and great Transgressions of his Life. Hence such complaints
and grounds as these, Oh, what a wretch am I, should be so unmindfull of God,
so unthankful to God, so unfruitful before him? That I should walk so
unworthy of him, that has laid such Obligations upon me. Oh! that I should
offend him so much, and glorify him no more, and serve him no better. Oh! this
goes near indeed, this is a sword in his bones, a burden to heavy for him to
bear, this extorted from holy Paul that bitter cry; O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of Death! This is my plague, but whence or
by whom comes my deliverance? And when he considers that deliverance is
wrought by Christ, he blesses God for him, and since a perfect deliverance is
to be brought to him by death, he thanks God for it, and this is one thing that
makes this grim Messenger so lovely and acceptable to him, because he knows by
that all the shackles of corruption shall be knocked off, and he shall be
troubled with sin no more. When he shall once lay down the body of flesh, he
shall also lay down the body of sin and death.

2. The Godly man sees enough to render all the comforts of this present life
cheap to him; So that he does not love them too much, nor value them at too
high a rate: They are not so cheap as that he does slight and despise them, or
is not thankful to God for them; He admires the goodness of God in all his
mercies, even the very least, the coursest garments he wears, and the brownest
bread he eats, and the meanest lodging, the hardest bed he has. I am less said
good Jacob, then the least of all thy mercies.

But they are so cheap, as that he is not unwilling to part with them, or to go
from them; Whenever God pleases he can part with them: The primitive
Christians took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and he can go from them.
Paul desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, he could without any
regret or reluctance leave the World behind him, so long as he did see his God
and Savior before him. Those comforts which God is pleased to afford unto his
people while they are here, are of two kinds; Spiritual and Temporal.

1. God is pleased to afford unto his People outward Themporal comsorts; These
he has in the creature from the hand of common providence, which feeds and
clothes him, and provides for him, and sometimes wrings out to him waters of a
full cup; But be his portion here never so fat, his outward enjoyments never so
large, yet they are but low enjoyments, they are but for a vile body, we do
consume and wast, and will shortly moulder away, and crumble into dust; Be they
never so delicious and pleasant, yet still they are perishing bread, it
perishes in the using. And besides there is a snare in these things, so that
we must use them with caution and fear; there is a snare in Relations, and in
possessions, a snare in Riches and Pleasures, a snare in Worldly Honors and
Dignities. Oh, how often do these things divert the mind from God, and distract
the thoughts, and deaden the heart, and embase the affections and clog the
heels, and hinder holy motions, these are weights that press down, so that the
Christian moves Heavily in the way of God, and cannot do those things that the
would, nor any thing as he would; and it does speak a great deal of wisdom, and
calls for no less care, so to enjoy the world, and take the comfort of it, as
to avoid the snare in it, and to keep our selves unspotted by it.

Secondly, God is pleased to give unto his people here inward and spiritual
comforts, from the hand of his Spirit, in the way of the Gospel, and
Gospel Ordinances and Duties. He gives them some clusters from Canaan, some
Pisgah-sights of the Land of promise, some praelibamens, and foretasts of those
Pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore; there are the kisses of his
Lips, the manifestations of his Love, the witnessings of his Spirit, the
unspeakable joys of Faith: and these are sweet indeed, and inestimably precious
to the gracious Soul. One day in thy Courts, said David, are better than a
Thousand elsewhere. What a day of gladness does a smile of God make, and what
melody is there in the sofest whisper of Divine Love. No such day in the week,
as that of a Sabbath; and no such meeting in the World, as that with God at an
Ordnance, it affords sweetness beyond expression.

But alas! Here is something to allay that sweetness; the good man does too too
often find himself unfitted for these things, his Soul is out of tune, he
cannot hear, nor can he pray, nor meditate as he would, nor keep up so warm and
intimate a communion with God as he would: Wandering, and dullness, and deadness
do adhere to his duties; and he blushes and mourns to see and consider the
iniquities of his holy things.

And then again, he does too frequently miss of that good and comfort which he
expects, and waits for, he goes out full of hopes, and returns home blank; He
looks for much, but gets little; he cannot see his Fathers face, that is
covered with a Cloud, nor can he hear his Saviors voice, for he has withdrawn
himself, and is gone; he cannot find those kindly meltings and warmings, and
quickenings, and enlargings that he desires; but he goes with a pitifully
cold, hard, straightened, dead heart; so that he begins to question Gods Love, and
his own Faith.

If he does at any time meet with his gracious God, and is sensible of his
doing so. If he can say, God was with me of a truth; I have this day sat under
the shadow of my dearest Savior with great delight, and his Fruit has been
sweet to my taste. Alas it is but short, ( Rara hora brevis mora) it comes but
seldom, and it lasts not long. It is but a little visit; and no sooner, it may
be, has the gracious Soul done blessing himself in his enjoyments* but he sees
cause to bemoan himself for his loss.

But however it be with some particular Saints, upon whom the Sun of
Righteousness stands and shines, with constant beams, yet this is most certain
as to all the Saints, that the most sweet, and full enjoyment which they have
of God (while they are here) the most pleasant and comfortable communion they
have with him, is but mediate. Christ looks upon him through the Lattice, and
they see him but as in a glass, darkly. All their refreshings are conveyed by
Pipes, they do not lie at the Fountainhead. When they are most present with
the Lord, they are even then absent from the Lord; and upon this account it is
no matter of wonder to see or hear that they are willing to exchange a dark
vision for a clear one, seeing in a glass, for a seeing face to face; to
exchange interrupt pleasures for permanent and abiding ones, and mediate
fellowship for that which is immediate. Love is an uniting affection, and is
set for the strictest and closest embraces of it is indeared object. And so a
Soul that truly loves God, cannot but desire to be as near to him as it can be,
and ready to exchange the comforts of the way, for the joys and pleasures of
the Country.

3. He that has seen God's Salvation, has seen enough to deliver him from the
dread and terror of Death; for this is evident and obvious, that if Christ be
any man's Salvation, it is utterly impossible that Death should be his
destruction. A man that is in Christ is not out of the reach of Death, but he
is secured from the hurt of Death.

Take an unregenerate man, one that is a stranger unto Christ, and he cannot
see any thing in Death that should commend it to him: It has a dreadful
aspect, and a worse issue; he has cause to fear both Death and its Followers:
He is stripped at Death, and lasht in Hell. Death to him is a dark passage to
outer and endless darkness.

But now as grim as Death looks, a Believer can easily discover a great deal,
that will make it lovely; even Death it self has its beauty; as thus.

It is a conquered Enemy. Christ went into the Grave it is strongest hold, and
there he baffled it, broke its Chains, and carried away its Gates; he disarmed,
and unstung it; so that Holy Paul did, and every true Believer may play with
it, and triumph over it; 1 Cor. 15. O Death where is thy sting, O grave, where
is thy victory, the sting of Death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law,
but thanks be to God, who has given us the victory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Though Death kill the Believer, yet it does not damage him; and though
it separate between his Soul and Body, yet not between him and God: who shall
separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ our Lord? Shall Death, says
Paul, no, says he, in that, as well as in other things, we are more than
Conquerors through him that loved us.

Nay through Christ, death is not only conquered, but also reconciled to all
the Saints; it is now become your Friend, and Servant, and does you a real
kindness, So that, as Solomon tells us, The day of your Death is better than
the day of your Birth. You came into the World crying, but you may go out of it
Triumphing, and with the voice of melody. The Primitive Christians did not
array themselves in Sables at the Funerals of their Friends; but in White,
looking upon their Dying Day, as the Day of their Nuptials. It was most
terrible to Nature to be torn in pieces by Wild Beasts, to die at a Stake, to
breathe their last in Flames, yet, in such a Death did they glory, counting
Martyrdom their Crown.

What though Death carry you from all your present comforts, it does at the
same time set you out of the reach of all troubles; and as it carries you from
comforts, so it carries you to comforts; yea, to such comforts as are far
better than those you part with. It pulls down this decaying and tottering
Tabernacle, that a more beautiful and stately Fabric may be erected. It takes
you out of your sorry Cottages, and carries you to those Blissful Mansions
which are in your Fathers House. The Grave it self, though it be darksome and
lonely, yet it is a good resting place ever since our Lord lay there: He has
perfumed it, and made it both soft and safe. That Bed of Dust is now better
than a Bed of Down, or Roses. It is true, in the Grave, though Christ's Body
did not, yet ours must see Corruption, they must putrify, and at last be
Converted into Dust; but that Dust is more precious than Gold Oar, and shall
accordingly be most curiously preserved, not an Atome of it shall be lost. And
that Body which is sown in weakness, shall be raised in power, and clothed
with immortality, and made like unto Christ's own most glorious Body.

4. And Lastly, That man who has seen Gods Salvation, has also seen all
things amiable, and desirable in the other World, whither Death will carry
him. He has looked within the Vail, and had a prospect of that better
Country. There has he by the Eye of Faith seen incomparable beauties to
enamour him, an excellent Glory to adorn him, unspeakable comforts to delight
him, the best of Friends to invite him, and an innumerable Company of Angels
and Saints to bid him welcome.

There shall be nothing at all that may offend, nothing in him to offend God;
nothing without to offend him; nothing of sin, and nothing of sorrow; no
temptation, no affliction, no danger, no loss, no frown, no fear, no sickness,
no pain, no want; no angry withdrawings, not one pricking Briar, nor one vexing
Thorn.

But there shall be all things that you can desire, and are suitable to that
glorious State unto which you shall be advanced, all things that will
contribute to your happiness and comfort. The Scripture tells us, Psalm. 16.
That in God's presence there will be a fullness of joy, and by consequence
there can be no scantiness of enjoyments, but pleasures for evermore, yea, a
River of Pleasures, nay, a bottomless, and boundless Ocean of them; the
Infinite and Eternal God must himself be exhausted, before the delights and
pleasures of Heaven can be spent. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither
has entered into the heart of man what God in the Mansions above has prepared,
and reserved for them that love him. There is a feast of Love, a Crown of Life,
and Robes of Glory. There is Abraham's Bosom, and the joy of their Lord, which
is too big to enter into them, therefore they shall enter into it, and be
filled, encompassed and swallowed up by it, as a small Vessel in the Sea.

When once the gracious Soul has set foot upon that celestial Country, and
made its entrance into that stately and magnificent Palace of the great King;
he shall be not only filled with satisfaction, but likewise rapt up into
astonishment, and highest admiration; What am I that God has brought me
hitherto? And what were all my services, that they should be thus rewarded. Oh,
how light and inconsiderable does he now think all his former sorrows and
sufferings, if compared with that far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
Glory.

What low thoughts will he then have of the Skin-deep beauties, and transitory
delights here below, on which the besotted Children of men do so foolishly
dote. And with what an holy scorn, and indignation will he call to mind that
pains men did take for, and that eagerness with which they did pursue the
trifling vanities of the Earth, and how they scrambled for them, and quarreled
about them.

And oh how does he wish and long for that blessed day, in which the Church
militant shall be made triumphant, and all his gracious Friends, all his
Brethren and Sisters in Christ, all the chosen and beloved of God shall be
taken up to the same place, that they may see what he sees, and be possessed of
that which he enjoys. That so they may altogether contemplate the glory of God,
and be satisfied with the fruition of him, and endear, admire, and extol
Father, Son, and Spirit unto all Eternity. Lay all these things together, and
you will easily see, that there is great, yea, abundant reason, why those that
have seen Gods Salvation, should be willing, yea, desirous to depart in peace,
and to take their flight into the other world. And now I come to shut up this
discourse with some application.

And in the first place this serves to show us, what it is, that above all
things should engage, and draw out the vigor and strength of our desires;
namely, the sight of Gods Salvation. My Brethren, I beseech you frequently to
consider, that we must all die, there is no shift for it. Death will not be
bribed, and it cannot be avoided. It is appointed for all men once to die, by a
Statute Law enacted in Heaven, which admits of no repeal. The aged Father of
this Family is now gone, and the youngest Child here must follow him sooner, or
later.

And is it not good for us to prepare for Death? Will it not be our Wisdom?
Will your Wisdom more eminently discover it self in any thing, than in this?
That so this King of Terrors may not be terrible unto you; that you may not
fear him, but rejoice in him* you will die uncomfortably, (this is past all
dispute) you will die unhappily, if you die unpreparedly. Oh the horror that
will sieze an awakened sinner upon a DeathBed! When he shall think thus, my
glass is run, my time is spent, I must die, but alas, I am not fit to die. I
must now appear before my Judges, but I have not made my peace.

Now then go on and consider, what is to be done by you, in order to this
preparation: A Life of vanity and folly will not fit you; the more you sin, the
more you sharpen the sting of Death. An eager minding the World, and pursuing
the delights of that will not fit you; the more you have indulged your self in
a course of profaneness, the more afraid you will be to die; and the more you
have set your hearts upon the Creatures, the more loath, and unwilling you will
be to die, when you come to die, the love of the World will make you unwilling
to leave it; and Conscience of sin and guilt will make you tremble at the
thoughts of appearing before God.

Turn away your Eyes then from beholding vanity, and pray that they may be
opened to see Gods Salvation. Oh, study Christ, get an intimate acquaintance
with him: Beg of God to reveal him to you, and in you, that you may know him,
whom to know, is life eternal, and never rest quiet nor contented, till you
have seen him by an Eye of Faith, and laid hold upon him by an hand of Faith,
as one that loved you, and gave himself for you; and have a care that there be
not a (deceptio visus) mistake in the case, but look to this, that your sight
be saving, and the Faith you pretend to, the Faith of Gods Elect, that you may
upon good grounds (such as the Scriptures will warrant) appropriate him to your
selves, as your Lords and Gods, and Savior.

Rest not in any thing till you find and feel Christ living, and commanding in
you; his Image drawn upon you, his Law written in your hearts, and his Spirit
poured out; Take not up with a verbal profession, formal duties, and
unblameable Conversation, common convictions, and some stirrings and flushes of
affection: All this may be, and all come to nothing. Hypocrites may go so far,
and yet they do not go far enough, but after all fall short of Heaven. It is
not the form of Godliness that will avail you, but the power, not a name to
live, but the life it self. God is not taken with empty shows and appearances,
he is for reality and truth in the inward parts; You can take but little
comfort from Christ dying without you, unless you find Christ formed and living
in you: notwithstanding the Death of Christ you may be for ever lost and
damned, unless you be made partakers of his Life. Remember and consider that
expression, Col. 1. 27. Christ in you, the hope of glory. When Christ dwells in
you by Faith, when he is in you by his Spirit, and by his Graces, then, and not
till then is there a firm Foundation laid, on which you may build the hope of
glory; For hope so grounded is good hope, such as shall never make ashamed.

Use 2. The second use will be of Reprehension. Those are blameworthy, and
deserve reproof, whose eyes have seen Gods Salvation. Men and Women that do
know the Jesus in whom they have believed, and are made partakers of
sanctifying, saving grace, and have had the manifestations of God's favor, and
Covenant love made to them, and are verily persuaded that it shall be well with
them when they dye, and that they shall go to Heaven when they go from Earth,
and yet they are loath to dye, and thoughts of their departure from hence are
afflictive to them.

When the message of Death was brought by the Prophet to good Hezckiah, he
turned his face to the wall, and prayed, and wept sore. And good David himself,
though he knew that God had made with him an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in
all things and sure, yet he cried, O spare me that I may recover strength
before I go hence, and he seen no more; He would fain live a little longer, and
see a few more days past over his head.

I do not wonder that wicked men are loath to dye, for they get nothing by it,
nay, they lose all by it, they are utterly ruined and undone by it. Death takes
them from all their good things, jovial companions, and pleasant enjoyments,
and carries them into that Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. Therefore
who would think it strange that they should put from them the day of their
Death, which will be to them such a day of evil. They have reason to desire
Life, yea to say, I would live always, because it is better for them to live
than to dye, if you kill them you spoil all. Such men may well say to Death, as
Ahab did to Elijah, have thou found me, O mine enemy?

But here is the wonder, that a Godly man should firmly assent unto this truth,
that there is another life after this, and that that life is unspeakably better
than this; There is no compare between the comforts of this and the glory of
that, and they are also confident, that when once they are absent from the
body, they shall be present with the Lord, and when once this frail, uncertain,
troublesome life shall come to an end, they shall live that better life, when
once they are got off this stormy tempestuous Sea, they shall bath themselves
Eternally in those Rivers of Pleasures, which are at God's Right Hand; And yet
Death is a word that sounds harsh in their ears, they care not to hear of it:
when they think of it they are troubled. A Deaths head upon the board spoils
the Mirth, and marrs the Feast, it does not only make them serious, that it
should do, but it also makes them sad and dumpish, and still they have desires
that they may, and some hope that they shall have a longer continuance in the
World, and draw out some more years, yet before they come to the end of their
line. I must and do most readily grant that long life is a blessing, a great
blessing, as such, it is the matter of the promise, but withal know, Eternal
Life is a greater blessing, and he is no loser that lives but a little while
here, and then goes to live for ever with God. For gracious persons that have
seen God's Salvation, and know they have seen it, I say for such to be
unwilling to dye carries two evils in the Bowels of it.

1. It is too great a magnifying of this present evil World, an over-valuing of
it, and a setting too high a rate, indeed an unreasonable price upon the
enjoyments and delights of it; Your esteem of them are far above their
intrinsic worth, what will carnal men say, who stand by, and see how you are
wedded to the World, and unwilling to be divorced from it? What have they
reason to say, but that you find a great deal in it? You taste the fatness of
the Olive, and the sweetness of the Vine, and so think it is good to be here.
Certainly this speaks your setting your hearts too much upon the Creatures. And
hereby you do justify and encourage them in their Worldliness, they are
strengthened in their love of the World, and devotedness to it; And also you do
hereby cross and thwart God, and run counter to him in one of his grand
designs, which is to wean his People from the World, and to take their hearts
off from creature delights, which do ingross so much of their time, and cares,
and do so much distract their thoughts, and embase their Spirits, and hinder
them both as to their service of God, and Communion with him; And indeed, how
indecorous and unbecoming is it for Heaven born Souls to embrace Dunghills, and
for those that profess themselves risen with Christ to set their affections
upon those things that are here upon Earth; And for you who are the children of
God, and heirs of Heaven, to mind carnal things. It is far more unseemly than
to see the heir of a Crown stopping Ovens, or raking Kennels.

After these things, says our Savior, do the Gentiles seek, that is, those
who know no better, who are without God in the World, who are drowned in the
flesh, and understand not the worth of an immortal Soul, and upon these things
let them dote still, alas, their portion is in this life, being Aliens from
the Covenants of promise: and having no hope. But as for you who have been
taught of God, who have heard of a blessed immortality, who have seen those
invisible glories that are within the vail, you should be disingaged from all
inferior delights, and carry toward them with a Spirit of indifference, You
should use the world but do not love it, make it serve your occasions, but
suffer it not to command your affections; While you have it in your hands, and
in your chests, keep it out of your hearts. The world is (as we use to say of
fire) a very good servant, but a very bad master. Things are useful and
beautiful in their places, so is the world, but when it is in the heart, it is
out of its place, and then it is stark naught, and does much hurt.

2. For those who are the people of God, and do know they are so, who have seen
God's Salvation, I say for them to be unwilling to dye is a great reproach and
disparagement to those glories which are above. Christians, you do hereby bring
up an ill report upon the Land of promise, as if the Honey and Milk of Canaan
were not so good and desirable as the Garlic and Onions of Egypt, what is the
interpretation and meaning of such a Spirit but that you fear it will be to
your loss to exchange Earth for Heaven, and to leave delights Temporal for
those that are Eternal.

What shall I say, this averseness from Death, and loathnesses to depart from
hence is a piece of practical blasphemy, as if these sorry cottages were better
to inhabit than those stately Palaces, that these puddle delights, and muddy
streams were more delicious and desirable, than that pure River of water of
life, which is clear as Crystal, and proceeds out of the Throne of God, and of
the Lamb, as if these childish and trifling vanities did outweigh and
out-worth the glories which are above; And these pitiful contemptible
glowworms did outshine and obscure the Eternal Sun of Righteousness; As if
God would take you from hence to your loss, and you should be better in a
strange Land than in your Fathers house; And the preparations that God has
made for Eternity, are not so good as those that he has made for a short time,
and so Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Peter, Paul, and the rest of the Saints
departed, had better have staid here, and now they are with God, do wish
themselves with us again. In a word, it is as if the immediate and full
enjoyment of God would not be sufficient for you, you could not find room
enough nor goodness and delights enough in a God, but you must go begging to
the door of creatures, and patch up to your selves an happiness with these
small and sorry shreds of being, and you have found more to live upon, and to
delight your selves in the drop of a bucket, than you can or do find in the
Ocean of goodness. I beseech you seriously consider of these things, all these
things lie uppermost, any one may see them in such a persons unwillingness and
loathness to dye whenever God would have him. But to proceed.

Use 3. In the third and last place, this may prove a very comfortable
consideration, and staff of support in the hands of those who labor under
sorrow and continual heaviness of heart, because of their departure of their
gracious and holy Relations, they are dead, and you carry as if all your
comforts were dead with them. This is certain that when God gives such blows,
those, that have any thing of tenderness, do feel the smart of them. Breaches
in the Family do make breaches upon the Spirit. When Lazarus was dead, Jesus
wept; Mourning at Funerals is no Soloecism, but a lovely sight, so the sorrow
be kept within those bounds that reason and Religion have set it: And where
there are such breaches, they call for binding up; We should all be as so many
good Samaritans, pouring Oil into the wounds of the Spirit, for the suppleing
and healing of them.

God has been pleased to come into this Family, and break the head of it, and
cut it off; in taking him away, he took away a tender Husband, a loving Father,
a good Master, a dear Friend, one that in these evil days owned God, his Ways,
and People, and kept a Church in his House, and his doors open, that hungry
Souls might feed upon, and be refreshed with the bread of life, which was there
from Sabbath to Sabbath, delivered out unto them. The death of such a person is
a common loss, not only to the Family, but to the Country too, and because
thereof you are in Heaviness, and afflicted in your Spirits.

Neither is this your case alone, but of many others. Death rides in Circuit,
and according to the Commission which it has received, so it makes it
seizures, here in an Husband deprived of the delight of his Eyes, there is a
woman made a Widow, and her Children Fatherless, Many a faithful, fruitful,
useful Christian is cut down, under whose shadow, and in whose sellowship his
Relations and Acquaintance did greatly rejoice.

Unto such I have something to say, that should prevail to the silencing of
them, and that is this, it is the will of God; the great God will have it so.
Thou would have had thy Husband, thy Wife, thy Father, thy Child lived
longer, but God would have him die now; and this should knock all quarrelings,
and murmurrings, and discontents down; for there is all the reason in the world
why God's will should take place, and he should fulfill all his pleasure, and
why our will should submit, and give place to God's.

And then I have something to say, that may quiet, and satisfy you under such
a providence; for it is not enough for us that we be silent under it, unless we
be also reconciled to it, and at peace with it; now in order thereunto, take
these 2 particulars, and consider them.

1. They did see Gods Salvation before they did depart, and so they dyed not
under terror, nor in doubt, nor at any uncertainty, but in peace; before Death
closed the Eyes of their Bodies, God had opened the Eyes of their Faith, and
shown Christ to them, and his love in Christ; and you have reason to be
persuaded good things concerning them, even such as do accompany Salvation,
nay, to be now persuaded of their Salvation it self. This was the reason of my
choosing these words of Simeon for the Subject of my discourse at this time,
because they were the Swanlike Song of our deceased Brother, the very last
words he spoke, save some short, and holy Counsels which he gave to his
beloved, and most hopeful Son, and shall not this satisfy you: But then add,

2. Now that those Holy ones are dead, they see those things which they never
saw; things that are most richly worth their seeing; and which, as the case now
stands with mankind, they could not see without dying. They have those sights
which make the seer blessed, they are taken up to the beatifical Vision. They
do not see an end of all their sins and sorrows, nothing shall defile, nor
afflict them more, all filth, and all tears are wiped away; they see the
accomplishment of all their hopes, the fullfilling of all their prayers, the
reward of all their services, the Crown of all their sufferings.

They see the excellent Majesty and Glory of that God whom they had chosen, and
do now behold his face in righteousness: Neither is that sight terrible to
them, as it was to Moses in the Mount, so that he did exceedingly fear and
quake. No, those Holy Souls do see God, and live, and rejoice; that sight is
their satisfaction, and delight. They see that Blessed Jesus, who loved them,
and gave himself for them, and washed them in his own blood, and made them
Kings and Priests unto God; yea, they shall be like him, for they shall see him
as he is. They do see that Holy Spirit which convinced them, and sanctified
them, who directed them in their difficulties, strengthened them in their
weaknesses, assisted them in their duties, and most sweetly supported, and
comforted them in all their distresses. They see an innumerable company of
Angels and Spirits of Just men made perfect. In short, they see that which Eye
has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive, namely, that Glory, Kingdom, Inheritance, those Robes, Crowns, and
Thrones which God has prepared for them that love him. And the day is coming,
in which they shall again see those Bodies (that at their flight to Heaven they
left behind) in a better State than ever. And you O Saints shall see them too,
and Christ with them, and then your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no man
shall take from you. Only, in the mean time, do you live believingly, walk
humbly, holily, and circumspectly; get your Vessels filled with Oil, your Lamps
burning, and your Loins girt; make haste to the Kingdom of God, and be ye
followers of them, that through Faith and Patience do inherit the Promises.


