A SERMON Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH IN DUBLIN, Before the Lord Lieutenant and
Council, The Fifth day of July, 1674.

BY Mr. ANDREW SALL, Formerly of the Order of Jesus, and Professor of Divinity
in the Colleges of Pamplona, Polencia, and Tudela in Spain, Rector and
Professor of Controversies in the Irish College of the University of
Salamanca, Professor of Moral Theology in the Royal College of the Society in
the same University, now Preacher of the Gospel in the Reformed Church of
Ireland, and Chaplain to his Excellency the most Honorable ARTHVR Earl of
Essex, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Ireland.

Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for thy mercy
and for thy truths sake,

Psalm. 115.1. I will speak of thy testimonies, also before Kings, and will not
be ashamed,

Psalm 119.46. Published by Authority.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to his King's most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild Bookseller in Castle-street, 1674.

Imprimatur.

JA: ARMACANUS

To His Excelleney, THE MOST HONORABLE, ARTHUR Earl of ESSEX, Viscount Malden,
Baron Capel of Hadham, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of His
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Hertford, and
one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Excellency,
THE love of Truth made me forsake what I loved most of worldly things, and
occasioned my dearest friends to become my bitter Enemies* Tyranny did stop my
mouth formerly from speaking Truth, and malice subrogated now does pursue me
even where I expected liberty, being busy, as I am informed, in contriving (if
not my destruction) my discredit, that I might not be able to speak against
errors, too much prevailing in the world, or not to be credited, when I should
do it.

The same of your Excellency's Heroic Endowments, and Christian Zeal of Truth
and Holiness, derived from your illustrious Progenitors, and more immediately
from your most honorable and renowned Father of glorious memory, for
sacrificeing his life to Truth and Loyalty, did encourage me to address my self
to your Excellency's Protection in this more than ordinary necessity thereof.
The most gracious reception your Excellency was pleased to give me, emboldened
me to manifest the justification of my departure from the Romish Communion, and
adhereing to the purity of Catholic Religion, as it is professed by the Church
of England, in a Sermon Preached at the Royal Chapel of Christ-Church, in your
Honorable Presence. And the singular ^^^ignity wherewith your Ex^^^^^cy and
your Ilustrious (...) was pleased to hear, and (...) prove of my discourse upon
(...) Subject, gives me confiden^^ to present to your Excellency, and commend
to your protection the same Discourse being ordered to publish it, That being
Honored in the Front with your Excellency's Illustrious Name, it might the
better withstand the assaults of envy and malice.

The adversaries of our Doctrine are so active in advancing their Faction, that
where they cannot practice Violence, their contrivances do reach to terrify
Sincere minds from professing or speaking what they judgright. I have but too
much ground to think it is so with very many in this Country and abroad, It is
more want of courage, than of knowledge, that keeps many good men under their
yoke, and such as know their ways, may think it a wonder that any who were
among them of note, should dare to oppose them. It will be a singular glory of
your Excellency, if under your shelter we may enjoy the freedom of speaking
Truth. Peace is the Foundation of Happiness and Luster in any Government, and
the fiercest Enemy of Peace is Dissension in Religion. Of such Dissension, the
only remedy by ordinary Providence, is, a free exchange of reasons, according
to the Rule of God's Word, and within the Bounds of Christian Modesty. And this
Freedom being all my ambition, I cannot but assure my self of your Excellencies
gracious Protection and Favor, that may enable me to praise God in this way;
That we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, Lu: 1.74.
might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness, before him, all
the days of our life. Praying continually to God, he may be pleased to bless
your Excellency with all prosperity, and farther your holy intentions for the
spiritual and temporal welfare of this Kingdom. I cease to give your Excellency
farther trouble, but shall ever remain

Your Excellencies most humble and obedient Servant, And Chaplain, ANDREW SALL.

THE PREFACE To my Dear Contrymen, Friends, and Kinsmen of the Roman
Communion in IRELAND
THE great Scandal you seem to have taken at my withdrawing from the Communion
of the Roman Church, and adhering to that of England, has occasioned, I should
the more willingly obey the order I had of exposing to public view, the
account of my proceeding, and motives of my alteration, contained in this
Sermon which I have preached in the Royal Chapel of Christ-Church at Dublin,
desiring, that such as could not, or would not go thither to hear it, may at
their leisure, and without passion, read it. If my proceedings herein were
indeed a scandal, I might justly fear that woe to him that gives it. But men's
averse disposition is apt to term a scandal, what in it self is an example. And
I have ground to hope it is so with you at present in my concern. Certainly it
may be called an example, and a good one, if you hear the voice of God, not to
harden your heart, or shut your ears against it, though you may prudently
examine the calling, and endeavor to be certified whether it be of God. And
when you are assured it is so, to obey your Lord and Maker, not heeding the
cries of the world against you, nor the suggestions of humane fear or shame. So
did the blessed Virgin Mary, who hearing that high and honorable calling of
God, by the mouth of the Angel Gabriel, did neither harden her heart, nor shut
her ears against it; nor yet did she give a sudden assent, but replied with a
pressing reason, according to the rules of humane Discourse, saying, How shall
this be, Lu. 1.34.
seeing I know not a man? but convinced with superior evidences, represented
by the Angel, she obeyed promptly the will of God, not regarding her former
apprehension of fear and shame. Her example I have followed, I heard the voice
of God by several ways, interior and exterior, calling me out of the errors
of my former profession. I neither hardened my heart with resolute obstinacy,
nor gave a hasty assent to change: but by prayer and study of many years, did
endeavor to certify my self of the truth, by all the ways I could imagine fit
to find it out; and being at last fully convinced, did resolutely embrace it,
and openly declare for it, not heeding the cries, nor fearing the menaces of
passion and malice against me. If you will not think fit to follow my example
in this kind of proceeding, I hope you will not disdain to follow that I
proposed of the blessed Virgin Mary. If you hear the voice of God, by what
mouth or means soever it comes, harden not your hearts, examine and try in
God's Name, whether it be really his voice and will, and finding it is so, fear
not to declare for Christ before the World, lest he may refuse to own you
before his Heavenly Father.

To persons thus disposed, and to such only, I desire my words or writing to
be addressed, deeming it labor lost, to speak or write to any that is resolved
obstinately to lie where his Lot was to fall, be it right or wrong. That there
should be any so careless of their greatest concern, is an object of pity, but
of wonder, that their judicious Instructors should teach them to think and do
accordingly; persuading them it is a mortal sin to admit of any doubt in their
belief; that they must neither hear nor read any Arguments against it; or if
they happen to do, it must be with resolution not to yield or consent to them,
be they never so demonstrative or evident: which is really to divest men of
rationality, and make Religion a matter of chance, not of council or free
election, and so undeserving praise or reward. They allow to others whom they
would gain to their party the use of their reason and liberty, to hear and
examine Arguments proposed to them, otherwise why should they go about to
convert them. How then come their own Flock to be excepted from the use of this
privilege, allowed to the rest of humane kind.

They wonder that I, by so many years learning and teaching Philosophy and
Divinity, in several famous Colleges of Spain, should not find out until now,
on which side the truth of Catholic Religion did stand. Which is to wonder,
that I could judge better of a debate after hearing both parties, than when I
was hearing only one side; to wonder that by ten years of more study, I should
learn more. Which will appear yet a more unreasonable wonder, if you consider
what St. Luke relates of Jesus Christ the Son of God, though of infinite
wisdom, Lu. 2, 40.
that as man he seemed to grow more wise by age. And shall we disdain to grow
more wise with more time, and with more light sent from God?

They object to me, that I am the first of my Family that became Protestant:
And so was St. Paul the first of his, that became Christian. If I am now in the
right, as I am fully satisfied that I am, I heartily wish that my Kinsmen,
according to the flesh, would follow my example, in examining the Truth, and
adhering to it,

They tell me I was unkind and hardhearted, in forsaking my Friends and
Kindred, in discomforting and offending many Noble Families, at home and
abroad, from whom I have received singular demonstrations of Love and Honor.
None is more sensible of the hardship of that case than my self. To dye
effectively in defense of Truth, never appeared to me so harsh, as to be
alienated from my Friends, and to see their love turned to hatred, but all
that, though heavy, I thought more tolerable, than God's anger, which I was to
draw upon me, by working against my conscience.

They say I lost my wits; and well may they say it, if for humane respects I
did take this resolution: but if for superior motives of pleasing God, and
securing Eternal Happiness upon sufficient ground, I might expect they should
rather take it for the greatest show of wisdom I could give. The trial will be
to examine the reasons I give for my resolution, in the ensuing Discourse, by
public writing, that indifferent persons may judge which of us speaks more
sense. That I heartily desire to see, provided it be in a modest and serious
way, with plain and solid reasons grounded upon the Word of God, as becomes
Christians and Learned men to speak, and will be fit for clearing the Truth.
Showing wherein my reasons, against their Tenants, examined in this Discourse
are deficient^ or what other reasons they have for them of more strength, and
expect my Answer to them. To such Replies I will listen willingly, and answer
seriously, with resolution to honor and acknowledge Truth wheresoever I see
it. If they think I am in an error, and pretend to win me out of it, this is
the way, and not by promises, menaces, or calumnies; with all I was assaulted.
To them that came with promises, I gave all shows of perfect indignation. To
the menaces I answered with Susanna; Dan. 3.22.
It is better for me to fall into your hands, and not to do it, than to sin in
the sight of the Lord.

The calumnies are so rude, and apparently false, that I need not wish more
harm to their Forgers, than that they should be known. Such is, to say that
after resolving to embrace the Communion of the Church of England. I went about
to my Friends in the County of Tipperary, and collected a great sum of Money to
go over Seas, and then came with it this other way. The untruth of this base
obloquy, I made evident after diligent enquiry, as is well known to the most
Reverend, the Lord Archbishop of Cashell, and to several other Persons of
Quality.

I being so averse to such proceeding, that I passed by the Houses of my chief
Friends and Kinsmen in that County without taking leave from them, fearing they
would offer me any Money for my Voyage (then intended for England, as I have
declared to some) and only entered in very few Houses, where I had some
concerns to dispose of, and where, by good luck, no Money was given or offered
to me.

Of the like condition, is the report spread here in Dublin, that at making my
Declaration in the Church of St. John at Cashell, before the most Reverend, the
Lord Archbishop of that City, and the Right Reverend, the Lord Bishop of
Waterford, and a very great Congregation, I was struck dumb, and could not
speak a word. And that after going in the street, I fell dead suddenly. It were
both tedious and rediculous to mention all the Fables they coin daily, forging
things certainly so far from my thoughts, and contrary to my inclination, as to
put my hand in the fire. I could not but expect this kind of proceeding from
them, knowing how much their Writers of greatest repute, do encourage them to
it, saying, it is lawful for a Priest, or Resigious man, to kill any that would
offer to divulge grave faults of himself, or of his Religion. And which to me
seems no less cruel; That it is not a grievous sin, to raise false
Testimonies against him that would blemish one's honor, to bereave him of
credit. If they allow this kind of defense for the honor of every particular,
what may expect they will suggest to destroy, or defame, one they su spect may
dimin^sh with his opposition, the credit of their whole Religion. I abstain, at
present, from quoting the Authors of this Doctrine, not willing to defame the
Teachers of such infamous Tenants, until farther occasion make it necessary to
show, how opposite they be to the Law of God, and the Doctrine of Christ. This
kind of defense is a great discredit to their cause, Truth needs not such
weapons to be drawn for it. David says, Psa. 16.2.
That God needs not our goods; Deus meus es, quoniam bonorum meorum non eges.
And if he needs not our goods, surely he needs not our evil. Who uses these
means, shows clearly it is not for God he acts; for God refuses all such
ways. Job 13.7.
Will you speak wickedly for God (says holy Job) and talk deceitfully for him?
Certainly none of his true Followers will do so. It is not the way Christ and
his Apostles did show us to propagate their Doctrine.

Several Persons that pretended to desire my safety, were employed to forewarn
me I should not speak in prejudice of the Party I forsook, in terms which might
seem a threatening, if I did not take that advice. If they require that I should
not raise, or blazon the faults of particular persons or Societies, I am my
self totally inclined and fully resolved to observe that rule. But if they
expect that I should not justify my departure from the Romish Communion, by
declaring the exceptions I took against their erroneous ^enents which I could
not with approbation of my conscience embrace: it is a cruel unjust demand, and
as much as to say, I ought not to defend Iruth and my Credit, according to the
Law of God and Nature, but permit them to strike at both without reply, to
which I cannot consent.

And whereas I understand there are malicious glosses made upon my Declaration,
falsifying the words of it, to build cavils upon others, substituted by
themselves. For discovery of that imposture, and manifestation of Truth a true
Copy of the said Declaration as delivered it in the Church of St John at
Cashell, is hereto annexed the following Discourse being a fulle^ explication
of what is there said in general. And that malice may confide less in its
contrivances, thinking they will not be discovered and confuted, I will let it
have here a view of its own weakness, declaring one of its attempts by way of
the foresaid Declaration.

Among other trials made of my constancy in my resolution taken, was a Letter
written to me in the month of June last, wherein was advertised, that in my
Declaration I acknowledged, that some years past, I did intend, and resolve to
forsake the Romish Communion, and adhere to the Church of England. Contrary to
which resolution, were extant Writings of mine in those times, approving and
defending the Roman Church. I desire the indifferent Reader to peruse carefully
the Declaration, and see whether in it he finds mention of a Resolution made
some years ago, of forsaking the Roman Church? and he shall only find, that
some years ago I doubted of the truth of some Articles of that Church, but no
word of a Resolution made of separating from it, as truly I never made it,
until the first day of last May; and no man living is able to say with truth,
that he saw any expression of mine by word or writing, concerning such a
Resolution, until that day. So this Foundation of that gloss, being thus
evidently falsified, all the breed of that great pregnaney comes to be that
writings of mine are extant, wherewith in times past, I defended the Roman
Church. A singular discovery; as if my name were not to be seen, enrolled
several years in the Registry or public Books of the University of Salamanca,
for Professor of Controversies in one of the Colleges, Members of that
Vniverfity; and my Auditors being composed of Spanish, French, and Irish, my
Dictates may not be in many hands, both in this Country, and abroad; as if I
were not one of the most srequent and earnest Disputers in favor of the Romish
Church, since I came to this Land This being generally known, and my self
canfessing it with repentance of my unfortunate error therein; what purchase
do they pretend to make with this acute discovery? of one I may probably assure
them, that the unpassionate will judge them unworthy of credit in matters less
clear, when they pretend to blind my self, and all the Country, making us
believe, that in my Declaration, extant in so many hands as here published, I
did acknowledge, that some years past I did intend and resolve to desert the
Roman, and adhere to the Protestant Church, whereas therein is only said, that
some years ago I doubted of the truth of some Romish Articles, but delayed to
give assent against them. And any good judgment may see, that to doubt of the
truth of some Articles, may be far enough from concluding upon the untruth of
them; and even this later may be yet farther from a resolution upon a total
breach, and separation from a Church.

Herein we see passion blinded for not to be sensible of shame, in telling
palpable untruths: weakness is no less discovered, in pretending to discredit
me, with telling, I did in former years approve and defend the Roman Church.
With this note, St. Paul may be branded, for being zealous one time of the
Synagogue, and opposing the Gospel. They should remember, that I live now in a
Congregation allowed to read Scripture, and not ignorant of the gracious Word
of God, delivered by the Prophet Ezekiel; Ezekiel 22.22
If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all
my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right he shall surely live, he
shall not dye All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him. If the godly people with whom I converse, make any mention
of my former errors, it is to rejoice at my conversion from them As there is
joy in the presence of the Angels of God, Luke. 15.10.
over one sinner that repents.

To this shot by way of menace, wa^ adjoined another from the same hand,
pointing at my intention. For they do not think it a robbery, to make
themselves equal to God, in searching hearts, and discerning intentions. They
object to me, that if my intention was to be certified of truth, as I do
profess, I should have consulted my doubts with some of my Brethren about me.
To which I answer; First, that I could not judge any of my Brethren living
about me, more fit to resolve me upon these points, than Suarez, Bellarmine,
Becanus, Stapleton, and others, the most learned Defenders of the Roman Church,
with whom I was always very much conversant, I would not judge any of them
mentioned so vain, as to pretend he could give me more satisfaction, than the
Writings of those great Doctors could afford. Secondly, I say, that to try
their skill, I related very often to the best understanders about me, my
several encounters with Learned Protestants, their Objections and my Answers.
And I never yet met with any that would tell me, I did not answer right, or
that I needed a supply from him to do it. My Learned Opposers were wont to say,
that a man so long time exercised in School debates, could hardly want an
Answer to Arguments, but that they suspected I was not my self satisfied; and
their suspicion there in was not erroneous. I could continue farther, giving
answer to others, but to the serious Proposals of my own judgment in the
presence of God, in favor of his truth, I could not resist, and to them I
yielded.

I say Thirdly, that many days before my Declaration for the Protestant Church,
I signified by Letter and Message to such as I thought fit to divulg it of the
Romish Clergy and Nobility that although I was forced to come under the
protection of the most Reverend Lord Archbishop of Cashell, to avoid the
popular fury raised against me; yet I would not declare against Communion with
the Roman Church, while any hopes appeared of being satisfied in the Exceptions
I took against the present practice of that Church; and being they had among
them my Writing, containing the said Exceptions (which in substance are those
contained in the ensuing Discourse) so long time as may suffice to have Copies
of it, I desired any that would pretend to resolve me upon those Exceptions
should appear, and that I would give a willing and unpassionate hearing to his
reasons. But none appeared for that purpose, nor signified to have a mind to do
it. Neither indeed had I reason to hope, that any of them could give me
satisfaction, having so long time, and very carefully studied upon the reasons,
given by the most Learned Defenders of their cause, and found no satisfaction
in them: and the rather, that when my Paper came to their hands containing the
exceptions I took against the Romish tenants, (but without any mention of
separation) in stead of a charitable conference with my self, they stirred the
people to fury against me, saying, I was already made Minister, and to preach
at the Protestant Church at Cashell the Sunday following: which being a fiction
of their own, I told it was so in a Noblemans house, where I had notice of that
report, without any promise made, (much less an Oath) that I should never
become a Protestant, which was one of the very false impostures framed against
me, without fear of God, or shame to be found in untruths. For certainly I
neither said that, nor had any Question made to me, that would occasion saying
it.

But those stories so enraged the people, that from worthy persons who tendered
my safety, I had notice given me of menaces made to destroy me, or convey me
where I should not appear speaking against the Romish party. As to the former,
truly I could hardly believe that Christians, Countrymen, and Kinsmen, whom I
served, and never offended, and from whom I had many shows of love and honor,
should intend to destroy me for following the dictates of my conscience; nor
that passion should so blind them, that being under a Government dissatisfied
of their Tenants, they should not be contented with the gracious toleration
given to them, but must insult with violence and malice upon such, as following
the light of their conscience do embrace the Religion, established by the Law
and Government which God has put over us.

As I heartily wish, and tender their welfare, I earnestly desire they may
avoid this foul kind of proceeding, withdraw their silly Rythmers, Scoulds, and
Forgers of Calumnies, and employ their good wits in examining soberly and
seriously) for the Glory of God, manifestation of Truth, and edification of the
people) the Points I handle in this Discourse; and showing wherein my Arguments
against their Tenants are defective; or what Arguments they repute of most
strength for them, and that with Authority of undoubted Canonical Scripture,
clear reasons grounded upon it, or practice uniform of the Primitive Church.
Not by Hyperbolical expressions of some one or more of Ancient Authors,
Rhetorical Flourishes, and Tropical Applications of Scriptures, drawing them
from their direct genuine meaning, to others different by the help of some
Figure. At which rate of disputing, the Alcoran of Mahomet, and the Talmud of
the Jews, may be defended as plausibly, as the Council of Trent.

The God of Peace, and his Son Jesus, who bequeathed it for inheritance to his
Disciples, make us appear to be of them, living in peace and charity together
in this Life, that so we may join to praise him in Life everlasting. Amen.

Mr. ANDREW SALL 's Declaration, made in the Church of St. John, in the City of
Cashell, the Fourth Sunday after Easter, May the Seventeenth; present the most
Reverend THOMAS, Lord Archbishop of Cashell; and the Right Reverend, HUGH Lord
Bishop of Waterford.
WHEREAS I Andrew Sall, have been born and bred in the Communion of the Roman
Catholic Church, followed a Religious Life, and completed my Courses of
Philosophy and Divinity in Colleges of the Order of JESUS in Spain, and was
employed in teaching of the said Faculties many years, I acknowledge, that
since, by occasion of this Function, I applied my self to a structer enquiry
and examining of matters, and by frequent reading of the Holy Scriptures,
Fathers, Councils, and Histories of the Church, my knowledge was farthered, and
my judgment ripened, I began to doubt of the truth of several Articles,
introduced by the Use and Authority of the Roman Church, repugnant to human
reason, and not warranted by Divine Writ; as Transubstantiation, Indulgences,
Purgatory, Worship of Images, etc. yet smothered my scruples, while I was in
Spain, partly fearing the severity of that Country against Opposers of their
Tenants, partly amused with a supposition, that the Church and Pope of Rome
were infallible in their Decrees touching Faith, and so may stand with security
to their declarations. But having arrived to this Country, disputed often and
closely of Religion, with several Persons eminent in Learning and Integrity,
but principally with the most Reverend Father in God (and mine truly in Christ)
his Grace, Thomas Lord Archbishop of Cashell present, who mindful of the duty
of a good Pastor, did procure to bring into his Fold this straying sheep, with
an unspeakable constancy, and indefatigable charity, suffering for six years of
continual battery my obstinate resistance, till at last, by means of his solid
doctrine, and of the example of his pious and upright Life, (to the glory of
God be I permitted to say thus much here) the Lord was pleased to give me a
more clear sight of the errors I was in; yet a full assent I delayed to give,
partly fearing, that the weakness I felt, might be of my capacity, rather than
of the cause I maintained, partly frighted with the confusions and dangers I
conceived might wait upon my deserting of the Romish Communion, and so betook
my self to a must diligent study of the case, leaving no stone unmoved to quiet
the trouble of my conscience, reading with indifferent eyes, the best Writers
on both sides. And though I heartily wished to find the cause I hitherto
maintained, justified, for not to run into the terrible inconveniences, which
human considerations represented to me in a change; yet assisted by Divine
grace, and taking for rule of my Actions, the Service and Will of God, and the
Interest of Eternity, I resolved constantly to adhere to the Party, which with
better ground, would render me secure of this higher Emolument; when being in
these considerations, suddenly issued out our Sovereign Lord the King's
Proclamation for banishing the Roman Clergy, wherewith I saw my self betwixt
two Extremities, either to continue farther in the Country, with my
ambiguities, in disobedience to my Sovereign's commands, or to go into Spain,
and there be forced to preach and practice Doctrines my conscience did not
approve of; and for a speedy resolution, after earnest prayer to God, for the
assistance of his Divine light, in so weighty a matter, I penned down for
better consideration, the reasons I did hear, read, and conceive, against the
Romish Tenants controverted. I did also carefully peruse, and seriously reflect
upon the 39. Articles, Canons, and Liturgy of the Church of England, and all
considered well, I did conclude the way of the Church of England, to be safer
for my Salvation, than that of the Roman Church. Wherefore I resolved to
declare, as I do hereby seriously and in my heart, without any equivocation, or
mental reservation, in the presence of God, and this Congregation declare, that
I do give my full and free assent to the 39. Articles of the Church of England,
for holy and wise, and grounded upon the infallible Word of God, acknowledging
the Romish Tenants against them, to be false and superstitious, especially that
of Transubstantiation, as forcing upon Christians a belief of monstrous
miracles, repugnant to human reason, and not grounded upon Divine Testimony,
nor necessary either for verifying Christ's Words in the Institution of this
Blessed Sacrament, or for the effects of it; not for verifying the words,
whereas Christ says in the like tenor, that he is the true vine, without real
alteration in his Person, or in the vine; nor for the effects of the holy
Sacrament, Christ being able to annex unto the receiving of Bread and Wine,
what spiritual Grates he pleases, without alteration of the Elements, as he
does afford the spiritual Grace of Regeneration in the Waters of Baptism,
without alteration in the substance of the Water.

And lest an imagination of some temporal or sinistrous intention in this my
Declaration, upon the present conjuncture may hinder the spiritual benefit
which souls may reap by it, I have grave testimonies to show, and did already
show them to my renowned Lord Archbishop his Grace, which assures I did enjoy
in Spain (and may now enjoy with more advantage going thither, upon the account
I was to go) such degree of honor and commodity, as possibly I may not expect
elsewhere; so as looking upon a Voyage thither, continuing my former
Profession, nothing occurred to my mind but pleasure, applause, and honor; and
turning my eyes upon my present resolution, mountains of crosses and dangers
did fright me. But in this perplexity, I have chosen rather to suffer crosses
here with sarisfaction of conscience than to enjoy honors that other way,
accompanied with the tortures of a checking conscience, and the unworthiness of
a dissembling life.

Wherefore I humbly beseech your Grace, that I may be admitted into the
Communion of this Church, and that I may be absolved for my so long continuance
in Error, resisting the p^werful Ca^ling of God, which granted, I hope by the
Grace of Almighty God, assisting me, that I shall never withdraw my self; for
farther confirmation of all this I have hereunto subscribed my Name,

Andrew Sall.

St. MAT. xxiv. 15, 16, 17, 18. When ye therefore shall see the abomination of
desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prephet, stand in the holy place, (whosoever
reads let him understand) Then let them which be in Judea flee into the
mountains. Let him which is on the house top, not come down to take any thing
out of his house; neither let him which is in the field, return back to take
his clothes.


ON all occasions I conceive it to be the Duty of a Preacher to search
diligently after the genuine and direct meaning of the word of God he takes in
hand to expound; that grounding his discourses upon it, rather than upon
private fancy, they may carry more weight for the benefit of souls. But when
the very Text does warn us of this duty, and exhorts to the right
understanding of it self, as ours at present does (whose reads let him
understand) then certainly we have a special obligation of searching carefully
for the right sense of it: which I have endeavored to do; and found three
several opinions among ancient and modern Interpreters, touching that
Abomination of Desolation standing in the Holy place, mentioned in our Text.
The first opinion, followed by St. Jerome, is, that by this Abomination of
Desolation, may be understood the Image of Caesar, which Pilate set up in the
Temple of Jerusalem; Or the Statue of the Emperor Adrian, which he affirms to
have stood in the most sacred place of the Temple, the holy of holies to his
own time; which to the people of God was most abominable, rendered the Temple
desolate and void of Divine praises; the faithful deserting the City and
Temple, that they might not be partakers of the profane Idolatry practiced in
it; as our Savior councelleth in the words of our Text. The second Opinion
followed by very learned Interpreters, and attributed to St. Chrysostom, is,
that by this Abomination is understood the Roman Army under Titus, coming to
besiege Jerusalem, and ready to fill the City with their Banners, bearing in
them the Image of Caesar and his Eagle, which to the Jews were Abominable and
Profane. The third Opinion followed by the Gloss Interlineal, is, that the
foresaid words of our Text do relate to the times of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
when that man of sin shall be revealed, Dan. 11.36. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
who shall exalt himself and magnify himself above every God, and who opposes
and exalts himself above all that is called God, as St. Paul says. At whose
appearance our Savior exhorts the faithful to shun the place where they see
it predominant. All which three Opinions, though different in expressions, do
concur to the same purpose of our spiritual instruction, and will contribute to
the right grounding the Points I intend to raise upon our Text to that end. The
following words of our Text, do set forth the have and diligence wherewith our
Savior would have the Faithful to shun the place infected with that Evil.
Gerson. Tract. in Magnifi cat. page 97.
The Buildings of Judea had commonly plain Roofs to walk upon, as Gerson
relates: now who should happen to be on such Roofs, is councelled by our
Savior not to stay for going by the ordinary way, nor regard the ordering of
his house; nor he that should be in the field return to take his clothes, but
hasten his flight with all the speed he can; being better to lose all, than to
lose his soul.

Our Text being explained thus, the first Point of my discourse upon it, will
be to justify the Council of our Savior; that if we should see any of those
three Abominations declared by the three Opinions related, Idolatry, Profane
violence, or Antichristian impiety, predominant in any Church or Congregation,
we are to shun it with all speed; without regarding ceremonies or compliances
with men, or the loss of humane interest or honor. The second is to declare,
that I saw, (and by what means I came to see) all these three kind of
Abominations practiced in the Roman Church. The third shall be to conclude from
these Premises, that the resolution I took of withdrawing speedily from the
Communion of that Church, when I was convinced of such corruptions to sway in
it, was Just and Necessary: and therefore undeserving so great an offense and
scandal as is taken at it by the generality of my former Brethren.

First Point.
As it is clear that Heaven is of more value than a piece of the Earth,
Everlasting Glory, than a short joy of this Miserable mortal Life, the Favor
and Grace of God than that of Men: so clear (and not needing tedious proofs) is
the First Point proposed of our discourse; that if we should see a Church
infected with corruptions inconsistent with the true worship and service of
God, we are to quit it with all speed and diligence, not heeding men's
discontents, nor any earthly interest. But why was our Savior so earnest with
his own Disciples that they should quit the Pleasures of Jerusalem and the
Fertile Fields of Judea upon such an emergencie, and flee to barren mountains?
might it not be expected from their constant Faith and fervent Piety, improved
in the School of Christ, enriched with the Heavenly dew of healthful Doctrine
daily dropping upon them from his Divine lips, that in midst of the Idolatry
and Profaneness of the Romans they would preserve themselves pure and unspotted
as the Fish in the Sea without relishing the salt of it? Nay further, may it
not be expected that by their Doctrine and example of their Holy Life, the
sores of Jerusalem may be healed and the inhabitants of it reduced to a better
Life? No; of their amendment there was no hope, because their hearts were
hardened as that of Pharao, and their disease incurable, which did increase
with the very remedies of it; their Stomachs so corrupt, that they turned the
most healthful food into Poison: their minds were so perverse, that they
abhorred their Cure and killed their Physicians: so our Savior declared of
them in the Chapter precedent to that of our Text, the 23 of St. Matthew putting
them in mind that their Fathers before them did so, themselves did so at
present, and would do the same in the future. The doleful words of our Savior
to this purpose are much to be remarked. St. Math. 23 v. 29 31.32.39.
Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites. Ye be witnesses unto your selves
that ye are the children of them which killed the Prophets. Fill up then the
measure of your Fathers. Behold I send unto you Prophets and wise men and
Scribes and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye
scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City: That upon you
may come all the righteous Blood shed upon the Earth etc. The People of
Jerusalem being thus given over to a reprobate obstinacy, what hopes could our
Saviors Disciples entertain of healing them?

Neither could they prudently hope to be safe themselves in so great and
general corruption. Isaiah thought it one and the same thing to live in a
corrupted company and be corrupted himself: Woe is me, said he, For I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a People of
unclean lips. Whereupon St. Jerome says that the former part of the Text was a
declaration of the later; and to say he lived with a people of unclean lips was
as much as to say he was himself of unclean lips: St. Hieron. ep. 1. ad
Damascum.
hoc in Pecati ac miseriae part ducit Propheta habitans in medio populi
polluta labia habentis. So powerful is the influence of bad company that the
best of men are apt to be spotted if not corrupted with it! Even Angels it
seems may not be safe from the contagions of such neighborhood. In the first
Chapter of Genesis is related that God divided the light from the darkness.
Genesis 1. Rupert. li. 1. in Genes. c. 13.
By which words Rupert understands how God separated the good Angels from the
Bad; and inquiring further what may be the motive of this separation, he
answers, it was, that the Good Angels may not be perverted by the company of
the Bad. How? are Angels Subject to such mutabilities? Is it not their nature
to have liberty in their first election, but that once made, to stick
immoveably to the side they adhered to? St. Thomas 1. p. q. 64. art. 2.
So Divines do teach commonly in Schools. But such is the Power of bad company,
that it will make even Angels to forget their nature and be perverted with the
perverse.

We have another fair show of this verity in the 10th. Chapter of St. Luke, V.
18. where our Savior, in testimony of his Divine power, Luke 10.18.
tells, that he beheld Satan as lightning fall from Heaven. And what
singularity appears in that? did not the Angels, and all the world, see the
same? Rupent. l 1 de victoria Verbi Dei. c. 13.
yea, says Rupert; but with fear and danger; only Christ the Son of God, could
behold that spectacle with security. Solus iste videbat securus sui; Angeli
autem videtunt in magno terrore positi. So strong and active is the venom of a
bad example, and scandalous company, that even those pure Angelical spirits
could not be secure from the contagion of it, in the opinion of this learned
Father; only Christ could behold with vafety the dismal fall of Satan; solus
iste videbat securus sui. Trust not in your virtue, build no confidence upon
your good nature; bad company will corrupt virtue, and pervert nature.

This fatal contagious influence of companies, justifies the practice I find
in nations of censuring every ones temper by the company he fancies. A Spanish
proverb reduced to English, says, Tell me with whom thou walk, and I will
tell thee who thou art. Noble men who tender your repute, Christians who regard
your welfare and salvation, take heed to what company you adhere. And this
doctrine being so important for all; I will confirm it further, with the famous
case of that prodigal son, set down in the 15th. chapter of St. Luke; who
having lavished away his substance, with riotous living in a foreign country,
Luke 15.15.
he joined himself to a Citizen, who employed him in feeding his swine; and he
would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat. How so?
that delicate youth, who loathed the plentiful fare of his Fathers house, now
fancy the husks that swine did eat? Is that a proper food for a man, and such a
man? no; but the company of swine made him put off his own nature, and wear
theirs. And when he came to himself, so follows the Text. What? did he leave
himself? yes, says ingenious Peter Chrysologus, a se migrat and transit in
bestiam; Chrysol. Ser. 2.
living with beasts, he left himself, and turned beast. That is the ordinary
effect of bad company, to turn into its own condition, the nature of such as
adhere to it. To presume the contrary, is to pretend to a miracle, and tempt
God. It were indeed a miracle, and a singular one, that a person living in a
bad company, should not conform to it. Our Savior, to confirm his Doctrine
with an uncontrolable miracle against the obstinate Jews, who condemned, as
Sorceries, his other miraculous works; got innocent children to blaze his glory
in the Temple of Jerusalem; according to the Prophet David, Mat. 21.16.
in the eighth Psalm: Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou have
perfected praise. This miracle wrought deeply upon the Jews, and confirmed them
in the belief of the others preceding; as St. Matthew relates. St. Mat. ^^. 19.
And when the chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he did,
and the children crying in the Temple, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David,
they were sore displeased. What made them take more notice of these innocent
Elegies of the children, than of the other wonders he wrought? (...).
Euthymius gl^ssing upon this passage, answers, that in other occasions they
suspected Christ might have deluded their eyes with appearances of things not
really existing; but that their own children, bred by themselves, and living
among them, should break out into Elogies of one they saw ever contemned and
reviled by them; was a miracle they knew not how to control: That ears
continually beaten with calumnies and opprebries against Christ, should
entertain any favorable opinion of him, was a wonder, which malice and envy it
self could not suspect. So strange it is, that any should not act according to
the temper of the company he lives in! A wonder passing all wonders! Such is
the influence, bad company has over minds adhering to it! And herewith I
conclude the first Point of my Discourse; how justly our Savior, in the words
of our Text, was so earnest in exhorting his Disciples to shun the Abominations
of Jerusalem, given over to corruption and reprobate obstinacy, that they might
not be perverted by them; and that if we should see any of those three
Abominations declared by the three Opinions of Interpreters, related in the
opening of our Text, that is to say, Idolatry, Cruelty, or Impiety, or all
three, practiced in a Church or Congregation, we are to shun it with all speed
and diligence.

Now I will proceed to the Second Point proposed of my discourse; which is, to
declare how I saw, and by what means God was pleased to let me see, that all
these three abominations are generally practiced in the Roman Church, as it
stands at present; to wit Idolatry in their Manner of Worship. Cruelty in
their conduct of Souls and Antichristian Impiety in extolling men above God:
That so my receding from the Communion of It, may be justified as no more, nor
other, than a dutiful obedience to the Council of Christ, declared in our Text.
But before I enter into this Point, I desire my judicious hearers not to
conceive I come here to scold or Insult upon my former Brethren of the Roman
Communion. I may not hate Them without hating my self; my flesh and blood and
dearest friends being among them; with tender compassion I lament their Error.
I could not in piety abandon the Mother at whose breast I sucked the Belief of a
Christian; if with tears or sweat I could hope to wash away the stains, which
corruption of time has cast upon her face, once fair and glorious: but seeing
her disease appears both incurable and contagious, I was forced to a divorce.
Mean faults could not give a just cause to it; they must be grievous ones,
which I cannot declare without giving them their own names; the same our Text
and declaration of it puts into my mouth, for just cause of the like
separation, Idolatry, Cruelty, Impiety. How I came to perceive the present
Practice of the Roman Church to be guilty of these faults I will endeavor to
declare with the brevity and sincerity duty requires, being to speak in so
Illustrious an Auditory.

Gods Providence leading me in my younger years to the Schools of greatest
credit in Spain; and disposing so that having completed in them my courses of
Philosophy and Divinity, I should be employed many years in teaching the same
Faculties; The exercise of those Reasoning Sciences joined with my own Genius
not fit for Pythagoras his School (where ipse dixit was the rule, and knowledge
must be taken upon credit of the Master) got me a habit of demanding reason for
the belief of Doctrines proposed. This, assisted by frequent reading of Holy
Scriptures, Fathers, Councels and Histories of the Church made me doubt of the
Truth of several Tenants introduced by the use or Authority of the Roman
Church, repugnant (in my esteem) to common reason, and not warranted by Divine
testimony to captivate my understanding to the belief of them. Of the Truth of
Holy Scriptures, of the Apostles Creed, of that of Nice and Athanasius I never
doubted. Therein I acknowledged the Heavenly gift of Faith received in the Holy
Sacrament of Baptism; and lifting my heart and eyes to Heaven, gave thanks to
God for this Sovereign benefit in those words of the Psalm: Psalm. 4. v. 6.
Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine: Thou have lifted upon us, O
Lord, and printed in our hearts the light of thy countenance. Without which,
certainly an understanding accustomed to search exactly into the nature of
things, their Essential constitutes, the proportion of causes with effects, and
to measure by these rules the credibility of them, would never give so free and
easy assent to the ineffable mysteries of Trinity and Unity in the Divine
nature, of the Incarnation, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ our Savior, of
the Descent of the Holy Ghost in tongues of fire upon the Apostles, and other
mysteries contained in Holy Scripture and the Creeds.

On the other side the reluctance I found in assenting to those Tenants of the
Roman Church, as opposite to other Christian Congregations, was to me an
occasion of suspecting they might not be grounded upon Divine institution: all
my understanding was turmoiled reflecting upon the prodigious Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; alone sufficient to fright rational believers from the
Romish Communion. By it we are required to believe that when the Priest
pronounces those few Latin words: Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body, minding
what he says, the substance of all the bread he lays before him, is destroyed
in a moment, and instead of it, our Savior Jesus is placed under that figure
of bread personally and corporally: A wonder, though a daily one, yet far
surpassing that other which once happened in the world, when God harkening to
the voice of Joshua; made the Sun and Moon stand, till he completed his
Victory against the Enemy invading Gibeon. Josh. 10.12.
And to support this wonder, a great number of others most stupendous, are
chained to it. As First, that those accidents of white and round remaining, do
subsist without any substance to rest upon; a thing repugnant to their nature,
and to all humane understanding. Secondly, that the same accidents being
converted either into vermin by corruption, or into flesh and blood by
nutrition, in him that eats them, should produce a substance; which is, to give
what they have not; a thing surpassing all kind of power. Thirdly, that a
proper well proportioned body, as that of our Savior, glorious in Heaven, must
come down and be fitted to every Wafer, and to every the least crumb of them.
Fourthly, that the same Body must lie, sit, or stand, or however, be, in a
hundred thousand places at the same time. All these monstrous miracles, and
more, we must swallow, to support that mystery, in spite of all reason to the
contrary, without any pertinent Text of Scripture to ground it upon, (nay, many
Texts opposing it, as we shall hereafter declare) and no necessity urging to
it, either for verifying the words of our Savior in the institution of this
blessed Sacrament, or for the effects of it: St. 1^.15.
Not for verifying the words; seeing our Savior in the same tenor said, I am
the true vine, without any alteration, either in his Person, or in the Vine.
And St. Paul says of his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12 27.
ye are the Body of Christ, yet meaning no conversion of substances. Nor for
the effects of the Sacrament; Christ being able to convey, with the worthy
receiving of Bread and Wine, what spiritual graces he pleases, without any
substantial alteration in the Elements; as in the Waters of Baptism, he
affords the sovereign grace of Regeneration without any alteration in the
substance of the Water.

The like repugnance I felt, in believing their prodigious Doctrine of
Indulgences, Purgatory, Worship of Saints and Images, and other Points
controverted with them; but smothered my doubts while in Spain; partly fearing
the severity of that Country, in proceeding against Opposers of their
Doctrine; partly amused with the supposition, that the Church and Pope of Rome
were Infallible in their Decrees, touching matters of Faith, and so might stand
with security to their Declarations. And finally persuaded by my Catechists,
that it was a mortal Sin to admit willingly even a doubt in Matters of Faith. A
terrible yoke, reaching to the thoughts of the heart; but conducent to their
purpose of keeping in their people by right or wrong. With these Generalities,
I quieted in some sort my mind, while I could see none that would seriously
oppose those Tenants, nor know the Arguments against them, but by relation of
Romish Writers, fashioning them so as they might better receive their stroke.
For though by occasion of my Employment of teaching controversies in the
University of Salamanca some years, I had a License from the Inquisitor General
of Spain, to read prohibited Books, yet the Prohibition was so severe, that I
could never come by any Book of their Opposers.

But Divine Providence leading me to this Country, I met with persons of
excellent wisdom, and great integrity; who in close and serious Disputes, gave
me a different light and help to find out the truth. The chiefest of all was,
the Most Reverend Father in God, Thomas Lord Archbishop of Cashell, who at his
coming to that See, having notice of me, and pitying I should continue in
errors, sought carefully after me; and finding me out, with admirable zeal and
great dexterity, dictated by Christian charity, set upon me with solid
Arguments of Holy Scripture, Councels, Fathers and Histories; and gave me to
view several learned Authors representing the Errors of the Roman Church in
all the points controverted; to which I listened the more willingly because I
saw a vein of Charity and Zeal of Union among Christians run through all his
discourses, acknowledging the Church of Rome to be a part of the Catholic
Church, though not the Catholic Church, (as they speak, excluding other
Christian Congregations from that honorable Title) reverencing what in them
was good, as the belief of Scripture, and Christian Creeds, the Practice of
Devotion and Piety, and only reproving the Superstructures of Erroneous
Practices introduced contrary to the Institution of Christ and Style of the
Primitive Church: entertaining a charitable hope of the Salvation of many of
them that went on with simplicity of heart and blameless ignorance of the
Errors they were bred in.

All which sympathizing with my own temper and dictates, in relation to all
Christian Congregations, got in my mind a special respect and regard to his
reasons. I replied to them with sincerity and liberty, according to the
principles I was instructed in: Where a clear Text or pressing reason was
deficient, I appealed, as to a Sanctuary, to the Infallibility of the Church;
that in things surpassing our comprehension we were to captivate our
understanding to the obedience of Faith proposed to us by the Church of God.

To secure this refuge and have it in a readiness, I framed to my self, and
proposed to his Grace, this kind of Demonstration: That by natural evidences, I
was convinced there was a God of infinite Goodness, wisdom and power; That to
these attributes it belonged, he should provide for Mankind means for
obtaining their end of everlasting bliss. That by revealed Oracles common to
all Christians I believed he sent down his Son Jesus Christ for this purpose in
humane nature, and to show by his Example and Doctrine a sure way to eternal
happiness. And providing not only for the age he lived in, but for all times to
come; he left upon earth a Church furnished with convenient Laws for the
foresaid end. And whereas he foretold himself, that in future times there
should arise Heresies and Controversies, (as it is the nature of men) it became
his wisdom and goodness to appoint a visible Judge, with infallible assistance
of the Holy Ghost, to determine all Controversies emergent; which Judge was no
other than the Pope of Rome, Successor of St. Peter; to whose definitions
therefore we ought to stand, and so quiet our minds.

The former part of this Demonstration had a grateful acceptance with his
Grace, as being rationally and Christianly principled, and nothing averse to
Piety; till coming to the later Proposition, That it became the wisdom and
goodness of Christ to appoint a visible Judge Infallible upon Earth, to
determine Controversies: He replied mildly, we had reason to go warily in
censuring the wisdom and goodness of God, if this or that thing seeming to us
expedient, were not done in the government of the World: for who can pretend to
know the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God; Romans 11.33.
to search into his judgments, and find out his ways?

This most rational advertisement took deep root in my heart, ever thirsty of
reason, and open to receive it: Neither did the modesty of the Proposer
diminish, but rather augment the weight of it. It was in truth the first shock
that touched me to the quick, striking upon the very root of that Engine of
Infallibility I leaned upon. Reflecting upon the matter in my solitudes, I
perceived the weakness of the ground I built upon; I saw, that in like manner
we may say, it belongs to the goodness, wisdom, and power of God, not to
permit that his Holy Law should be transgressed by vile creatures, and his
supreme dread Majesty offended by despicable vermin; Nor that Pastors of
Souls, (especially the Roman Pope, deemed a Vice-God upon Earth) should fall
into errors, and scandalize, with wicked life, the people: And, alas! it is
but too well known, he permits this. Shall we therefore waver in the Opinion of
his goodness, power, and wisdom? God forbid. Why then should we think it a
failure in his providence, or goodness, if, besides Holy Scriptures, abounding
in all light and Heavenly Doctrine, to such as are not wilfully blind, he did
not appoint some visible Judge universal for our direction? St. Paul saying, 2 Timothy 3.16.17.
that Holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation, that the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

That Foundation alleging the necessity of a Judge visible, universal, and
Infallible, being thus weakened, I proceeded to examine what right the Pope or
Church of Rome could pretend to such infallibility, the support of all their
Incredible Doctrine. And, first, the very inconstancy of their pretense to this
privilege, and great dissension of their Authors in asserting it, was to me a
main reason of suspecting the truth of all, and a concluding argument that they
cannot be certain of having it. Vide Bell l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 2.
For some will have the Pope himself alone, as Pope, or as teaching from his
chair, to have this Infallibility of Doctrine. Others will not allow it him,
but in conjunction with a Council, either general, or particular of Cardinals
and Divines. Others only attribute it to him in a General Council. Others
neither separately nor conjunctly, and will only allow the Church Universal to
be Infallible. And finally, others of the most Learned affirm even the Church
Universal, S. Tho. Turre ^^^mata. Alphon^us a Cact^o apud Candi 4 (...) c. 4
concl. 2.
to be capable of a Material Error by Probable Ignorance, though not of a
Formal and Heretical one: which in substance is to allow the Church no more
Infallibility than Origin, Tertullian, or any other particular true Christian
Believer has, though subject to errors; (which Opinion if extended to make the
Universal Church fallible even in Points Essential to salvation, is false). And
upon so great an uncertainty of their Infallibility, they will have us to build
a certain Infallible Belief of all they please to teach us; which is, to build
a house incapable of falling, upon a sandy and ruinous Foundation.

Now for their grounds for this pretended Infallibility; what is their warrant
for it? Divine Scripture they say, for who but God could give such a
Privilege? and what warrant have they for believing he Scripture saying so to
be Divine and Infallible? The Infallible Testimony of the Church, say they
again; their own Roman Church they mean. So they believe the Scripture is
Infallible, because the Roman Church does testify it; and this Church to be
Infallible, because the Scriptures Testimony is for it. A circle in reasoning,
which Logicians would hiss out of their Schools. Neither may Becan's escape
avail him, that they deal with Christians who believe the Scripture: for no
Christian, but such as they will make blind, can believe that there is any
Scripture favoring their case in this particular, without clipping or
corrupting it to serve their purpose. For example, Their main pillar for this
Infallibility, fetched out of the 24th. chapter of St. John, John 14.16.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth. Their own Disciples, who
ordinarily know no more of Scriptures, than what they are pleased to show to
them for their several purposes; may think that Text to be pertinent for their
pretentions. But who will take the liberty to read the Context before and
after, will clearly find out, that the very same Text destroys their whole
design, and takes away all certainty of the Holy Ghost his assistance, for
rendering their Decrees Infallible. The Text restored to its integrity says
thus in their own Bible: If ye love me keep my commandments, Mundus, id est,
remanens amator mundi, cum quo nurquam est amor Dei. Gloss. interlin. Non
habent spirituales oculos quibus Spiritum sanctum videant mu^^i ama^^res,
Gloss. ordinaria.
and I will ask my Father, and he shall give you another Paraclete, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive. By the first words you may see this to be a conditional promise,
limited to such as love God, and keep his Commandments: by the later words you
see worldly and sinful men expressly excluded from receiving that gracious
assistance of the Spirit of Truth; therefore to be sure that the Pope and his
Council have the assistance of the Spirit of Truth, we must be sure that they
love God, and keep his Commandments; but of this we cannot have security, their
own Histories relating, and the world knowing enormous vices in them.

What they allege out of St. Paul writing to Timothy, Tim. 3.15.
that the Church is the pillar and ground of Truth: we freely admit it as due
to the Universal Church, not to any particular; but less to one found guilty of
so many and great errors, such as the Romish is; whose ambition in claiming
and appropriating to it self all the commendations delivered of the Church
Universal, is no less reprehensible, than as if the Scribes and Pharisees
persecuting our Savior, should appropriate to their Synagogue all the praises
given to Moses and Aaron. Would not you wonder, that their chief Champion
Cardinal Bellarmine, Bellar de sum P^n l. 4 c 2.
should bring for proof of the Pope's Infallibility, that in the Old Law God
commanded Two Hebrew words, Exodus 20.
or Two stones, signifying Doctrine and Truth, to be put in the breast plate of
the High Priest? And what then? will you infer thence more Infallibility in the
Pope, than in those High Priests you bring for example? Will you make them all
Infallible, even Caiphas? If we will speak in earnest, I would suppose these
words so inserted, were an advertisement to the High Priest, that he was to
exercise Doctrine and Truth, as becoming his place. The same advertisement I
allow the Pope should have; and I wish he did always do accordingly. This is
the utmost That Text can afford. And of this weight are the other Texts they
bring, to assure us of the Infallibility, pretended to build all our Belief on.

This main Foundation of the Romish Church being thus weakened; I began with
more liberty to pry into, and examine exactly, the Mysteries and Tenants of
both parties, Protestant and Romish. To which purpose, if I had no other notice
of the Protestant cause than that afforded by Popish Writers and Informers (as
long time I had not) I should have been for ever kept from adhering to it. Here
I perceived a great Insincerity of dealing in the proceeding of Romanists; who
to make odious their Adversaries, gathered up out of the Writings of some
particular persons, a heap of some extravagant doctrines; adding thereto humane
frailties of their private lives, (whether true or false, I will not debate
now) but certainly such, as any wise and modest Protestant would abhor no less
than any of themselves; And if he were to repay them in the like coin, he may
by their own mouth do it superabundantly. For Two certain Families or Orders of
them, reputed the most learned and grave of all, (but very opposite in
doctrine) passing from the Gravity of Scholastic Disputes to the Scurrility of
Infamatory Libels, have published of late such damnable doctrines, and hideous
vices, the one of the other, as any humane, and more a Christian heart, would
tremble to hear. Which, lest I should defile this sacred place, or your ears,
or my own mouth, I will not relate now. But I thought it fit to insinuate to
them, that this foul and killing Armor of their own against themselves is in a
readiness, if our necessary defense would require to draw it; but such a
necessity not intervening, I think it unbecoming an Evangelical Preacher to
stir that dung; and indeed no effective way to conclude with serious minds upon
so weighty a matter; being certain, that in all Congregations of men there are
defects in particulars. The true and proper way (being to deal as becomes men
of solid and serious temper) is, to examine these Tenants wherein each party
does generally agree with public Uniform consent: which I have done:

And beginning with the Church of England, I find the eminent persons of it, by
Uniform consent of word and writing, Article 20.
assert the sum of their Faith and Religion to be the Word of God, contained
in the undoubted Canonical Scripture; besides which, and the plain indubitable
consequence of it, they require nothing to be believed as matter of Faith. What
rule could be imagined more sacred and excellent than this, for the instruction
of men in Faith, and good manners? if you fancy Infallibility or Antiquity,
what more Infallible or Ancient than the eternal Word of God? if Sanctity and
W^sedom, what can be imagined more holy and wise, than the councels of Christ
our Savior, the sentences of holy Prophets and Apostles? if the Luster of
Miracles, what more admirable and certain than those wrought by our Savior,
and his Prophets, and Apostles, in confirmation of their doctrine? if
Universality, all true Christians do agree in embracing and honoring Canonical
Scripture.

Now as to the Roman Church; the Tenants of it, as opposite to the Protestant,
shall be considered for the present to be reducible to these seven heads.
First, the Infallibility and Supremacy of the Pope. Secondly, the Mystery of
Transubstantiation. Thirdly, the Worship of Images. Fourthly, the Praying to
Saints and Angels. Fifthly, the Half Communion denied to the Laity. Sixthly,
the use of Indulgences, and doctrine of Purgatory. Seventhly, the celebrating
of public Divine Worship in a Language generally unknown to the people, and
prohibiting the generality the reading of the Holy Scriptures.

Pope's Infallibility.
As to the First, we have already declared how ill grounded their pretense to
Infallibility is. St. Tho. 22. q. 13. Art. 3. ^^iman. ^^. 4. tr ^0. c. 6.
Now it remains to show how heinous a crime it is to attribute it to the Pope
or his Council. Their own Divines with St. Thomas Aquinas do agree, in
asserting, that of all sins Blasphemy is the greatest. 1 p q 16 ar. 18 30.
The same Divines do accord in saying, it is Blasphemy to attribute to any
creature what is proper to God; whereas God's Attributes are indistinct from
himself, and so to ascribe any of them to a creature, is to make such a
creature God. Now, that Infallibility is one of Gods chief Attributes,
incommunicable to any creature, 1 p. q 16. ar. 8.
the same St. Thomas teaches expressly; grounding his Opinion upon these words
of the Eleventh Psalm, Psalm. 11.1.
according to the Latin Translation; Quoniam diminutae sunt veritates a filiis
hominum, that verities are maimed among the children of men. To which is
consonant the English Translation of the same Text, that the faithful fail from
among the children of men: Psalm. 115. v. 11.
but more resolutely the hundred and fifteenth Psalm declares that all men are
liars. Therefore the Romanists Attributing Infallibility of Doctrine to their
Pope, are guilty of Blasphemy, the most heinous of all crimes; which is
evidently deduced from premises of their own Theology.

This heinous Blasphemy of parallelling the Pope with God in the Attribute of
Infallibility, is raised to a higher degree in their practice of making him
Supreme and Absolute Judge and Arbiter of the Law of God and his Holy
Scripture. So as for the belief and practice of all, we must stand to his
Declaration; in such degree, Bellarmin. li 4. de Romans Pont. c. 5.
that Bellarmine sticks not to say, if the Pope did command Vices and
prohibit Virtues, the Church would be obliged to believe Vice to be good and
Virtue bad. Nay the Council of Constance professedly commands the Popes
Decrees to be preferred to the Institutions of Christ. Whereas confessing that
our Savior did ordain the giving of the Sacred Communion under both kinds to
the Faithful people; and that the Apostles and Primitive Church did practice it
so: notwithstanding they command, Council. Constan. Sess. 13.
that for the future it be not given to the Laity, but under one kind.
Proposing no other reason for it, than that the precedent Popes and Church
governed by them, practiced it so; though contrary to the practice of Christ
and His Apostles. Whereby they extol the Pope to a degree Superior to God
himself in the Government of humane kind. If the Laws of England were not to be
understood or practiced in Ireland, but according to the will and declaration
of the King of France; certainly the King of France would be deemed of more
Power and Authority in the Government of Ireland, and the people more Subject
to him than to the King of England: So if the Law of God is to be measured by
the Popes will and declaration: certainly the Pope is above God in the
Government of man kind.

Who would believe that any Christian would presume to say, that it should be a
greater sin to transgress an Ecclesiastic Law of the Pope, than to break the
Law of God? Costerus c. 15. enchiridii. propos. 9.
yet Costerus one of the chief defenders of the Romish Doctrine, sticks not
to say so much; resolutely asserting that it is a greater sin in a Priest to
Marry, than to commit Fornication or keep a Concubine in his house: That
Greater sin, in his opinion, being but a transgression of a Papal Law; and the
other reputed by him for Lighter, a trespass against the Law of God expressed
in his Divine Decalogue. What Christian ears can abide to hear such execrable
Blasphemies? will they wonder now that the Pope should be taxed with that
Antichristian Impiety declared by Daniel the Prophet, Dan. 11.36. 2. Thessa.
2.4.
and by St. Paul, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God? Here you see the Romish Church guilty of that Abomination mentioned in our
text* of extolling man above God.

Pope's Supremacy.
To this enormity of robbing God of his prerogatives, is joined another of
making the Pope Supreme Head, and Master of all Christians; not only in
spiritual matters, but also in their temporal interests, with power to depose
Kings, and move their Subjects to Rebellion against them, when they do not obey
his will; as it was declared in the Lateran Council under Innocent the Third by
these terrible words: If a temporal Lord warned by the Church does neglect to
purge his Land of Heresy, Council Laterar. c. 3.
let him be excommunicated by the Metropolitan; and if within a year he gives
no satisfaction, let that be signified to the Pope, that from thenceforth he
may declare his Subjects absolved from their obedience to him, and expose his
lands to be occupied by Catholics. And so was done to King John of England by
the same Pope Innocent the Third as it is recorded by Polidor Virgil; Polidor.
lib. 15. Suar. li. 3. defens. c. 23.
to the Emperor Henry the Fourth by Gregory the Fourth; To Frederick the 2d.
by Innocent the 4th. and to several other Christian Princes, as Suarez relates;
making the Practice of Popes herein an Argument of their Power for doing so.
Which kind of arguing as I was admiring in so exact a Schoolman, and reflecting
upon the power of prejudice, and education even over the most sublime wits; an
ingenious Divine of the University of Dublin replied facetiously, it was a very
concluding argument, that proceeds ab actu ad potentiam, being he did so,
it is sign he could do it; that was good for a jest: But Suarez to be in
earnest, and give consistence to his argument, subsumed, that the Church
Universal did see and approve of this proceeding; and the Church being
Infallible, could not approve it if not Lawful. Many other controversies would
have a quick decision, if this discourse were Legal. That all saw it, is
allowed; but that all approved of it freely, is denied. Force and fear made
them suffer, what they would have resisted if they knew how.

I remit enlarging upon the injustice of the Pope's pretensions herein, to
another occasion; and their unreasonable exclamations against the claim of our
Princes to Supremacy of power over their subjects; being they pretend no other,
than such as the godly Kings of Israel had in their time over the Jews, and the
Christian Emperors in the primitive Church over their respective subjects; as
it is declared in the 37. Article and 2. Canon of the Church of England.

Only I will reflect at present upon the cruelty the Pope has practiced of late
toward the unhappy Irish his Followers, in pursuit of his pretended power of
deposing Kings; That being no matter of Faith, nor passing a probable Opinion,
as Azor, Peron, Azor to. 2 li. 11. c. 5. q. 8. Peronus in replica sua typis
data anno 1620.
and other very learned Authors of his own party do declare: If we may call
probable a doctrine so damnable, that the great Parliament of France, (wherein,
of 200. Votes, only 6. were Protestants, in the year 1604.) commanded Suarez
his Book containing this doctrine, to be burned by the hands of the public
Executioner; and ordered the Jesuits to have their preachers exhort the people
to the contrary doctrine; or otherwise they should be proceeded against as
Traitors and Disturbers of the public peace: Besides, all their own Divines
generally asserting, that in a probable controversy, one may with safety of
conscience follow the side he pleases: Yet the Pope prohibited severely the
Irish to disclaim that seditious doctrine, let them suffer never so many
penalties and suspicions for it. So zealous is his Holiness, not of the
salvation of souls, but of the conservation of his own Grandeur; in having all
power upon Earth at his will, and the Crowns of Kings to stand or fall at his
beck! is not this to exercise tyranny and cruelty in the conduct of souls?

Transubstantiation.
Touching the second Point proposed, of Transubstantiation, I signified before
how prodigious that engagement was, and what weak Foundation they had for it in
Scripture. Now I will declare how directly contrary to Scripture it is, and to
the doctrine of the Fathers of the Primitive Church. The Council of Trent
accurseth such as affirm Bread and Wine to remain in this Sacrament after
Consecration. Trident. Sess. 13. can. 2.
And yet St. Paul teaches us expressly, and repeateth the same doctrine some
five times over; that after Consecration it is Bread which is broken and eaten.
1 Cor. 11.23, 24.
The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took Bread, and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body, which
is broken for you; this do, in remembrance of me. Of the Bread he took in his
hand, all that follows is affirmed, to wit, that he brake it, and that it was
his Body. And whereas in a literal sense it could not be said with truth or
propriety, that the Bread was his Body, as you may not say with sense, that a
stick is a stone, he declares immediately, that he spoke in a figurative
sense, willing it to be a commemoration or remembrance of him; the Bread still
remaining in the nature of Bread, though elevated by Christ's Institution to a
supernatural and spiritual power of giving grace to well disposed Receivers.
And so S. Paul in several verses after, making mention of that Consecrated
Element, calls it still Bread; as often as you eat this Bread; Whosoever shall
eat this Bread, etc.

In all which St. Paul does but conform himself to the words of our Savior,
which he relates exactly, as set down by St. Luke in the 22th chapter of his
Gospel, v. 19. And he took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
them, saying, This is my Body, which is given for you: this do in remembrance
of me. And when our Savior himself thus declares his words to be in a
figurative sense, after an usual and plain manner of speaking; it is a disorder
to run to a violent explication of them, containing wonders surpassing humane
understanding, without any probable ground in the holy Text; as the Papists do
to maintain their doctrine, with this or the like gloss: This is my Body, that
is, the thing contained under those Forms, is, by conversion and substantial
transmutation, my Body. So as pretending to stick to the letter, they only keep
the sound of the words; and to give them sense for their purpose, they unaware
produce a trope, or something darker, a paradox, repugnant to all humane
reasoning, and nothing coherent with the context.

We agree all in calling the holy Eucharist a Sacrament; why should we not then
agree in taking the expressions touching it in a Sacramental way? A Sacrament,
in common, is a sign of a sacred thing: Signum rei sacrae, as Divines do
ordinarily define it. Why may not the Sacrament of Christ's Body be called a
sign of his Body: Why may not we understand that to be the meaning of Christ's
words, when taking the Bread, he said, This is my Body? to wit, this is the
sign of my Body. It being usual to call Sacramental signs by the name of the
things signified by them. As St. Augustine testifyeth, Sicut ergo secundum
quendam modum Sacramentum Corporis Christi, Corpus Christi est, Aug. to. 2 ep.
23. ad Bonifac
saying, Sacraments are signs, which often do take the name of those things
which they do signify and represent. And to our purpose adds, that after a
certain manner, the Sacrament of the Body of Christ is the Body of Christ. So
the Lamb being a sign of the Passover, is called the Passover, Mat. 26.17. Exo.
12.11. The Rock being a sign of Christ suffering for us, is called Christ; Vt
Baptismus dicitur Sepulchrum: sic hoc est Corpus meum, Aug. con. Faust. li 20.
c. 21
and the Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. and Baptism the sign of Christ's Burial,
is called Christ's Burial, which St. Augustine applies to our purpose, saying,
As Baptism is called Christ's Burial, so is the Sacrament of the Body of Christ
called his Body.

Besides Bellarmine, Non enim Dominus dubitavit dicere, hoc est corpus meum,
cum signum daret corporis sui, Aug. to. 6. cont. Adaman. cap. 12.
and all other Romish Writers do confess, being not able to deny it, that the
words of our Savior, touching the second part of this Sacrament, to wit, the
Cup, are sigurative: This Cup is the New Testament of my Blood; Where they
acknowledge a Trope in the word Cup or Calice, taking it for that which is in
the Cup. Why will not they likewise admit the former words relating to the
Bread to be figurative? Non negamus in verbo calix tropum esse. Bellarm. de
Euch. l. 1. c. 11.
such pressing reasons moving to it, and such terrible inconveniences attending
their construction, as hereto has been, and after shall be further declared.

Now that the most Reverend Fathers of that happier Age taught by Christ and
his Apostles were of our Opinion, taking the words of our Savior in a
Figurative sense, and the Eucharistical Bread a Type, or Sign of his sacred
Body, is clearly seen by their Writings, such as could escape the blots of the
Roman Expurgatory. Vererable Denis Areopagita was ignorant of
Transubstantiation; and so distinguished between the substantial signs and
Christ signified by them, saying: By those Reverend signs and Symboles Christ
is signified, Dionis. Areopagita Eccles. hierar c. 2. I no and Dionisiq. cap
hier. 3 Eucharistiam. vocat ant typon Belar. li. 2. de Eu char. c. 15. n. sed
hoc.
and the faithful made partakes of him. He calls the Sacrament a Type, even
after Consecration, as Bellarmin himself confesses. So that according to St.
Denis, the Elements of Bread and Wine in this Sacrament are Types and Symboles;
which is to say, figures and signs of the Body and Blood of Christ; though not
bare signs, but really exhibiting Christ and his Spiritual grace to the
faithful, duly disposed: which being St. Denis his expression, fully agrees
with the belief of the Church of England in this particular.

St. Chrisostom delivers clearly the same Doctrine, Chrisest epist. ad. ad
Caesar. co^tr. haeres. Apollinar.
saying that before the Pread is sanctified we name it Bread, but the Divine
Grace sanctifying it, by the means of the Priest, it is freed from the name of
Bread; but it is esteemed worthy to be called the Lords Body although the
nature of Bread remains in it. But St. Austin is most eminent in clearing this
point, where he brings in Christ thus speaking to his disciples: Aug^ in Psa.
98.
you are not to eat this Body which you see, or to Drink that Blood which my
crucifiers shall power forth. I have commended to you a Sacrament, which being
spiritually understood shall quicken you. Contra Adamantium. cap 12.
And again he says that Christ brought them to a banquet in which he commended
to his Disciples the figure of his Body and lood. For he did not doubt to say
This is my Body, Contra ^^austum Manichaeum.
when he gave the sign of his Body. And in another place he says; that which
by all men is called a Sacrifice is the sign of the true Sacrafice, in which
the flesh of Christ after his assumption is celebrated by the Sacrament of
remembrance.

Theodoret is more emphatical upon this subject, saying; Theodoreus Dialog 2 c.
24.
Christ honored the Symboles and the Signs which are seen, with the title of
his Body and Blood; not changing the nature, but to nature adding grace. For
neither do the mistical signs recede from their nature; for they abide in their
proper substance, figure and form, and may be seen and touched etc.

I will conclude these testimonies with one that happily may carry more weight,
if not deemed Infallible, I mean of Pope Pelagius, speaking thus: Pelagius Papa
de duabus naturis contra Eurichem and Nestori um. vide Picherel in dissert de
missa and expositione verborum institutionis caenae Domini. Page 14.
Truly the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ which we receive is a
Divine thing; for that by it we are made partakers of the Divine nature; and
yet it ceases not to be the substance or nature of Bread and Wine. And truly an
Image and similitude of the Body and Blood of Christ is celebrated in the
Action of the mysteries.

I am to suppose it will be replied (for some exception must be conceived
against evidences so clear and executive) that these testimonies of the Fathers
are not to be seen thus in their more corrected editions; which I have reason
to believe, having seen the venerable writings of the most ancient and grave
Fathers of the Church, both Greek and Latin, defaced with large blots,
wheresoever they were found opposite to the present Tenants and practice of the
Roman Church, according to the direction of the Roman Expurgatory. They pretend
that Protestants have inserted into the Books of the Fathers, those clauses
favoring their own Doctrine. But who can believe, that so many weighty Volumes
making up great Libraries, should be newly printed to receive those supplies?
that so many clear sentences concording with the context, should be so
artificially conveyed into the very heart and marrow of the Homilies of the
Fathers? The contrary is the more credible to me, I having seen very ancient
Libraries, which never came under the hands of a Protestant, expurged of such
clauses and sentences according to the Rule of the Roman Expurgatory.

Besides this, Scot. in 4. dis 11. q. 3. Ocham ib. q. 6. Biel lect. 40 in
Canon. Missae. R^ffens c. 1. o. 1. controv. captiv. Balil.
Scotus, Ocham, Biel, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Bassolis, Caietan, Melchior
Canus, and others, many eminent Schoolmen have affirmed, that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is not expressed in the Canon of the Bible. And certainly it
was no Article of Faith, before the Lateran Council declared it for such, 1200.
years after Christ, as Scotus and others do affirm. And even after this
declaration, several of their chief Teachers continued affirming that Article
not to be contained in Scripture; Bassolis, Cai^tan, ap^d Suar. to 3 Disp. 46.
sec. 3. Ca^us lo^ com. l. 3. sun. 2.
especially ^assolis, Caietan, Melchior Canus; and so they coined it of their
own heads: for they could not declare it to be revealed, if it was not in
Scripture.

Their doctrine of Transubstantiation and Corporal Presence of our Savior in
the Sacrament of the Altar being thus ill grounded; consider how desperate is
their resolution, in giving to the consecrated wafer the Worship of Divinity;
nay greater than ever they give to the true undoubted God; as is well known to
such as have seen the sumptuous pomp of Spain, and other Popish Countries, in
adoring the Consecrated Host. Even standing to their own principles, they can
never be absolutely certain of Christ's Corporal Presence under those Forms of
Bread; That depending, as themselves teach, from the intention of the Priest
consecrating, and his due Ordination; and this later again depending from the
intention of the Bishop that ordained him, and his legal Ordination, and so
upward, of endless requisites impossible to be known certainly upon any
occasion, as Bellarmine, Vega, and all their Writers commonly do confess.
Bellar. li. 3. de justif. c. 8.
What blindness therefore is it to give Divine Worship to a thing they know not
certainly to be more than a piece of bread? Vega lib. 9. de justif. c. 17.


Some, pressed with this Argument, did answer that they were free from Idolatry
in their practice herein, because they believe that host to be God. But upon
this account, the Egyptians worshipping the Sun for God, and the Israelites
adoring the Golden Calf, believing it was the true God that brought them out of
Egypt, and the grossest Idolaters that ever were, may plead for excuse from
Idolatry, alleging unwilful mistake. To this again some of them reply, that
they do not barely suppose Christ to be really present under the Form of bread;
but that they know and believe it upon the same ground and motives, upon which
they believe that Christ is God, and consequently to be adored. Whereby
certainly they give great advantage to the enemies of Christ's Divinity; seeing
they make the truth of these two things equal, that is, Bellar. de Christo, l.
1. c. 4.
the Divinity of Christ and Transubstantiation. And of the untruth of this bold
Assertion, I will take learned Bellarmine for judge; who when he proves the
Divinity of Christ, goes through nine several classes of Arguments (of which
six are wholly out of Scripture) with uncontrollable strength and admirable
clearness. But being to prove Transubstantiation out of Scripture, his only
argument is from those words of our Savior, Matthew. De Sacr. Euchar. l. 3. c.
19.
26. Take, eat, this is my body. And finding that proof not clear enough,
appeals to the Authority of Councils and Fathers, concluding the chapter thus:
Though in the words of the Lord there may be some obscurity, or ambiguity, that
is taken away by the Councils and Fathers of the Church; and so passes to that
kind of proof.

But whatsoever be of Scripture for Transubstantiation, it is intolerable
boldness to say, there is the same reason for the adoration of the Host, as for
Christ's Divinity it self; whereas for the one we have a plain command in
Scripture, and for the other nothing like it. St. Paul tells, that all the
Angels are commanded to worship the Son of God; Heb. 1.6.
and that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in Heaven, Phi.
2.10.
in Earth, and under the Earth. And St. John tells from his Master's mouth,
that the Heavenly Father commanded that all men should honor the Son, even as
they do the Father. Jo. 5.23.
But where is the least intimation given, that we are to worship Christ in the
Sacramental Bread, supposing him present there? If you answer, the general
command extends to him where ever he is present; I say you may upon that
account, as well worship him in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in any other
bread, for in all he is present as God.

I will conclude this Point with answering the argument I saw, taken for the
most weighty against our Doctrine hitherto declared, of taking the Sacrament of
the Altar for a commemoration of our Savior, and spiritual partaking of his
blessed Body and Blood, for the food of our souls to life everlasting, without
any real transmutation of the substances. That if the Jews did take his words
in this sense, they could not in reason strive among themselves, saying, John
5.52.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? nor his Disciples say, This is an
hard saying, who can hear it? And Christ replying, did not reprehend their
misunderstanding his words, but repeated his former doctrine, saying, Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, ye have no life in you.

This argument I once over-valued; but considering it better, I look upon it as
a tacit censure of Christ's reply for non pertinent, to satisfy the Objection
of his Hearers. Shall we pretend to understand their meaning better than
Christ, to whom they spoke? or is it impossible that the malice of the Jews
would not, or the simplicity of the Disciples could notunderstand the height
and mysterious sense of the words of our Lord? viz. that the Elements of Bread
and Wine, consecrated and taken in a Sacramental way in remembrance of his
Death and Passion, should feed to life everlasting the Faithful, taking them
with due preparation, as Protestants do understand in conformity with the
Fathers of the Primitive Church before related: but that rather they understood
them of a corporal and fleshy eating of his Body as Papists do; and so
represented Difficulties which reason dictated against the like expression,
such as we did in the beginning of this Discourse. You say he did not correct
such understanding; but he did apparently, replying to the Objection of his
Disciples; so. 6.63.
It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: The words that I
speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. Wherewith he draws them
from an apprehension of a corporal eating, to that of spiritual feeding,
conducing to the everlasting life of their souls. His reply to the Jews,
signifies, they understood him, as we do of a spiritual eating, and miraculous
operation, which they would not believe: and so he repeateth the same doctrine
to them, with the commination annexed, that if they did not eat his flesh, they
should not have life in them.

Worship of Images.
As to the third point, of worshipping Images, it is clearly prohibited by God
in the second precept of the Decalogue; Exodus 20.4.5.
Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, thou shall not bow down thy
self to them. This Precept they have put out of their Catechism, to give place
to their own of worshipping of Images, with the same honor due to the persons
represented by them; and consequently the Image of God, and Christ, with
latria; of the Virgin Mary with hyperdulia; of Saints with dulia, according to
the graduation they express. This to be the general Tenent with them, Azor
declares in these words, Constans est Theologorum sententia imagines eodem
^^nore, and (...) honorari and c^li. quo colitu^. id cujus est image, Az^r
instit mor. (...) 1. l 9 c. 6.
It is the constant judgment of Divines, that the Image is to be honored and
worshipped with the same honor and worship, wherewith that is worshipped
whereof it is an Image. Nay, they will have us believe, that God did ordain so
much in the first commandment, and so contradicted himself, prohibiting in the
second commandment, what he commanded in the first. Lau: Vaux in his Catechism
to to this Question; Who breaks the first commandment of God, by irreverence
of God? gives this Answer; they that do not give due reverence to God and his
Saints, or their relics and Images? What reverence they pretend due to
Images, Decissione casuum conscientiae, p 1. l. 2. c. 2. sect. t^nult. Vet.
d^gma Theto. 5. l 15. c. 3. s 1^. c. 14 s 8.
Jacobus de Graffijs declares fully, according to what has been said before.

But Dionysius Petavius, one of their most warrantable Antiquaries, tells us,
that for the four first Centuries, and farther, there was little or no use of
Images in the Temples or Oratories of Christians; and such as was, Pope Gregory
declares, it was only for Historical use, for information of the unlearned,
not to worship them, and so writing to Serenus Bishop of Marsile, who brake
down the Images that were in his Church, Gre. regist li 7. Ep^s 2^9. ad Serenum.
seeing the people worshipping them, says thus; We commend you, that you have
that zeal, that nothing made with hands should be worshipped; but yet we judge
that you should not have broken those Images; for Painting is therefore used in
Churches, that they which are unlearned, may yet by sight read these things
upon the walls, which they cannot read in books; therefore your brotherhood
ought both to preserve the Images, and restrain the people from worshipping
them.

This difference betwixt making an Image, and worshipping of it, is confirmed
by the example of the brazen Serpent, Number. 21.9. 2 Kin. 18.4.
which God himself ordered to be made; which when only made and looked upon,
was a Medicine; but when worshipped, it became Poison, and was destroyed.

Learned Vasques acknowledges, that the worship of God by an Image is clearly
prohibited in the second Commandment; and not only the worship of an Idol,
saying, that it is plain in Scripture, Vasq in 3. p. dis 94. c. 3
that God did not only forbid that in the second Commandment which was unlawful
by the Law of Nature, as the worship of an Image for God, but the worshipping
of the true God by any similitude. Nic. ph. l. 8. c 53


Nicephorus Calixtus relating the Heresy of the Armenians and Jacobits, says,
they made Images of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which he censures as a
most absurd thing? quod perquam absurdum est, yet they do it in the Roman
Church. But S. Clement of Alexandria, of Images in general, declares thus: Li.
7. Hom. and in paraen.
We have no Images in the world, it is apparently forbidden to us to exercise
that deceitful art: for it is written, thou shall not make any similitude of
any thing in Heaven above, etc.

They confess it is sinful to worship an Image terminative, or in it self; but
pretend it lawful to worship it relative, or for God or the Saints sake, who is
represented. A strange way of serving God! to transgress his Commandment to
please him.

Saul was reprehended, and severely punished, for this kind of officiousness;
when being commanded to destroy all that Amalek had, he spared sheep and oxen
to sacrifice to the Lord. But that fair pretext could not excuse his
disobedience; and what he thought religious devotion, was declared to be no
better than Idolatry. Samuel intimating to him this fearful Verdict; 1 Samuel
15.22, 23.
Has the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? behold, to obey is better than sacrifice; and to
hearken, than the fat of rams: for Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubborness is as iniquity and Idolatry. This being so, when God is so clear
and absolute in commanding not to bow down to Images, adding to this Precept,
(beyond others) special expressions of jealousy, and commination of severity
against infringers of it; how can bowing down to them be justified with colors
of devotion? or excused from rebellion or stubborness which is censured to be
Idolatry?

Besides, the worship of an Image terminative, and not relative, includes a
contradiction; the very essence of an Image including relation to another;
whereas nothing can be an Image of it self. Wherefore the same precept that
prohibits a terminative worship, excludes a relative. But whatsoever may be
intended by these expressions, how many of the commonalty take notice of that
distinction? very few certainly. When they bow down to an Image, the Image it
self downright they worship. Then generally they commit Idolatry in this
practice, or at least a sin, in exposing themselves to a danger of committing
it.

But what of the inconveniences of this practice? one comes to a Church or
Chapel laden with Images, and before he can recollect himself and think of
God, his imagination and eyes run upon those pictures, and he returns home more
full of Figures than of Spirit.

Inveration of Saints.
Now to the Fourth; Their invocation of Saints, is contrary to God's Ordinance,
Rom 8.34.
who has appointed his Son Jesus to make intercession for us; who is more
compassionate, better able, and more willing than any of the Saints or Angels
to help us: Joh. ^ 16.
And himself assures us, that whatsoever we ask the Heavenly Father in his
Name, Acts 4.^2.
he will give it us. Contrary to this and the declaration of St. Peter, that
there is not salvation in any other? and that there is no other name under
Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. The Romish Church teaches
her children, to call the blessed Virgin Mary their life and hope, vita,
dulcedo, and spes nostra, their Redeemer and Savioress; Reparatrix and
Salvatrix desperantis animae: their comfort and giver of spiritual grace,
irroratrix and largitrix spiritualis gratiae; with other extravagancies,
certainly unwelcome to that glorious Mother of Christ, and true humble soul,
who in that her famous canticle acknowledges her very lowliness to be the
motive of God's high favors to her, Luke 1.46.
for he has regarded the lowliness of his Hand-maiden. The like exorbitancies
they preach and teach of other Saints. As I was considering this Point, came to
my hands a paper of my own, censuring the doctrine I heard in a Sermon preached
where I was present, in the City of Palencia in Spain, the year 1661. by a
Friar of a certain Order, upon the Festivity of one of their Saints, saying of
him, that he was incapable of erring in his doctrine; that his doctrine was of
equal authority with the Bible; that whatsoever such a Saint did say, (though
false in it self) he saying it, must be true. The proofs he brought for these
desperate positions, were as mad as the positions themselves, and so
ridiculous, that dare not relate them in this grav Auditory, though I have them
in writing. Let not malice gather by this discourse that I revile the Saints,
or repine at their glory; I rejoice at it, and bless God for so rewarding his
Servants. What I reprehend, is, the blasphemous abuses committed in the worship
of them, unpleasing certainly to the Saints.

A facetious expression of a Spanish Preacher, may be a serious proof of this
being so. Preaching upon the Festivity of a Saint, Founder of a certain Order,
he feigned, that studying his Sermon, he had an ecstasy or dream, wherein
finding himself in Heaven, he saw that Saint he preached of behind the door,
hiding himself; and being questioned why he did so? answered, He came there,
being ashamed to hear the mad expressions of his Fryer's, in praising and
extolling him upon such days.

And certainly, if the Saints living in glory were capable of shame and sorrow,
they would grieve and be ashamed at the proceedings of their wild worshippers.
Of this I made grievous complaints to the Inquisitor General of Spain, crying
against exorbitancies of that kind, repugnant to all Christianity; being
commissioned by himself to give him account of what doctrine I found
censurable. Even then, and in that Country, I cried against these
exorbitancies: but how succesful my good intention to that purpose was, I do
not know; for this malady grows still: The way of getting the credit of a
sound Catholic with the blind Vulgar, is, to exceed in this Practice: as to
spite the Jews, and seem true Christians, they will eat more Pork than their
stomach can bear: so to spite Protestants, they will run beyond all measure,
even of their own principles, in advancing Saints: For one Church dedicated to
our Savior, you will see an hundred dedicated to diverse Saints; for one Pater
noster, ten Ave Mary's; for one discourse or praise of God, a thousand of their
respective Saints. Whereof I often saw, to my deep grief, sad experiences. A
person of Quality lies dying; in comes a Friar of this Order, and falls with
all his Rhetoric to exhort him to devotion toward the Saints of his own
Order; to take the habit, scapulary or cord of it. Then comes one of another
Order, and falls likewise a commending the Saints and habit of his Order, and
so each one as they come. Among them all, little or no mention of our Savior
Jesus his Passion to rely upon. Would you think it is the good of that soul, or
the honor of the Saint, they are zealous for; or rather the interest of the
Convent? judge it you, and let others of more liberty speak it. Have pity O
good God, of souls left to such Instruction.

Half Communion.
Touching the fifth point, of denying the Chalice to the Laity; I think it an
injury to our cause to seek after any farther proof of it, than their own
Confession; that our Savior Jesus did institute, and the Primitive Church did
practice the administration of the blessed Sacrament under both kinds to the
people, as it is used in the Church of England. But the Roman Church thought
fit to do otherwise. This confession is their greatest confusion, and too too
sufficient confutation. It was to me a horror to see the boldness of the
Council of Constance, confessing the foresaid, and coming down with a non
obstante; That, Council. Const^n. l^ss. 13.
notwithstanding Christ's institution, and the practice of the Primitive Church
therein; the Council prohibited all Priests, under pain of Excommunication, to
administer the Communion under both kinds to the Laity: For causes they do not
express, neither do we need to labor in searching after them, it being
sufficient for our purpose to know, that they can find or pretend causes to
alter Christ's institutions, and introduce others contrary to them. The only
reason they give for their Decree herein, is, the Authority of the Church, and
some preceding Popes or Fathers, and yet acknowledging that Christ ordained the
contrary. Is not this to transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?
Man: 15: 3.
is not this to agree with that attribute of Antichrist; who opposes and
exalts himself over all that is called God. The Pope would seem to clear
himself from that imputation, bearing for title, Servant of the Servants of
God. Gen: 27: 22:
The voice is Jacob 's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. The Pope's
speech in calling himself Servant of the Servants of God, is Christian; but his
Deed in preferring his own Law and Institution, to the Institution of Christ,
is Antichristian.

They cry Antiquity and Authority of the Church for this practice; and in the
same breath they disclaim greater Antiquity, and more warrantable Authority of
the Church, acknowledging, that Christ did institute, and the Primitive Church
did practice the giving of the Sacrament under both kinds to all the people.
How inconsequent is error? This only instance may assure us, that the Romish
Religion, as it stands now, did not proceed entirely from Christ and his
Apostles.

If we object, that the detracting of the Cup, is the bereaving the faithful
people of their spiritual food to life everlasting, by not permitting them to
partake of the blood of Christ, he affirming, Jo: 6.5 3.
that except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you. The Council tells us, We must firmly believe, and no way doubt,
that the entire body and blood of our Savior, is contained as well under the
Form of bread, as under the Form of wine. But we have showed before, how little
ground we have for a firm belief of their doctrine in this point. How great
reason to doubt it, nay, to be assured of the contrary; and that Christ is
present and taken in the Eucharist, only in a spiritual and Sacramental way:
that being so, in bereaving the Faithful of the Cup, they bereave them of the
whole Sacrament. For their own Divines do agree in affirming, that the
consecrated Forms of Bread and Wine are essential Constitutes of this
Sacrament; Suar. in 3 p: disp: 42: sec. 1 conc: 3:
any, they alone are the Sacrament properly, as Suarez declares, relating a
great number of other Divines for the same doctrine. Therefore taking no Wine,
they take no Sacrament; taking no Sacrament, they have no life in them, as our
Savior declared; and so bereaving them of the Sacramental wine, they bereave
them of the life of their souls; and is not this to use cruelty to souls?

Purgatory and Indul. gences.
As for the sixth Article, concerning Purgatory, I do not find their Learned
men so confident as the Vulgar, in fixing a determinate place for it in the
bowels of the Earth; with those frightful qualities, their Legends do specify.
Being contented to conclude from some places of Scripture, and by conjecture,
that after this Life there must be some place to expiate or purge souls from
Venial fins, or satisfy for the Temporal penalty due to Great ones, without
determining whether that place be over, or under, or in the Earth; or whether
the pain be heat, or cold, or darkness, or tempest, etc.

And as the Conclusion is obscure, so is the inference of it from the premises
laid. The chief place out of the Old Testament, is the case of Judas
Macchabeus, sending money to Jerusalem, that sacrifices should be made for his
soldiers defunct, and the gloss annexed, that therefore it is a holy
consideration to pray for the dead, etc. But though the Book relating thiscase
were canonical, and of certain authority, (which is not allowed) yet the
conclusion pretended from it, for the doctrine of Purgatory, is not of force.
For, Prayers for the dead may be made, and were made, to different purposes, 2
Match. 12.43.
than that of drawing them out of Purgatory. First, Suar: to. 1. in 3. P. disp.
10. Sec. 4.
because many learned Writers of the Romish party do teach, that God, as a good
Paymaster, does oftentimes give beforehand, the reward of services to be done
in the future; and therefore being longsighted, and always present to all the
spaces of Eternity, may see now and listen to prayers, that will be made in any
Age after. And foreseeing, that godly persons shall pray in the future, for
the assistance of his Grace, to one dying now, may yield it accordingly. This
doctrine I have seen practiced in a Letter, written to my self, by one of the
learnedest men in Spain, wherein speaking of the death of his Mother, he prayed
to God that he might have assisted her in the later hour for dying penitent. If
this go well, Prayers may be commendable for the Dead to different purposes,
from that of drawing them out of Purgatory. And if the case related of the
Macchabees be true, it is more likely the prayers made for the slain should
have proceeded in the manner foresaid, than for bringing them out of
Purgatory. Whereas in the same place is related, that those men were found to
have committed a mortal sin, (which is not pretended to be pardoned in
Purgatory) under the coats of every one that was slain, 2 Mac. 12 V. 40
they found things consecrated to the Idols of the Jamnites, which is forbidden
to the Jews by the Law. And though Bellarmine pretends the sin of those men
should be venial through ignorance, it is but a bare conjecture, and not
agreeable to the context, showing that deed to have drawn upon them God's
vengeance: then every man saw that this was the cause wherefore they were
slain. Their death might have been their temporal punishment; and final
penitence might have freed them from the eternal, as Bellarmine confesses,
relating for it the Psalm 78. Ps. 78.34.
Cum occideret eos, quaerebant eum, and revertebantur; when he slew them, then
they sought him, and they returned and enquired early after God.

But not to rely upon the forementioned consideration of some particular
Writers, if we find in some of the Ancients, prayers to be made for the dead,
it was to other ends than to draw them out of this supposed Purgatory. First,
to praise God for giving them a happy end in his holy Faith, and rest from
their labors, as appears by those words of the Revelations used by the
Ancient Church in the Office of the dead: Rev 14 13.
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the
spirit, that they may rest from their labors. Secondly, that we should comfort
each other in the death of our Friends, reflecting upon the hope of meeting
them in Heavenly glory, according to those comfortable words of St. Paul, in
his first Epistle to the Thessalonians, 1 Thss, 4.13.
accustomed to be read in the same Office of the dead; I would not have you to
be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which areasleep, that ye sorrow not even
as others which have no hope, etc. third ly, for our spiritual instruction
whether considering the good example of our faithful Brethren preceding;
whether reflecting upon our mortality at the sight of death.

All this may be seen by the practice of the primitive Christians, as it is
declared by the Author of the Commentaries upon Job, inserted among the Works
of Origin, li. 3 comment. in Job.
by these words: We observe the memorials of the Saints, and devoutly keep the
remembrance of our parents or friends which dye in the Faith, as well rejoicing
for their refreshing, as requesting also for our selves a godly consummation of
the Faith. Thus therefore do we celebrate the death, not the day of the birth,
because they which dye shall live for ever: and we celebrate it, calling
together religious persons with the Priests, the Faithful with the Clergy;
inviting moreover the needy and the poor feeding the Orphans and Widows, that
our festivity may be for a memorial of rest to the souls departed, whose
remembrance we celebrate, and to us may become a sweet savor in sight of the
eternal God. Whereby you see, prayers and deeds of charity used in exequies of
the dead, without mention of Purgatory.

This same Answer may serve for what Bellarmine relates out of the fourth
Chapter of Tobias, Tob. 4.
touching Bread and Wine to be brought to Funerals, and the custom of inviting
Friends, and feeding the poor. What he alleges of passing by fire, Psalm.
66.12.
out of the 66. Psalm, We went through fire, and through water, but thou
broughtest us out into a wealthy place; is as little effective to the purpose;
for by fire, as well as by water, are understood tribulations and crosses of
this life.

What they allege out of Math. 22. where our Savior says, that some sins
shall not be pardoned, neither in this world, nor in the world to come;
therefore some sins are pardoned after this life, is no good consequence; for
from a negative, follows not a positive: as from saying the Duke of Venice is
not Earl of Dublin, it follows not therefore, (...) c. 4.
some other is Earl of Dublin. Bellarmine says, the former consequence ought to
be held for good, according to the laws of prudence, if not according to the
rules of Logic; lest Christ should be thought to speak improperly, if no sin
were to be pardoned in the other world. But upon this account you are to admit
for lawful, according to the rules of prudence, this other consequence; Mat.
1.25.
Joseph knew not his wife, till she had brought forth her firstborn Son;
therefore he knew her after, lest the Evangelist should be found improper in
his delivery. And as Bellarmine, or any other Christian will not think himself
obliged to admit this later consequence, so neither do we think it just to
admit the former.

The Doctrine of Purgatory being so weakly grounded, the inconveniences of it
are very great, making people negligent of true repentance and satisfaction for
their sins in this life in hopes of Remission in Purgatory. Besides the
occasion it gives to piniful abuses in the valuation of Masses for stipend,
wherein Simony would appear if that great skill of Casuists did not prevent it
wherewith any sale of Sacred things is sanctified and freed from Simony by some
dress of intention. What of the cheats used in receiving many stipends from
several persons for one Mass? Of the cruelty used with widows, children and
sometimes with creditors of the person dying bequeathing what is their right
upon Clergy sometimes not in any great need of it. Wherewith under the shape of
piety great impiety is often practiced. But the vast lucre accruing to the
Clergy from this Doctrine, (more than any text they have for it) does engage
them for the maintaining of it.

The Doctrine of Indulgences serving that of Purgatory has the same obscurity
in the assertion and uncertainty in the foundation of it as the former. Suar.
lib ^ de fens fid. c. 15.23.
Suarez declares that Indulgence is nothing else but a remission of the pains
of Purgatory which God of his infinite goodness through the Excellent merits of
Christ (to which he adds the satisfaction of Saints) has granted to his
Church together with the power of absolving. Of the infinite goodness of God,
and infinite merit of Christ, no Christian may doubt, as neither of the power
of absolving given to his Church. But whether this power extends to the
profuse grant of Indulgences practiced at present by the Roman Church, Suarez
is not so certain of, giving only for ground thereof Ecclesiastical tradition
and ancient custom generally approved.

But neither is the tradition so certain, nor the custom so ancient or
generally approved, as is pretended. The First we meet is that of Gregory the
seventh given to those of his party who would fight against the Emperor Henry
the fourth which Baronius relates from his penitentiary, Baron. ad An. D. 1084.
n. 15.
in which was promised remission of all their sins to such as would venture
their lives in that holy war. The like Indulgence with remission of all their
sins was granted to those who would fight against the Sarazens in Africa by
Victor succeeding Gregory the seventh. Other Popes following continued the same
practice. Then private Bishops began to publish Indulgences to those that would
give money toward the building or repairing of Churches or other public works
promising pardon of the seventh or Fourth or third part of their sins according
as their bounty deserved. Vide Morin. de Paenit, lib. 10. cap. 20.
So as Mauritius Bishop of Paris is said to have built the great Church of
Nostredame there in this manner.

But the Bishops of Rome abridged other Bishops of this power, and made great
complaints that by the indiscreet use of Indulgences by the Bishops, the keys
of the Church were contemned and the discipline lost, Council. Laeteranens. sub
Innoc. 3. can. 92.
so Innocent the third in the Lateran Council. I wish the present Popes had
regard to the like inconveniences still following their great profuseness in
granting indulgences censured not only by their adversaries, but by the more
sober of their own party, seeing clearly sordid lucre to have a great share in
the conduct of them, and loose livers give reins to their vices in expectation
of those boundless pardons, whose excesses I leave for others to relate, and to
be considered by such as see them. Aquin. supl sum. q. 25. art. 20. Bonavent in
4. sent. did. 20 q. 6.


Aquinas and Bonaventure do tell that there were some in the Church who said
the invention of Indulgences was only by a Pious fraud to draw men to
charitable Acts, which otherwise they would not have done; as a Mother that
promises her child an aple to run abroad, which she never gives him, when she
has brought him to it. Dur. in 4. did. 20 q 3.


Durandus a learned and sincere writer confesses that very little can be
affirmed with any certainty concerning Indulgences because neither the
Scriptures speak expressly of them, and the Fathers Ambrose, Hillary, Augustine,
Hierom speak not at all of them. Major ibi.
John Mayor adds that though it be a negative argument yet it is of force
because in the time of those Fathers they were very much skilled in Scriptures,
and it were very strange if Indulgences were to be found there, that they did
not find them. Bellar de amiss. gratia li. 6. c. 3. resp: ad object. 6.
Add to this what Bellarmin says excellently that in things which depend on
the will of God nothing ought to be affirmed unless God has revealed it in the
Holy Scripture. And conclude that the Doctrine of Indulgences being not found
in the Holy Scripture as now declared, you ought not to build upon it the hopes
of your Salvation: but endeavor with fear and trembling to secure it by exact
keeping of the Commandments of God, and following the Councels of Christ
toward a perfect life and true repentance of your sins.

Public Prayer in an unknown Language.
I will conclude this survey of Romish Tenants with the seventh and last point
proposed of their Latin Mass, and prohibiting their flock the reading of Holy
Scripture. And as to the former, of having public prayers in a Language
generally unknown to the people, certainly the whole 14th. Chapter of St. Paul
in his first Epistle to the Corinthians is clearly against it. For whatsoever
may be cavilled touching the Object of his discourse, his reasons do evidently
conclude our purpose, showing with admirable arguments, and very apposite
examples, how improper and absurd an undertaking it is to speak to a people in
a Language they understand not, pretending to teach or edify them. The purpose
of nature by speaking is to communicate the sense of him that speaks to the
hearer: But how can that be if the hearer perceives not the meaning of the
words he speaks. 1. Cor. 14. v. 17.
Even things without Life (says the great Apostle) giving sound, whither pipe
or harp, except they give a distiction in the sound, how shall it be known what
is piped or what is harped? For if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound who
shall prepare himself for the battle? so likewise you, except ye utter by the
tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for
ye shall speak unto the air. If we were to frame our selves a reason to make
out our Doctrine to the full, what other could we devise more apt and suitable
to our pretention than this? Is not prayer ordained to raise up our minds to
God? that is wont to be given for the definition of it, elevatio mentis in
Deum, a raising up of our minds to God, to praise him or ask favors of him?
will it not be conducent and necessary for this purpose to understand the
signification of the Psalms and prayers wisely ordered to this end? to say Amen
to a prayer you do not understand, may seem like the setting of your hand to a
writing without knowing what it contains. What if a Jewish or other impious
Minister did say a prayer containing Blasphemies against Christ or curses of
the Christian people present? must they say Amen to all?

If a Persian or some other that never heard of such proceedings, did come into
a Church and hear a congregation speak loud and see them make gestures, and
should be told that none of them knew what the other said; would not he justly
think them to be mad, and that the builders of the Tower of Babel were there
revived? St. Paul calls such a practice madness, laying for foundation, 1.
Cor. 14. v. 26.
that in the Church all things ought to be done to edification. And what
edification can souls receive by the noise of words they understand not, more
than by the ring of Bells. St. Augustine declares how absurd a thing it is to
speak in a Language the Hearer does not understand, Aug. de doctrine. Christ.
li. 4. c. 10.
in these terms: Quid prodest locutionum integritas, quam non sequitur
intellectus audientis? cum loquendi nulla sit causa, si quod loquimur non
intelligunt, propter quos, ut intelligant, loquimur; What profits any
excellency of speech, if not understood by the Hearer? no cause being for
speaking, if what we speak be not understood by them, for whose sake we speak,
that they may understand. And to our purpose, we may in like manner ask, what
profits the admirable providence and good Order of the Church, in
distributing the select part and choice substance of Holy Scripture upon the
Offices to be read in Churches throughout the year; if the people, whose
edification is pretended by such Offices, do not understand the contents of
them?

I shall desire such as are not resolved to be blind and to shut their eyes
against light, and stop their ears to reason, that they consider what advantage
the Protestant people have for improving their souls in this particular. They
have the word of God clearly and intelligibly beaten into their ears daily in
their Liturgy. The Psalms, Prayers, Epistles, Gospels, and lessons of the old
and new Testament, most exactly distributed upon respective days and
Festivities, contain so much of Heavenly wisdom and piety, as alone may suffice
to make a well disposed soul both Holy and wise: and very hard must the heart
be, that with such continual showers of Heavenly doctrine, will not be
mollified to piety and the fear of God. When the poor simple flock following
the Romish Priest, wants all these powerful helps of piety and virtue; Their
whole exercise of Religion (speaking of the vulgar which is the far greater
part) being to hear a Mass now and then, and not understanding a word of it
(and very seldom hearing any declaration of it) do return home as wise as they
went. I saw often some of their pious people extol the happiness of some few
among them, that had knowledge of Latin to understand the word of God read
before them, for more elevating of their minds. Why will they not reflect upon
the happiness of the children of the Protestant Church in this particular, as
in many others, and open their eyes to see their delusion?

Their leaders allege Antiquity for the practice of Divine Service in Latin.
But Antiquity goes thus. In the Eastern Empire, the Liturgy was in Greek,
because that was the mother tongue in Constantinople, the Court and head City
of that Empire. And inferior Provinces must endeavor to conform in public
exercise both of Church and State, with the Court Language. In the Western
Empire, the Liturgy was in Latin, because it was the mother Tongue in Rome,
that was Court and Head of this Western part. And Rome, under Popes pretending
no less command in the Provinces of Europe, than it had under Emperors, must
force all to conformity of Language with it self in the public worship of God;
and will exact more obedience in that point than the Emperors did: For it was
not for any privilege or sanctity conceived in the Greek and Latin Tongue,
that Liturgies were ordered in them; but because they were the Languages more
generally understood in both Empires. And therefore exceptions from that rule,
were granted to Provinces that could not conveniently observe it. So Pope John
the eighth allowed to the Prince of Moravia, to have their Liturgy in the
Sclavonian Tongue, because St. Paul says: Let every Tongue praise the Lord,
which was the reason given by the Pope in his Letter, related by Baronius.
Baron. to. 10. Anno 880 n. 16. Strabo de re eccles. c. 7.
And Walefridus Strabo tells, that in his time the Divine Office was performed
among the Scythians in the German Tongue, Origin cont. Cess. li. 8. p. 402.
which was common to them and the Germans. Nay, Origin affirms, that in the
primitive Churches, all public Offices of Religion were performed in the
proper Language of every Country.

Scripture prohibited.
And lest they should learn in their Houses, what they cannot in their
Churches, they are prohibited to read Scripture in their own Tongues, without
license under the hand of the Bishop or Inquisitor, by the advice of the Priest
or Confessor, touching the person's fitness for it; and who presumes to do
otherwise, is to be denied absolution. This is commanded in the Fourth Rule of
the Index, Index li. prohib. Alex 7. Romans An. 665.
published by Order of the Council of Trent, and set forth by the Authority of
Pius the Fourth, and since by Clement the Eighth, and lately enlarged by
Alexander the Seventh. Mat. 4.4.
This is cruelty to souls; Christ declaring the Word of God to be their food.
And Scripture it self so often inviting us to the reading of it: St. Peter thus
exhorts to it, 2 Pet. 1.19:
We have also a more sure Word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye take
heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place till the day dawn. St. Paul
commends to us the reading of Scripture, as written for our instruction and
comfort, To. 15 4. 2 Timothy 3.15. Act. 17.11.
and as able to make us wise unto salvation. St. Luke praises the Inhabitants
of Berea, in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily.

The Holy Fathers of the Primitive Church, were of the same spirit of exhorting
the Faithful, to the reading of Scripture for their comfort and direction. St.
Clement, Clement. Epist. ad Corin. p: 58.
for remedying a dissension happened among the Corinthians, writes thus to
them: p: 61.
Look diligently unto the Scriptures, which are the true Oracles of the Holy
Ghost. He adds after, Take St. Paul 's Epistles into your hands, p. 68.
and consider what he says, and praises them for being skilled in the
Scriptures; Beloved, says he, ye have known, and very well known, the Holy
Scriptures; and ye have thoroughly looked into the Oracles of God; Ignatius
epist. ad Philad. Policar. Epist. ad Philip. Clem. Alexand. Strom. 7. p 72.
therefore call them to mind. Of the same mind was Policarp, Ignatius, and the
other Ancient Fathers. Clemens of Alexandria mentions the reading of
Scriptures among Christians before their Meals, and Psalms, and Hymns at them.

What makes the present Church of Rome so vigilant to the contrary, in keeping
their Flock from reading Scripture? One reason they give, and another they keep
to themselves: the reason they give, is, that Heresies did arise from the abuse
of Scriptures. Be it so, but who were the abusers? certainly Priests, Monks,
and Friars more frequently; and of them the most Learned. Turn to Records, and
you shall find it to be so. Then if this Argument proves any thing, it will
obtain the banishing of Scripture from among the Learned, and out of all the
world. Proving so much, (which is too much) it proves nothing. Meat and drink
is the ruin of many, shall they be banished therefore out of the World? No,
let the creatures of God serve his servants, and let the abusers of them have
their punishment in the very abuse they commit. Let this Heavenly Lanthorn,
which God set up in his House, the Holy Church, to guide us in the dark ways of
this life, shine to all Christians.

And, that weak eyes may not be dazzled by the brightness of it; let this be the
general rule for all to read Scripture: Where they find it clear, let them
embrace it devoutly, and frame their lives accordingly: where it appears
obscure, let them humbly pray the Lord, he may help them with light to
understand it, and wait patiently upon his pleasure for doing so. In the mean
time, they may be assured, that all necessary knowledge for Faith in God; to
serve and praise him is fully contained in what is clear of Scripture. So St.
Augustine affirms; Aug. de Doctrine. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
In iis quae aperte in Scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae
continent fidem moresque vivendi. Whereof St. Paul gives an ample testimony,
saying, 2 Timothy 3.15.
The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation: through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus: and are profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness. That the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

The Holy Fathers do agree with St. Paul, in this his Opinion of the profit of
Scripture, for our spiritua^ instruction. St. Basil commends them as the best
remedy for all the passions of the mind. Basil. in Psalm 1.
St. Chrysostom reflecting upon that great meekness of David, in letting Saul
go free, when he had him at his will in the Den, commends to all the memory of
that example, Chrysostom. Homil. 1. de Davide and Saul.
saying, It is impossible, that a mind conversant with this kind of Histories,
should be overcome with passions. St. Jerome says, that infinite evils do
arise from ignorance of Scriptures. From hence most part of Heresies have come;
from hence a negligent and careless life, and unfruitful labors.

The reason given by Papists against reading of Scripture being thus confuted;
would you know what reason it is that they have, and keep to themselves? Very
many say it is, for keeping the people blind-folded, that they may not see the
Ignorance of their Ministers, nor the Corruption of their Mysteries It seems
they have declared so much themselves, in a Council of Bishops met at Bononia,
for restoring the dignity of the Roman See, Conc. de stabilien. Romans fid. p. 6,
apud Stilling-fleet opere de Idololatria, Romans ecc. page 201.
by Order of Pope Julius the Third: the chief advice they gave, was, that by
all means, as little of the Gospel as might be, (especially in the vulgar
Tongue) should be read in the Cities under his jurisdiction. Adding that Book
to have been the cause of that great decay of their former luster, and
concluding thus; And in truth if any one diligently consider it, and compare it
with what is done in our Churches, will find them very contrary to each other;
and our very doctrine not only to be different from it, but repugnant to it.
Thus God was pleased they should discover their intention, and that it should
be published for undeceiving the misled by them, as written by several grave
Authors; who, I suppose, would not publish it, but upon sufficient ground. And
is not this to use Tyranny over souls?

Third Point.
Now I will come to the third and last Point proposed of my Discourse, which
is, to conclude from what is said hitherto, that the resolution I took of
withdrawing from the Communion of the Roman Church, was just and necessary. My
whole Discourse upon the Text prefixed, is but one Syllogism, whereof the major
Proposition is this; That if we should find a Church or Congregation convinced
of Idolatry, Impiety, and Cruelty, in the public established practice of it;
we are to forsake the Communion of it. This is the doctrine of our Savior,
contained in the words of our Text, as appeared by the declaration and proof of
it in the first Point. The minor is, That I found the present general practice
of the Roman Church, convinced of Idolatry, Impiety, and Cruelty: The
Conclusion is, that the Resolution I took of forsaking it, was just and
necessary. No Christian may deny the major, it being Christ's doctrine, as
appears by our Text. If the minor be true, no good Logician may deny the
conclusion. The truth of the minor, touching Idolatry, seems to be sufficiently
proved by what is said concerning the Worship of of the Eucharistical bread,
and of Images. And touching Antichristian Impiety by what is declared of their
opposing, and preferring the Popes Laws to the Law of God; making the Pope Sole
and Supreme Arbiter of Gods Law, giving him the Attribute of Infallibility
proper to God alone; abrogating Christ's Institution in the Administration of
the Eucharist or Communion, and Establishing another contrary to it. Bereaving
Christ of the title of sole Savior and hope of human kind, by calling the
Virgin Mary their Savioress and hope. Advancing the honor and worship of
Saints beyond that of God, by dedicating more Churches, and saying more prayers
to them than to God

Their Cruelty in the conduct of souls appears too much in what we have said
of bereaving the Christian people of the Fruit of the blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, in their practice of half Communion: in depriving them of the benefit of
their soul, having public Divineservice in a Language not intelligible to
them, and of the liberty of reading the word of God in his Holy Scriptures.
Their Tyranny over Princes, in deposing them from their Crowns and dignities,
and moving subjects to bear arms against them. Their severity used with the
Irish in pursuance of their pretention herein.

To this may be added their Tyranny over consciences in forcing them to the
belief and defense of Doctrines repugnant to their judgment, and not
established by Catholic Faith; as may appear in their violence about forcing
all to believe and declare for the conception of the virgin Mary without
original sin; so many clear testimonies of Scripture being against it as
affirm, that all men did sin in Adam; that Christ was universal redeemer from
sin, and Savior of all mankind. And not one word to be found in favor of the
Exception they pretend for the Virgin Mary, besides their voluntary, and very
often frivolous applications of Texts, never intended by the Author of them for
their purpose. So whatsoever is said by Solomon of the Spouse in his Canticles,
of wisdom in his Proverbs, etc. that may seem to have some sound or cadency,
suiting with their intention, is taken up for a sure Oracle, declaring the
immaculate conception of the blessed Virgin. But what strength is wanting to
their Texts, is supplied by Force and Art; two Orders being engaged in that
quarrel, for the immaculate conception; the one numerous among the people, and
violent in stirring them to abuse the Houses and persons of their Opposers: the
other prevalent with the Peers and Prelates, and with the Popes, to engage all
in their Quarrel; obtaining fearful Excommunications against Opposers of their
doctrine by word or writing; ordering that in Universities none may have
Degrees, in Churches none may preach, but such as will protest publicly for
the immaculate conception, with other many violences used to extort such
protestations. Of which Protestants how many do Protest against, what in their
mind they judge to be truth, God knows. For my part, I am slow in judging of
men's thoughts; but I dare judge, that if their Definitions touching other
Points controverted did proceed after this manner, I am not obliged to take
them for Infallible.

What of their cruel censures of their Fellow Christians, not subject to the
Pope of Rome, excluding them, and the rest of human kind, not living in that
Communion, from all hopes of Salvation; wherein they not only oppose Truth,
but belly their own Principles, as was clearly made out, in a Treatise I was
forced to pen some years ago: When being questioned by some of the Nobility,
whether one baptized, knowing the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the
Creed, and endeavoring to live according to them, ready to believe what he
understands to be true Catholic Faith, guilty of no obstinacy in misbelieving
any Article of it: Whether such an one may be saved, though he be not of the
Communion of the Roman Church. I answered, he may; and was truly a Member of
the Catholic Church, notwithstanding any calling the Vulgar gave him. And
having understood I was censured for this Doctrine in absence; (though none
opposed me in presence) I penned a Treatise in Latin, wherein I demonstrated
by evident Testimonies of Scripture, Councils, Fathers, Authority of Divines,
and Declarations of Popes, that the Doctrine I delivered was Catholic Faith,
and the contrary of it was Heresy and Blasphemy. Coppies of this Treatise were
given to them of more Authority and Learning, of the Romish Clergy in the
Kingdom, and are among them these 3. or 4. years, and none yet could show in it
any thing untrue, or ill grounded; yet all conspired against the publishing of
this said Doctrine, as being prejudicial to the Romish Cause; because thence
followed, that Protestants may be saved, and that many called Heretics, would
not be such indeed. To which I answered, that I found great conveniences in
those things they represented to me for inconveniences; being heartily desirous
that all men should be saved, and that of them called Heretics, none of all
should be such in truth. And come what will of my Answer, I cannot but answer
truth when I am questioned.

I replied to their complaints of that, with the words of Job, Jo. 13.7.
Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? Or as the
Latin Text has; Number quid Deus indiget vestro mendacio, ut pro illo loquamini
dolos? Does God need your lies, and that you should use cheats in his cause?
surely he does not. And so I concluded, it was not the cause of God, or good of
souls, they zealed, but the Grandeur of the Roman Court, and their own
pretentions with it; which I would not advance with telling lies, or concealing
truth. Let them sooth one another with those compliances, as those Owls and
Sirens Isaiah represents, answering one another in the ruinous Houses of
Babylon; Respondebant ibi ululae in aedibus ejus, Is. 13.22.
and Syrenes in delubris voluptatis. Odious Night-birds, and lewd Sirens keep
correspondence in Babylon. But the children of Light, and Lovers of Truth, will
not listen to their charms, nor yield to their cheats.

They deceive the simple with saying, that Protestants do allow Papists may be
saved; but Papists do not allow that Protestants may be saved; and thence
conclude, that both parties approving of the Popish Religion for a sure way to
salvation; it is to be reputed for the most secure but in neither do they say
truth; for no learned Protestant does allow the Popish Religion in general, and
absolutely speaking to be a secure way to Salvation. For all do agree in
affirming, that many of their Tenants and practices are inconsistent with
Salvation; though ignorance may happily excuse many of the simple sort; but not
such as know, or with due care and inquiry, may know their error.

On the other side, all learned men of the Roman Church do teach, that all
Protestants baptized, Laiman: l. 2. tr. l. c. 13. Vasq. q. 1. disp. 126.
Castropal. p. 1. tr. 4. disp. 1. q. 11. p. 1. diffic. 4. aetatis apud ipsos.
and believing the common principles of Christian Religion, not convinced of
any error against the Catholic Faith, but conceiving they follow the truth of
it, are not Heretics, but Members of the Catholic Church; and so endeavoring
to serve God according to the rules of their Belief, may be saved, as formerly
declared. And it is a high point of rashness, and want of Christian charity, to
judge of any particular, without special ground that he does not live with that
sincerity of mind and belief, that he is in the right. Such presumptuous
censures are injurious to the goodness of God, and Disturbers of human quiet.
For truly, if by reason of the diversity of tempers, abilities, educations, and
unavoidable prejudices, whereby men's understandings are variously formed and
fashioned, they embrace several opinions, whereof some must be erroneous; to
say that God will damn them for such errors, they being lovers of Truth, and
desirous to serve him; is to rob man of his comfort, and God of his goodness.
In which rash proceeding, the commonalty of the Romish party are beyond all men
presumptuous and malignant; and their learned men that do favor, and not
rebuke their malignity therein, may justly fear God's displeasure, and that
Christ will disown them for followers of him, as void of charity, the chief
mark he gives of his Disciples, saying; by this shall all men know, that ye are
my Disciples, Jo. 13.3.
if ye have love one to another.

Hereunto I may add the great tyranny and cruelty they use to souls in the
practice of Confession. On the one side, they increase the rigor of it with
additions of severity, obliging to such minute expressions of the most loathsome
circumstances of secret thoughts and deeds, as render it the most heavy of
Christian Duties. And on the other side, they put so many stops to the
execution of it, by reservation of cases not to be absolved, but by determinate
persons; that it occasions lamentable perplexities of souls, and proceedings
against the dictates of their Conscience. Which cruelty is farther increased in
many places, by the sordid avarice of their Pastors, making poor souls believe
they may not confess but to their own Curats, and refusing to hear their
Confessions, without receiving Money for it. I will not be so unjust to the
Roman Church, as to fasten this later abuse upon the whole body of it, it being
but the fault of some corrupt members. I am not so malignant toward her, as to
throw the dirt of her feet in her face; whereas I would, if I could, wash away
all her stains with the blood of my heart. But even her feet are so haughty,
and ill sufferers of correction, that endeavoring to reform this abuse, with
intimating Decrees of Councils and Popes against it, and representing the
miscarriage of souls by it; I had no other fruit of my labor, but spite and
hatred, for pretending to cure this malady; which joined to many other
experiences of their distemper, to be both incurable and contagious, I resolved
upon this conclusion: Jerem 51.9.
We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed, for sake her.

But thou, O Father of mercy, Lord Omnipotent, to whose power all creatures are
subject, who can hold in with bit and bridle, such as will not approach to
thee; forsake not that Church, nor any other Congregation of men redeemed by
the precious blood of thy Son Jesus. Illuminate them all with the glorious
beams of thy Heavenly Light: Reduce them by the powerful ties of thy grace, to
perfect Union in Truth and Charity, to serve and praise thee duly in this life,
and join together in thy Glory, in Life everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.

