Sundry Queries tendered to such as are, or profess themselves to be Ministers
of JESUS CHRIST, for clearing the Doctrine of the FOURTH COMMANDMENT. And the
LORDS SABBATH DAY.
To all that are, or profess themselves to be the Ministers of Jesus Christ;
These ensuing Queries are humbly presented to be considered, for the clearing
of the truth in this weighty controvercy, about the SABBATH DAY.
Querie. 1. WHether the Fourth Commandment, expressed, Exodus 20. be not Morral
and perpetual, as well as the other nine be, yea or no?

Quer. 2. Whether the scope and drift of that fourth Precept, be not to
persuade us to lay by the works of our calling one day in seven, that we may on
that day wholly, give up our selves to wait on the Lord, in the performance of
duties of piety and mercy, for our attaining of, and growing in sanctification
and holiness?

Quer. 3. Whether the fourth Precept, do not as strictly bind us to keep holy
the seventh day, of or from the Creation, as it binds us to the observation
of a seventh day.?

Quer. 4. If the seventh days Sabbath, be not Morral and perpetual, then how
comes it to pass that it was instituted, or appointed from the first Creation,
when man by guilt stood in no need of a Savior; nor yet of such a cerimony,
Genesis 2.3.

Quer. 5. If the seventh days Sabbath he not Morrall, and belonging both to
Jews and to Gentiles: Then how comes it to pass that it was given to all men in
Adam, when there was no difference between Jew and Gentile? and was observed by
command from the beginning, as appears by comparing together, Genesis 2.3. and
Exodus 16.18. to 31.

Quer 6. If when our Lord Jesus says, Matt. 5.18. that till heaven and earth
pass, one jot or tittle should in no wise pass from the Law. If he there meant
not the Law of the ten Commandments, expressed in Exodus 20. then what Law did he
mean?

Quer. 7. If the seventh days Sabbath be not Morrall, but an abrogated
cerimony now since the death of Christ; then wherefore should our Savior
instruct his beloved Apostles, that must instruct christian Churches to pray,
Matt. 24.20. that they might not fly on the Sabbath, knowing that their flight
would fall out more than thirty years after his death?

Quer. 8. If there be a day instituted or appointed for holy, instead of the
Sabbath, without a word or warrant from God: how much does this come short of
will worship?

Quer. 9. If there be any word from the Lord, or from any of his Apostles,
Prophets, or Evangelists, for the changing of the day; from which of them is
it, or where is it written?

Quer. 10. If there be no text of scripture that warrants the changing of Gods
holy rest, from the seventh day to the first day of the week, wherefore should
we follow Rome the mother of harlots, in this unwarrantable practice?

Quer. 11. If there be never so weighty reasons found in the judgments of men,
for the changing of the day, whether is that a sufficient ground to change it,
without a word from God?

Quer. 12. Whether you find any part of all the New Testament, or any christian
Author for one thousand five hundred years after Christ, that in any Book or
writing, or relation at any time; did call the first day of the week the
Sabbath day: if so, show who, and in what Book, or writing it is so?

Quer. 13. Whether you find not that as in all the New Testament, which was all
written after Christ's death, for the use of all christians to the worlds end;
so also in all Lattan and Greek christian Authors, the seventh day, (which now
from the heathens custom is named Saturday,) is always, in all their writings
both Civil and Ecclesiastical, called Dies Sabbati; as well as in all the
Parliament Rouls of England, and what that providence speaks forth, that they
never made so bold with that day, as they did with all other days, to which
they gave heathenish names.

Beloved and much honored, the reasons of my troubling you with this great
business at this time, is, the weight and worth of this truth; for the knowledge
of the Lords Sabbath, and the holy observation of it, does eminently tend to
our help and furtherance in Sanctification and holiness; and there be very
gracious promises made to them that shall sanctify the Sabbath, Isa. 56.2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. and 58.13, 14. etc. which makes me esteem it a truth of great worth.

But Secondly, I find the judgments of men very much at a loss about the
Sabbath: Some saying that the Sabbath is now abollished, and so there is none
since the coming of Christ; neither are we bound to keep any day holy now.
Some others there be as learned as any, and the most considerable for number,
that say the old Sabbath is abollished by the Church; and the first day of the
week is made holy instead thereof; and that the Church has authority so to do.
A Third sort of men there be which say, the day was changed by Christ, for the
honor of the work of Redemption. Now I do freely acknowledge unto you, that
with none of these three opinions I am at present satisfied.

For the First of them, I cannot easily believe that that Law which was given
at the creation, Genesis 2.2, 3. and was spoken by the Lords own voice from
heaven, out of the midest of the fire, Exodus 19.20. 1 Daut. 4.12.13. and 5.22,
23, 24. and which alone was writ with his own fingers in Tables of stone to be
kept in the Ark, and that are so carefully distinguished by Moses, from the
statutes and judgments which he tought Israel; and he has discribed them by
the name of Ten Commandments, Exodus 31.18. and 32.15, 16. and 34.28. Deuteronomy.
4.13, 14. and 5.22. and 9.10, 11, 15, 17. and 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. should be any
of them abollished: I must have better ground to believe it, than any at
present I see, or else I cannot believe it.

The Second Opinion seems to me altogether as bad, or worse than the former;
that the Church should have any such power in works of this nature, seems to me
altogether unlikely, the Lord so frequently forbidding her, to add to his word,
or deminish from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Josh. 1.7. Prove. 30.6. Revel.
22.18.19. Again, Christ is said to be in all things head to the Church, Ephesians.
1.22. and we have one Law giver, Iam. 4.12. we read of no more. Again, the
transgressing of the Commandemtnts of God, to bring in the traditions of men,
was vain worship in Christ's time, and so condemned by him, Matt. 15.3, 6, 9.
and therefore a sin now sure; and if this change must be admitted of as good,
upon this account; I see not how we can avoid falling back to Babylon again,
and receiving all Romes traditions, although never so contrary to the
Scriptures.

To the Third Opinion, I am as hard to be reconciled as to the former. First
because I find no word in the Scriptures evidencing this, that Christ did
change the day. Secondly of that any of his followers did it by his authority,
nor yet the least mention made of any such reason in the word, as the work of
Redemption, or the Resurrection of Christ, as a cause of the change thereof;
but that the Church in its Apostasy did change it, I doubt not, as she has
done all other the Lords holy ordinances: But that there is any the least
warrant from the word of truth for her so doing, is all the doubt. But further,
the scriptures are flat against it; our Savior would not have us think he came
about any such business, Mat. 5.17, 18, 19. Therefore I do beseech you all, in
the fear of God, take this matter into your serious consideration, and show
some good ground from the scriptures for your neglect of keeping the Lords holy
Sabbath; and your suffering the people to live in this great sin; of making the
Lords holy day, their greatest working day, through the whole Nation, or else
repent your selves, and persuade the people to repentance also; as you will
answer it at the great day of account.

But now because there is some show of proof brought for this Third and last
Opinion, therefore I shall examine it before I leave it. And as for what is
alleged from John 20.19. it can be no proof of their keeping the first day of
the week as a Sabbath, although they met together, for in Luke 24.11.13. it
appears evidently they did not believe that Christ was risen from the dead,
therefore they could not keep the day by his appointment for the honor thereof.

Secondly, two of the Disciples went a journey of threscore furlongs that same
day; which going and coming was not less than fifteen miles, too much for a
Sabbath days journey, when it is to go from the Assembly of the Saints. And
Thirdly they kept the day next before it holy, Luke 23.56. and it is not like
they kept two Sabbaths together. And as for what is alleged from verse 26.
that he appeared to them again after eight dai s, It needs no more answer but
this, That if it were after eight days, as the text says it was, then it
(...) ^ot be upon the eighth day, and so it can be no proof in that case, and
as for what is affirmed by some, that all Christ's appearings after he arose
were on the first days of the week: I say it wants proof from the scripture,
but if it were so, it would be so far from proving it a Sabbath; that it
would prove it the contrary: For the third time in John, of his appearing to
them, he found some of them a fishing, and he reproved them not, but set them
to work: look John 21. from the 1. to the 15. And as for that text, Acts 20.7.
I say thus, it is to be enquired of them that bring this text, to prove that
the Sabbath is changed; whether the breaking of Bread here, must needs be meant
of the Lords Supper; or may it not rather be understood of common eating?
seeing breaking of bread is as well used for common eating, as in Acts 2 46.
But it seems more likely for this reason also, because Paul was to take his
leave of them on the morrow morning. But that which is most clear against this
opinion is, the season in which they brake bread, it being after midnight, not
an usual hour for this duty of remembering Christ's death; and as may appear, was
not done as a Sabbaths days work, for if they met in the day light before, and
kept it a Sabbath, then this after-midnight in which they hrake hread, could be
no Sabbath, it belonging unto the second day of the week; for this is evident
by scripture, that the night of every day, goes before the day, Genesis 1, 2, 5,
8, 13, 19, 23, 31. Levit. 23.32. But if they met in the night of the first day
of the week, that goes before the day light, and is part of that day, then is
it evident that the first day of the week is no Sabbath, because Paul set
forward on his journey in that very morning, and so this text falls short of
being any proof of the change of the Sabbath likewise.

Also in might be inquired, whether that word Preached that is there put in, in
Acts 20. be properly translated or no, and whether the same word in all other
places, be not always translated discoursed, or reasoned, and never translated
Preached; and if generally so translated in all other places, then was it not
so improperly translated here, as if it should prove the first day of the week
to be kept a Sabbath, for want of clearer or better proof?

There is yet a text more brought, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. to prove a changing of the
Sabbath also, but it is commonly alleged with this addition, when you meet
together on the first day of the week, just as if it were so written in the
text indeed; whereas there is not one word of the Churches meeting or coming
together in the text, but only of each man's laying aside by him in store
something for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, according as God had prospered him;
that so at Paul's next coming to them, their charity might be ready to be sent
away. So that in this text there is no room for any man to prove, that on the
first day of the week here was any Church-meeting, or Sabbath days work
appointed to be done, but rather a considering what good bargains had been made
the week before, and a looking over Shop-books and casting up Accounts, to see
how God had blessed their labors the week before, and what might be spared out
of their gains, to make a purse for the poor Saints of Jerusalem, this is the
clear import of this text, for how else shall men lay by them accordingly as
God has prospered them, unles they take account how he has prospered them;
now Paul appointing this work to be done upon the first day of the week, it
shows plainly that the day is no Sabbath, and it is most likely it was so
appointed, to prevent the doing of it at the latter end of the week, least it
should occasion their intrenching upon the Sabbath for the doing of it.

There is also one other text, that is summoned in commonly to appear for
proving the change of the Sabbath from the seventh day to the first day of the
week, Revel. 1.10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day. Now by what rule of
scripture these men call the first day of the week the Lords day, I know not,
no text of scripture that ever I read of, ever knew it by that name yet, or by
any other name but only this, the first day of the week: but indeed the
seventh day is known by the name of the Lords day very well in the scriptures,
the Lord himself gave it this name, Exodus 20.10 and the Prophet Isaiah knew it
by this name. Isa 58.13. So that if we will permit the scriptures to be judge
in this case, they will give the name of the Lords day to the seventh day; but
if we will needs have the first day of the week to bear away this noble tittle,
it must have it from some old tradition only, now it is not hard for me to
believe, that the Church might soon corrupt her self, and superstitiously
observe the first day of the week for the honor of Christ's Resurrection, as
tradition gives us an account they did observe the sixth day also for the honor
of his death; for in how short a time did the true Church of God miscarry, as
far as this comes to; and drew Aaron the High Priest into the snare with them
for company, in making a day holy to the Lord, Exodus 32 56, So also might the
Church soon after the Apostles death, set a part the first day of the week upon
a godly intension, and yet upon some superstitious account, and when they had
so done, it would not be at all hard to honor it with the name of the Lords
day: But further, the Papists themselves confess in their Commentary upon this
very text, that the first day of the week is kept holy by tradition, and not by
authority of scriptures, also from Ecc^esiastical history, Socrates Book 5.
Chap 21. It is plain, that all Churches came together to break bread in
remembrance of Christ's death on the Sabbath day, for some hundreds of years
after Christ, but only the Church of Rome, etc which (says the history) used
to do it on the first day of the week, upon an old tradition: So that if men be
willing to see from whence the changing of the day came, it will not be hard to
find it out.

For the other two Opinions, I shall not at present trouble my self further
with them, because their ill complexion seems to promise, that they will dye of
themselves.

So leaving my writings to your reading and consideration, I remain,

Your servant, and the servant of all men, for the truths sake, W. Salter.

Her Priests have violated my law, and have profaned my holy things, they have
put no difference between the holy and profane; neither have they showed
difference between the unclean and the clean; and they have hid their eyes from
my Sabbaths and I am profaned among them. Ezekiel. 22. 26. Blessed is the man
that does this, and the son of man that lays hold on it; that keeps the
Sabbath from poluting it, and keeps his hand from doing any evil. Isa. 56.
2.
FINIS.

