A SERMON Preached on the Thanksgiving-Day. The 27th Day of October, 1692. AT
CROSBY-SQUARE. By SAMUEL SLATER, Minister of the GOSPEL.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, over against
the Compter, 1693.

TO THAT Flock of GOD, which meets at Crosby-Square.
Dearly Beloved,
THE following Discourse was through Divine Assistance, prepared for you, and
delivered in your hearing; it is now published upon your Desire, which would
not take a Denial. Ambition of appearing in Print is far from me; the very
Trouble of it is sufficient to discourage one who has so much Work besides to
engage him: But you are so dear over me and to me, that to refuse what you
request is next to impossible, specially when it speaks your Zeal for their
Majesty's Interest, and tends to the promoting of common Good.

The Acceptance my poor Labors find with you is a great strengthening of my
Hands, as your Peace and Unity among yourselves, and the sincere Love you bear
to all that love our dear Lord Jesus, is no less the matter of my Rejoicing.
Sad Divisions there are to be found up and down at this day, which cause great
Thoughts of Heart, and call for great Searching: Oh that the infinitely great
and wise Physician would be pleased to speed the Healing of them; and blessed
be his Name, the Devil has not hitherto set his Cloven Foot among you; and oh
that he never may! And that you may still keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of Peace, growing exceedingly and sensibly in Grace, and in the Knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, shining with the bright Beams of Holiness
to the Adorning of your Profession: And that you may meet with God in
Ordinances here to your Comfort and Improvement, and after that have a full
Enjoyment of him, and immediate Communion with him in his Heavenly Kingdom for
ever, is and shall be the hearty Prayer of him who is

Yours to serve you in the Gospel of Christ, S. SLATER.
From my Study, Nov. 14, 1692.
XX. Psalm v. We will rejoice in thy salvation.
THIS short, but sweet and excellent Psalm was indicted by the holy Spirit of
God, and penned by David, the sweet Singer of Israel, in the form and manner of
a Prayer, for the help of the Church in their imploring Blessings and Successes
upon their Kings, whom God by his Providence had set over them; though here is
also a particular Reference or Respect had unto the Lord Jesus, who is the Head
of the Church, and over all things to the Church, King of Sion, and of Saints:
Of whom those other Kings in their Power and Authority were Types, shadowing of
him out in his Royal Office and Dignity; and some of them, as David and
Solomon, were so in a more special and peculiar manner.

The Psalm indeed does contain in it two parts, or is made up of two things,
Prayer and Praise. The former of these, namely, the Prayer, takes up the five
first Verses, in which they do humbly and heartily beg of GOD these things for
the King:

First, They beg of GOD Audience for the KING, The LORD hear thee in the day of
trouble. Where we may observe that Kings may be in Trouble as well as meaner
Persons: They have Burdens upon them, the Burden of Government, which calls for
a strong Sholder; and the Burden of Care, which requires an able Head and
Heart. And as they have their Burdens, so their Troubles; Crowns and Thrones
are not without their Thorns no more than other Things. Trouble will make its
entry into the Prince's Palace as well as the Peasant's Cottage.

Observe again, As Princes have their Troubles, so they should not be without
their Prayer: It is not enough for them that their Clergy and other Subjects
are Suitors on their behalf, but they ought to spread their own Case before
God, and make their Requests known to him; while their People pray for them,
they should pray for themselves and their People too. As they are Men of Power,
so they should be Men of Prayer: I give my self unto prayer, said David. And
happy that Nation which has a Praying King, such a King as is valiant and
dares fight with Enemies for them; and being gracious knows how to wrestle
with GOD too. It is in the Text taken for granted that the King prays, and
therefore they desire he may be heard.

Observe again, While the King prays, it is the People's Duty to back him, and
set in with God with him, and for him: We owe him a special Room in our Hearts
and Petitions, The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: Does the King pray? oh
that he may prosper! oh that his Prayer may come up before God as Incense! oh
that his Prayer may be accepted and granted, The Lord hear thee.

Secondly, They desire Protection for him: The name of the GOD of Jacob defend
thee. Do Troubles encompass thee; let Salvation do so too: Are Men thine
Enemies; let God be thy Guard: his Name is a strong Tower; let it be so to thee
from the Face of thine Enemies: Let all his glorious Attributes, which are as
so many Letters of his Name, be engaged and employed for thy Security and
Preservation.

Thirdly, They beg Assistance for him, not only that the Divine Shadow may be
over him, but that the Divine Hand also may be with him, and the Everlasting
Arm stretched out on his behalf: Send thee help from the sanctuary, and
strengthen thee out of Sion. Help when thou need it, and call for it;
may thou never be without the help of God: Strength when thou have Enemies to
grapple with, that thou may conquer them; and when thou have Work to do, that
thou may go thorough with it, and do it to Acceptance, Praise, and Honor:
send thee such Help as will be seasonable, and such Strength as will be
sufficient.

Fourthly, They beg for him Acceptance with God, and the gracious Remembrance
of all his Religious Services: Remember all thy offerings, and accept all thy
burnt-offerings. O my Friends what a singular Comfort is it to a gracious
People, when they know their King to be a true Worshipper of God, together with
them, and have reason to look upon him as one that is devoted to the Fear,
Service, and Honor of God; and when they are so persuaded, it is
unquestionably their Duty to desire that he might in all that he does be
accepted of God, acceptable to his People, at least to the best and most
judicious of them, and to his God too.

Lastly, They beg the fulfilling of all his Counsels, and of all his Petitions,
Verse 4. Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsels.
And, v. 5. of which the Text is a part, The LORD fulfill all thy Petitions. The
Lord grant, that when thou have directed thy Prayer, and look up, thou may
see something of Mercy coming down: That none of thy Prayers may miscarry, none
drop by the way, and fall short of Heaven, but that what goes up in a Cloud of
Prayer, may descend again in a Shower of Blessings: And that none of thy
prudent Counsels may prove abortive, but what thou have been traveling with
for the Glory of God, the Welfare of the Church, and the Good of the Nation,
thou may be able to bring forth. The Lord grant that thy Prayers may be
followed with satisfactory Answers; that thy Counsels may be crowned with
prosperous Issues, and thou may prove most happily successful in them both.

Besides these their Prayers for the King, (whose Example let us follow in
Prayer for ours, who highly deserves it at our hands, as all must acknowledge
who are not basely disingenuous and ungrateful,) they do in the words of the
Text promise and engage for their interesting themselves in his Good, and that
his Safety, Peace, and Welfare shall be the matter of their Comfort, We will
rejoice in thy salvation. In which words we may take notice of these two parts:

I. A great Mercy or Blessing bestowed upon the Person of the King; that is,
Salvation.

II. A suitable Affection thereupon working in the Hearts of the People; and
that is Joy: this they promised, We will rejoice in thy salvation. If God be
thy Defense, that shall be our Delight; and I question not their Performance,
good Men will be as good as their word. And may their Example be followed by
us, may all the People of this Land tread in their steps. God has graciously
commanded Salvation for our King; and now let us rejoice in his Salvation. Sure
I am there is very great reason why we should. The Doctrine which I shall from
hence draw and, insist upon, will be this:


DOCT. The Prince's Salvation is just and great Cause for the Peoples Joy: When
the Prince's Salvation goes before, the Peoples Joy should quickly follow
after; Praises should even tread upon the heels of Mercy, and answer presently
as the Echo does the Voice. And now that our King who has received the Mercy,
does out of that kindly and deep sense he has of it, call us to the work of
Praise, we should have our Ears open to the Call, and our Hearts raised and
tuned for the Work: Now that their Majesty's say to us all, Bless the Lord with
us; that Man who will not come forth with a Blessing, deserves to meet with a
Curse at home. He that is without his Joy is unworthy of a share in the
Benefits of the Salvation. In the Prosecution of this Point, I shall observe
this Method:

1st, I shall prove it, and give you some Reasons for it, why the Prince's
Salvation should be the Peoples Joy.

2dly, I shall instance in some particulars which do accent the Salvation, and
therefore may very well raise and increase the Peoples Joy: A special Salvation
ought to be attended with more than a common Joy. Here I shall present you with
some Considerations that may help to furnish you with the better Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving, and prove as Fuel to raise a higher and more noble Flame.

3dly, I shall in a few things show you, what kind of Joy we should have, what
ought to be the Properties of it, if we desire-it may be accepted and approved
of God, and then,

4thly, We shall make some Improvement of it in a way of Use and Application,
and in all have a due Respect to the Time. We will begin with the first, and
shall speak to it as at this day it has a direct reference to his present
Majesty; his Salvation does loudly call upon us to rejoice in it, for these
Reasons:

1. Because it is such a Salvation as has come to him upon the Wings of
Prayer: Sudden and unexpected Mercies, Deliverances, and Salvations ought to be
rejoiced in, such as come to us in a way of Surprise, when God does for us
things that we thought not of, that we looked not for; these we should
entertain with Joy, and be thankful for. These speak the watchful Care and rich
Mercy of a gracious God. But when we can look on a Mercy, a Salvation as an
Answer of Prayer, it puts a further and very delicious Sweetness into it, and
accordingly calls for the higher Praises. When a poor Woman has been in hard
Labor, and had many a severe Throw and terrible Pang, that has extorted
Groans and Shreiks from her, Oh! what Joy is there when she is told that a
lovely perfect Child is brought forth into the World: If we do not trifle with
Duty, but understand what Prayer is, and manage it aright, we do travel in
Prayer, we have our Pangs and Throws, and surely it is with great Wrestlings
that we wrestle, and when the Mercy sticks in the birth, what an Agony is the
holy Soul put into: And when we do prevail, when Free Grace says, Be it to you
even as you will; and Divine Providence midwives the Mercy into the World, we
should be very disingenuous, ungrateful, and unworthy if we should not heartily
Welcome it, embracing and hugging it with joyful Arms. A bare Salvation is a
Mercy, a single Mercy, but a Salvation fetched in by Prayer is a Mercy doubled
upon us: A mere Salvation is but a common Mercy, extended to the Bad as well as
to the Good, to Brutes as well as to reasonable Creatures, for God preserves
Man and Beast. But that Salvation which is commanded and sent in as a Return of
Prayer is a special Mercy. How greatly upon that account was the Heart of that
good Man David affected in the 66 Psalm. 19, 20. Verily God has heard me he
has attended to the voice of my prayer: Blessed be God, which has not turned
away my prayer, nor his mercy from me. Now while our King has been studying,
caring, and consulting for us, while he has been traveling, laboring, and
fighting for us, we have been praying for him. Some of us have been praying for
him every day, and more than once in a day: you know what Prayers have been
made and multiplied for him in our public Congregations, and solemn
Assemblies; what Clouds of Incense have ascended to Heaven, what Days of Prayer
have been spent and set apart for him, what Fastings and Prayers there have
been, and in them the Pourings out of our Souls; and it has not been in vain,
God has heard, and answered, and done: therefore let us be joyful in the Lord
and his Goodness, and take up the aforesaid Expression, Blessed be God that
has not turned away our Prayer, nor his saving Mercy from our Sovereign: Yea,
and again, let us say, Blessed be God.

2. The King's Salvation is and ought to be the Matter of our Rejoicing;
because by means thereof there is the continuance of our Peace and Prosperity.
Indeed when Princes instead of being the Fathers of their Country, do become
Tyrants, and their Government degenerates into Oppression; when they bind heavy
Yokes and Burdens upon their Subjects, and sport themselves in their Sorrow and
Ruin; when they take destructive Courses, and are known to join with a common
Enemy in order to the Overthrowing of all: then it must be owned a Mercy to
have them taken away, for it is a good Riddance: and that Hand which gives them
a fatal Stroke, or a seasonable Remove, reaches out a singular Kindness to the
People. It Is sad when they sit in the Throne, who will not mind and pursue the
great Ends of Government: But the Salvation of a Prince whose Heart is set for
public Good, and who does (as David said) bear up the Pillars of a Land,
should engage all his Subjects in the Work of Praise.

There are, I would hope, not many among us, but what are sensible what a
potent and cruel Enemy we have too too near us, that hates us with an
implacable Hatred, a declared Enemy both to us and our Religion, and who will,
if ever it come within the reach of his Power, make us pay dear, and smart
bitterly for the Opposition we have made him, and the Blows we have given him,
of which he possibly is soar, and it is not a little slight Revenge that will
satisfy his Rage: Rods will not be thought bad enough, no, no, they must be
Scorpions. And some, who have their eyes in their Heads, and open, do, and
cannot but see what kind of Persons we have living among ourselves, what Vipers
lurk in our own Bosoms, who are full of Discontent and Malice, so that they
cannot command themselves, nor bridle their Passion, but must give Vent: We see
their Restlesness, we are not Strangers to their Purposes and Endeavors, and
we hear their Threatenings, and if God had not been pleased to guard and
establish the Throne, to preserve our King abroad, and our Queen at home, and
continue them both to us, what Confusion would that sort of Men have put us
into before this? How would our Land have been made an Aceldama, a Field of
Blood? But through Divine Goodness, our King is saved, our Peace is preserved;
you may follow your Callings, take the Comfort of your Estates, enjoy your
Relations, delight yourselves with and in your Friends, meet together in the
great Congregation, Worship God in the Beauty of Holiness, and sit under your
own Roofs, Vines, and Fig Trees, none making you afraid; and therefore we have
reason to rejoice in the King's Salvation.

3. The Salvation of the King is and ought to be the Matter of our Rejoicing,
because it is a great ground of Hope and comfortable Expectation for the
future: The broken hearted and weeping Prophet Jeremiah did teach the
Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem to bewail their own Loss by the early Death
of that gracious and most excellent King Josiah, in these Expressions: 4. Lam.
etc. The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their
pits; of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the Heathen.
Blessed be God, our King is not taken in their Pits, nor fallen by their
Swords, nor stabbed by their Ponyards, nor poisoned with their Figs, nor wounded
by their Bullets, nor cut off by any of their cursed Plots: But may we not say,
He is the breath of our Nostrils? I mean under God, for without him he is no
more than another Man; but it is to him under God, that we do owe our being a
Nation, a Nation in so much Peace, a Protestant Nation; and may we not hope and
say, That under his Shadow we shall live, notwithstanding the burning glowing
Fury of our enraged Enemies, and under his prudent and happy Conduct we shall
be delivered from, and prevail against the Power and Attempts of those Sons of
Perdition, who are skilful and greedy to destroy, and who would gladly make us
their Prey, and swallow us up quick. Surely we may look upon this Preservation
in the midst of so many Enemies and Dangers as being a singular Token for Good,
and comfort ourselves with the thoughts of this, that he is continued by God in
Mercy to us, to the Nation, to Europe, and to the Church of CHRIST: And that as
he has not only exalted him, and placed him in the Throne, but likewise
honored him already by making use of him as an eminent Instrument in his Hand
for Good, so he will go on to employ and prosper him yet further; and that he
still has more great and excellent Work for him to do, both among us, and in
the World. And that as his Hands have laid most happily the Foundation of our
Peace and Prosperity, so he shall proceed until he has added the Top-stone,
upon which the^e shall be joyful Acclamations, Grace, grace to it.

And since God has put it into the Hearts of their Majesty's, with so much
Thankfulness to own him in the Mercies which they have received, in the
Deliverances which have been commanded for them, and in that signal Victory
which was given their Forces at Sea. I do heartily pray that they may, and I do
with no small Confidence persuade my self, that they do and will look upon
these Mercies, Deliverances, and great Success, as laying upon them strong
Obligations to a continued and vigorous Appearance for the Honor of his holy
Name, and the Prosecution of the great and glorious Ends of Government, that so
Mercies may not turn Plaintiffs, nor the Expectations of God and good Men be
disappointed. I conclude that upon these accounts, it is evident the Prince's
Salvation should be the Peoples Joy.

My Work in the next place will be to offer to your serious Consideration some
things which may advance and increase your Joy, in order to the filling up of
this Day with the Duty of it, that the Flame may be answerable to the Occasion,
the high Praises of God being both in our Hearts and Minds. Now to this purpose
know, that an ingenuous and rightly spirited People should and will raise up
their Joy and Thankfulness to a lofty pitch, a very high degree, for the
Salvation of their Prince, when it is accompanied and clothed with such
Circumstances as these:

First, When the Prince has been the means of their Salvation, when he that is
now their King was before their Savior; when he is not only their Governor,
but their Redeemer and Deliverer also; when that Crown which now he wears upon
his Head, was placed there by the Hands of an engaged and grateful People, as a
Reward due to him for the special Kindness he had shown them, and the eminent
Service he had done them: and when the Royal Scepter which he now sways, was by
them put into his hand as an Acknowledgement of his having drawn his Sword in
their Quarrel, and for their Defense.

Whatever some Sons of Discontent do mutter, we cannot but know how sad and
doleful our Condition was, and what a black Cloud sat upon the face of Things
among us, when he was by a gracious and compassionate God sent in to our
Relief. You cannot so soon forget what a Multitude of perplexing Thoughts
crowded in upon you, what Fears did fill your Minds, and that you were in your
own Eyes an Undone People, when the Wicked did walk on every side, and the
vilest Men exalted, and the Power for most part put into the hands of those who
were Enemies to you and your Religion. You know how Religion was
discountenanced; Sobriety it self ridiculed; Profaneness tolerated and
encouraged, the Floodgates of Wickedness and Debauchery drawn up; the Edge of
Penal Laws whet, sharpened, and turned against the best of Men, who were
peaceable in the Land, and deserved not only Protection, but Promotion also.
How did the Antichristian BEAST lift up his Horn among us; the old-rotten Whore
endeavored to intoxicate all Ranks of Persons by her Golden Cup of
Fornication; and the Locusts that came out of the bottomless Pits,. swarmed
among us. Were not Popish Schools erected for the corrupting of our Youth? and
a wide Door set open in their Assemblies for the introducing Doctrines of
Devils, and setting up Idolatrous Worship, which God's Soul abhors? In short,
we were upon the very Brink of Ruin, in the Jaws of Death, and the heavy Iron
Yoke of Arbitrary Government, Popery and Slavery almost bound upon our Neck;
after which we must have gone bowed down to the Grave. This was the Time, this
our Condition, when our dearest and most renowned King was pleased to
interpose, and make a Rescue: and the Hand of our Gracious God was upon him,
and with him for good; as he had inspired into him a mighty Spirit, so he
assisted him with an Almighty Arm. And now blessed, yea, for ever blessed be
his Name, for that he has preserved and saved him; For verily he did work with
GOD that day; as the People said concerning Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 45.

Secondly, The Peoples Joy should be very great in the Prince's Salvation, when
having been the glorious Instrument of their Salvation formerly, he is still
devoted to their good, and set heartily for it. Though there has been an
addition made to his Honor and Power, yet there is no abatement of his
Vigilance, Kindness, and Care. There have been Kings in the World (History
acquaints us with them,) that have been shrivel'd and confined to themselves,
altogether swallowed up of themselves, though they mistook their Way, and mist
their End, undoing themselves in a fond, foolish, and unlawful seeking of
themselves. How many have there been that did reach at, and would grasp all in
their own Fists; they would make Prerogative to command Law, and devour
Property; as if the King were the only Figure in a Land, and all the Subjects
must stand for no more than so many Ciphers: Or as if the People were made only
for the King, and the King not at all for the People; whereas there ought to be
a Reciprocation of Kindness between them; the King studying and seeking the
Peace, Prosperity, and Comfort of the People; and they again contributing
freely, cheerfully to the Honor of the King. But there have been Princes
wholly immerst, drowned in the Pleasures of a Court, as if the gratifying of a
sensual Appetite, and fulfilling brutish Lusts did better become them, and more
loudly proclaim their Greatness, than a due and Paternal Care of the Body
Politic would do. And without all peradventure that must of necessity be a
very sickly, consumptive, and languishing Body, which has such an Head, and
whose Physician is its worst Disease.

But happy these Nations, if they will but know their Happiness, and not be
peevish, sullen, and Enemies to their own Good: As our King came to deliver, so
he goes on to desend; as he came to wrest our Liberties and Comforts out of
the Hands of those who had seized them, and to restore them to us, so he
labors to preserve us in the possession of them. In short, as he rose at first
like a beautiful Sun with Healing under his Wings, so he goes on to warm and
refresh us with his Beams. How much does he think and study for common Good?
How does he labor and lay out himself? How does he weary and spend himself,
hazard and expose himself? We see the beauty and glistering of his Crown, but
it is he that feels the weight of it: As it has its Rose, so it is not without
the Thistle. We little think how often he breaks his Rest, that ours may be
undisturbed; how frequently and long his Eyes are held waking, while we lie
down in safety, and throughout the Night take a sweet and comfortable Repose:
The Voyages and Journeys which he undertakes, the Councils in which he
presides, the Armies which he commands, the Battles which he fights, the
Hazards which he runs for the preventing of ours, do speak him a loving,
vigilant, and active Prince.

Thirdly, There is reason the Peoples Joy should be very great in the Prince's
Salvation, when their Religion is dear to him, and lies near his Heart. It is
a very sad and dreadful thing when the King is an utter and sworn Adversary to
that pure and excellent Religion, which is so precious in itself, and in the
eyes of his People, as that they value it at a greater Rate than all their
Temporal Enjoyments, yea, than their very Lives. How sad is it when the
Prince's Design is to deliver the Ark a Captive into the hands of the
Philistines; upon the taking whereof the Subjects would (as once the Wife of
Phineas did) cry out, and name the Land Ichabod, because the Glory is departed
from it. It was sad when a Jeroboam would not permit the Children of Israel to
go and worship at Jerusalem, the City of the Great KING, where God placed his
Name, and therefore to be the City of their Solemnities, but laid Snares for
them upon Mizpah, and spread Nets upon Mount Tabor to catch them; and also set
up his Calves at Dan and Bethel for them to pay Homage to, and by that means
made them to sin: Such an one, wheresoever he is found, deserves to be counted
the Plague and Curse of the People, who turns his own back upon true Religion,
and not only so, but encourages others to do the like, by making them the
Objects of his Favor, and that the Highway to Preferment; neither is that all,
but will with Violence and Fury compel, or ruin those that do refuse to follow
his pernicious Ways. God grant this poor Nation (which has been long
contending with Difficulties and Troubles) may never have such a Bramble for a
King to reign over it.

Blessed be God, our King is of the same Holy Religion with ourselves: He has
not given his Power to the BEAST, but is a Follower of the LAMB. He serves that
GOD whom we call Father; rejoices in that CHRIST JESUS who is our Prince and
Savior, does receive and own the same Scriptures which we do for the perfect
Rule of Faith and Manners, performs the same Worship with us for the substance
of it; gives Liberty to all that fear God, and will be peaceable in the Land;
is himself tender over tender Consciences, and instead of setting up Mischief
by a Law, has by Law (as we to our Ease and Comfort see) given them Protection
and Encouragement, opening unto them by a gracious Hand a wide Door, though
there be many Adversaries to whom it is an Eyesore. The good Lord grant that
none might be able to shut it, and that all might be made so wise as not to
abuse it.

It is great, a very great Mercy to a Protestant People to have a Protestant
King and Queen set over them; and this is the Mercy which our God has now
extended to this sinful, unworthy and provoking Nation; And oh that it may be
continued to us, and blessed, for ever blessed be his holy Name, that it has
been continued to us so long, and upon that account let us heartily rejoice in
their Salvation.

Fourthly, The Salvation of the Prince is to be looked upon by the People as
matter of great Joy, when it has been a Salvation from great and eminent
Dangers: The greater the Dangers have been, the greater is the Deliverance; and
the greater the Deliverance is, the greater should the Rejoicing be: So far as
our Ability reaches there ought to be some Proportion between the Receipt and
the Return. We shall be too low when we rise up to our highest: it is a shame
for them to content themselves with doing little things for God, for whom God
has been pleased to do great things. David took special notice of this as to
himself, in the 18 Psalm. 50. Great deliverance gives he to his king, and
shows mercy to his anointed. I doubt not but we may say, Our King is God's
King. God has set his King upon the Throne in these Nations; he was raised up
and sent to us by God; he was called and spirited by God: he was advanced over
us as by the general Choice and Consent of the People, so by a special and
mighty Hand of God: It was the Lord's doing, and well may it be mavelous in
our eyes, 118 Psalm. And great deliverance has God given to his king. Let the
King remember, and with all Humility own what follows, That God shows mercy
to his Anointed. Though he has deserved great things of us, yet nothing of
God: he has deserved a Crown of us, but not a a Crum of God: of us he has
highly merited, but not of God, 16 Psalm. O Lord, said the King, my goodness
extends not to thee. His Deliverance was a great Mercy, and we may well call
it a great Mercy, because it was a great Deliverance: Great it was in itself,
and great, I hope, it will be in its Effects. May Proud and Cruel Lewis feel it
so.

It was a multiplied Deliverance, a repeated Salvation, not only from one
single Danger, but from several, there was a Complication of them; some of them
are known, and are there not more unknown? It is like the Devils name, Legion,
may very fitly be given them, for they are many. Something we are made
acquainted with by the Royal Proclamation. A Preservation of their Majesty's
Government, notwithstanding the Designs and Attempts of their open and secret
Enemies: Though their Government has been so just that it pleases good Men,
and so mild that it might attract and reconcile bad Men, yet still they have
their Enemies. There are those that rather than they will not be Enemies to our
King and Queen, will fall out with Reason, and be Enemies to themselves and
their own Interest, and we may be sure they are not without their Design,
because they are wicked, nor without their Attempts, because they are restless.
And there are too many of both sorts, for certain more than are good. Abundance
of open Enemies, the God of Heaven fight against them: abundance of secret
Enemies, the Lord discover them, and either change their Hearts, or blast and
confound them both. Great Deliverance the King had from many and great Dangers
of War in his late Expedition beyond the Seas, when Swords were drawn against
him, Bullets flew thick about him, and he was the principal Mark they levelled
and aimed at: besides, there was the Defeat of an horrid and barbarous
Conspiracy for the cutting off his Sacred Person, and putting a Period to his
precious Life by Assassination. Hell, and Rome, and France have been busy at
work; and God knows how many more of the Divel's Imps concurred and joined
with them. But his and our God has had an eye upon him for good, delivering
him from bloody and violent Men, and giving him the Shield of his Salvation,
his right Hand has holden him up. This one thing being well and thoroughly
considered, will do much to the enlarging of our Hearts in Praises; And oh that
they may be so this day, and longer too!

Fifthly, The Prince's Salvation well may, yea, and ought to be by the People
looked upon as great matter of their Rejoicing, when much, exceeding much
depends upon his Life. Who is there that can tell or conceive what never enough
to be lamented Changes and Alterations would have attended his Miscarriage?
What a dismal Catastrophe would there have been upon his Dissolution! How many
pale Faces, aching Hearts in these three Nations! What Floods of Tears, wringing
of Hands, and trembling of Limbs would have followed, not only here, but in all
places where the Everlasting Gospel is in Estimation! And on the other side,
what Te Deams, and Triumphs in France, what Insultings, Healthings, and Huzza's
among the Atheists, Papists, profane Debauchees, and vilest of Men among us!
Had our implacable Enemies prevailed against him, they would not have
questioned the working their Will upon us: Had he not returned in Safety and
with Honor to us, we might have bid a sad Farewell to our Religion, Peace,
Prosperity, all that we can call good, and wished for Death rather than Life,
seeking Ease and Rest in the silent and lonely Grave, which we could not
possibly have enjoyed above Ground. His Fall would have shaken all the
Protestant Princes and States in the World, and made so great a Gap and wide a
Breach among ourselves, as that an Inundation of Evils would suddenly have
broken in upon us, and we been deluged with all sorts of Miseries, which it is
in the Power of prevailing and enraged Enemies to bring upon the People of
their Wrath. That was a notable Expression of David, 75 Psalm. 30. The earth and
all the inhabitants of it are dissolved. His meaning is, they were so in the
time of Saul, who was wicked himself, remiss in his Government, and suffered
the Reins to lie loose, and Men to take the Bit in their Mouths and run into
what Villainies they pleased; all was turned into Disorder and Dissoluteness:
From the Throne of GOD and the the LAMB, 22 Revel. there proceeds a pure River
clear as Crystal; but from the Throne of Saul there came a Stream as black as
Hell, which poisoned the Country. There was no Care taken of Religion, nor of
the due Administration of Justice, and so both Place and People were ready to
sink under the weight of their Iniquities; but David came in and set his
Shoulder to it, I bear up the pillars of it. I am the Basis, that does uphold
those things upon which the Earth should stand, and without which Kingdoms must
and will fall into Decay and Ruin. I make it my business to reduce all into
Order, to set and keep matters in a due Frame and Posture, by a regular and
religious Government: And upon this account also, blessed, yea, for ever
blessed be the Father of Mercies for putting his Everlasting Arms under our
King and Queen, and for bearing them up who bear up the Pillars of our Country;
without this we should soon have had among us a terrible Earthquake to an utter
Overthrow. But once more,

Sixthly, It is most certainly the Peoples Duty to increase their Joy in the
Lord upon the Prince's Salvation, when it does not come alone, but attended
with a great and lovely Train, and brings other choice and desirable Mercies
in its company, when it is ushered in by some, and followed by others; so that
we may say, Behold, a Troop comes! Had there been no more than the single
Deliverance and Preservation of our King, who in our Quarrel ventured himself
in the high places of the Field, and upon the mighty Waters; we should have
been mightily concerned in it, and therefore greatly obliged to bless God: But
as Affliction does not use to go alone, so neither did this Mercy; God has
compasted us with Favors, and laden us with Benefits, of which we may well be
glad. How precious have his Thoughts been concerning us, and how open his Hand
of Bounty to us! Who can tell the number of the former, or measure the
largeness of the latter? Day unto day has shown his Love, and night unto night
his Faithfulness. Take a few Instances, and set a mark upon them: How gracious
has God been in the Preservation of our Queen, let us give him the Glory of
that, and of his directing and assisting her in a most prudent, most just, and
most gracious Administration of Government. His Mercy in the late Earthquake,
that he did so gently shake his Rod over us, and not stir up all his Wrath, nor
rise up to that height of Severity which he had used a little before upon
Jamaica, but only showed us what he could do, and we deserved; still drawing
out upon us a longer Line of Life and Tranquillity, and giving us space for
Repentance. Mercy in continuing the Peace of the Nation so that none have been
able to disturb or interrupt it. Mercy in his gracious Presence with you of
this great City in the Choice of your Magistrates, under whose Conduct we may
promise our selves Encouragement of them that do well, and the Suppression of
those crying Abominations which have abounded among us. And likewise wonderful
Mercy in that great and signal Victory given to their Majesty's Navy over the
French Fleet, whereby the Marine Power of that Cruel Nimrod was greatly shaken
and shattered, and his intolerable Pride may well be abated. Neither may we
forget, or in Silence pass by that seasonable Weather which was given to the
laborious, but then sorrowful Countryman, for the gathering in the Fruits of
the Earth, when the great and continued Rains had threatened us, and some begun
to hoard up Corn, and most did apprehend a Scarcity approaching, and at the
very Door. Shall I bind these up together: Our King has had Salvation abroad,
our Queen been blessed and made a Blessing at home; our Forces have been crowned
with Victory; our Land enjoys Peace, when neighboring Countries have been
the Seat of a devouring War; we have Plenty as well as Peace; yea, and the true
Religion and Gospel Truths and ordinances to sweeten all the rest. For all this
praise the Lord O England, praise thy God O London, whose Name alone is
excellent, and his Glory above the Earth.

In the next place we are to consider what should be the Qualifications, what
the Properties of this Joy; and that I shall do in these three Things:

I. Our Joy ought to be an hearty Joy, not feigned but real, not hypocritical
but sincere; the joyful Sound we make ought not to be an empty Sound. It is an
impossible thing to deceive God, and a dangerous thing to moek him: Do not you
mock him in your meeting together at this time. I wish none might be guilty of
it, though I fear some will, who for Example sake, because others do so, or out
of Fear, and to avoid Suspicion, will go to Church somewhere or other, and sit
out the Public Worship, though very uneasily and as upon Thorns, and then go
to the Tavern, and meet their vain Companions, and with them drink Confusion to
their Majesty's sacred Persons, and Health to their Enemies. Let not such Guilt
come upon any one here before the Lord, whose eye is upon you, that pure and
peircing Eye which searches the Hearts, and looks for Truth. What you do this
day, do it as to the Lord, as in the sight of God: be affected indeed, with
this Salvation, and with these Mercies, and with the great Goodness of God in
them, and be thankful indeed. The Apostle tells you, your Love must be such,
not in word and in tongue, viz. only, but in deed and in truth. Call upon
yourselves as that holy Man did, 103 Psalm. 1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
all that is within me: Bless his holy name, bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. Or let me bespeak you in those words which you
have in the 105 Psalm. 3. Glory ye in his holy name, and let the heart of them
rejoice that seek the Lord. You have been a seeking People, you have fought the
Lord, his Face, and Favor, and Strength, you have been seeking frequently,
earnestly; you have been seeking the Lord on the behalf of your King and Queen;
we have done it frequently, earnestly, together and apart; many and many a
Prayer we have lifted up to Heaven for them, and God has graciously heard us,
and been found of us: Our King has found God near to him, and round about him.
He has been followed and guarded with an Army of Prayers; and he has been
brought home to us in the Arms of Prayer: Now as you have been hearty in your
Praying, make sure that you be so likewise in your Rejoicing: Let the hearts of
them rejoice that have sought the Lord. It is as the Prayer, so the Praise of
the Upright, that is God's Delight. It is an Harmony between the Heart and the
Lip, a Consent and Agreement between the inward Affections and outward
Expressions, that makes Melody in the Divine Ears. Therefore that Request in
the 19. Psalm. 14. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

II. Our Joy must not be light and frothy, but a solid Joy: There is such a
Laughter as Solomon called Madness, with it Persons that are sober and in their
Wits should have nothing to do. Some cannot be merry without Ranting, let them
do so without you. I do not now condemn nor speak the least Syllable against
those outward Expressions of Joy which are in use among us, and unquestionably
lawful: No, no; let the Bells ring, and the Canons roar, and your Bonfires
flame; let there be the sound of the Trumpet and Instruments of Music. But do
not any of you mingle any thing of wilful Sin with these innocent and very
becoming Signs of Joy: do not speak your Thanksgivings in the Language of Hell;
away with all Swearing, and Cursing, and Excess, all Drunkenness and
Debauchery. These things would be the Sacrifice of Fools, and not of a sweet
Savor in God's Nostrils: They would indeed go up as Pillars of Smoke, but not
perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, and all the Powders of the Merchant.
While we are pleased, I beseech you, let not God be provoked by us, lest he
quickly distributes Sorrows in his Anger, and turn our Mirth into Mourning.
Make it appear to all Bystanders, that while you are cheerful and pleasant,
there is the Awe of God upon you, remembering the Command given forth by an holy
Person divinely inspired, 2 Psalm. Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with
trembling. Not as Slaves, but as Children that know their Father's Greatness,
and their own Duty. True Joy is a grave and severe thing, and does not admit of
what is childish, for that lessens it, nor of what is profane, for that does
corrupt it. Keep all your Festival Days like Christians, not like Heathens: Let
Holiness to the Lord be written upon them. May a Vein of Godliness run thorough
all your Actions; but do nothing contrary to the Principles and Rules of
Morality. When you have put on your white and beautiful Garments, do all you
can to keep them clean, do not contract Dirt and Filth upon them; for let me
tell you, that which is to day a Spot upon your Garment, may another day prove
a Wound in your Consciences. Oh therefore after you have been here offering
Praise to GOD, do not go away and offer Affronts to Him. May that abide upon
you with a commanding Power, which you find in the 50 Psalm. 23. Whosoever offers
praise glorifieth me: and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I
show the salvation of GOD. Let God see that which pleases him, and you shall
see that which will comfort you. In this way you shall see more Temporal
Salvations, and you will have need of them, and at last you shall have an
Eternal one.

III. Our Joy in the King's Salvation ought to be a well regulated, well
governed Joy: Give it its full scope, but still keep it in its right place, and
within its due Bounds. God would not have you honor him with stolen Goods, but
hates Robbery for a Burnt-offering; and for certain he is as much against
Sacrilege, his Soul loathing them that would go about to take the Crown off his
head and set it upon a Creatures. Therefore let your Joy in the King's Life,
Health, and safe Return be subordinate to your Joy in God: Love the King and
Queen dearly, but love GOD more, for he is infinitely better than they: Honor
them, but give GOD a greater Honor, for he is the KING of Kings, and the
highest of them are his Servants: Rejoice in them, but most in GOD, make him
your exceeding Joy, the Gladness of your Rejoicing. Let us bless GOD for
establishing their Throne, but let none go about to set them, or either of them
in GOD's Throne. Remember that of our precious Savior, which is Counsel worthy
of the Author, Give unto Caesar the things which are Cesar's, and to GOD the
things which are GOD's. Our King is a great King, and he is a good King, a
singular Blessing to us, yet he is but a Man, a frail Man, a mortal Man,
subject to Errors, Mistakes, and Passions, who would soon faint and sink if
GOD did not uphold him, quickly swerve and wander if GOD did not guide him. The
sense of this put Solomon upon asking Wisdom of God, 1 Kings 3, etc. I am but a
child, I know not how to go out or come in, give therefore thy servant an
understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and
evil. Some have been so vain, foolish, and absurdly wicked as to turn Princes
into Idols: so must not you; for doing so will be a Mischief to yourselves, and
no Kindness at all to them: 12 Acts 21. Herod arrayed in Royal Apparel, and
sitting on his Throne, made an Oration, thereupon the People gave a shout,
saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a man. But it had been better for
him if they had been silent, or he had sharply reproved them, for immediately
the Angel of the Lord smote him, and he was eaten of Worms. Cursed is the Man
that trusts in Man, glories in Man, and makes Flesh his Arm: As for us, let
us trust in the Lord, and that for ever, since in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength. I proceed to the Use, which shall divide itself into five
Branches:

First, Do you this day put that in practice which my Text tells you, the
Church had in her Resolution, God, even our God has graciously commanded
Deliverance, Salvation for our King and for our Queen; he has been the
securing, comforting Shadow and saving Strength of his Anointed; now let his
high Praises be in our mouths; let us compass him about with Songs of
Deliverance: It is GOD that gives salvation to Kings, and covered his
Servant's head in the day of Battle, and delivered him from the hurtful Sword.
His gracious Eye has been upon him for good, while the malicious Eyes of his
Enemies have been against him for evil. Let us there therefore put on our
Garments of Praise, which are indeed beautiful Garments, and comely for the
Upright. Let us make Melody in our Hearts to the Lord, and come before his
Presence with Thanksgiving. The Mercy calls for it, our King and Queen call for
it, our own Interest does oblige to it, and God expects it at our hands: Let us
now answer the Calls on Earth, and the Expectations of Heaven, and in order
thereunto look diligently upon the Mercy, study it well, labor to see it
through and through, in the Largeness of its Extent, in the Greatness of its
Beauty and Glory. Thereby our Hearts may come through the concurrence of a
Divine Influence to be duly affected with it, and greatly enlarged: Oh that
none of us here may be found empty before the Lord! but every one provided of
such a Sacrifice to lay upon his Altar, as he will not despise but accept,
having a Respect to our Persons, and to our Offerings as he had to Abel's: Yea,
I earnestly entreat that you together with me would use greatest Care to offer
up this day such Praises to GOD as he may call a glorifying of him.

Secondly, Let us accompany and follow our Praises to God for the Salvation
which has been already commanded, with Prayer for further Salvation, as need
shall require, and for more and more Blessings upon him, upon them both, sor
they will stand in need of more: They have an absolute Dependence upon him, and
cannot be without him one day; should he depart from them, their Strength would
be Weakness, their Counsels Folly, and all their Endeavors unsuccessful. God
has store of Salvations by him, and a multitude of tender Mercies, and can
send down Showers of Blessings; and he is willing so to do, for he does not
faint under Works of Power, nor is he weary of Acts of Kindness. But still we
must seek him, for he loves to be enquired of by the HOUSE of ISRAEL. Let us
therefore pray for our King and Queen heartily, constantly every day; while
they are thinking, consulting, ordering, caring, spending, venturing themselves
for us, it is our unquestionable Duty to be Praying for them. Let us do it now,
and hold on in doing it. Praise and Prayer are good in company: When we with
Joy draw Waters out of the Well of Salvation, we must let down our Buckets for
more: And since GOD has set a Crown of pure Gold upon their Heads, let them
still joy in his Strength, and through the Mercy of the most High let them not
be moved, let them be prevented, compast, followed with the Blessings of
Goodness; let them have Honor and Majesty laid upon them, and be made glad
with the Light of his Countenance: Let the right Hand of GOD find out their
Enemies that hate them; and make them as a fiery Oven in the time of his Anger:
The good Lord cloth their Enemies with Shame, but upon their Heads let the
Crown flourish.

Thirdly, Make their Work as easy to them as ever you can. You all see the
height of their Station, and how much GOD has advanced them above others, but
you do not know the Difficulties they meet with in it; Crowns do glister but
they are very heavy. It is no easy thing to manage such a Trust, and sit at
the Helm of three Kingdoms. You that have but little Families do know it is an
hard matter to provide for them, rightly to govern them, and to keep all things
in them in a due Order: by that judge what it is to look after, care for,
direct and rule such great Bodies. O let us make it our business to render
their Work as facil and delightsul as we can: And surely it is highly
reasonable that every one should contribute his utmost toward it. While it is
our unanimous Desire they should make their Government as easy to us as they
can, shall we not make it as easy to them as we can? And then we shall do so,
when we are a quiet and well-tempered People, when we are a loving and loyal
People, when we are an united People: Away with Discontent and Variance, with
Discord and Quarrels, and Grumblings without Cause, or for Trifles, or for such
things as are unavoidable. Let their Majesty's see that ye Love them, and are
at Peace among yourselves: How sweet and pleasant will it be to them to find
they have a Room in your Hearts; and that you have a Brotherly Kindness for one
another; and why not? Though there are and will be Difference of Judgment, and
consequently of Practice in some things, yet there may and should be an Uniting
in Affection; Men may walk diverse ways without punching one another.

Fourthly, Be ready to assist them to your Power: In the Natural Body the Hands
and Feet, and all the Members will contribute all they can to the Service of
the Head; so it ought to be in the Body Politic. Accordingly let all do the
Duties of their Places; single Persons theirs, let them order and govern
themselves; Masters of Families theirs, let them wisely rule their own Houses;
Magistrates in Cities, Towns, and Countries, fi^l up their Places; Judges
theirs, Ministers and People theirs, Persons in Ecclesiastical, Civil, Military
Employments theirs. That is an healthful Body, of which all the Parts are fit
for, and bufie at their several Functions. The doing of this will lighten the
Princes Load, and remove many Rubs out of their way: Assist them then with your
Persons, one would think the Gallantry of an English Spirit should scorn to
wait for a Press, when the Service of the King and Country calls you out, much
more to flee and hide from it: My heart is toward them among the people, that
offer themselves willingly, said brave Debora, 5 Judges. And let all that are
able too, assist with their Purses. Why such Discontent because of the Taxes!
are they Unnecessary? Can they be avoided? Can a War be maintained without
Charge? A Navy and Army be kept up with nothing? Will Soldiers and Seamen
venture their Limbs and Lives for nothing, or is it fit they should? Who can
see by your Garbes and Tables that you are over-burden'd by the Taxes? Which of
you fares the Coarser for them, or goes the meaner? But what are these Taxes to
what those poor Countries suffer, that are the Seat of the War? what to
Military Execution? Do you pay more than the Gospel is worth? more than the
Honor of your Wives and Daughters is worth? more than your Peace and Liberty
are worth? I think it better to pay half what you have, than lose all, as
thousands have, and you will if under a French Power.

Lastly, Do not you expose their Majesty's to Danger by your Follies: We are
now rejoicing for their Salvation, and other Mercies shown to them, and us in
them; let us not when we have done, go and sin both them and us into Misery and
Ruin. Know as a People may suffer for the Sins of a King, so Egypt did for
the Stubbornness of Pharaoh; yea, and Israel too for David's Numbering the
People: so may a King suffer for the Sins of the People: It was unto the People
Samuel spoke those words, 1 Samuel 12. 25. If ye shall still do wickedly, ye
shall be consumed, both ye and your King. Let us all therefore take heed to
ourselves; let us break off our Sins by Repentance, and be a reformed and holy
People, so walking as to please GOD, and honor the Gospel; then it will be
well with Us and our KING and QUEEN.

Amen.
The END.

