The Humble Address OF I. S. To His Sacred MAJESTY, Delivered at White Hall
the second of June 1660.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Leach in the Year, 1660.

The Humbe Address OF I. S. To his Sacred MAJESTY.
Dread Sovereign,
YOur miraculous preservation in in that fatal fight at Worcester, (where your
personal valor was so signally manifested to the world) and the no less
miraculous deliverance from the fury of your pursuers, who before had acted
beyond the Parable, and above all President of Cruel^y (at which the Nation did
blush, and all loyal hearts did bleed) and now were in hot pursuance of your
person, hoping to have acted another Scean in so dismal a Tragedy, until that
Providence which protected you, then carried you on through so many Stages of
Dangers to the place of your arrival, where their malice could not reach you,
which made all good and wise men presage that your Majesty was to reserved for
an universal blessing to the Nation, when God thought fit to restore you, and
us capable to receive.

But when you fled in a disguise from the face of that unparalleld Rebel, that
place of Jehu presented it self to my observation and fear, two Kings could not
stand before him, and as in such an exigent David made a Cave his Sanctuary, so
(not unlike it) to escape the fury of your Saul, you hid your self in the Cave
of a Tree, and by a strange method of Providence, decayed nature became the Ark
of your preservation. And after that being destitute of other remedies, in the
habit of a Servant (a penance to Majesty) wandering in your own Kingdom for
safety, had a new title to it by the conquest of your patience; Which virtue
has been so long exercised by you in the School of your affliction, and
banishment, and the rest of them which do so eminently shine in you, have been
improved to so high advantages, so far beyond any of your Royal Predecessors,
in studying men and languages (the most proper study for Princes) and
consulting Foreign States and Councels with so much Prudence, that you are
universally reputed, the wonder of yourage, and the wisest of Princes, a Title
far greater than that of great Britain.

To which your Majesty has a double right, not by Descent only, but by the
impressions of Loyalty in the Hearts of your Subjects, which, the resentments
of your Calamity, and their sad experiments of the changes of Government under
the heavy Yoke of Usurpation and Tyranny, have so indelebly stamped in them,
that they are now as fit for Obedience as You for Government.

But above all your other Royal Graces, your Constancy to your Religion is the
most resplendent Jewel in your Diadem of Honor, notwithstanding those many
Incounters and Temptations You have met with, which has made You a Star of the
first magnitude in the highest Orb of the Church; So in that also You have got
an additional Title of the Preserver of the Faith in Your self as well as of
Defender.

And by the conduct of a prudent and loyal Commander the Sword is put now into
your own hand, a man of men, who has conquered without fighting, and has laid
at your soot the whole Harvest of his victory, no less than three Kingdoms; To
whose virtues I have the ambition to be allied, as I have the honor to be to
his person, who has made himself glorious in the discreet management of this
great affair, and famous to all posterity; Who need no other Advocate than his
own merit to have an eminent place in your Majestyes favor, of whom it may be
truly said, Thus it shall be done to him, whom the King not only delights,
but is concerned to honor.

And now after a long Eclipse, the Sun of Majesty appears in full splendor;
may you shine long upon us with a gracious aspect, that neither any Cloud of
Rebellion, or Meteor of Conspiracy or Faction, may obscure your Light, or
obstruct your Influence.

And when you are in the Meridian of your Glory, remember that once a Hollow
Tree was the place of your Refuge when your Enemies were thick about you, which
may be of as great use as that memento to Philip of Macedon, which his Son did
so much forget, that after his Asian Conquests puffed up with so many great
successes, he flattered himself into a conceit of a Deity, and commanded Divine
Adoration to his Person, but not long after one of his Commanders secretly
performed the Office done to his Father, and by the contrivance of Poison put
him in mind also that he was but a Man.

But your Majesty need look no further back than the beginning of your own
Reign, which as it has been hitherto Cloudy and Tempestuous, so I earnestly
pray the Progress may be serene and quiet, and the End Glorious.


