A DISCOURSE OF CLOSET (or SECRET) PRAYER, FROM MATT. VI. 6. First Preached,
and now Published at the Request of those that heard it. BY SAMUEL SLATER,
Mininister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, and Tho. Cockerill, at the Golden-Lion
in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over against
the Stocks-Market. MDCXCI.

To that Flock of Christ, over which the Holy Ghost has made me an Overseer.
Beloved in the Lord,
IF Sins and Troubles make times bad, those have been so in which our lines
have been cast; as great and glorious light has shined in our Horizon, as in
any since the Apostle's Age, yet the works of darkness have abounded among us,
Superstition, Persecution and Profaneness. Great numbers among us hate the
light of Truth, and gladly would have it extinguished; And who can count those
who walk as enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is in their shame? We have had fierce disputes, and hot contentions (
Veluti pro aris and foc^s) for lifeless Forms and Ceremonies not worth a
button, which have been bones of Contention in the Church of God ever since the
Reformation, and will continue so to be, till Men are grown wise enough to cast
them out; but at the same time, the Vitals of Christianity, and Power of
Godliness have been forgotten and neglected, nay, by the generality, (such
Christians there are in our days) ridiculed and hated; so that many live direct
contradictions to the Profession they make, and throw dirt upon that Name in
which they would be thought to Glory. The grand design, indeed, driven on among
us, has been to reduce these Nations to the Sea of Rome* and to bring in
Popery among us; in order whereunto; Men taught by the Devil, and wise to do
evil, have by their Hellish and Cursed Examples introduced prophandenss; for
none so fit to make a Doctrinal Papist, as one that is a Practical Atheist. How
far these persons have prevailed, and this Nation has been by them immoralized
and debauched, and all ranks of Men among us, Clergy as well as Laity, Nobility
and Commons, Gentlemen and Peasants, vitiated both in Principles and Life, is,
alas! too obvious and visible to any one that has an eye in bit head. And if
ever God has a purpose to do this Nation good, and to deliver us form
implacable enemies, and menacing dangers, and after all ou fears, and
convulsions, and shakings, to settle ^u^ upon sure and lasting foundations, he
will reform us. I wish that every one would reform himself and save cur Rules a
labor; if they will not I wish that our Governors would employ then power;
and as they are providing (as necessity requires) against a potent Adversary
abroad, they would, by the vigorous execution of wholeso^^ Laws against
overflowing sins within, which most expose us to ruin, because to Divine wrath
and thereby (if I may so speak) save God a labor: But if they will not do
their work, God will do his. It is my hope, that he will not for sake this
pleasant Land, in which he has so great an interest; but mend it, that he
might delight in it, though in what way, and by what means, whether by some
smarting Rod, or sti^ging Scorpion, teaching us by Briars and Thorns, letting
out the corrupt Blood by tremendous Judgments, or more gently by the Word, it
is not for me to determine, that we must leave to him whose wisdom is
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. Though I cannot but hope well from
his gracious opening such a wide and effectual door to hi^ glorious Gospel, and
giving to it so free a passage, as blessed be his name, we see at this day; and
restoring a desired and welcome liberty of Preaching to many of his faithful
and eminent Servants, who had by severe Laws been driven, and kept out of the
Vineyard; for which many of them who had an hand in making those Laws, have
answered at the highest and most dreadful Tribunal; and the rest shall in due
time, too soon for them. The good Lord grant, that while the Gospel runs, it
may be glorified, by attaining is most excellent and noble end in the hearts
and lives of those who sit under the joyful sound thereof; that so Religion may
recover its pristine Luster, yea, shine forth with a greater glory than it did
in the days of our most famous Predecessors.

Altogether unexpectedly to me, It pleased the great God (whose right it is to
dispose of us according to his good pleasure) to call me to Minister to you in
the Gospel of his Son, after he had taken home to an everlasting Rest, and
fullness of Joy, in and with himself, your former, Learned, and every-way
accomplished Pastor, whose death was as it deserved to be, bitterly bewailed by
you. In the same Relation to you he has continued me for almost these Fifteen
years during which space of time, variety of Providence have passed over our
heads, we have met with both Halcion and Tempestuous days; but we must, we are
obliged togive an honorable report of him, as having been to us a shadow from
the heat, and a shelter from the storm; so that few of our Sabbaths have been,
in the fury of the times, Fasting-days throughout, and very f^w of our Meeting
disturbed and violently broken up: But as he was pleased to give me an heart to
Preach, so you had from him an heart to hear; and however some that went off
from us have tacked about, and defiled their Garments, the most of you have
weathered the point, born the burnt, kept your ground, and found mercy to be
faithful to the Cause you owned, not sinfully complying with the Lusts of Men,
nor submitting to their impositions, and unscriptural mixtures with, and in
things pertaining to Divine Worship; upon which account among many others, I
can look upon you as those that have been, and yet are, and will, I hope, go on
to be my Joy and Crown.

I can call God to witness, that I love you in truth, and have both sincerely
and earnestly desired your good, endeavoring to the utmost of my ability, to
make known unto you the whole Counsel of God; not putting you off with
Rhetorical flourishes, the enticing words of Man's wisdom, new and empty
notions, Philosophical strains, and inventions of Men; but with that Bread that
came down from Heaven, nourishing you up to Eternal Life; determining to know
nothing among you, but Jesus, Christ, and him Crucified, who is the admiration
of Angels, and worthy to be the desire of all Nations; but too little Preached
in England, in London at this day; and too little valued and believed in. He
has been the great subject of my Discourses among you, while, as you will bear
me testimony, I have not sought yours, but you. And as you did choose your Cook,
so you have liked the Provision be dressed and set upon your Board, having been,
for the greatest part, as constant in your attendance upon my Ministry, as any
in London; and not like many, given to change, wandering up and down from place
to place, by means whereof their itching Ears have been more tickled, that
their precious Souls advantaged; yed, some of them running from the Flock to
which they-belong, and not keeping the place in which God by his Providence
had* set them, have fallen into the hands of Seducers, who have led them out of
the way Everlasting, and then robbed them of their Light and Heat, the precious
Truths of God, and their Zeal for him, leaving them wounded both in Head and
Heart, and wallowing in the Blood of their Apostasy.

I was, in a prudent and very modest Letter desired to preach upon that
excellent Duty of Secret Prayer, by one of your number, who had with grief
taken notice what strangers some Professors are to the practice of it, yea, how
some do live in the total neglect of it, as if it were altogether unnecessary
and unprofitable. The motion being made, did meet with a very ready and
cheerful entertainment: I stood not debating, but presently closed and buckled
to the business, and the very next Lord's Day begun it. A single Sermon only
was desired, and I intended no more: but having once engaged my thoughts, they
multiplied, and grew up into four. As soon as I knew the person that sent me
the Letter, and made the Motion, I gave her my Thanks, and I do here repeat
them, because I find that many, through the Blessing of God, have got good by
it. When I had finished the Discourses, a Letter, subscribed by several, was
presented me, desiring, That what had been Preached, might be Printed; which
was granted as soon as asked; though the Great Work which lies upon me, does
render Printing very tedious to me, and allows me not that exactness which I
delight in, and should otherwise endeavor. But I am Yours, and take pleasure
in being so, and know not how to deny you any thing. And now I wish, That what
is here sent abroad into the open World, might find acceptance there, and meet
with a kind reception from Others, as it did from You; and also, That it may
bring forth much fruit, and accomplish that for which it has been designed,
even the good of precious Souls, the awakening to, and quickening in this great
piece of practical Godliness, those who have totally neglected it, or been
exceeding remiss.

Little do Men and Women think how greatly they prejudice themselves by
carelessness touching matters of this nature: they had better act by halves, and
tri^le in the Affairs of this World, than in those of Religion. How can any
think to be supplied fresh that Stock which is laid up in the hand of Christ,
or to be enriched by his inexhaustible fullness, if they do not seek him? How
can any expect the performance and making good of the Promises to them* unless
they put them in suit? How can any rationally hope, that they shall with Joy
draw Water out of the Well of Salvation, when they will not take so much pains
as to let down their Bucket into it? Though great and glorious things be in the
heart and purposes of God concerning his People, and he has passed his Word
for them, which is better than Man's Bond, Security sufficient; yet he will be
enquired of by them to do them for them. Well, whoever they be who undervalue
God, making him the Object neither of their Love nor of their Fear; whoever
they he that say unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, nor to maintain any fellowship with thy Majesty; whoever they be that
taste no sweetness in holy Exercises, and see not that God is necessary, but
hope to pick up a satisfaction for themselves out of inferior and transitory
Goods: Let your wants drive you to God, and your love draw you to him; do you
seek the Lord, and his strength, yea, seek his face evermore; lay hold upon all
opportunities of meeting with him, bearing from him, and pouring out your Souls
before him; go with Zacheus into the Highway, that there you may get a sight
of Christ; and with the Spouse into the secret places of the stairs, and there
let him hear your voice. Certainly, all those that are born of God, have been
made partakers of the Holy Ghost, are entitled to the Glory above, and
Ioint-heirs with Christ; have received and are acted by the Spirit of Adoption,
which is a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and puts them upon going to him in
all cases, as to their Father in Christ, their God in Covenant. They are in the
Scripture called, The Generation of them that seek him. And let men say what
they will, it will be found, That the most praying Christians are the most
thriving Christians; They are the persons that now get most of Heaven, and make
the happiest progress in the way thither. Do you therefore in the morning
direct your Prayer to God, and look up; do you present Him with the
First Fruits, so will the whole be sanctified; by that means you will secure to
your selves his direction in the difficulties of the day, his defense against
the temptations of it, his support under the afflictions of it, his assistance
in the work and duties of it, together with his blessing upon your endeavors
to succeed them, and upon your enjoyments to sweeten them to you. When the
evening comes, end your day with God, make him the Omega as well as the Alpha;
pay him the tribute of Praise for the Mercies you recieved, beg the continuance
of his favor; so may you lie down in peace, and comfortably expect a being
shadowed with his wing, and having sleep given you as to his beloved Ones,
while the Hedge of his Protection is set about your Persons, Families, and all
that you have. Upon the Lord's day, get alone, and do all you can to pray your
selves into an holy and heavenly frame, fit for the Duties and Ordinances of
it; beg his Presence with you, and in them, and a sight of his Power and Glory;
and that there he would give you of his Loves, and Kiss you with the Kisses of
his mouth. Never dare to come to the public Assemblies, till you have been
with the Great Master of them, who alone can bless his Provisions to your
refreshing and nourishment, and fasten his Truths in your Heads and Hearts, as
a Nail in a sure place. Pray that he who has the Key of David, would open the
Minister's mouth, and your hearts, giving him the Tongue of the Learned, and
you the Ear of the Obedience; both prepare the Seed, and likewise fit the Soil.
And when you return from the Congregation to your own Houses, there set upon
Prayer again, and so cover the Seed that is sown, and earnestly desire of God,
That as he did enable you to mingle Faith with the Word that was delivered, so
he would grant you to live and practice it. The Life in Heaven will be a Life
of Praise; O let our Life on Earth be a Life of Prayer: There our Souls will
have an Eternal Repose in him; Here let our Souls f^llow hard after him.

But this Epistle s^vells too big, it is high time to draw to a Close. My hearts
desire and Prayer for you all is, That you may be saved, and that you may work
out your Salvation with fear and trembling. If you and I get to Heaven at last,
it matters not what storms we meet with here. It is but a little while, and all
our hard work* and sharp conflicts, and sour afflictions* will have an end; and
then we shall see God, and manage Everlasting Triumphs; sinning and sighing*
wanting and weeping no more. Watch while you live in the midst of Enemies* walk
while you have the light, and mind your work while you have any to do. Husband
your time, improve your seasons, trade with your Talents, fill your Relations
with Duty, and in all things adorn the Doctrine of our God and Savior. It is
your professed desire to enjoy pure Ordinances and an holy Communion: Oh that
there may be none among you that profane those Ordinances, and pollute that
Communion! First look to your hearts, then to your ways, and make and keep both
as clean as you can. Be much in minding your selves, not in censuring others;
their infirmities do you pity, and labor to get your own healed. Your stay and
mine here is not like to be long; and we mine here is not like to be long; and
we need not care how short it is, so the great work for which we were sent, be
finished before we go. When we are once in Heaven, we shall not need the World,
and the Church will not need us; for God has the residue of the Spirit, and
can set others in our places, who shall fill them better than we have done.
While I am continued among you. I shall, by Grace assisting, make it my
business to help your Faith and Joy; do you work together with me, and God with
us all. Be friends to your selves, and one another; why are you brought into an
holy Communion, but in order to mutual edification? And our life is not to be
measured so much by the multitude of days, or plenty of enjoyments, as by
usefulness* He that does most service, shall have the greatest commendation,
and weightiest Crown. Now commending you to God, and the Word of his Grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them
which are satisfied, I rest

Your Servant for Jesus sake, SAMUEL SLATER.
From my Study, November. 24. 1690
MATTHEW VI. 6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when
thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret.
THese words are a little part of our dear Savior's first Sermon, and the
longest that ever he Preached; full of excellent matter, most worthy of the
Preacher, most proper and profitable for the Hearers; it abounds with wholesome
and excellent Counsels, and affords most precious and cordial Comforts. They
that would taste his Comforts, must follow his Counsels; and as they desire
that Christ would admit them into Heaven when they dye, they must be very
careful while they live, to observe and practice what he taught while he was
here upon Earth: Learn of him as a Prophet, if you would be advanced by him as
King.

In the beginning of this Chapter, he commands his Disciples and Followers to
take heed. Caution becomes Christians, their Case calls loudly for it; the life
which they live in the flesh, requires a great deal of caution for the leading
of it, that it might not be a vain and empty life, a low and unworthy life; and
the duties of Religion, to the doing of which they are engaged, requires as
much, that they may not be spoiled by them, nor rejected by God; nor thrown as
dung into their faces. Take heed, O Professors, how you live, and walk and
carry in the World; weigh all your actions, and ponder the path of your feet.
Take heed what you hear, and how you hear; take heed how you pray, for what,
and in what manner; take heed how you converse, and with whom; take heed how
you eat and drink, and buy and sell; how you think and speak: Take heed that
you avoid all sinful things, and that you do not sin in any lawful things.
There is a great deal of unseen danger, there is a multitude of snares subtly
and privily laid; and we are very prone to miscarry, to fall into those
dangers, and be caught in those snares: We have need to be circumspect and
wary. Take heed therefore, remembering and considering, He gives the charge,
who loves you dearly, and knows better than you what need there is of it.

Our Lord in particular gives this direction and caution concerning the
ordinary works of Almsgiving and Prayer, and that extraordinary duty of
Fasting: all which are so good and excellent in themselves, that he would not
have them spoiled by any of his Servants, whatever they are by others, who will
needs pretend to him, while they have no more of him than the name; and that
which as to these things he does in general caution them about, is, That they
be not as the Hypocrites. Hypocrisy is a thing exceeding odious unto God. An
Ape is most like a Man, but is not one; and of all creatures he is most
deformed. An Hypocrite is of all others most like a Saint, but is not; and of
all Sinners he is most hateful. He shall not stand before God, but be banished
furthest from him: The worst, darkest, hottest place in Hell, is his apartment.
God does so much loath Hypocrites, that he does not allow his Children to
resemble them. He would not have them to be Hypocrites; nay, he would not have
them to be as Hypocrites: When thou gi^est Alms, do not sound a Trumpet as the
Hypocrites do: Instead of letting the world, do not let thy left hand know what
thy ^ight hand does. When thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites
are, for they love to pray standing in the Synagogues: They do not love to do
good without having many Witnesses of the good they do: As if that Duty were
lost from which they do not reap the praise of Men. When thou fastest, be not
as the Hypocrites, of a sad countenance: They love to put on a sour face; but
never look after nor care for a broken and contrite heart. Thus our Lord and
Master would not have his followers to conform to them; Do not fashion your
selves like them; get not into their mode and dress, though it seem great and
handsome; Be ye followers of God, as dear Children, in all things; Keep as
close to him as ever you can. Put on the Lord Jesus, be ye clothed all over
with Christ; That as near as may be, nothing but Christ, and his Spirit, and
Virtues, may be seen in you; but be not like the Hypocrites in any thing. An
Hypocrite loses all he does, and will be himself rejected.

In the words which we have under our consideration, you find the direction
which our Savior gives concerning Prayer afterward, an excellent pattern to
frame it by; here is an excellent Rule. In the former Verse, He had taken notice
of the guise or manner of the Hypocrites in those days, They loved to pray
standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, in open and
frequented places, where they were sure not to fail of Spectators and Observers
of their Devotion, who would, as they hoped, tell what they had seen, and cry
them up as persons eminent for their Piety, though that was a thing of which
they had no more than the show. Thus they had merely an external Religion, unto
the practice whereof, they were carried out only by external considerations. It
was not a Spring within, but Weights without, that set their Wheels a going.
The end that they in all aim^d at* was to be seen of men, that among them they
might raise a name, obtain credit and applause, and be accounted somebodies for
Religion, though they knew themselves to be no other than Cheats. Christ tells
us the issue hereof; they do not miss the mark, but catch what they fish for.
Verily they have their reward; there is none to come, none laid up for them in
Heaven, they have it now, in this present time, all that is good of it; Glory,
but a vain glory; a Name, but nothing else; they get an esteem with ignorant
men, who are as empty as themselves; they are reckoned great Men, Who but they
for their Sanctity? And let them have it, and bless themselves in it: But thou
who love thy Soul, and desire to be indeed a gainer by thy Religion, enter
thou into thy Closet when thou prayest; run not into a corner of a Street, but
some nook or corner of the House; and when thou have (not opened thy Casement,
but) shut thy door, pray to thy Father.

We may rationally look upon Christ, as supposing that all who call themselves,
and would be by others accounted Christians, do pray; that every one who counts
it his honor to take up that Name, will also reckon himself obliged to take up
that work. And indeed it is a contradiction for any Man to say that he is a
Christian, and yet live a Prayerless Life; no Man can have a Spirit of Holiness
given him, who does not pour out his Soul unto God in Prayer. It is as possible
to find an Holy Devil in Hell, as a prayerless Saint upon Earth. Paul was no
sooner thrown to the ground, but we have him upon his Knees; no sooner a
Convert, but a Supplicant: Grace cannot possibly be in that Man's heart, who
lives without Prayer in the World. Christ takes it then for granted, that
Disciples will pray; when they can do nothing else, they will do that: If they
be in the furthermost parts of the Earth, they will from thence send up a cry
to Heaven. Jonah thought the Belly of the Fish, in which he was, to be the
Belly of Hell; yet there he did pray, and resolve to look toward God's Holy
Temple. So then, I say, our Savior takes it for granted, that those who are
his Disciples do pray; and therefore here he only gives them counsel and advice
for the right management of it, that they might not, through some fatal
mistake, lose their labor, spend their breath to no purpose, offend the God
whom they seek; and instead of obtaining a blessing from him, pull down wrath
and a curse upon their own heads. Do not you in your Prayer fly so low a pitch
as to make esteem with Men your end, either the whole or any part of your end.
Do not aim at vain glory; suppose by that means you may get a Name, that gain
will not make you rich; a Name you may have, but such an one as will rot and
perish. A great noise you may make in the World, but it will be an empty sound:
And what will you be the better for that? A little popular breath may swell and
puff you up; but it will not raise you any thing nearer to God and Heaven, nor
blow you on any faster to the Port of Glory. It is no matter how much there is
of privacy in your Prayer, so that there be sincerity and purity too, nor how
secretly it goes up to God, so that it does not go out of feigned Lips. When
others are altogether for the Synagogues and Streets, Do thou, O Christian,
enter into thy Closet, or Chamber, and shut thy door about thee; do thou take
pleasure in thy retirements. When no body sees, thy God does, yea, and he loves
to see; and when no body hears, thy God does; and what he hears, he likes; thy
Prayers, thy Sighs, thy Groans are his Music: Only I desire that this may be
remembered, That while Christ does here command and enjoin secret duty, it is
not any part of his purpose to exclude or take us from public; only he would
shut out and separate Vanity and Pride from both. That point of Doctrine, which
from hence I shall raise and discourse upon, is this:

Doct. Closet, on Secret Prayer, is an excellent and advantageous duty, which
all the People of God ought to be very much in the performance of; when you are
alone, and have no body with you, then be you with God. At a night, when you
are in Bed, commune with your hearts, and be still; turn your eyes inward
before sleep closes them; and before you go to Bed, spend some time in seeking
of, and communing with your God. Take your leave of your Friends and Relations;
or if you please, steal away from them, that you and your God may be together.
When upon an express command given him by God himself, Abraham went to offer up
his only and dearly beloved Son Isaac, Genesis 22. 5. He said unto his young
men, Abide here with the Ass, and I and the Lad will go yonder and worship, and
come again to you. He feared that if they went with him, they would be an
hinderance to him, and therefore would not admit of their Company. So let
worldly business be laid aside, and acquaintance set at a distance, while you
go by your selves to perform acts of Worship, and to pour out your requests
into the bosom of your Heavenly Father. Think not that I speak against Public
Prayer, for God loves the Gates of Zion, and Christ walks in the Golden
Candlesticks; when his people are met together in his name, he will be in the
midst of them. Nor am I for your casting off Family Prayer; there is a Prayer
upon record in Scripture against prayerless Families, calling for wrath to be
poured out by God upon them. Both these kinds of Prayers ought to be presented,
let them not be neglected. Secret Prayer is a choice part of your work too, be
not any of you wantings. to it. In the handling of this point, I shall first
lay down these four propositions:

1. First, Prayer in general is the Christians duty; a burden laid upon us by
God himself. It is very much commanded in the Word, and the Precept of it
frequently repeated, Matt. 26. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing. 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will that men
pray every where, without wrath or doubting. And in Matt. 18. 1. Our Savior
spoke a parable to them to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to
saint. You should be continually in a praying frame, having your Graces and
Affections ready; and you should be frequent in the Work. This is a piece of
natural worship, the very Law of our Creation does oblige us to it; and the
light of Nature (though it be now since the Fall exceeding dim, and like a
Candle burnt down into the Socket) has directed the Heathens themselves to the
performance of it: They, when in a menacing Storm, and Jonah fast a-sleep in
the Ship, could go and awaken him, and bid him to call upon his God.

Prayer is what we owe to God, not only as we are Christians, but likewise as
we are creatures; not only as Saints, but also as Men and Women. It is a part
of that homage which we ought to pay to him, as we had our Being from his
Power, and as we have that Being continued and sweetened to us by his Goodness.
In a word, It is a practical acknowledgment of that necessary and constant
dependence we have upon him. So that the Man or Woman who does not pray, is no
better than an Atheist, both in Heart and Life. He does first cast off God who
casts off Prayer, Psalm. 14. 1. The fool first says in his heart, there is no
God; and then you find in verse. 3, 4. That he does not seek God, nor call upon
him. Let Men and Women make never so great and fair a profession, attribute to
themselves what they will, and lay their claim to as many glorious Names and
Titles as they please, their Profession is no better than a Lie; those Names
and Titles do not at all belong to them; and the Religion unto which they
pretend, is no other than a lifeless Image, which God, when he awakes, will
most certainly despise, in case they live without this excellent duty. You may
call and count them Atheists, without doing them any injury. Those that live
without Prayer in the World, are the Men and Women that live without God in the
World; and if they live without God in this World, you may easily know with
whom they shall live in that World which is to come.

Some may be apt to think it a thing impossible for any Atheists to be found in
London, where there is so much Knowledge, such plenty of Means, such a great and
glorious Light shining; but I fear, if there were an enquiry made, it would
plainly appear there are more of them than we do imagine; yea, I am not in the
least afraid to affirm, that in this famous City there are the greatest and
vilest Atheists in the World. The Lord himself says, Isa. 42 14. Who is blind
but my servant? or deaf as my messenger that I sent? Who is blind as He that is
perfect, or blind as the Lord's servant? As if he should have said, There is no
reason to wonder at the ignorance and blindness which is among the Heathen who
live in the dark places of the Earth, when there is such blindness among my
Servants, both Prophets and People, who have their habitations in a Land of
Light, a Valley of Vision. There are none so blind, as those who are blinded by
the Sun, and have their Eyes put out by that very light by which they should
see. None so blind as those that will not see; none so ignorant as those that
will not learn and know. First Men do wickedly shut their own eyes, and then
God does in just judgment put them out, Isa. 6. 9. Go, and tell this People,
Hear ye indeed, but understand not; see ye indeed, but perceive not; make the
heart of this People fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
hearts, and convert and be healed.

But know that in the first place; remember and consider it. Prayer is
absolutely your duty: charge it upon your selves, and make conscience of
minding and doing it: you are obliged to it both as you are Christians and
Creatures; it is a part of your reasonable service: and your neglect of it will
never discharge and deliver you from your engagement to it. If you do not pay
it, the Debt goes on; the Sin increases; and how great a sum will it at last
amount to! every day that you pass without your Morning and Evening Sacrifice,
you do feloniously rob God of that glory which is due to his Name, and wickedly
transgress the Law of your Creation.

2. Secondly, As Prayer it self is your duty, so a liberty to pray is your
choice privi^ege. It is God's mercy, and your happi^ess, that he gives you
leave to knock at his Door, and lie begging there. Sit down ^ere, and pause a
little, and seriously think with your selves, how great a matter it is for a
poor contemptible Worm to have the Ear of the Infinite and Glorious God open to
its cry: for you; who are no better (as Abraham freely acknowledged) than dust
and ashes, to have the door of Grace opened to you, and leave to approach, and
make your application to the Majesty of Heaven, and to state your case to him,
and to spread all your desires before him, and to pour out your requests and
groans into his Bosom at any time, and as often as you please, so that you
come in a right manner, and behave your selves with a becoming reverence, and
godly fear. Converse and Communion with God was the happiness of innocent Man.
So long as our first Parents persisted in that pure and perfect state in which
they were created, they could think of God with rejoicing, contemplate his
Glory with delight, and walk with him as Friends: But all this was forfeited
and lost by the Fall. Sin, at its first entry, broke that harmony; it clothed
God with terror, and Man with shame; his confidence was gone, and horror took
its place; so that instead of fellowship with God, man fled from him, and would
have hid, had he known how, and where. Sin presently erected a middle-wall of
partition between them. It would have been fatal to man, and as much as his
life was worth, to have adventured in his lapsed state into the presence of
God, whom he had highly provoked, had there not been help laid upon one that is
mighty, and the gracious interposition of a powerful and prevailing Mediator.

God is in himself a devouring fire, and everlasting burnings. How then is it
safe for man to approach to him, or to dwell with him, since he is of a plasant
Plant become no better than a Briar, a Thorn, dried Stubble, fit for the
burning? how well might guilty Sinners call (with them in the 6th of the
Revelutions, v. 16.) to the Mountains and Rocks to fall upon them, and hide
them from the face of him that sits upon the Throne? But the beloved and
ever-blessed Son of God, in a most gracious compliance with, and pursuance of
his Father's will, has restored unto man freedom of access to God. Jesus
Christ, though He knew full well how great the attempt was, and how much it
would stand him in, did put his life in his hand, and engaged his heart to
approach unto God; and being our peace, has procured for us a liberty of
approaching too, and of drawing nigh, going as near as we will, even to his
very Throne, Heb. 10. 19, 20. Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
consecrated for us through the veil, that is to say, his flesh. Christ entered
into the holiest of all, he entered in triumph as one that had conquered all his
Enemies; He entered with joy as one that had finished the work, and sat down at
the right hand of God, to take there his everlasting rest; and (as you have it
in the 9th of the Hebrews, v. 12.) He entered not by the blood of Calves and
Goats, but by his own blood. He carried that along with him; and now by that
Blood we may enter too, we may enter with safety, there is no danger for a
gracious person, a believing Soul: Though the Throne of God be a Throne of
Glory, yet is it a Throne of Grace, a Mercy-seat, that has a Rainbow round
about it; and because we enter with safety, therefore we may enter with
boldness, both with a freedom of speech, telling God all that is in our hearts;
and with the full assurance of Faith, as those that shall find mercy and grace
to accept, and help in time of need. Now if that any of you do not value this
privilege at an high rate, if you do not carefully improve it, and make use of
it now it has been purchased by Christ for poor Sinners; you deal very
disingenuously, do not well consider the inestimable price which it cost, and
you offer a most vile and wretched affront to the precious Blood of Jesus, as
if it were an unholy thing, of no more excellency than that of a Beast, a
common and ordinary man, or of a guilty and deathdeserving Criminal.

3. Thirdly, All the sorts of holy Prayer are to be made use of, Ephesians. 6. 18.
Praying always with all prayer in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, and supplication for all Saints. Your Prayers must be in the
Spirit: that is, with your Spirit; Prayer must not only be a Lip-labor, but
the work of the heart; the words in Prayer are but the carcass of the duty; the
fervor and heat of the Affections, are the life and soul of it: and also it
must be with the Holy Spirit; whose work it is to help his peoples Infirmities,
and to make intercession in them: Prayer must be by the influence and
assistance of the Divine Spirit, and with the heat and earnestness of our own
spirits: so then we are to pray in the Spirit, or, as Jude says, in the Holy
Ghost: and happy they who have not fallible men to make their Prayers for them,
but the Spirit of God: but there are two other Expressions in the forementioned
Scripture we ought to take a little notice of. Praying always, Do not
understand it as if you were to be day and night at it, as if praying were the
whole of your duty, for you have a great deal of other work to do, which must
be carefully attended, and therefore the Original is, (...). in all
opportunities, in every fit and proper season for prayer: in every condition
into which Providence casts you, and upon every occasion that calls for it: The
other Expression most pertinent to our present business, is, (...), with all
prayer and supplication, i. e. with ordinary prayer, and with extraordinary
too, that which has fasting joined with it: private prayer and public too;
ejaculatory prayer, when the Soul ^allies out on a sudden unto God, gives him a
visit, and away, knocks at his door, puts in a short Petition, and is gone,
like one that is engaged about some other business, and cannot stay: and also
composed Prayer, in which the Soul fixes and abides some considerable time
with God: Family Prayer, and Closet-prayer; Prayer in conjunction with others,
and alone by our selves. We may, and must, make use of all these kinds of
Prayers as opportunity offers, and occasions do require. But to come more close
to the matter in hand.

4. Fourthly, Secret Prayer is a duty incumbent upon Christians. Now that we
call secret Prayer, when a person gets alone by himself, and makes his requests
known to God. When being sequestered from all company whatsoever, and withdrawn
from his nearest and dearest Relations, his most familiar and intimate Friends,
and by himself in a most close and private retirement, he sends out his Soul
upon the wings of holy and servent desires, and labors with all his might to
fetch down his God to him by his gracious presence, and to obtain of him those
favors and blessings of which he finds a sensible want, either in whole, or in
part. It is that by which he knocks at the gate of Heaven, and goes into the
Holiest of all, and gives his heavenly Father a visit in such a manner as that
no body may know of it. No^ that he is ashamed of what he does, for he is free
to own God for his Sovereign Lord, Christ for his dearly beloved, Prayer as his
duty and work, before all the World, though he be reproached, scorned and
maligned for it; but because he would avoid the suspicion of a Pharisaical vain
glorious Spirit, and also that he might get as far as ever he can, out of the
reach of Impediments and Diversions: He enters into his Chamber, and there
shuts his Door upon him, that so he might shut out all that would interrupt and
disturb that fellowship with his God which he has so often found an
incomparable sweetness in, as that he counts it his Heaven upon Earth. At other
times he will make one of the great Congregation, and go to the House of God
with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that keep holy day, Psalm.
42. 4. he loves the Gates of Sion, and to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his Temple, Psalm. 27. 4 and also he knows how to go out, as Isaac
did, into the Fields to meditate; and in the night season to be abroad, and
consider, with David, the Heavens, which are the works of God's hand, the Moon
and the Stars which he has created, and so take some turns in an holy
fellowship; and, as Enoch did, walk with God, before he be removed from hence,
and taken up to the habitation of his Holiness and Glory, the Chamber of his
presence; and in these Walks he finds his heart warmed, and an holy fire
kindled, and then returns with that burning within him; then he speaks with his
Tongue, and sends up a pure flame of earnest supplications.

Confident I am, The excellency of this course will not be in the least
questioned by any who believe there is a God, and own that absolute and
necessary dependence, which both as Creatures and Christians we have upon him,
and who have any sense of Religion upon their Souls: yea, I believe it will be
acknowledged a duty by many, very many of those who yet do not themselves live
in the performance of it: there has such a clear light broken in upon them, as
has convinced their Judgments, though that conviction has not had power
enough upon their wills, as to bring them to the practice of it. And for my own
part, I do not know so much as the shadow of a reason why it should be
questioned, and made a point of controversy: This I do with a fullness of
persuasion assert, That if there be any such thing in the World as a duty which
we owe to God, secret Prayer is so. And I do add this, wishing those (into
whose hands this little Piece shall come) seriously to think of it; those
persons that do not make conscience hereof, let them make never so great a
noise, do indeed make conscience of nothing. He is not a true Christian that is
not a through Christian; nor he a real Disciple that has not a cordial respect
to all that Christ commands him; and I shall not at all wonder to see or hear
that man is remiss and careless and negligent in other things, for which at
present he pretends a zeal, and at the long run to throw up all. Yea, and I
will venture to add this one thing further; He that does not seek God when he
is alone, has no reason to promise himself God's gracious meeting with him
when he is in Company; but if you will exclude, and shut God out of your
Chamber and Closets, you will not to your comfort, though indeed you may to
your terror, find him in the Congregation. The only thing which I shall do
more in the doctrinal part, will be to prove the Point; and in order thereunto,
I shall endeavor with all convenient brevi^y to show, That secret Prayer is,
I. A Duty. II. An Advantage.


I begin with the former of these. Private or secret Prayer is a great duty,
which all that call themselves Christians, ought to be much in the performance
of. For the evidencing of this to you, I shall lay down these four things.

1. First, Secret Prayer was the practice of our blessed Lord Jesus; as he came
into the World to redeem us, so to direct us: as his Death was an expiatory
Sacrifice, so his Life was a leading Example. He is that excellent Copy without
blot, after which we are to write; and that most exact and perfect Pattern,
without blemish or defect the imitation whereof we are obliged to study and
endeavor, and that to our utmost; we must lead his Life as near as ever we
can, and tread in his steps, for that is to foot it right; and we must show
forth his virtues; there must be an impress of them upon our dispositions and
conversations. The same mind ought to be in us that was in him, Phil. 2. 5.
Then is a Christian in his beauty and glory, when he is clothed with Christ,
and shines with the beams of Christ.

Now Christ was very much in the work of secret Prayer, and exceedingly
frequent at it. How did his perfectly pure and precious soul delight to be on
the wing, and mounting up to his and our Father in his recesses? He did not
only teach his Disciples to pray, giving them in this Chapter a most excellent
pattern for them to draw theirs by; nor did he only pray with them, as Master
of the Family; but he likewise did many and many a time pray by himself alone,
a great deal oftener than we do, or any in the world ever did know of; but
something to this purpose, has been by the Divine Spirit (who guided the Holy
Penmen) put upon Record in the Sacred Scripture, Thus in Matt. 14. 23. after he
had wrought that great and amazing Miracle of feeding five thousand Men, beside
Women and Children, when he had no more provision than five Loaves, and two
Fishes: He sent the Multitude away; and not being satisfied with their absence
alone, he would have his very Disciples go by Ship to the other side: it is
said, he constrained them to go: poor hearts! they loved him dearly, and
nowhere enjoyed themselves so well as they did when they were in his company,
and therefore they were loath to leave him; but he would have it so, he ordered
and commanded them to be gone; but what was the matter? what did our Lord do
when they were all gone? That Text tells you, He went up into a mountain apart
to pray, and when the evening was come, he was there alone. He had his Father
with him, and doubtless a multitude of the heavenly Host, the glorious Angels
attending and waiting, but nobody else: none of the multitude, not so much as
one single Disciple. Now let me desire you to think seriously of this; that it
was far otherwise with Christ, than it is with the best of us. He had another
manner of command over his mind and heart, his thoughts and Affections, than
the most gracious Man or Woman upon Earth has. He could with the greatest ease
imaginable keep his Soul close to, and intent upon the business which was
before him, without the smallest diversion and extravagancy; and yet he chose
to be apart from all, and alone by himself when he prayed unto his Father: and
shall not we go and do likewise? Sure that which Christ did, was very well
done* You have another Scripture which holds out the same, and refers to
another time, when he had healed Simon's Wife's Mother, who lay sick of a
Fever, and many others that were diseased, and had cast out many Devils. Mark
1. 35. In the morning, rising up a great while before day, ^e went out, and
departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. Hypocrites, as you have
heard, choose the corners of the Streets, places of concourse; go into the
Abbeys and Cathedrals, and there you will see them by a Pillar at their
devotion; but Christ chose solitariness, (...), a desert, lonely place, where
there was no body, there he loved to meet his Father. Take but one Text more,
which you have in Luke 22. 39, 40. He came out, and went, as he was wont, to
the Mount of Olives, and his Disciples followed him; and when he was come to
the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation. First, he
set them to their work: he knew that the Devil would quickly be at his work,
and Christ would have his Disciples be at their work first. We are then least
in danger, when a danger comes and finds us at our work. Christ knew that an
hour of temptation was coming, and he would have them lay up-Prayer against
that hour. Will Satan tempt? then do you pray; thus he sets them at work: if
you ask what Christ did then do himself? I answer, You may be sure he was not
idle; what he bid them do, he did; but he did it alone; He was withdrawn from
them about a stones cast, and kneeled down and prayed. This was Christ's wont,
as to go to the Mount of Olives, so to get alone and pray, not having so much
as any of his Disciples with him. Now is not this a plain evidence of the
thing? and shall not this be a prevailing motive with you? In my mind, the
practice of Christ should be a powerful and cogent Argument with all those that
call themselves his people.

2. Secondly, The people of God in their several Ages and Generations have
taken the same course, and walked in the same way; I mean, all those whose
hearts have been upright with God; and the desires of their Souls have been to
his name, and the remembrance of him, and communion with him. Iasob was a plain
man, but a great wrestler, and very famous for his skill in that holy and
excellent Art, and crowned he was with admirable success. He wrestled with God,
and prevailed like a Prince; tho he got a lameness, which he carried with him
to his Grave, yet he got a blessing which kept him company into the other
World, and he was alone at the work, Genesis 32. 22, etc. He took his two Wives,
and his two Women-servants, and his eleven Sons, and sent them over the Brook;
and being left alone, he wrestled with the Angel till the break of day: it is,
by the way, said, there was a man wrestled with him, who was no other than the
Lord Christ, who, says Dr. Lightfoot, sought to kill him for his diffidence,
and for his sending a Present to his Brother Esau, before he had, according to
his Vow, paid the Tithe to God: But be that how it will, this is plain, He
prayed when he was alone; then he wept, and made supplication. When that
Rebeccah had conceived, and there were Twins in her Womb, which fell to
struggling, God thereby showing that Contention which would afterward be
between them: and it is said, Genesis 25. 22. She went thereupon to enquire of the
Lord: which indeed, according to the Opinion of some Learned Men, was by
consulting of some Prophet; but I rather think, according to the judgment of
others, she did apply her self to God immediately, and consulted, or enquired
of him in a way of Secret Prayer: And that it was so, seems to be evident from
the 25th verse, which tells us, she had her answer from God himself; The Lord
said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb; i. e. two Heads of Nations: and two
manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; so that the good Woman got
alone to pray and seek the Lord. We do also read in Genesis 25. 22. That Abraham
planted a Grove in Beersheba, and there he called on the Name of the Lord, the
Everlasting God. He singly, and by himself. Jonathan says, that Grove was an
Orchard full of Fruit Trees, which did afford both what was pleasant and
grateful to the taste, and a comfortable refreshing shade in that hot Country;
but that is only a Jewish Tradition: This we learn form the Text, That thither
he was wont to retire himself for prayer; that was his Ora^ory when he had a
mind to be alone. When Elijah was by Iezabel threatened with death, he came to
Beersheba, and left his Servant there; but 1 Kings 19. 4. He himself went into
the Wilderness a days journey, and sat under a Iuniper-tree, and be requested
for himself that he might die, and said, It is enough now, O Lord, that I die,
for I am not better than my Fathers. He would have no body with him, not so
much as a Friend, no not his Servant. Once more, in Acts 10. 9. it is said,
Peter went up upon the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour: not then with
the Family in which he was, nor with any of his Brethren; but by himself, at
the top of the House, upon the Leads, in the open air, from whence he might
look toward the Temple at Jerusalem, and be remote from all Company and
Spectators; so that you see what has been the practice of these gracious
persons, whose Names stand upon Scripture-record; and I dare say, all the
Saints who have been acquainted with God, have been familiarly acquainted with
this work too; and now I say, Do you go and do the same; and in this be ye, as
well as in other things, followers of them, considering the most happy end of
their holy conversation.

3. Thirdly, There is an express and special command that binds this upon you
as your duty. Our dear and precious Jesus, who has bought us, and so is our
Lord and Master, has directed us to this practice, and in plain terms required
it at our hands: for the proof of this, we will go no further, for we need no
more than the Text before us. Thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet,
and when thou have shut thy door, make all as close and private as thou can,
when thou art so alone, as that no body can come at thee, then pray to thy
Father. I told you before, and think it worth my while, because it may be
profitable for you, to repeat it, and tell you again, That our Lord Jesus does
suppose thee to be one that fears God, and that make Prayer thy business;
He takes it here for granted, that the new Nature thou have received, will act
like it self: and therefore though the does in other places command you to do
it, yet He does not do so here, but supposes it: and surely every man that is
himself, does pray. He that is a man of sense and wisdom, will be a man of
prayer. He that does not pray, is a Madman. He has not the understanding of a
man; he does not act according to the dictate of his own reason, which, if
consulted, would certainly put him upon it, as a thing highly due to God, and
every way advantageous to man. Christ therefore does here suppose you do pray:
and therefore does only direct you as to the manner, and that in this one
particular.

And I do likewise desire you to observe, That our Lord Jesus does here speak
in the Second Person, Singular, Thou, in the same language, with the same
particular application, and awful Majesty, as the Ten Commandments were given
forth: thus you know they run; Thou shall have no other Gods before me; Thou
shall make to thy self no graven Image; Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain; Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day. So here,
Thou, when thou prayest. Christ would have every one that names his Name, that
takes upon him the Profession of being one of his People, to make a particular
application of this to himself, and to look upon this counsel as given, and
this charge as laid upon him. Thou, Thomas, when thou prayest, do this; and
thou John, when thou prayest, do this; and so, thou Matthew, and thou Andrew;
and so every one that was then alive, or that shall live in any Age or place of
the World. It is spoken to you, and to me, and to all: do thou enter into thy
Chamber, thou alone, and shut the door upon thee, not upon others with thee,
but upon thee, and so pray unto thy Father; get alone, says Christ, and pray
alone: do it when there is no body by, none to see thee, none to overhear thee.
God and an holy Soul are very good company, when it goes out with tears, and he
meets it with smiles: when it draws up its Confessions, and he seals its
Pardons: it breathes out holy desires and longings, and he affords it gracious
answers, and in them satisfactions: it states its case, tells its Diseases,
open its Sores, and he applies easing and healing remedies. In a word, When the
Soul fires its Sacrifice, and then in the holy flame thereof the blessed Angel
of the Covenant does wonderfully. It is oftentimes good for the Saints to go
one with another into the presence of their Father; they have been called upon
to strive together in prayer, and that in Family duties, or in public
Ordinances, or in cases of common concernment; but there is no Christian, who
has not his own wants, and his own pressures, and his own bitternesses, and
upon these accounts it is best for him to go alone: and thou can not tell, O
holy Soul, what special favor God may show thee, what token of love he may put
into thy hand, when there is no body by. When disconsolate Hannah had been
watering her plants, weeping greatly alone, pouring out her Soul in tears and
prayers before the Lord, she had such an impress upon her Spirit, such a
message of peace whispered to her, as made her glad at heart, and on a sudden
dried up all her tears, so that her countenance was no more sad. Thou, if thou
engagest in this work in thine uprightness, may believingly and comfortably
expect the same in God's time. However, set this down with thy self, and act
accordingly, That Secret Prayer is thy unquestionable duty by virtue of a
Divine Command.

4. Lastly, There is a very gracious promise made to Secret Prayer: and here I
shall lay down this Assertion as worthy your taking notice of; That the great
God does not make promises to any thing, which he does not require, and which
is not acceptable and pleasing to him, and which accordingly is not duty in
man: Promises do follow Precepts, and are designed for the, strengthening of
our hearts and hands, the encouraging us to Acts of Obedience, and the
sweetning those Obediential Acts to us. He is angry at those, who offer to do
those things in matters of his Worship, for which they have not his Warrant.
Hence such enquiry as this; Isa. 1. 12. Who has required this at your hands?
viz. to come in such a manner. And hence also that Complaint and Charge; That
they burn their Sons and Daughters in the fire, made a Sacrifice of them, which
as he says, Ier. 7. 31. He commanded them not, neither entered it into his
heart. David's Design was good, and it pleased God that he had an heart so set
for his honor, yet it was a rebuke and check to him that God sent him this
message by Nathan, 2 Samuel 7. 7. In all the places, wherein I have walked with
the Children of Israel, spoke I a word with any of the Tribes of Israel, whom I
commanded to feed my poople Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of
Cedar? From whence, says Peter Martyr, we learn, that David failed in
attempting such a thing, when he had not a word for it from God, from whom he
ought to have expected and waited for a peculiar command, as to the thing, and
time, and place. Those that run on such Errands as God never sent them on, and
presume to do such works as God never set them about, or will venture to do his
work in a way of their own, cannot with any shadow of reason expect a reward
from his hand, let them get one where they can: Why should God pay them for
doing that which is none of his work, or for doing it after their own fashion?
Nadab and Abihu did the work of God in offering Incense, but they did it after
their own fashion, in making use of strange fire, and it cost them their lives;
they found God not a bountiful Rewarder, but a dreadful Revenger. When Promises
are made by God to any thing, they do plainly speak that thing, to which those
Promises are made, a duty. Now we find here in the Text a great and gracious
promise made by our Lord Jesus to secret Prayer: Do this, says he, when thou
prayest, enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door about thee; study all
possible privacy and retirement; let no body know of that which thou go
about, if thou can help it: do it (...), in secret; there is Christ's
Counsel, and it must needs be good, because given by him, in whom are all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and whose name is Wonderful, Counselor:
now take with you the Promise annexed to this Counsel. Thy Father, which sees
in secret, shall reward thee openly. God will not send one single Petitioner
empty from his Throne of Grace: though thou go begging, yet thou shall
return rejoicing. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, had bowels of compassion
yearning over his wicked Neighbors; he prayed in secret for ^ilthy Sodom.
There was no body to back him in that Suit, nor to plead together with him:
that City was indeed so bad, that he was both ashamed and afraid to appear as
an Advocate for them, and therefore he did more than once deprecate the Divine
displeasure; Oh let not the Lord be angry: yet observe how mighty he was with
God. He lifted up prayer after prayer, and God condescended to him again and
again. Single and solitary Abraham had such a great interest and success, that
the glorious and provoked God did not give over granting, until Abraham had
given over praying

By what has been said, I hope the first thing promised is performed, namely,
it is made plain and evident, That Secret-prayer is the Christian's duty. We
now proceed to the Second, which is to prove, That if it be rightly managed, it
will be his advantage; and to that end, I shall only show, that it will afford
him these two things: 1. Safety. 2. Comfort.


1. First, Secret Prayer is a choice and excellent means of Security; would a
Man be safe when he is alone, then let him pray when he is alone? On this side
of Heaven there is not any one place to be sound, in which a person may
rationally look upon himself as quite out of the reach of danger. I heard one
once wittily say, He did not upon the Road fear Highway-men, so long as be was
alone. But there are other enemies from whom we may apprehend mischief when we
are most alone. The subtle Serpent wrigled himself into Paradise it self; and
there he did mortally sting our first Parents, and undid them and all their
posterity in them. Holy Paul was perfectly safe while he continued in the third
Heaven, the malicious Tempter could not come at him there; since he was cast
down from that blessed place, He never yet could, and for the future he never
shall make a reentry; nor is his Arm strong enough to shoot an Arrow, or throw
a fiery Dart so high: But no sooner was that eminent Apostle come down again,
but he was desperately set upon, worse than the Philistines were upon him; there
was a Thorn stuck in his flesh, which could not but put him to pain; and a
Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, who without peradventure gave him no
small blows.

One would conclude a person safe enough when nobody is with him; as there is
none to help, so there is none to hurt; yet even then he may be in danger; for
though there be no Man with him, yet there is a Devil with him; yea, more than
one, possibly more than a Legion. It might have been rationally concluded, That
David walking upon the top of his House, did not stand in need of his
Lifeguard about him; Who was that should or could do the King a mischief
there? Yet even there a Naked Woman conquered that Man of War, and a malicious
Devil let fly one of his envenomed Arrows, and wounded him to the very heart by
the eye. It had been well for that good Man, if, instead of gazing about, and
viewing every object that presented, he had been looking up to his God, and
praying in secret.

Know and consider, O thou poor Soul, the Devil has a mind to thee, not out of
any Love he bears thee, for there is no such thing in Devils; they must cease
to be Devils before they can have any kindness for Men: But he has a mind to
you, as a roaring Lion has to his prey; and in pursuance of his bloody design,
he is restless; though he can do himself no good, he reckons it worth his while
to do thee a mischief; and therefore he does not only walk with thee up and
down in the Street, and from this private or public House to that; nor only
follow thee to the public Congregation, there to divert thy thoughts, or
deaden thy affections, or direct thine eye to some vain and wanton object, or
pick up the seed which is sown, that though it be cast in at the ear, yet it
may never reach so far as the heart to root there, and bring forth precious
fruit in the Life and Conversation; but he will also dog you into your
Chambers, and intrude into your Closets; when the Door is shut, he will get in;
you cannot, while here, get clear of the old Man, and the old Serpent; and
wherever he is, you may be sure, He comes for no good. He is wholly set upon
mischief; that is his constant employ, his beloved work, his heart is set upon
it, he follows it close, and with all his might.

Therefore my advice is, That thou would make Prayer thy Closet-business;
that when this implacable Enemy of thine finds thee alone, he may not have an
advantage against thee. When in Ephesians. 6. the Apostle Paul had told you of the
Enemies you must contend with, that they are not only flesh and blood, but also
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places; he
advised you to put on the whole Armor of God, and over and above he directed
you to this excellent and necessary work of Prayer, as knowing that both your
security and victory depend as much upon that, as any thing: Your Armor will
not do without your God; and him you cannot expect without Prayer. If then you
would not fall both into temptation, and by it, your care and work must be to
watch and pray; and I do not in the least doubt but Prayer has laid many a
restraint upon the Devil, and kept him off from meddling with a Child of God
when his fingers have itch'd at him, and blunted his tools often and often, so
that he could not do the work he intended with them; and broken the neck of
many a cursed design which he was most industriously carrying on.

2. Secondly, Secret Prayer is a special way for the making of your retirement
comfortable and pleasant to you. Solitariness is looked upon as having
Melancholy for its usual. Companion; and a Life of loneliness and retirement
is reckoned a very disconsolate Life. The Prophet made this a part of his
bitter complaint, Psalm. 102. 7. That he was as a sparrow alone upon the house
top. And Solomon says, Eccles. 4. 10. Woe be to him that is alone. Hence one
said, He that loves to be alone, is either a Beast, or a God. But Secret-Prayer
is an excellent way to sweeten solitariness, and take off the uncomfortableness
of it. If thou do but in thine uprightness apply thy self heartily to this
work, when thou art without any Company, thou shall not be without matter of
rejoicing; but with Hagar in the Wilderness, find a Spring opened to thee. That
was a great saying of one, Nunquam minus solus quam cum maxim solus: I am
never less alone, than when I am most alone. He did never find less want of
Company, than when he had none; then a Man enjoys his God and himself; and he
that has indeed that enjoyment, needs no body. John 16. 32. Our Savior spoke
thus to his Disciples, The hour comes, yea, is now come, that ye shall be
scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone, and yet I am not
alone, because the father is with me. Not alone when alone. I shall be
altogether without you, but not without my Father, who does more, infinitely
more than fill up those vacancies; as at noonday we do not want the Stars,
though they be all obscured and disappear, because we have the glorious Light
and Beams of the Sun, who does abundantly supply their absence.

David tells us in Psalm 145. 18. which is a Psalm of Praise, That the Lord is
nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.
Sincere Prayer will fetch God down from Heaven, to stand at thy right hand. Our
Heavenly Father is more ready than the most affectio^ate tenderhearted Mother
upon Earth, to arise and come in at the cry of the Child. In Psalm 18. we find
that good Man in his distress, called upon the Lord, and cried unto his God,
and God heard him: Divine Love is quick of hearing, He heard my voice out of
his holy temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears. And now
observe what haste God made to his Servant; Verse. 9, 10. He bowed the Heavens
and came dewn: He rode upon a Cherub and did fly; yea, he did fly upon the
wings of the wind. When Holy David wanted his God, God would be with him
presently.

I dare assure thee, O Saint, if thou will but get thy Soul upon the Wing, and
by the hand of servent believing Prayer knock at Heavens door, thou shall to
thy comfort find, that thy beloved will not be long from thee; no, no, he will
be sure graciously to return thy Visit, he will come and drop some sweet
smelling Myrrh upon the handles of thy lock; Secret Prayer is the nearest and
readiest way to secret and intimate Communion with God; as it is an opening of
the heart to God, so it makes way for God's opening of his heart to the Saint;
and when that is opened, what blessed discoveries are made, what treasures
appear, and riches of Grace, what counsels of Wisdom, and thoughts of good and
great designs, the very sight of which is ravishing, and may well put the Soul
into a transport! When guilty, but convinced, Ephraim got alone, and made his
reflections, and thereupon bemoaned himself for his former folly, stubbornness
and obstinacy, and begged hard for converting, turning Grace, God presently
turned toward him, and with yearning Bowels spoke his love; this resolution was
immediately taken up, I will surely have mercy upon him. In a word, God does
sometimes in displeasure withdraw from his sinning Children, but it is with a
resolution to be found of them when they seek him; and to return to them when
he is sent for. Hos. 5. 15. I will go and return to my place, till they
acknowledge their offense, and seek my face. I will stay away, I will not come
near them, I will have nothing to do with them till they do this; but let them
do it as soon as they will, and they shall meet with acceptance; I will rise
out of my place, and visit them with Salvation. He will be sure to come at
Prayers call, if some crying sin or other do not drown the voice of it; and his
Presence and Beams will effectually scatter the thickest and blackest Clouds;
the light of his countenance, when once lifted up, will make it a day of
gladness to the most benighted Soul: Whenever he comes, he will be sure to
bring a blessing along with him, and so appear unto its joy. These particulars,
to which I have largely spoken, are, I hope, sufficient to prove, that Secret
Prayer is both your Duty and your Interest; and so I have done with the
Doctrinal part, and shall now proceed to the improvement of it by Application,
which will be twofold: 1. For Reprehension. 2. For Exhortation.


The use of Reprehension or Reproof, shall be directed to three sorts of
persons, who do indeed deserve to fall under it; and oh that it may come with
such power as to make them fall before it, and issue in their amendment of
those things, which by the light of Truth breaking in upon them, they shall see
to be amiss.

First, They are sharply to be reproved, for they are deeply guilty before God,
who instead of making Conscience, and living in the performance of Secret
Prayer, are altogether strangers to, and live in the total neglect of all
Prayer: They do not know what it is to approach unto the Throne of God, and to
pour out their Souls before him; they go to their Beds at night, like Swine to
their Sty, not begging Divine protection; and rise out of them in a morning,
and go about their business without paying any acknowledgments to their great
Benefactor, under the Wing of whose careful Providence they were secured; yea,
sit down to their Tables, without asking God's Blessing, as if they had no
dependence upon him; and when they have eaten and are full, rise up to work or
play, without giving God Thanks, as if they were not at all beholden to him.
And thus they live Prayerless lives in the World: They have passed many days,
and escaped many dangers, and received many mercies, and committed many sins,
but never set themselves, at least, in good earnest, to put up one Prayer. Oh
how do they tumble out by wholesale an innumerable company of execrable Oaths,
and tremendous Curses, which speaks their Tongues the Devils Instruments, set
on fire with the fire of Hell; but no body ever saw them upon their knees
before God, nor heard a word of Prayer drop from their Lips. They have had many
Dangers prevented; but never sought refuge, nor took shelter in God. They have
every day received multitudes of Mercies; but did never solemnly beg one. God
did in the time of the Old Testament, order that the Fire of the Altar should
never go out, and appointed the morning and evening sacrifice; but poor
creatures, these have no fire, their hearts are as cold as Ice, they know not
what true love to God means, and having no fire in themselves, God shall have
no sacrifice from them, his Altars shall be empty, they have nothing to lay on
from the beginning of the year to the end of it. How many are there that never
made an attempt this way, never tried to Pray, never went about the work? They
in the pride of their countenances will not seek after God. He is not in all
their thoughts, Ps. 10. 4. In all of them! He is but in few of them; and when
he is in any, when he forcibly breaks in upon them, and makes his own way, (for
they never invite him, nor study to think of him) he is not welcome nor
grateful to them. I fear, if a man should come and ask some of you such a
question as this; Friend, Neighbor, what intercourses are there between God
and you? what converse and fellowship have you with God? do you pray adays? do
you pray by your selves in your Chambers, or with your Families? are you some
of that blessed wrestling Generation who seek the face of the God of Jacob? if
you would speak the truth, and not cover your sin and shame with a lie, you
must answer, No, not I: God knows, I cannot pray, I do not know how to pray, I
never went about it, I see no need of it, I have no heart to it: may we not say
of these, what Agur said of himself, Prove. 30. 2. Surely they are more brutish
than any man, they have not the understanding of a man, they have not learned
wisdom, nor have they any knowledge of the Holy. Let them be reckoned for Beasts
in human shape. Some have written as if they did not look upon Reason but
Religion, as the thing which makes the specifical difference between a Man and
a Brute; because there is something in Brutes which, say they, may pass for
Reason, to be sure it looks very like it, but there is nothing like Religion in
them; and I would fain know, what there is, or at present can be of Religion in
that Man or Woman, who lives without Prayer; and how unworthy is such an one of
the name, Man? The late Learned Bishop Wilkins, in his treatise concerning the
Principles and Duties of Natural Religion, has these passages: In the Actions
of many brute creatures, there are discernable some footsteps, some imperfect
strictures and degrees of Ratiocination, such a natural sagacity as at least
bears a near resemblance to Reason. From whence it may follow, that it is not
Reason in the general, which is the form of humane nature; but Reason as it is
determined to actions of Religion, of which we do not find the least signs or
degrees in Brutes. Man being the only creature in this visible World, that is
formed with a capacity of worshipping and enjoying his Maker. And he adds, This
is not any new Opinion, but what several of the Ancient Writers, Philosophers,
Orators, and Poets have attested to, who make the notion of a Deity, and
Adoration of him, to be the true difference betwixt Man and Beast. Thou then
who have hitherto lived without God and Prayer in the World, own thy
degeneracy, take unto thy self both the name and shame of a Brute, and now
begin to act the part of a Man, in falling upon thy knees before God, and with
an humble blush, crying out as good Asaph did, when once got from under the
power and fury of an hideous temptation, Psalm 73. 22. So foolish was I, and
ignorant, I was as a beast before thee.

Besides this, I would have you to consider the disingenuity you discover in
living at such a rate, and in such a neglect and contempt of God as this; what*
will you not so much as thank God for all that good he does you? will you own
him in none of the footsteps of his Providence, and evidences of his care? does
he step in between you and your dangers, hold your Souls in life, lade you with
benefits, direct your affairs, assist you it business, succeed your endeavors?
does He day unto day show his bounty, and night unto night his goodness, and is
it not worth the owning? Will thou not make any thankful acknowledgment, nor
pay him any tribute of praise: would thou carry thus to thy Fellow Creature?
or would thou thy self bear it from another?

Think again how unnatural you are to your own Souls: if a poor Creature wants
bread, how will he go out into the Fields and Streets, and ask of every one he
thinks able to give, and continue upon his knees hours together? do thou not
see them? While thou do, thou have reason to reflect upon thy self with
indignation and abhorrency: will he beg for a penny? and wilt not thou pray for
a Kingdom and a Crown of Glory far better than those of Gold? When a Criminal
has a Sentence of death past upon him, he will plead hard for his life, and
leave no stone unturned. Benhadad, though a great King, when in danger, sent
his Servants in a most submissive manner, with Ropes about their Necks, to beg
for his life: Thou art a Criminal, the Sentence is past upon thee, and none can
tell how soon execution may be done; thou can not promise thy self an hours
respite: how unnatural then art thou, how hard is thy heart, and how cruel to
thy self, who go day after day, and year after year, without sending up a
Petition for the life of thy Soul, though thou have often heard that the King
of Heaven is a merciful King, and that there are forgivenesses with him?

What shall I say? if you are resolved to go on at this rate, and persevere in
this inhuman neglect, thou may e'ven as well renounce thy Allegiance to God,
disown thy being any of his Creatures, deny any dependence which thou have upon
him. Call not thy self from henceforth a Man, a Woman, endued with reason, or
acting according to the principles and dictates thereof, but acknowledge thy
being sunk down and degenerated into a Beast; and truly thou deservest to be
sent with Nebuchadnezzar to graze among them, till thou art made better to
understand both God and thy self. What, O Man, O Woman, what do thou mean?
live, and not pray? live merely upon God's mercy and patience, and not pray?
live upon his goodness, and his cost, and not pray? must thou one day dye and
go into the other World, and not send any prayers thither before thee? Must
thou go to God, in order to thy being judged by him, and sentenced as to thy
everlasting state, and yet not pray? Surely thou have lost thy reason, and art
chargeable with egregious folly and madness. Oh that I could do something in
order to thy cure, and bringing thee to thy self, and upon thy knees, and that
God would by his Spirit and Power accompany what I shall to that purpose offer
to thy most serious and repeated consideration.

First, That man who spends his days altogether without Prayer, is dead while
he lives: though he has a natural life, yet he has nothing of the life of
Grace, nothing of that divine life of which the Lord Jesus was the Purchaser,
and is the Principle, but is to this very day alienated from the life of God
thorough the ignorance and perverseness which is in him, and dead in trespasses
and sins. Newborn Children cry: What! can a person be born spiritually, born
of God, and brought forth unto God, and yet not cry, not pray! It is a thing
impossible, it cannot be. The work of Prayer, indeed, may be for a while
interrupted, sometimes through inward weakness and oppression, as that holy man
complained in Psalm 77. 4. I am so troubled, that I cannot speak: sometimes
through violence offered him by temptation; the Enemy of God and Man comes and
stops his mouth: otherwise the very nature which a Saint has been made a
partaker of, does carry him out hereunto: and that holy fire which is kindled
in his Soul, will be ascending up in such a flame; 2 Cor. 4. 13. It is written,
I believed, therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and therefore speak: that
is to be understood of speaking in a way of confession; but it is true also,
speaking in a way of supplication. In Acts 9. 11. The Lord said unto Ananias,
Arise, go into the street, which is called Straight, and enquire in the House
of Judas for one Saul of Tarsus, for behold, he prays. Poor Ananias was
startled at the Order, and not very willing to be sent upon such an Errand, and
began to object; Lord, this man has got a very bad name, I have heard of him
by many. He is the talk both of Town and Country, as having been a mischievous
Instrument; he has done much evil to thy Saints at Jerusalem, and now he comes
armed with Authority from the Chief Priests to bind all that call on thy Name.
Well, Ananias, do what thou art bidden; for though it is true, that he has
been a vile Wretch, a cruel and malicious Enemy, fear him not, the Wolf is
turned into a Lamb; It is no matter what formerly he was, he is now quite
another thing, and is acted by a far better Spirit. He is a new man, and thou
may take this for a certain and undoubted evidence of it. He is a
Praying-man. He that before spoke nothing but blasphemies and outrages against
Christ, and breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord, did now that he was converted and sanctified, speak supplications.

It is the fashion of a great many, when the Lord's day comes, they will go out
to hear, and they are for variety, this man and that, and twenty more, possibly
three Sermons upon a day, peradventure four: and I do not blame any for being
swift to hear, it is an excellent thing to see Christians hungry, and of good
appetites, so that they do but allow themselves necessary time for concoction,
and be not wanting to personal and Family duties; but Conscience, do thou
speak, and that loud enough to make guilty Persons hear and feel too: be there
not some of these, who at home are never upon their knees before God? If a man
could look into their Houses, and into their Chambers, he would find that
Prayer is quite shut out from thence. And for my part, I cannot but tell you,
That let these Persons hold their heads never so high, and have obtained never
so great a name, I can look upon them as being no better than a company of
walking Ghosts, such as do really want an inward vital principle, and are
carried up and down from one Congregation to another by some external
consideration. Prayer is a breathing in Heaven's Air, it is the breathing of
the Soul in the bosom of God; it draws in spirit and life from him, and then
again it pours out and empties it self into him: and it is full out as possible
for a man to live a natural life without natural breathing, as it is for him to
live a spiritual life without spiritual breathing, I mean, without Prayer. You
know when God promises his Spirit, Zechar. 12. 10. he does it in these
Expressions: I will pour out upon the House of David, and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplications. Wheresoever the Spirit of God
comes and dwells in the Soul as a Spirit of Grace, there he does certainly act
as a Spirit of Supplications: and the Apostle Paul says, Romans 8. 15. That the
Sons of God receive the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba, Father.
Which imports a filial boldness and confidence in dealing with him by fervent
Prayer.

I remember what you may meet in 1 Cor. 13. 1, etc. Though I speak with the
tongues of men and Angels, though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand
all Mysteries, and all knowledge: though I have all faith, so as to remove
mountains; though I bestow all my goods on the poor, and give my body to be
burned, yet if I have not Charity, it profits me nothing; I am nothing, but as
a mere sounding brass and ^inkling cymbal. What he there speaks of Charity, or
Love, which does indeed make Actions lovely in the sight of God and men, and
puts a luster and beauty upon them; the very same may be affirmed concerning
Prayer. Let a man be never so well accomplished* never so raised in his
seize, never so fluent and warm in his discourses, never so eminent for
his profession, never so frequent and attentive in his hearing, never so
abundant in acts of Charity, yet if he be a prayerless Person, he is nothing;
nothing in Religion, nothing to purpose; all his parts and performances, though
many and specious, will amount to nothing; in Heaven's Arithmetic they will be
of no more significancy, than so many Ciphers without a Figure, to put a value
into them.

That which I have said, amounts to thus much; To live without Prayer, is
utterly inconsistent with a gracious and holy frame; and all that such an one
does, will never turn him to a good account. You may as soon live a spiritual
life without Faith, as live by Faith without Prayer: for, as was before
observed, they that believe, will speak. When God has kindled a spark of Grace
in the Soul, it will be working in a way of Prayer; that spark will fly upward,
and carry the Soul along with it. Thus we find it in Psalm. 39. 3. My heart was
hot within me; while I mused, the fire burned: then spoke I with my tongue.
What did he speak? Prayers. Lord, make me to know my end, and the measure of my
days. Therefore my advice is, that you would either take up Prayer, and follow
it as a principal part of a Christians work, or else lay down your Profession;
boast not of a filial Relation to God, while thou art not possessed with a
filial spirit and disposition. Never talk of your being acquainted with God,
and some of his Friends, when in all your lives you never spoke one serious
hearty word to him. If you are resolved to live without Prayer, be so just and
reasonable as to put off the honorable name Christian, which does by no means
belong to you, and call your selves Heathens, Beasts, nay, which is worse,
though not too bad for you, downright practical Atheists.

Secondly, Your Condition at the present is very miserable, though you know it
not: so long as you live without Prayer, you live without a blessing:
whatsoever may light upon you, the blessing of God is the portion of a praying
People. If you will look into the Book of God (which, I believe, you seldom do;
for those that will not beg his mercy, will not labor to know his will) you
may see how much it cost Esau to get a blessing from his Father Isaac, he shed
many tears, and lifted up loud cries; Genesis 27. 33, 34. Isaac told him, that one
had brought him Venison, which he had eaten of, and he blessed him, and he
should be blessed. It is said, When Esau heard the words of his Father, he
cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his Father, Bless
me, even me also, O my Father: and when Isaac answered, verse. 37. Behold, I
have made him thy Lord, and all his Brethren have I given to him for Servants,
and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and what shall I do now unto thee,
my Son! Verse. 38. Esau said unto his Father, Have thou but one blessing, my
Father? Bless me, even me also, O my Father; and Esau lifted up his voice, and
wept. What, art thou so poor, O my Father, as that in giving one blessing, thou
have given away all? Have thou not reserved one? And all this he was fain to
do, before he could obtain. Yea, and it was not only thus with a profane Esau,
who might well be thought to have forfeited the blessing by his selling his
Birthright; but even good Jacob himself, when he would have a blessing from
Heaven, he was constrained to wrestle with the Angel for it, and to put forth
all his strength in the conflict, and to keep his hold, though the Angel se^med
willing to shake him off; yea, and to tell him at last, that he would not let
him go until he had got it. Thus it has, been formerly: Blessings come down
from Heaven upon the wings of Prayer.

And what, O man, do thou think, that the Blessings of God are fallen so much
in their price, and grown so cheap at this day, as that they go a begging? Or
that men may have them without asking for? God has been wont to stand more
upon his Honor than so: and therefore has declared his will, that Prayer
shall come in between the Promise and the Performance; he would have his People
sue out the Promise before they shall have the good which is contained in it;
as is evident from that well-known Scripture, Ezekiel. 36. we find the heart of
God greatly enlarged to his People, and Promises flowed in abundance from him,
and He gives them the assurance of his fixed resolution in the thing. I the
Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. Do not you doubt, call not my truth in
question, I will be as good as my word. Yet observe what follows in the 37th
verse; Thus says the Lord God, I will yet be enquired of by the House of
Israel to do it for them. All those great and good things had been in the heart
and purpose of God from eternity, and now he was graciously pleased for their
comfort to put them into his Promise; but if they had a desire to have them,
they must send Prayer to Heaven for them.

Holy David tells us, Psalm. 3. 8. God's blessing is upon his People: and
certainly every one will grant that there is a great deal of reason why it
should be upon them exclusive to all the World beside; upon them, and upon none
but upon them: they only have been by the Lord Jesus redeemed from the curse of
the Law, and therefore they only can lay a rightful claim to the Blessings of
the Gospel. God may, yea, and he every day does give bread to his Enemies; but
surely as long as they continue his Enemies, he will not give them his
blessing; and indeed why should they expect it? But now, O prayerless Soul, how
will thou prove thy self one of his People? Thou have upon thee those Spots
which are not the Spots of his People, when at the same time thou do want
those Marks which are the Marks of his People: thou who spendest thy days
without prayer, do pay no homage unto God, thou ownest no dependence upon
him, thou give him no reverence, thou do him no service, thou bring him
no honor, and I pray, tell me, why should his blessing be upon thee? God may
deal bountifully with thee; possibly he does do so already, and gives thee
waters of a full cup; it is his manner; many srcaps and good bits fall under
his Table; He lets them fall on purpose for his Dogs to gather up: his Sun
shines, and his Rain falls upon barren Wildernesses and noisome Dunghills, as
well as upon fruitful Fields, and pleasant Gardens; Outward mercies are
therefore called Common Mercies, because all have their share in them, the just
and the unjust too, the evil as well as the good; so that the Wise Man tells
us, No man can know either love or hatred by all that is before him. Therefore
let no man be proud of his temporal Enjoyments, nor of an elated Spirit,
because he is of a raised condition, and stands upon the World's upper ground.
If thou have no other arguments to use, but those thou fetchest from the
World's Topics, thou will never prove thy self Heaven-born, nor make out thy
Title to the happiness and glory which is above. God indeed may fill thy
Pocket, and spread thy Table, furnishing it with variety of Dainties; He may
cram thy Bags, and make thy Cup run over; He may throw into thy Possession
Houses and Lands, as he gave Quales to the Israelites, in his wrath; and if
thou will take the pains to turn over all thou have, and make as diligent
search as thou can, thou will not find one blessing in it; many a Creature,
and in every one a curse: thy Clothes have a plague in them, witness thy Pride;
thy Table is thy snare, witness thy excess; and Riches are laid up by thee to
thy hurt, whilst thou make them thy God, which should be no more than thy
Servants. Thus it is with thee at present, and thy present condition is thy
best condition: unless thou growest better, that will not: all that thou can
do, is to rejoice in sense, thou must leave it to others to rejoice in hope.
But however, if it will do thee any good, and the Lord grant that it may, we
will enquire what is like to be hereafter. Therefore,

Lastly, Let us look on to the consequence, and consider what will follow this
sinful brutish negect of your unquestionable duty. You know, your own
Consciences tell you, that you do not pray; you are not convinced of any need
that you have of it: other things there are which you think you cannot be
without, such are your Jovial Companions, and your vain antic Dresses, but you
can be, and do very well without Prayer; you taste no sweetness in it: ranting
and roaring is music, Healths and Huzza's, Balls and Masks, are ravishingly
delicious; but to you, Prayer is a very dull and insipid business. But, I pray,
what will be at the last? I would stain have my best at last, and so would you
too, if you be wise: if you have not your best at your latter end, you will be
found fools at your latter end. I find an excellent wish concerning Israel of
old, whether it was God's wish* or Moses's, or both, I am sure it was very
good, and carried in it a great deal of love; Deuteronomy. 32. 24. O that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end. By
latter end there, according to the judgment of Expolitors, we are not so much
to understand their death, as the end and issue of that course which they were
then steering. O that they would seriously think with themselves, and wisely
foresee whither that way would bring them, in which they were then walking. It
was a very smooth and pleasant way, it was paved with delights, but the great
business was, whither did it lead them? It is my hearty wish for you, whoever
you are, that you would once in a day retire your selves, and get alone, and
seriously think what your total neglect of Prayer will produce, when you are on
a Deathbed, and after Death, in Eternity.

First, What fruit you will have from hence, when Sickness Arrests you, and you
find that the King of terrors is at your very door; that will be a dismal time,
and it will cause many thoughts and tremblings of heart; and then, if ever, you
will stand in need of Cordials, and happy the Man that has his comfortable
Reflections and Prospects to support his Spirits; who can look back to his Life
past with peace, and look forward to Eternity with hope. When a Child of God,
that has maintained a close and intimate Communion with his God, and given
himself unto Prayer, comes to lie upon his Deathbed, he is so roughly handled
by that last enemy, that he cannot pray; his heart is so faint within him, and
his pains are so strong upon him, that he has not any leisure for that work in
which he has found so much sweetness, and for which he has so dear a love:
Alas then his case! his weakness, his agonies, his tumblings and tossings are
such, that he cannot pray as he was wont, only sigh and groan, and lift up an
eye, and give a look toward God's Holy Temple, and dart up a short ejaculation:
Poor Soul! that is the utmost length he can go, and it is no small grief to him
that he is so straightened and confined. Holy Asaph put this among the Reasons of
his bitter complaints, Psalm. 77. 4 That he was so troubled, that he could not
speak. But at that very time he can relieve and comfort himself with his former
praying, and former walking and Communion with God; his former seeking of God,
and conversing with him. When there was a message of death, by the Prophet,
brought to Hezekiah, he could send this short Petition up again to Heaven, Isa.
38. 3. Remember, now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight.
He could do but very little then, his strength was gone, and his breath was
short; but he could with comfort remember, and desire God himself to remember
how he had walked, and what he had done in his Halcion and healthful days. So
when a gracious person is disabled for his work, he can think thus, There is a
stock of Prayers which I have laid up in Heaven, against such a time of need as
this is; and the thought thereof will be a singular support and comfort to him.

But what do you think will become of you at such a time, you that have been
all your days strangers to this work? When you come to dye, you cannot pray,
your distempers and pains will not let you, and you do not know how to go about
it, nor how to do one stroke at it; and it will then be a sting and horror to
you to think, that when you were in health and strength, and all things well
with you, you would not pray. You were called upon often, by your godly
Ministers, and by your gracious Friends and Relations, but you would not. At a
dying hour you will have no fitness for that work; and all the time that you
lived before, you had no heart to it. But possibly you will comfort your selves
with this, that when you are sick, and full of fears and inward disquiets, and
you are not in a capacity of praying for your selves, then you, or some of your
Friends for you, will send for some godly Minister or other, and desire him to
pray for you. Well, suppose that is done, and the Minister sent for, comes, if
he knows what a wretch thou have been, and how much thou have neglected God and
thy Duty all thy days, What straitnings of Soul must he of necessity be under
as to thee? With what holy confidence and hope may we go to God in Prayer on
the behalf of a godly person when sick, if we can say to God as they did to
Christ on the behalf of Lazarus, John 11. 3. Lord, he whom thou love, is
sick? But what a damp must it needs be to us, when we think we are going to God
for a sick and dying Man, but such an one as neglected God, and hated him, and
lived without him, and in open rebellion against him? I fear, I fear, there are
too many among us that befool and deceive themselves with this, That if they
can get a Minister to Pray by them (especially if it be such an one as will
give them the Sacrament too) oh, then all is well, and their Souls go
immediately to Heaven without any stop by the way, and the Gate of Glory is
opened to them, and entrance granted; but it is probable that will not do, and
that these Men build their high hopes upon a Sandyfoundation that will fail
them: And I would fain know what great encouragement, or what sufficient ground
we have to believe, that we shall carry them in the Arms of our Prayers safe to
Heaven, who would not themselves take one right step in the way that leads
thither; would never be humble Petitioners for the pardon of their Sins, or for
the Life and Salvation of their own Souls? That I look upon as exceeding worthy
of your observation and repeated thoughts, which we meet with in the 1st of
Samuel, chap. 12. After that good Man had faithfully reproved the people for
their great wickedness in asking a King; and likewise put them into a great
consternation by a Storm of Thunder and Rain in the time of Wheat-Harvest,
which was unusual in that Country; they became humble Suitors to him, saying
in verse 19. Pray for by servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not. That
request he was most freely wil^ing to grant; God forbid, says he, that I
should sin in ceasing to pray for you. He had prayed for them, and would
continue to pray for them. But now mark and remember that which follows in
verse. 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart. Which
is, as if he had said, I will not be wanting to my Duty, you are a people that
I dearly love, and heartily wish welfare and prosperity to; I will speak for
you, and plead for you, and wrestle with God for you; but do not you lay too
great stress upon my Prayers; look to it that you be not found sinning against
God, whilst I am praying to him for you, left you do your selves more mischief
than I can do you good. My Prayers will not prevail on your behalf, unless you
will resolve to fear God your selves, and to seek and serve him your selves,
and pray, and honor and obey him your selves. By warrant of that Scripture, I
do now say to you, when you are sick and in distress, and fear you shall dye,
you will call the Ministers to pray for you, and we are ready to do it; when
you send for us we will come (only I wish that we may be sent for sooner than
we are by some of you, viz. while you are able to give us an account of your
selves, and in a capacity of receiving counsel and advice) and when we come, it
shall be with bowels of pity and compassion, and we will pray for you heartily,
and with all our might; but do not you trust to that, and pass the time of your
health and strength in a supine carelessness and neglect, but now make Prayer
your business, go to the Throne of Grace upon your own errand, and seek God
your selves.

Secondly, Consider what will be the fru^t of this total neglect of Prayer,
after Death has put a period to your sinful careless Life, Enoch, while in the
way, walked with God; and then in the end God took him. The Communion was begun
here, that showed the Holiness of Enoch; in Heaven it was perfected, and that
made his happiness complete. A Praying Saint does at death go up to the Quire
of Angels and glorified spirits of just Men, to join with them in their loud
and never-ending Allelujahs; they lived a Life of Prayer upon Earth, and they
shall live a life of Praise in Heaven. But what will become of you that are
altogether strangers to the work? what kind of Eternity is that which you shall
launch into? How unspeakably doleful will your condition be in the other World?
You are not fit for the work of Praises, for your instruments are not in tune
for it, there never was any thing done here for the putting your hearts in
frame; from you there would proceed nothing but jarring in the midst of that
most pleasant and melodious Consort. You cannot pray to God, which is the work
of poor indigent Beggars; How then can you exalt and praise him, which, to do,
is the work of holy and ever-blessed Angels? And then if you are not fit for
Heaven, you will be fit for Hell; if no company for Angels, then for Devils; if
you will not pray here, you shall in the torment and bitterness of Soul roar
and howl there; you will not honor God, he will punish you; you cared not for
the knowledge of his ways, and you shall not know his rest; you will not seek
his face, and you shall not see his face: No, no, down you shall be thrust into
that lake where there shall be fire to torment, but no light to refresh; where
there shall not be the voice of joy and triumphs, but weeping and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. In this Life you send up no Prayers to God, but live as if
you did not know him, as if you did not need him, as if you had no love for
him; and the truth is, you have not. Well, remember this, He lets you alone at
present, and carries as if he took no notice; but he will deal with you
accordingly, when he has you in the next World, the place of giving out
rewards and punishments, rendering unto every one according as his work has
been; there you shall have tribulation and anguish, but God will not be
affected with your miseries, nor will he pity your groans, nor have any respect
to your tears. Lay these things to your hearts, and be convinced of this, that
Prayer is your interest; set upon the work, if you did but get acquaintance
with it, you would love it; if you were but once used to it, you would never
leave it. Psalm. 116. 1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice and
my supplications. Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore I will
call upon him as long as I live. And that was long enough; longer he should not
pray; so long he would; there is no Praying-work in Heaven: Well, said David, I
will ply it here, and follow it hard now. He had found the good; and tasted the
sweetness of it.

USE.
In the second part of this Use of Repr^hension, I shall direct my Discourse to
those who are altogether for Public Praying, getting into Churches, and such
(as they call) Consecrated places, there to show (I think that is a word very
proper to the design) their Devotion; though I do not see, but that when their
hours of Prayer are come, and their Service is doing, their Churches are
exceeding empty, which is indeed a shame to them; for if they are persuaded in
their Consciences, That is the way of God, why do they not frequent it? If they
are convinced, That is the work of the Lord, why do they not abound in it?
There is a great cry among them for that form and Mode of Worship, and I
heartily wish it may do them much good that love it; but since their cry for it
is so loud, why is their devotion so little? Why do small matters keep them at
home upon weekdays? why do they choose Taverns and Alehouses, rather than
their places of Prayer? Let them look to it, that their seeming zeal do not
come from a bad Principle, and be not directed to a bad end.

I shall not speak a word against the Liturgy; That is not my business, who
desire to follow those things that make for Peace, Let those that like it and
choose it, use it if they please; let them that find it heart-raising,
heart-warming, heart-inlarging, go on in their attendance upon it: I envy none
that which they like, and may do them good, especially when I have that which
pleases me better. Blessed be our Gracious God, and thanks to those in
Authority over us, we have liberty to serve God according to our Judgments and
Consciences; yea, and that Liberty established by a Law. We know there are many
Adversaries that are enraged at it; but through Divine Goodness, there is a
wide and effectual door opened, the Lord grant none may be able to shut it.

That which I blame many for, is their Idolizing of Public Places, as if they
did put an Holiness and Virtue into work done in them; and as if Public Prayer
were enough, and would serve for all. How have we some superstitious persons,
as they pass through an Abbey, Cathedral, etc. not only bare their heads, but
drop upon their knees in a Pew, or at a Pillar! And others, that I have known,
when the Bells chime in, up they get, and to the Church they go, and there they
sit till the Service be finished, and that they think sufficient, and with that
they do at present put off their Consciences, that is all the Prayer they make,
then to Eating, and Drinking, and Visiting, and Gaming, there is no Praying in
their Families, none in their Chambers and Closets; I appeal to your
Consciences in the Case, and accuse no body living, unless their Consciences
accuse them. Now, my Friends, what do you think of this? Is it well? will this
do? is this the way to please God? Is this to fill up your days and places with
Duty? Is this to deal bountifully with that God, who does deal so bountifully
with you? Is this to fit your selves for the giving up your account unto God?
The proud Pharisee went to the Temple to pray; but when he had done, he came
away with a world of sin in him, and with a load of guilt upon him. He did,
indeed, justify and applaud himself; but God's Soul abhorred and loathed him.
Whereas the poor, humbled, brokenhearted Publican stood a great way, and
prayed in the Spirit from an inward and deep sense of his own vileness, and he
was sent home to his House justified; God gave him a Pardon and a Smile. I
shall not spend much time or pains about this sort of Men, because I conclude
their prejudice is so great, that they will give very little heed to any thing
that I shall say, though delivered with all possible meekness, and really
designed for their good; yet not knowing what it may please that God to do upon
them, who is the Father of Mercies, and God of all Grace, and has the hearts
of Men in his hand, and can make what impressions upon them, and changes in
them, seem good in his sight, I shall not pass them by altogether in silence;
but offer to their consideration these two things, which, in my judgment, carry
something of weight in them.

First, Places do not add any value to Actions of Religion, so as to commend
them to God. I remember, that which after the discourse of Cornelius, Peter
said unto him, Acts 10. 34. Of a truth I perceive that God is no respector of
persons; but in every nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness,
is accepted of him. And I may say, as there is no respect of Persons with God,
so there is no respect of Places with God; He has no more esteem for the
Chancel, than for the body of the Church; and that which is within the Rails,
is no more Sacred than that which is without them. There is as near,
compendious, and direct a way to the Throne of God from thy House, O Believer,
as there is from the Church, or the most magnificent Cathedral; and those
Supplications which are made and presented there with an holy heart, by the
assistance of the Divine Spirit, and in the name of Christ, shall find as free
an access to God, as ready an audience with him, and as gracious an acceptance.
It is indeed by us, and all, granted, That the Temple at Jerusalem was an holy
place; yea, there was in it, not only an Holy Place, but the Holy of Holies.
God himself had sanctified it, and appropriated it to his own most solemn
service; there he had been pleased to place his Name, that was an excellent
Type of the Lord Jesus, our ever-blessed Mediator; and wherever the Jews
were, into what Country soever they were scattered or carried Captive, they
were to pray toward it. Dan. 6. 10. When Daniel knew that the writing was
signed, he went into his house, and his windows being open in his chamber
toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day and prayed, and
gave thanks before his God, as he did afore-time. But that Temple being
destroyed, and not so much as one Stone left upon another, that Church State
being at an end, and that dispensation ceased; I know no such thing as Holiness
of Places here below. The Synagogues among the Jews in the Land of Canaan were
not Holy; but only convenient places for them to meet together in for the
performance of public Worship, and waiting upon God in the way of his
Ordinances. And our Churches at this day, come not in the room of the Temple,
but of those Synagogues. There was indeed a very great stir and hot contention
in our Savior's days, and before, about the place of Publick-worship, between
the Jews and the Samaritans: The Jews were for the Temple built by Solomon at
Jerusalem, and they were in the right; for that was the place which God had
chosen and appointed. On the contrary, the Samaritans stood stiffly for the
Temple, which had been built by their Ancestors upon Mount Gerizzim. The Woman
of Samaria, having an opportunity put into her hands, did in John 4. 20. start
the Question, and propound it to our Savior, seeking, as one says, to be by
him satisfied about it, as in a case of Conscience. Now it is worth our while
to observe his Answer thereunto, which you have in Verse 21. Jesus said unto
her, Woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye shall neither at Jerusalem, nor
in this Mountain, worship the Father. Prayer, Ordinances, and the Worship of
God, shall not be restrained to this place nor to that; it shall not be more
pleasing, powerful and prevalent in one place, for the place's sake, than it is
in another. Add hereunto, that which the Holy Apostle Paul says, in 1 Timothy 2.
8. I will, that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and
doubting. Mark his manner of expression, I will; he speaks with Authority, we
may be sure he received this from the Lord. He would never have said, I will,
had he not been sure that it was God's will; it was God's will, and therefore
it was Paul's will. But what was it? That Men do not look to the place in which
they pray, but to the manner how they pray; let them pray any where, every
where, in what place they themselves judge fit and convenient, so that their
hands be washed in innocence, and their hearts are but cleansed from their
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness. Holy and pure Prayer shall be
welcome to God, and have a most gracious reception, from what quarter or corner
soever it comes. We find that good Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God, when he
was in the Belly of the Fish, which was so dark and dismal a place, that he
counted and called it the belly of Hell; yet his Prayer made there, did not
lose its way, nor fail of the end for which it was sent. Jonah 2. 2. I cried by
reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of
hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.

Secondly, I do advise and desire you to examine your selves, and to be better
studied in, and acquainted with your own hearts, than, it may be, as yet you
are; for I cannot but tell you, though this be an excellent work, and necessary
for all that would manage Religion to everlasting advantage, and approve
themselves to God; so it is in a particular manner necessary for them that lay
so much stress upon places, and other things of like nature, to watch their
hearts narrowly, and to keep a very strict eye upon them, lest by those
superstitious observances, they be found wanting to, and of the very vitals of
the Duty, and hug and please themselves with a rotten and stinking Carcass,
where the Soul and Life are wanting; and as our Lord said to the Pharisees,
Matt. 23. 23. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye pay tithe
of mint, and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the
law, judgment, mercy, and faith: They neglected the magnalia legis, the great
things of the Law, while they were greatly solicitous about the minutula, the
little things, which did speak the unsoundness of their hearts; so what shall
we think of them who spend all, or the greatest part of their care and heat
about those things which come not under any express command of the Divine Law?
They that are most curious about their Bodies, are, as it is to be feared, most
careless about their Souls; they spend so much time at their Glass, that they
have none for the Bible; they are so careful that a Pin be not stuck amiss in
their Clothes, that they leave every thing amiss in their Hearts; by the Garbs
and unreasonable Dresses, in which some sillily proud persons come into the
Assemblies, it is easy for Spectators to determine how they spent and profaned
the Morning of the Sabbath at home; and we may apprehend and fear the same in
the present case, that those persons who are so much set for such things as
this, are, at least, very apt and prone to bestow none of their care about that
which deserves most; they are so much for the place, that they forget and
neglect the heart; they are so thoughtful where they pray, that they do not
mind how they pray; they are so set for a form, they do not mind, nay, possibly
they hate the Power. But by the way, let^me whisper this in the ear of these
persons, That the Altar will not Sanctify a corrupt thing: If you bring dead,
formal, lifeless Prayers, though you offer them up in your Consecrated
Churches, nay, at your adored Altars, they will not come up with a sweet
smelling favor and acceptance before God.

I would not have any body think that I do, God forbid that I should say, A
Form of Prayer, and Formality of Heart, are inseparable Companions; I do not
doubt but mere formal Professors are most for forms; but I dare not affirm that
all those who make use of Forms, are mere formal Professors. I do not doubt but
some looking upon Forms as lawful, and out of modesty, and an humble sense of
the lowness of their own parts, do make use of Forms when they pray with
others, and are conscientious in the use of them; and they do accompany the
Petitions, Confessions, and Thanksgivings contained in them, with sincere
affections, and do meet with a gracious acceptance with God, and do enjoy a
communion with his Holy Majesty.

But this I will also be bold to say, and if any be offended at it, upon them
be it; That constant stated forms of Prayer and Formality, are borderers upon
one another; they live at no such great distance, but that they frequently, yea
commonly, meet together in the same Service, and in the same Persons: And
really I am of the mind, that it stands them in hand, who make use of forms, to
be very cautious, and look warily to themselves, lest they do, even before they
are aware, fall into formality; that indifferency and lukewarmness of Spirit
which God cannot endure. When in the forequoted Scripture the Woman of Samaria
fell into discourse with Christ about the place of Worship, whether it ought to
be at Jerusalem, or in that Mountain, viz. Gerizim? our Savior did wisely and
graciously take her off from that, as a matter not so momentous as to deserve
either her Enquiry, or his Resolution; and fell to acquainting her with,
directing her to, and putting her^ upon the Spirituality of that Worship, which
is to be performed, as that which she and every one ought principally to attend
unto, because it is that which the heart of God is most for, and upon which his
pure eyes are chiefly set. 4 John 23, 24. The hour comes, and now is, when the
true worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; for the Father
seeks such to worship him. God is a spirit; and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit, and in truth. Spiritual Worship is most congruous and
agreeable to God. Childish Toys please Children, who have no more wit; outward
Pomp and Ceremonies please vain men, who have not so good hearts as they
should: but spiritual Worship is acceptable to that God who is himself a
Spirit; such Worshippers he seeks, others he rejects when he finds them;
therefore you must be such, if you would find favor, or receive a Blessing.
And to shut up this particular, I will only add, That if men were once set, as
they should be, for the spirituality of Worship, they would not be so
unreasonably eager as they are for, nor so tetchy, froward and contentious
about Places, Modes, and Forms, which can fetch their pedigree and original no
higher than mere human Invention and Appointment. Enough of that; and it will
be well if some persons do not think this a little too much.

USE.
In the third and last branch of this Use of Reprehension, my work will be to
awaken, rouse, and startle; to convince, and bring those to judge and condemn
themselves, who live without secret Prayer: I hear from some, and I do more
than partly believe it, That there are many Professors, and those too of some
Name and Eminency, who live under the dreadful guilt of this sinful omission:
and if there be some such, how great may we suppose the total number to be, of
them who are this way chargeable! though let them be never so many, every one of
them, Man, Woman, and Child, is known to that God who observes our down-lying
and our up-rising, and is acquainted with all our ways. There are those that
will come to public Ordinances, that they may not be counted Heathens, nor
suspected to be Papists, which Party now, blessed be God, is under great infamy
and reproach, though not greater than they do deserve, upon account of the very
Principles of that cursed Religion which they have embraced, and do profess:
Yea, and they will attend upon those Ordinances which they think are most
purely administered, and also join themselves in Communion with those Churches
which they look upon as being of the most Scriptural Constitution, that so they
may be reckoned among Christians of the highest Form, and chiefest Rank; yea,
and peradventure they will set up Family Duties, they will call their Children
and Servants together, and all under their ^oof and Charge, to seek the Lord;
lest upon a discontent or remove, somebody within doors should tell tales, by
means whereof their reputation should be blasted, and the truth of their
Religion called in question by any of those to whom they are desirous, yea,
ambitious of approving themselves. But, wretches as they are! as for Prayer by
themselves, either in Chamber or in Closet, or any where else, they do lay it
aside altogether. God himself will be a swift Witness against them, that He and
they never so met together. They find much other work, and can do many other
things when they are alone: They can spend a great deal of time at the Glass,
viewing and dressing themselves; they can tell their Money, and read over their
Bills and Bonds: but as for Soul-searching Works, and Heart-examining, and
seeking after God, either acquainting themselves with him, or making their
requests known to him, they are utter strangers to it, and never troubled
themselves about any thing of that nature.

Now let me ask you, Is this kind? Is there any thing of ingenuity in it? Can
the great God, unto whom you are infinitely obliged, take it well at your
hands? You would have God look after you in all places where you come: You do
not indeed delight in his Company, but would be the Objects of his Care; you
would have his Mercy and Goodness follow you all the days of your life. If
Israel wanted any thing in the Wilderness, if they had not Water here, and
Flesh there, they took pet, and fell a grumbling. You expect that God should
secure you, and support you, and supply you, when you are alone, as well as in
Company; and I would have you give me, if you can, one good reason, why you
will not seek and serve Him when alone, as well as in Company?

And I desire you to study the frame of the Spouse's Spirit, and take notice of
the resolution she took up, and consider whether there be nothing in it worthy
of your learning and imitation. Cantic. 8. 1, 2. O that thou were as my
brother, that sucked the breasts of my mother! when I should find thee without,
I would kiss thee, yet I should not he despised. I would lead thee, and bring
thee into my mothers house. Bear with me, while I present you with a few
thoughts upon these words. In them you have the Spouse's Option and Resolution.
Her Option or Wish: Oh that thou were as my brother, that sucked the breasts of
my mother. That is, As near in relation and conjunction to me, as near can be:
I am for no distance that may issue in strangeness, but the greatest nearness
possible, that will warrant familiarity, and justify a free converse. Oh that
thou were as my Brother! mine own Brother, my Brother in all respects, who did
not ouly lie in the same Womb, but was nourished and brought up with the same
Milk, and sucked the same Breasts. Well, suppose it had been so; what then?
what advantage would she have had? what encouragement would she have taken from
thence? That you may see in her Resolution, which fixed upon two things: When I
should find thee without, I would kiss thee; the world should see, that I have
an heart, and love for thee. But what, O thou enamored Spouse, thou faithful
Turtle, what of that? Others will do so too; they will have their
lipkindnesses, who are mere strangers to an hearty and sincere affection. How
many men will abound in expressions of love when they are without,
extraordinary kind to their Wives in the streets, and in their Neighbors
houses; huge loving and good-humored before folks, when they are mere Dogs, or
rather Devils within doors; Naphtalies abroad, that give goodly words; but
Nabals at home, where their Tongues are sharp Swords. Let such men know, and
tremble while they know, there is a God in Heaven, and a Conscience in their
own bosoms, that curiously observe and record all. And just so it is in the
present Case. A great many will seem to kiss Christ abroad in a Church, and at
a public Ordinance; who there so devout as they? They will cringe and bow to
his very Name, Jesus; a great stir they make, but it is nothing else than a
Complement; when they turn back upon the Church, they turn their back upon
Christ too; and going home, they leave at the Church-door all the respect and
kindness which they would be thought to have for him. But the Spouse was acted
by another Principle; she carried the same dearness of affection to Christ
along with her to all places where she came; and therefore she resolved not
only to kiss him when she found him without, but likewise to lead him, and
bring him into her mothers house; She would be as dear over him, and respective
to him at home, as abroad; she would indeed be glad to meet him abroad, to meet
him in the Highway of his Ordinances; thither she goes, there she walks, and
waits for that very purpose; she esteems Ordinances, because they are divine
appointments, and have the stamp of God's Authority upon them; but she rests
not in the bare enjoyment of them, but in and by them would have communion with
Christ himself; and let her Sanctuary-sighs, and sense of his Power and Glory
there, be never so clear and sweet, she would, for all them, long to have him
at home; home would not be home to her, but a Wilderness, an Hell, if she could
not have communion and an intercourse of kindness with Christ there.

And this which we find her in that place fixedly resolved to do, was no more
than what she had formerly done, when she had been so happy as to meet with
him. She had found it was a thing seasible; Christ was easy to be entreated;
if desired, he would not refuse to come under her Roof; and she had found how
much good she got by his Company, that in having Him with her, she had All in
him. That she had done thus before, you may see in Cant. 3. 4. It was but a
little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loves. And glad
she was that she had found him; she did not repent of the great pains and many
weary steps that she had taken in the search. But what did she do now that she
had found him? She tells you, I held him, and would not let him go. I am
persuaded Christ did not intend to leave her, he delights to stay where he is
welcome and made much of; nothing drives him away but unkindness. Yet true love
is jealous and afraid: He has withdrawn, and I did not know then how to be
without him; when my Sun was gone, it was dark night with me; and therefore she
would make as sure of him as ever she could: He was too good to part with,
therefore now she had got him again, she would keep him. If you ask, How long?
she tells you, Till she had brought him into her mothers house, and into the
chamber of her that conceived her. She was for secret Duty and Fellowship,
Chamber-enjoyment and Communion.

And I think this may be taken for granted, that there is not any one truly
gracious Soul, who knows what it is to have the sweet gracious comfortable
presence of Christ, and what it is to lie and labor, sigh and groan under his
subductings and absence, but will be of the same mind with the Spouse; having
recovered his loss, he will in a pang of love, and rapture of joy cry out, O
thou whom my Soul loves! have thou been gone so long, and have I been mourning
and lamenting after thee so long, and seeking thee so diligently, going, and
weeping as I went, dropping tears faster than I took steps, and have I found
thee at last! I will not part with thee: if thou will not take me up to thee,
thou shall not deny to go along with me; unless desires and longings are grown
insignificant, unless Prayers and Tears have lost their wonted power, I will
have thee to my House, to my Family, to my Chamber; I am now set for the
greatest privacy, and for the sweetest intimacy: there will I pour out my
fervent Prayers, and there I will humbly and patiently, yet with inflamed
longings, attend thy pleasure, and wait thy gracious Answers.

We find that holy Abraham did erect Altars to God abroad, in the several
places to which he came. God had his Tables for Abraham, and Abraham would have
his Altars for God; God was very gracious, Abraham very ingenuous; God was
bountiful, and Abraham grateful. At Sichem the Lord appeared to him, and there
he built an Altar, and another he made near unto Bethel; and another in the
Plain of Mamre: and doubtless, as he had his Altars, so his Sacrifices; as all
places were witnesses of God's kindness to Abraham, so he would have them
witnesses of his mindfulness of God. Yea, and as he had his Altars abroad, so,
as you have already heard, he had his Grove at home; an Oratory, a place of
Prayer, where he called on the Name of the Lord, the Everlasting God. There are
those in the world, and among our selves, who can find Altars abroad; and if
there be none, they will make some; they had as lieve be without Churches, as
without Altars: And oh! how do they admire them, as the most holy places, though
there be no Sacrifice! and how do they plead for them, and stoop and bow to
them! and herein they place a main piece of their Religion, though it be but a
piece of foolish Superstition, if not something worse; from which God deliver
England and other Reformed Churches, which do yet need a further Reformation.
Well, these people have these things abroad; but suppose one should ask them,
what they have at home? May they not say, We have rich Tables, full Cups,
stately Chambers, Down-beds, yea, and Cards and Dice, Healthing and Ranting,
Chambering and Wantonness? Yes, it is very probable: But what is there of the
Service of God, of the Worship of God, of any Honor done to God? Nothing of
all this; no, nothing at all. And art thou one of this number? then I earnestly
desire thee to think with thy self, and seriously consider, what a profane
place is thy Closet, in which there is no Prayer; how it stinks in God's
nostrils: Whatever other Sweets thou may have, where there is no holy Duty to
perfume it; what a wicked place, what an Hell is thy Chamber, out of which the
Glorious Majesty of Heaven is, so far as thou can do it, excluded! If there
be no Prayer there, then for certain there is no God there; I mean, by his
gracious presence; and if there be no God there, then there are a thousand
Devils.

But my chief design is not to deal at present with the gross and openly
flagitious; I have no cause to wonder that they have no such thing as Prayer in
their Chambers and Closets, who do by their loose, vicious and abominable Lives
proclaim to all that know them, that there is no fear of God before their Eyes;
I would indeed speak a thousand words to do their Souls good, and think my time
and labor well bestowed: But now my business lies among Professors, those of
them who live in the shameful neglect of Secret Prayer, to whom I shall
propound these four Questions, and let them consider what Answer they can give.

First, Art thou a Christian indeed, or art thou not?

Secondly, Do thou make Religion thy business, or do thou not?

Thirdly, What account do thou make of God?

Fourthly, Does not thy Conscience charge thee with the omission of a Duty? I
desire to deal faithfully with you, as one that must answer before my Judge;
and oh that you would deal faithfully with your own Souls, for it is your great
and everlasting Concern.

First, Art thou a Christian, or art thou not? I mean not in Profession only,
but in reality; not in show only, but in sincerity; not in word and in tongue
only, but in deed and in truth? thou will answer, yes, I am a Christian, God
forbid I should be otherwise. Thou say well, but the great business is to
make it out. How do thou prove it? Thou will, perhaps, answer, Thou have been
baptized: that is well too, that thy Parents did their duty in bringing thee to
that sacred and solemn Ordinance of initiation, and thereby binding thee to the
faith, fear and service of thy great Creator, and Lord Redeemer. But my Friend,
Is that all thou have to say for thy Christianity? Is that all the Evidence
thou art able to produce? I cannot forbear telling thee, That Baptism (where
there is that, and no more) does make a company of pitiful Christians. There
was an Israelite in show, and an Israelite in deed. Will thou observe and make
due use of that which Paul says, Romans 2. 28, 29. He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, neither is that Circumcision, which is outwordly in the flesh; But
he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in
the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God. And
in the same sense I may say, that is not Baptism which is only outward, that is
not enough to give the denomination; upon that single account Christ will not
own a person for a Sheep of his Fold, a Member of his Body: that lays indeed,
on all them that receive it, an obligation unto holiness, and it will greatly
aggravate the sins which they afterward live in the wilful commission of; but
it will not entitle them to Salvation, and everlasting happiness. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
Baptism does now save us by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: possibly now thou
think thou have enough. Baptism saves, and what do I need more: but stay,
let the Apostle explain himself, which he does in the very same Verse. Not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, by sprinkling water upon the face,
according to most; or dipping in it, according to others; or plunging the whole
body in it over head and ears, according to some; neither this, nor that way
will be sufficient and saving alone. The unregenerate Children of Israel,
though circumcised, were unto God as the Children of the Ethiopians, Amos 9. 7.
And as one says, A man may go to Hell with the water of Baptism upon his face.
But, says Peter, the answer of a good Conscience toward God. When Conscience
is able to give this testimony of a man, that he has been baptized by the Holy
Ghost, renewed in the spirit of his mind; that it is his desire to answer the
Engagements in Baptism, to attain the blessed Ends of Baptism, and to approve
himself to God, ^y walking as becomes one of his Covenant-^eople.

Now then let me put the Question to ^hee again; Art thou a Christian? have
thou been baptized into Christ? have thou ^ut on Christ? has he got the
possession ^f thine heart, and the supreme power and ^ommand in it? If thou art
a Christian, be ^niform; let thy whole life be of a piece. ^insey-woolsey
Christians (bear with the ^xpression) are abominable both to God and Men. What
thou art, that be in all ^laces; having put Christ on, keep him on, and walk up
and down, everywhere as a ^an in Christ, expressive of Christ, making ^im
visible in thy life, and all the passages of it. Do not thou carry like a
Christian in the Congregation, and like an Heathen in the Closet. Since God is
so very gracious as to admit thee into his House, to tread in his Courts, to
sit down at his Table, to feast it with his Children upon marrow and fatness,
dainties and spiced wine* be not thou so disingenuous and ungrateful as to shut
him out of thy Chamber, when thou let in the World and Sin. Holy Paul,
speaking of himself, and others of the true Apostles, he says, 2 Cor. 2. 14.
That God made manifest the savor of his knowledge by them in every place: that
was a very great and excellent work; they were not moral Preachers, but
Gospel-preachers: They did not preach Plutarch, but Jesus. The Spouse had said,
Cant. 1. 3. That the name of her Beloved was as an ointment poured forth. Now
said Paul, I determined to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified; and all the Apostles were acted by the same Spirit, and inflamed
with the same love to Christ: they took his name as a box of most precious
Ointment; and wherever they came, they opened it, and made Christ known; and
whereas the Gentile World was exceeding unsavory, and all places did stink
most wretchedly of their Idolatry; the Apostles perfumed and sweetened, and
brought into them the most delightful savor of the knowledge of the true God
in Christ. Now accordingly I would have you act, if you be professors: make
every place where you come, to savor of Religion; let all your Discourses have
a savor of it; carry that savor with you into your Friends Houses, and
public Houses of entertainment; and be sure that in your own Houses, in your
Chambers and Closets, you do make manifest the savor of that knowledge which
you have of God, and of that true sincere love which you have for God. If you
be Christians, be uniform, practice Christianity always, everywhere.

Secondly, I would seriously propound this Question to thee, Do thou make
Religion thy business? I have not lived above Threescore Years in the World
without making some Observations, and getting some knowledge of it; and I must
needs say, I know a great deal more than is good. I have read many Books, and I
have read Men too, though indeed many of them are crabbed pieces, not easy to
be understood: But this I have found, and still do, to my sorrow, and to their
shame, that many Persons among us do make a profession of Religion, who never
indeed took it up, nor buckel'd to it as their Trade: they are not altogether
strangers, but will be doing something; but here is the mischief, it is only as
a (...) business by the bye their thoughts, and cares, and studies, are carried
another way; their main work does lie somewhere else; namely, in the World,
that is the thing they are devoted to, and set their hearts upon, and spend
their time and strength in the pursuit of; how they should get it, how they
shall increase it, how they shall secure it, and how they shall inebriate
themselves with the comforts, delights and pleasures of it. Whereas the
gracious Soul, that is sound at the bottom, and that in truth which he would go
for in the account and esteem of men, makes his Religion his great and
principal work. David said, Psalm. 109. 4. I give my self unto prayer, others
give themselves over to sin. God gives them up to a reprobate mind, and to vile
affections, and to their own hearts lusts, and they give themselves up, one to
his drunke^ness, and another to his unclea^ness. Now David gave himself to
prayer; and what he says of Prayer in particular, is true as to Godliness in
general; a godly Man gives himself up to it, he is addicted and devoted to it,
he is all for that; and the truth is, none but such an one will do good upon
it. Believe it, O Professors! for your own experiences will in the end make my
words good; none but such as do indeed make Religion their Trade, will thrive
upon it, and grow rich toward God.

Now then, if thou do indeed make Religion thy business, thou will heartily
study, and do all thou can to promote it; as you know the promoting of Trade
is the matter of common discourse among men, and they are greatly set for it,
they are glad to hear of any thing that will contribute thereunto. Now there is
nothing in the World that does forward a Christian more in this his great
business, and that does more promote the Trade of Godliness and Religion, than
Secret Prayer does. I am not willing to compare one Duty with another, or one
Ordinance with another, ^^ir they are all of God; they are all stamped with his
Authority, they are all great advantages to them that walk uprightly. God is
more wise and gracious than to set his Servants about any unnecessary (...).
You know that many Persons* who are w^ll^ moneyed men* have a stock going with
others, as in the African and East India Company; but not satisfied with that,
they will have their Secret Stock also, and will trade by themselves: So here,
the Saints and People of God should be trading, and have a great deal going in
the common Stock, in public Worship, in the Assemblies and Congregations of
the Saints, Psalm. 42. 4. Holy David did reckon it a brave time when he went
with the multitude to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with
a multitude that kept holy day, Psalm. 122. 1. He was glad when they said unto
him, Let us go into the house of the Lord. And it is prophesied and promised as
a choce and singular blessing, Isa. 2. 3. That many people shall go, and say,
Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. But
it is not to be expected that they should thrive amain, and grow very rich
toward God* unless they have a Secret Stock going too, and will be trading by
themselves in private and keeping up that communion* correspondency and
intercourse with God and Christ, which others do not know of David was very
much for Sanctuary sights and enjoyments; when he was deprived of them, he did
seek and thirst, and long for them, Psalm* 63. 1, 2. but still he was careful
of, and busy at his home-trade; Psalm. 55. 17. Evening, morning, and at noon,
will I pray and cry aloud. And yet that was not enough for him, at that rate of
working he could neither live, nor lay up as he would: therefore you read in
Psalm. 119. 164. It was his constant practice to be at his praises of God seven
times a day.

Thirdly, I would ask thee this Question, What do thou think of God? what
figure does he make? I know, notwithstanding his unmatchable Excellencies, and
infinite Perfections, he is very low in the thoughts of many, yea most; but I
am now speaking to thee who art a Professor, and pretendest to a knowledge of
him, and a love to him: But prithee, What room do thou give him? where do
thou place him? do thou deal becomingly with him? do thou value and esteem
him as a God ought to be valued? do thou believe that he alone is more than
all the Angels in Heaven, and all the Men on Earth put together? do thou
think that to have his Eye upon thee, is a far greater matter, than to have the
Eyes of the best and greatest Persons upon Earth upon thee. It really is so,
for what is all the World to God? what is Heaven and Earth to God? what is
their loving thee, if he hate thee? what is their liking thee, if he loath
thee? what is their approving and justifying thee, if he reject and condemn
thee? but I ask now, what thy thoughts are? and again, I ask, do thou think,
that to have his presence with thee, is more than to be in the most frequent
and numerous Assembly, the most thronged Congregation? and certainly it is so:
the presence of God alone should be more awing, and it is more delighting than
that of any other.

Now if thou have this high esteem for God, if thou make this account of his
presence, then remember, that He sees in secret. So our Savior tells us in
the Text. His Eyes run to and fro in the Earth; not only in the Highways, and
broad Streets, but they look into Nooks and Corners also. He does not only walk
in the golden Candlesticks, but steps into Chambers and Closets too: as in
Ezekiel. 9. 8. he ordered the Prophet to dig in the wall, and commanded him to go
in and see the Abominations that were done there. And Verse 12. He speaks of
what the Ancients of the house of Israel did in the dark, every one in the
chambers of his imagery. Idolaters act their idolatry, and ungodly Men their
wickedness as close as they can; they have darkness and walls to conceal it;
but to God the darkness is as the light, and the night shines as the day: and
in the wall there is an hole, through which God's Eye looks and discovers all:
and he that can find an hole in the wall, has also a window in the Chamber.
Now if the Eyes of Men will make thee pray in thy Family, if they have such a
powerful influence on thee as to fetch thee out of thy House, and draw thee to
join with the Congregation i^ the Acts of Public Worship; give me a reason, if
thou have one worth the giving, why the All-seeing Eye of the glorious and holy
God, should not make thee pray in thy Chamber by thy self, since he does most
curiously observe thee there, though no body else does. I think my self bound
to tell thee, whether thou will believe and consider it or not, I must leave to
thy self, That if thou do neglect Secret Prayer, it is an evident sign that
thou undervaluest God; It is no less than a base slight put upon God: and those
that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed.

Fourthly, Let me once more inquire of thee, what agreement is there between
thee and thy Conscience? When you do not seek God, do you find and enjoy peace
within? is Concience quiet? does it not quarrel with you? and make you feel its
anger? I remember what the Apostle says in Romans 14. 22. Happy is he that
condemns not himself in that which he allows: that is satisfied about the
thing which he does; whatever others say against him, he is not self-condemned.
So I may say, Happy is the man who condemns not himself in the thing that he
omitteth. Thou never prayest in secret, but art thou not in that wanting to thy
duty? art not thou injurious both to God and thine own Soul? do thou not
withhold from him that which is his due? does not thy Conscience tell thee,
thou art wanting to thy duty: does it not vote for it? does it not upbraid thee
with the neglect? does it not sometimes flee in thy face, and charge it upon
thee, and put thee into a Little-ease? I think, I have said enough in the
Doctrinal part for the proving it to be thy Duty; And has not thy Conscience
gone along with those things, and subscribed to them as the Truths of God? And
if so, what account will thou be able to give unto thy supreme Lord for thy not
giving ear to his Vicegerent, that he himself had appointed and set up in thy
bosom? How will thou answer him, when he shall say, Why did thou not attend
to the dictates of thy Conscience? why did thou not do that which thy
Conscience told thee thou wast bound to do? How do thou think to come off?
what plea will thou use at the last and great day, when thy heavenly Master
shall say, I have not found thy works perfect before me, they have not been
filled up, here has been an huge Chas^e, a great vacancy; I have been
forgotten and neglected by thee when thou wast alone; thou would not do me
service when thou had nothing else to do; thou would rather sit still
nodding in thy Chair, than take the pains to give me a visit. We are commanded,
always to ahound in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. verse last. How dare
thou then to omit so considerable, so sweet and so necessary a part thereof,
especially when thy Conscience persuaded and called thee to it? Conscience will
be heard sooner or later, in one way or other; if you will not hear its softer
Counsels, you shall its louder Thunders; if you will not follow its Directions,
it will pursue you with its Terrors. In a word, if you will not attend to the
Dictates of Conscience, you shall feel the Fury of it; and when you feel it,
you will find it intoll^rable.

Having thus ordered out those Reproofs which I judged necessary upon occasion
of this Text, and begging they may take place, and be accompanied with a
blessing upon those who are guilty before God in one of these respects or
other; I come to speak unto you in a way of hearty and serious exhortation: I
do in the Bowels of Love, and with great earnestness, entreat and beseech you,
who are yet altogether, or too great strangers to it, to set forthwith upon
this excellent Du^y of Secret Prayer; and oh, that by the concurrence, and
effectual working of the Divine Spirit, I might prevail with you. I can say, to
the glory of God, and desire to do it with thankfulness, That these Discourses,
when Preached, were not without some fruit; oh that now I have been put upon
the Publishing of them, they may go and bring forth much more fruit! Do not
stand arguing the case; it is a Thousand pities that any part of that should be
made matter of Dispute, which is, or ought to be a matter of Practice. Do not
procrastinate and put it off; Why should thou say, To morrow, when it should
be done to day, and it may be thou shall not have a morrow to do it in? Fall
immediately upon the performance. When the Spouse would not open at the first
knock, and import^^at^ call, but lay still, asking questions, and making
excuses; when she reflected upon her unkindness, found her Bowels troubled
within her, and rose up and opened to her Beloved, He to her grief and cost had
withdrawn himself, and was gone. David's example does command and deserve our
imitation, who could say, Psalm 119. 60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep
thy commandments. I beseech you, out of hand, answer the call; make your Houses
Churches, and your Chambers Oratories; send up such Prayers as may come before
God like Incense; and be in his Nostrils a sweet smelling favor.

Though Man be a sociable creature, and his nature carries him out to desire of
communion, and it is not good for him to be always alone; yet it is best for
him to be sometimes alone. It will certainly conduce much to your advantage, to
converse frequently with your selves, to search curiously into your own hearts,
that you may understand the better their frame and constitution; to be asking
your selves such important questions as no body el^e can answer; and diligently
enquire how matters stand with you, whether you thrive or go backward. A
Merchant sees it necessary for him to be in his Counting House, as well as upon
the Exchange: whatever you do, O Christians, be not strangers at home, be
self-studied, and self-acquainted. And at other times, yea, and in the same
retirement, before you return to your secular affairs, it will be for your
interest to be conversing with your God; you never go to him in a becoming
manner, but he gives you something that is worth your while; a gracious Soul
gets something, even when as to its present sense and feeling it gets nothing.
In a Winter season, though the Branches of the Tree look as if they were dead,
the Root is often watered.

Tell me, O Christian, Have there not been such times in which thou have found
God speaking to thee? Elihu, indeed, says, Job 33. 14. God speaks once, yea,
twice, yet man perceives it not. Many a Man is so careless, that he does
neither understand God, nor mind; he does not perceive what God says, what his
meaning is, it is all a strange Language to him, and he does not perceive that
God speaks; he does not think that God says any to him. Isa. 26. 11. Lord,
when thine hand is lifted up, they will not see. No, they shut their eyes, and
are willingly ignorant; and as they will not see when God's hand is lifted up,
so they will not hear when God's voice is lifted up. The Saints if well, and in
health, have all their senses exercised; but wicked men have none, of their
senses exercised about the things of God. But have thou not perceived God
speaking to thee, once, yea twice, in diverse manners? By his Providence,
frowning and smiling, prosperous and adverse? by his Word and Ministers? by
his* Holy and Blessed Spirit, and by thine own* Conscience, which he has
awakened when it was drowsy and sleeping, and opened its mouth, and put words
into it that it should say to thee? Has he not spoken to thee* at diverse
seasons? In a dream, when thy eyes were shut, and when awake; abroad and at
home; when in company, and when alone; when up, and when laid, in a vision of
the night, as Elihu said, when deep sleep falls upon men; in slumberings upon
the bed. And he has spoken to thee to diverse purposes; sometimes Precepts to
direct thee, sometimes Promises to revive thee; now a Rebuke, then a Cordial;
at one time Trouble, and at another time Peace: Thus according to thy case and
exigency, he has varied his Applications.

Now, has God spoken so often to you, and do you find nothing to say to God?
Will you be always in the possession, and under the power of a dumb Devil? Are
you so full of goodness and comfort, so rich in knowledge and grace, so
increased in mercies and blessings of all sorts, that you have no more to ask?
Do you find that to be a Canaan, a Heaven, which others call a Wilderness,
because of pinching wants, and pricking Thorns, and Beasts of prey? Is your
mouth so filled as that you need no more to open it wide? nay, not at all*
Remember how Laodicea was mistaken about her own case, pleasing her self in
such high, but vain conceits, when, indeed, she was wretched, and poor, and
miserable, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. Are things so well with thee, that
thou have no reason for a sigh, nor room for a groan? Is it so thoroughly and
perfectly well with thy Soul, with thy Body, with thine Estate, with thy Family
and Relations, with the Nation and Church of God, that thou have no complaint
to make to him, not one boon to beg of him? Is thy day so serene and fair, that
there is no cloud appearing? Is there no sin within that is too hard for thee?
Does it never war against the Law in thy mind? or do thou immediately knock
it down, and get a complete victory at thy first entrance into the field? Have
thou quite shaken off that body of death which poor Paul could not for his
heart get rid of, but carried up and down with him* or has it grown less
trouble some, and ceased to stink in thy Nostills? Is there no burden upon thy
back that is too heavy for thee* Is there no wound in thy Conscience that puts
thee to pain? is there no plague in thine heart that needs a cure? If thou
be, indeed, a Believer, a Man or Woman in Christ, I grant the cure is begun,
and dare assure thee, that being in the hand of so great a Physician, it shall
be carried on; but what, is it perfected already? In a word, is there nothing
at all that troubles thee? or have thou nothing to say to God in private? what,
nothing, but what thou would have every body hear and know? But I pass by
that at present; we shall by and by have a fitter opportunity of speaking more
concerning it.

Come, come, Christian, be thine own Friend, better than ever thou have been
yet, and without more ado be persuaded to get alone, and shut thy door, and
fall down upon thy knees, and pour out thy Soul into the bosom of thy heavenly
Father; I am confident, if thou will begin it in good earnest, thou will not
easily give it over. I do not, indeed, know what interruption the Devil may
give thee, who hates all the Work of God, and good of Man; but if, by
temptation, thou should for a time be taken off from it, thou will not be
well, nor able to enjoy thy self till thou do return to it again. I dare say,
in an humble, holy, and beli^ving performance, thou will experience such
incomp^rable sweetness, and so much benefit and advantage accruing to thee,
that thou will go on, and call upon God as long as thou live, and then expire
thy Soul in the same manner as Stephen did, whose last words were Prayer, Acts
7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my spirit; and, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge; and when he had said this, he fell asleep. That which I have further to
do, will be in these two things: 1. Lay down Motives to the work. 2. Give
Directions for managing it.


I shall begin with the Motives for the alluring and drawing you to this
excellent work, who have hitherto been altogether strangers to it, or very
backward, and by consequence inconstant, off and on; and I shall most heartily
rejoice, if the Lord would graciously please to succeed these endeavors, so
that what I shall suggest to you, may bring you upon your knees; that there may
be more of this Chamber-practice, more of a Chamber-fellowship, and
Closet-communion with your God. The Motives are these:

First, Do you pray in secret, because that God, who is the proper Object of
Prayer, sees in secret; as trusting in him, you do* at no time and in no
condition, trust in a God that cannot save; so directing your Prayers to him,
you do in no place pray unto a God that cannot hear. When Hagar had in a fear
fled from the face of her incensed Mistress, God found her out in the
Wilderness, where she was absconded, and appeared and spoke unto her there;
whereupon it is said in Genesis 16. 13. That she called the name of the Lord that
spoke unto her, Thou God see me; for she said, Have I also here looked after
him that sees me? We may, as some do, reckon these words to be words of
reprehension, as relating to herself; and words of admiration, as referring to
God. Have I also looked after him! Here I am, but how stupid and foolish have I
been! I have been looking back to the Comforts which I had when in the Family,
and under the wing of my Master Abraham; and I have been looking to the
displeasure and severity of my Mistress Sarah^^ and I have been looking to the
desolate place and distressed condition into which I am now brought: but have I
here minded God, and looked after God? I have been so afflicted with my loss,
and have pored so much upon my troubles, that I have been unmindful of God, did
find neither heart nor leisure to think of Him, or look after Him: (a Case it
is too common among the children of men!) yet here he ^eeth me, and minds me;
here he looks upon my person, and upon my affliction and sorrow. And may not
Thou, my Friend, say the very same, when thou art alone, and in thy
Closet-recesses, Thou God see me? When no soul living is by, when no mortal
eye se^th me; then Thou God see me. Now let me desire thee, after that
serious consideration, to propound this as a serious Question to thy self; Have
I also here looked after him that sees me? God's eyes have been here upon me;
but have mine eyes been again upon God, and unto God? It may be, thou art able
to say, In the public Congregation I have looked after that God who sees me,
there I have had many, frequent, repeated, and raised thoughts at him; there I
have waited for him more than they that watch for the morning, yea, more than
they that watch for the morning. But when thou art in thy Chamber, can thou
make thy Appeal to God, and say, O Lord, thou know, and art my witness, that
even here I have looked after thee that see me; here mine eyes of Faith and
Prayer have been toward the Lord that sees me?

This is an Argument which our de^r^st Lord Jesus makes use of in the Text,
That your Father sees in secret. The Royal Prophet says, Psalm 139. 7.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
The Question speaks it a thing impossible to be done. His eye is fastened upon
thee, and follows thee whithersoever thou go: look to thy self, and ponder
all thy actions; thou art under the pure and piercing, and all-discerning eye
of the infinitely Great and Glorious Majesty, when thou art in the
Congregation, and in the Street, and in the Shop, and in the Kitchen, yea, and
when thou art in the Closet too. And since he does see thee there, what would
thou have him see thee doing? would thou have him see nothing but vanity in
thy mind, and corruption in thy heart? would thou have him see nothing done
by thee, but looking into thy Glass, and into thy Chests and Bags, or turning
over thy Fineries and Fooleries, and so feeding thy Wantonness and Pride; or
making provision for a perishing Carcass, to deck and adorn it; or gratify a
brutish and sensual Appetite: but never see thee upon thy knees, seeking his
face and favor, or the good of thine own precious and neverdying Soul?

Oh that His Eye might affect your Hearts! That Divine Eye which is upon all
your ways, and looks you through and through; That Eye which is ten thousand
times, yea* inconceivably more than the eyes of all the Angels in Heaven, and
of all the Men upon Earth. The Eye of God should, among others, have these two
effects upon us, and upon all men that know and own him: First, It should awe
us; Se^ondly, It should quicken and animate us. It should awe us when we are in
secret, and be an effectual curb to those Lusts and Corruptions which would
otherwise break loose and grow rampant. When no body is by, do not dare to sin,
because God is by. This preserved young Joseph from falling before a great
temptation. When he might have procured the savor of his Mistress, and, as
some would have thought, have done himself a kindness; this thought brake the
neck of the temptation, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? Again, the Eye of God should animate and put life into you* it should, as
a golden Spur, quicken you to the careful and lively performance of Duty when
you are in secret, and no body at hand to take notice of it, and make report.
Let it be enough for you, enough alone, that God sees your love to him, and
the desires of your Souls to his Name, and a remembrance of him, and communion
with him* and He needs none to inform him of your unmindfulness and neglect of
him; no, no, He sees it himself; He sees where your thoughts are, He
understands them afar off, and He sees where your hearts are: so it appears by
the charge he gave out against Israel of old, This people draws near unto me
with their lips, but their hearts are far from me. And I would ^ain know of
you, how it is possible but that he should take it very unkindly at your hands,
and be highly offended, if that he should be slighted by you, who is so
excellent and glorious in himself, and so absolutely necessary for you, and
unto whom you are so everlastingly beholden and obliged? How can he otherwise
choose but be angry with you, if in your leisuretime, and at your spare hours,
you will not give him a visit; if you cannot find in your hearts to bestow some
of that time upon him, which you have to spare from your earthly Friends, and
worldly Business? When he sees this, how can thou think but that his fury
will come up into his face?

Secondly, Praying in secret is a very good and comfortable sign of sincerity.
I do not say that it is a certain and infallible sign, and that every one that
sets upon this work has indeed the Spirit of Adoption, and may from thence
arrive to an assurance of Sonship, and draw an undeniable conclusion, That he
is born again: for I do very well know, there is no external act of Religion
which an hypocrite may not set his hand to. As Reputation and Credit among men
may bring them out to public Ordinances, so that they shall come as the people
comes; and sit before their Minister as the people sits, and hear his
words, Ezekiel 33. 31. so an enlightened, awakened, uneasy and importunate
Conscience, may bring them upon their knees in private. An hypocrite's heart is
really in no piece of the work of God; while he draws nearest to him with his
lips, that is far from him: how indeed can he raise that up to God, which he
has set upon his iniquity? Yet he may have a finger in every thing that is of
the outside. A Iehu knows how to be zealous against Idolatry, and for the
Lord, when so to be, paves his way to a Throne; though when he has once got it,
and is warm in it, he himself would be as bad as any, 2 Kings 10. 31. Iehu took
no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart: for he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin. A Soul would
sacrifice, yea, was too hasty at it; and a Pharisee would pray in the Temple
and Synagogue; and those hearts run after their Covetousness, and would not be
obedient to the Word of God, would yet go out to hear it: And I do not know,
but persons of the like Spirits and Principles as rotten at heart as any of
them, may set upon Religious Actions when they are alone; they may, when by
themselves, take up a Bible, or good Book, and read in it; and they may, when
there is need, fall upon their knees, and offer up their requests unto God. An
hypocrite may be at duty in his Closet, though his heart never be with God in
duty, neither in his Closet, nor any where else.

But now observe, this is not so acceptable to him, it is not that which he
takes pleasure and delight in; he is put upon it; he is under a force;
Conscience offers violence, and drag him into it: as Ioab* when he saw Justice
would take hold on him at the last, though, it is probable, he never had any
great love for the Altar, yet then he would ^^ee and catch hold of the Horns of
it, and would even die there. But, I say, this is not the matter of their
delight, they do if not so much out of choice as cut of constraint; it is not
That which they take pleasure in; and because it is not their pleasure,
therefore it is no^ their practice. They may do such a thing now and then in a
straight, when they are put to a pinch; but they do not make it their Trade.
Our Savior tells us where we are most like to meet with them, if we have a
mind to find them at their Devotions; that is, in the Synagogues, and the
corners of the streets. If you would find them in their wickednesses; for
hypocrites are Villains, they make use of Religion for no other end, but as a
Cloak to cover their Knavery; and there is a great deal of that, which some of
them are guilty of God is pleased now and then to pluck off their Masks: and
oh what Deformities do then visibly appear in their lives and conversations!
When their Paint is once off, there are no persons so ugly: But, as I was
saying, if you would find them in their wickednesses, then look for them in the
dark, and in holes; it is not for their Interest, it is inconsistent with their
design, to be so impudent and brazen-faced as the profane Cr^w, who glory in
their shame, no, no, these are sneaking wretches, who would steal their sins,
and no body know of them. But if you would find them at their Devotions, do but
listen, and you may possibly hear their Trumpet found; or if not, the best way
is to look for them in some noted and frequented places, the Synagogues, and
corners of streets. Public places are the hypocrites haunts, for they are most
convenient and proper for the carrying on of their design, which is not to be
approved of God, but seen of men.

And this I say, Though secret Prayer, and the performance of other duties of
Godliness in secret, be not a certain and infallible Argument of an heart
renewed by Grace, and upright with God; yet it is a very good Argument. Though it
be not such an Evidence of Grace, as alone will put it out of all doubt and
question, yet it is a good Evidence, and will do much in a cumulative way, and
in conjunction with other things. And though he may be a wicked man, who does
several things that every good man cannot but do; yet he cannot be a good man,
who does not do those things. A wicked man may be found in a good way; but he
is not a good man, who always turns his back upon a good way, and does never
walk in the Law of the Lord. So here, though he may be an Hypocrite, who does
pray in secret, yet he cannot be a Saint who never prays in secret: He who does
not desire and maintain secret Communion with God, has not, whatever his
pretenses may be, an heart indeed set for God. The hearts of men are curiously
searched into now, and they shall all be openly discovered at the last; and
when the day of manifestation shall come, he that now is not for being with
God, when he is alone, will then be found and condemned as one that has not
been for God at all. And this I do positively lay down as an undeniable Truth,
That love to fellowship with God in secret, does speak a real love to God. Though
a person may pray in secret, and yet be unsound and rotten; yet a person has
an heart sound in God's Statutes, who so prays in secret, as not to be
satisfied with the work done, unless he be with God in it; i. e. sensibly find
God coming to him with the communications of his Grace, and the sweet
discoveries of his Covenant-love; or, at least, his soul working out to God in
holy desires and longings.

Thirdly, Thou can not but be conscious to thy self of a great many secret
sins with which thou art chargeable before God; and is there not a great deal
of reason why thou should perform secret Duties, where thou did commit
secret Sins? and that those places should be witnesses of thy fear of God, and
love to him, which have been frequent witnesses of thy neglect of God, and
rebellion against him? There are, indeed, those who commit uncleanness with
greediness, and act ^n with highest impudence: they do so dearly love and
delight in it, that they are not at all ashamed of it, but can without a blush
do the Devil's drudgery, the dirtiest and basest of his work. Hence as in one
place this is the complaint, They draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin
as with cart-ropes, so in another place, viz. Isa. 3. 9. the complaint is thus:
They declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not; no, not they* but like some
who think they can mend what a better than they have made, they carry their
black spots in their very faces, and glory in their shame, Phil. 3. 19.
Formerly, indeed, men were more modest; they cast a Mantle over their
Nakedness, and did the works of darkness in the dark. Paul says, in his time,
They that were drunk, were drunk in the night: but now wickedness is grown more
common, and men more audacious, and they do not avoid the light of the Sun, nor
the eyes of men: the open street and the noonday are thought now as convenient
time and place as any other: they are grown so desperate, that they care not
what they do, they will run upon the mouth of the Cannon, the bosses of God's
Buckler; and so impudent, that they care not who sees them: as 2 Samuel 16. 22.
There was a tent spread for Absalom upon the top of the house, and Absalom went
in unto his father's con^^bines in the sight of all Israel. Yea, these
wretches, when they have acted to their utmost, and sinned as they could, do
not yet so tire and weary themselves in the Devil's service, but that they will
find something to do at home, and give some strokes there to the further
pleasing of their tyrannical Lord, and gra^ifying their insatiate Lust. The
Scripture speaking of uncleanness, tells us of eyes that cannot cease to sin,
cannot brook an intermission, they are not at rest any longer than they are at
work: they are looking round about for new Objects, and every such Object
inflames them, and by it away they are carried to fresh transports of defiling
folly and madness.

But I have dwelt too long upon these Vassals of Satan, and sworn Votaries of
the Flesh: let us turn our thoughts another way, and consider whether the
Children of God themselves have not their secret Vanities, Follies, and
Extravagancies? When did thou so put off the Old Man, that there was none of
his deeds to be found in thine hands? What stream has flowed from thee, which
has run clear; nay, what drop that was perfectly pure? Name that place, if
thou can, in which thou have not done more than enough to pollute thy Soul,
to wound thy Conscience, to offend and provoke thy God? Ask thy own Conscience,
O Christian, and let that tell thee, Has not God seen thy pride in thy Closet,
and thy worldly-mindedness? has he not been privy and eyewitness to thy
unbelief and shameful distrusts of his fatherly Love and Care? has he not been
acquainted with thy froward passions and swelling discontents, when at any time
his Providence ru^ cross to thy humor, or seemingly to thine interest? has he
not heard thy murmurings and repinings, when thou could not get the good
thing thou had a mind to, or did lose what rhou had set thy heart too
much upon? Possibly, many of these things thou have forgotten, but God has
them sealed up in a Bag; they are all in the light of his Countenance. I have
often considered those expressions of holy David, who was a precious Saint,
though his great miscarriages spoke him far from a perfect one; and I do advise
you to consider them too, and heartily wish you would. Psalm. 19. 12. Who can
understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults. It is a thing
utterly impossible for man to understand himself perfectly: it is a mercy for
him to understand his way, but he cannot understand all his deviations. As a
Christian does not understand his progress, so not his wanderings; and as for
his faults, there are some of them so secret, that tho he be very circumspect
and wary, though he does with utmost diligence study himself, his heart, and
life, yet he does not know them; they are secret, some of them, to him; he does
not know them to be sins; they seem lawful unto him, when they are not so; his
ways are right in his own eyes, but not in God's eyes, which are purer than
his; some of them he does not take any notice of: such is our foolish
incogitancy, that many actions pass from us, which we do not seriously ponder
before we do them, neither do we with any due deliberation reflect upon them
when done. Again, a man has other faults open to him; they stare him in the
face, and his own Conscience does roundly tell him of them; but there is a veil
of darkness drawn over them, so that they are secret to all the world beside.
Some are such Masters in the Black-Art, that they can lead a very bad Life, and
yet keep a very good Name. Oh! what abominations did the Ancients of the house
of Israel do in the dark! Ezekiel. 8. Every man in the chambers of his imagery!
Will you be persuaded to sit down a little, and take a review of your lives,
and consider what iniquities you commit in the Chambers of your privacy? how
many are they, and how great? You your selves know most of that, though I know
nothing. Your own Consciences will tell you what no body else can; I advise and
beseech you to consult them, and to give them leave to speak all they have to
say; do not stop their mouths, nor hold the truth in unrighteousness. And let
us now bring this to the business in hand, and see if there be not something of
weight and cogency in the Argument: Have you your secret Sins, and will you not
have your secret Duties? Have you your secret Provocations, and is it not sit
that you should have your secret Supplications? Will you not seek his face,
where you sin to his face? Oh! look carefully to it, that as there are secret
Faults, so there be secret Prayers and Tears; as secret Sins, so secret
Services.

Fourthly, There are special and momentous Causes and Reasons for secret
Prayer, Surely there is not that Man nor Woman to be found upon the face of the
earth, but has something or other which he would by all means have a Mantle of
privacy thrown over; something or other which he may be free and willing to
whisper in the ear of a prudent intimate Friend, and lock up in his bosom: but
he would not have it divulged and come abroad to the knowledge of every body.
Now let me ask thee, Have thou nothing to speak to God in his ear, something
which thou would not have any person in the world acquainted with; something,
it may be, that does greatly oppress thee, and whilst thou do smother it
altogether in silence, thy heart is almost broken within thee? There is an
absolute necessity of giving vent, and thereby some ease to thine over-burden'd
mind: and where can thou do it with more freedom, and greater hope of relief,
than when thou art alone before a gracious God, whose mercies are everlasting,
and his compassions do not fail?

Will that, which they call Common Prayer, r^ach thy whole Case? does it
contain in it all that is in thine heart? do thou find every one of thy wants
mentioned there? every one of thy groans formed there? every one of thy desires
drawn up there? is there nothing singular and peculiar in thy Case? is it
exactly stated by others in all the particularities of it? I am sure, the Wise
Man tells us, Prove. 14. 10. The heart knows his own bitterness, and a
stranger intermedleth not with his joy. These things are so locked up in the
heart of a man, that no body else has a key to let him into them. I think it
is most proper for a poor diseased Patient to tell his Physician how he feels
himself: indeed if he be so disturbed in his reason, or so much enfeebled, that
he cannot do it, then it is necessary for some other to do it, that has been
about him, and curious in his Observations: but I am of the mind, that the wise
Physician will like that account best, which comes from his Patient's own
mouth, supposing him capable of giving one. Do thou go and do so to thy great
and everblessed Physician, the holy God, and to that end, study both his Word
and thy Heart; that by studying his Word, thou may come to know how it should
be with thee; and by studying thine own heart, thou may know how it is with
thee, and then go and tell him.

Again, will Publick-Prayer at all times become thee, and in every one of thy
concernments? Have thou so much of an unspotted innocence, or such a large
measure of confidence, as that thou will not blush to tell the whole story of
thine heart and life upon the Housetop? Have thou been so undefiled in the
way, that thou need not care who knows what thou have been, and what thou
have done? Indeed, when a proud and self-conceited Pharisee makes it his
business to display his glory, and to trumpet out his own commendations, to
tell God that he is a Phoenix, a kind of nonesuch in the World, one that is so
free from common defilements, so abundant in goodness and acts of goodness,
that his fellow is scarce to be met with; it is no wonder to find him ambitious
of having Auditors enough, and to see him in the pride of his countenance, and
with his hand by his side, strutting it to the Temple, where he does expect a
great confluence of people, who might go and inform others what great things
they had heard concerning him from his own mouth, and so raise to him Thousands
of admirings among such as would be credulous, and believe him upon his bare
word: But methinks when a poor Publican, that groans under an heavy burden of
sin and guilt, who knows himself unable to answer for one of a Thousand, and
who has had often and often the sentence of death in himself, pronounced by
his own awakened and wounded Conscience; when, I say, he is to draw up an
Indictment against himself, and to read it in the presence of his righteous
Judge, and then, having so done, to beg upon his knees, and plead hard for his
Life, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. He may stand a great way off, and get
alone by himself as a person ashamed, and even confounded. When thou go to
acquaint God with thy diseases, foul loathsome diseases of Soul, and to open thy
Artery Sores, and those wounds in thy Conscience, which as poor David found and
owned, stink and are corrupt, it speaks an humble modesty, and does highly
become thee to do it between him and thee alone. Now, Christian, give me leave
to deal particularly with thee, and to come as close as I can, and to propound
some few Questions to thee, and to desire thee to propound them to thy self
when I have done.

1. Have thou not some secret sins to confess to God? Have thou been all thy
days so sober, and righteous, and godly, so circumspect and exact, that no
action of thine troubles thee, or will reflect dishhonour upon thee, or in the
least put thee out of countenance? is there no blot in thy Escutchion, no dead
Fly in thy Box of Ointment? Are there not some things done by thee which nobody
does know of, and which thou would not for more than I will say, have any
body know of? Let this bring thee to Secret Prayer, for they must be confessed.
Indeed, unless it be in some cases, thou do not need to do it unto Men* there
is no necess^^y for thee to proclaim and publish thine own shame. Auricula^
^onfe^^^on, which the Popish Priests do require, is an abomination. But a
Confession there must be, else the wound of Conscience will not be healed, the
oppressed Spirit will not be relieved, the S^ain will not be taken out, the Sin
will not be pardoned. The Promise is, He that confesses and forsakes his sin,
shall find mercy; as much as he needs or can desire. And the word of Truth
gives us this assurance, I John 1. 9. That if we confess our sins, God is just
and faithful to forgive us ^u sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
Blessed be God for those words, from all. Pardoning Mercy, and Justifying
Grace, will make through work wherever it comes; it takes away iniquity,
transgression and sin, all sorts and sizes, sins of all kinds and degrees. But
where does this take place? Only in them that Confess. Where there is no
Confession, you cannot with reason hope for a Remission. Add this, You may very
well spread before God those sins which you have committed in secret, because
it is not in your power to hide them from him* they are all in the light of his
countenance, he understands them already, for he counts thy steps, and tells
thy wanderings; he knows every act of sin which thou have done, and every
circumstance with which that act is clothed. Psalm ^0. 21. I will reprove^
thee, and set them in order before thee. Upon which words, Reverend Mr. Dickson
has this passage, Sins forgotten, cast behind the back, and thrown into
confusion by the secure sinner, shall in the day of God's reckoning be brought
to remembrance, with time, place, and other circumstances, and so presented to
the Conscience, as the sinner shall not be able to look aside from his fearful
accusation, or to deny any part of it* And the only way to prevent God's
charging them upon us to our confusion and everlasting condemnation, is for us
to confess them unto him with contrition and self-abhorrency; therefore do you
go and* do it quickly and fully. Yea further, it is your duty, you ought to do
it; for t^e^eby you give him glory. Joshua 7. 19. Joshua said unto Achan, My
son, Give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession
unto him. Thou did greatly dishonor him by thy foul sins, but thou will
honor him by thy humble and free confession, as it is an owning and
acknowledgment of his Omnisciency; there is no need of doing this openly and
before others, unless it be where the sin is open, and others by it
scandalized. Open and full Confession of secret sins before Men, is not, or may
not be in all cases safe; it may not be safe for others, because of the bad
example; by which they may be infected; and it may not be safe for thy self,
but expose thee to punishment. To be sure, Men cannot heal thy Soul, nor wash
away thy filthiness, nor lay the furious storm which is in thy Conscience, but
they may reproach and blemish thy name, and give such a fatal blow and wound to
thy reputation, as cannot be cured without a scar, while thou breathest.

2. Art thou not sensible of base corruptions in thy heart? vile Lusts which
lurk and lodge in thy bosom? Are they not often troublesome and vexatious to
thee? do they not stink in thy Nostrils, when they stir in thy Soul? and are
they not frequently too too powerful and prevalent? Thou have oftentimes,
perhaps, horrible and blasphemous thoughts, those fiery Darts of the Devil are
with a strong hand thrown into thy mind, and do so startle and affright thee,
that thou art a burden and terror to thy self, and even weary of thy Life; at
other times thou have filthy, unclean, and lascivious thoughts, which would be
fitter for a Goat or Dog than for a reasonable creature, who should be able to
govern and command himself; and then again, thy mind being like the raging Sea
that cannot rest, but is continually casting up ^ire and dirt; there appear
cruel, malicious and revengeful thoughts, yea, and in thy very Duties, thy most
sacred solemn attendances upon God, thou aboundest with vain, foolish and
impertinent thoughts. And now, I ask thee, Would thou have all know what a
vile Nature, and wretched heart thou have? how that loathsome dunghill is
sending forth its unsavory smells? what a filthy scum is continually rising up?
and what vermin overspreads and covers the face of thy Soul, which should have
the beauty of the Lord its God upon it? No, no, I am persuaded, thou would
not have thy dearest Friend privy to all this for a World; if others should
know that by thee, which thou do know by thy self, thou would be ashamed
to show thy head: Let this then drive thee to thy Secret Prayer. A Person that
labors under the Foul Disease, and desires a Cure, will go in private and
acquaint his Physician, whose silence he dares promise himself. God is the
great and only Physician of Souls, go and tell him thy Case, who has
graciously and faithfully promised that he will not tell again, but so pardon
as to cover. To this purpose, read what himself has said and given us under
his hand, Ezekiel. 33. 16. If the wicked turn from his sin, and do that which is
lawful and right, none of his sins that he has committed shall be mentioned to
him. They shall not be charged upon him* had it been said so, it would have
been an admirable mercy; but that is not all, Divine Mercy does not stop there,
they shall not be mentioned, but buried in Eternal Oblivion, and carried into
the Land of forgetfulness. As they shall not be charged upon him to his
condemnation, so they shall not be mentioned to his reproach. God will take
care not only of his Peoples souls, but likewise of their names. James 5. 11.
Ye have heard of the patience of Job. Yes, and we have heard of the passions of
Job, his cursing the day of his birth; but hold, not a word of that it now is
as if it had never been.

3. Let me propound to you one Question further; Have thou nothing to ask of
God? is there not some secret boon and kindness which thy heart carries thee
out to the desiring of at the hands of God? such a scruple in thy Conscience,
which puts thee to pain, and would gladly have taken out, but can not by
all thy study and endeavors remove: and such a blot in thine evidence for thy
being in a state of grace, and having a title to the glory and happiness of the
other World, which puts thee to a stand, so that thou can not read on, nor
make any thing of it to thy comfort and satisfaction? this thou would not have
others know, but desire a deliverance from Thou have such a good purpose and
excellent design in thy head, which thou know not how to communicate, yet
thou would be directed, assisted and prospered in. Thou have, perhaps, a
yoke fellow, that is a Son of Belial, does not know the duty of his place; or
though he knows it, he will not do it; but is a thorn in thy side, and make
thee go mourning all the day; and thou love him so well, and art so tender of
his reputation, that thou will not tell the dearest Friend thou have of it; and
I commend thy prudence and affection, bear it as long and as well as ever thou
can; but thou may do both him and thy self a singular kindness by telling
thy God of it. Thou have an unnatural and disobedient Child, who came out of
thine own Bowels, and whom thou love as thy own Soul, but he neither fears
God, nor reverenceth man; he is so far from following the good counsel thou
give him, that he will not so much as hear it; thou can not think of him
without breathing a sigh, scarce see him without dropping a tear, and thy Soul
does even break with the longings it has to see him another man, a new man,
convinced, converted, sanctified, turned from his disobedience to the wisdom of
the just, and brought over from the power of Satan to God; thou would have
more of the love and kindness of such an one as thou art nearly related to, or
have great dependence upon: These things, and, possibly, twenty more, which may
be reckoned up, are very much the matter of thy desire, and all of them are
within the reach of the Divine Power: that God who performed all things for
David, is able to perform all these things for thee: and if thou would not
willingly have others acquainted with these things, if thou art loath that thy
Family should be privy to the stirrings and workings of thy heart in these
respects, then let them bring thee upon thy knees in thy secret Retirements:
there thou may be bold, and as free as thou please; there thou may fully
open thy case, and unbosome thy self, and tell God all that is in thine heart,
and keep back nothing: after the manner of holy David, who could say in Psalm.
38. 9. All my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.

Fifthly, The pleasantness of the work is enough to attract and draw an holy
Soul to the performance of it. Secret Prayer brings the Christian into secret
Communion with God, and secret Communion is a sweet Communion, as that person
tastes and experiences, who loves God indeed. Two Lovers have abundantly more
delight and satisfaction in each other's company, when they are got in a
corner, and no body to interrupt or observe them, than when they are in a crowd
and throng of People, or in a room, where many eyes are upon them; for there
they cannot be so familiar and free, as their mutual affection does require. We
have free leave given us, yea, we are under a Divine Command, to come to the
throne of grace with holdness, Heb. 4. 16. with a freedom of speech, to fetch
up the bottom of our hearts, and tell our whole minds to God; but when the
Saints go in company, many times he that is called out to be at that time the
mouth of the rest to God, finds himself confined and bound up by a natural and
over-powering modesty, and his Christian Child-like boldness is abated, nay,
wholly to seek; and he is at such a great loss, and so exceedingly troubled
that he cannot speak, that I may use the words of that holy man Asaph, Psalm.
73. His freedom is turned into oppression, and he is so full of matter, that
his heart is almost ready to break within him, because at that time he knows
not how to give himself vent: in such a case there is an awe upon him, and that
does issue in a painful restraint. Oh Christians, if you could hear some
gracious Souls in their private Addresses to God, it would put you into an
amazement, you could not forbear standing and wondering how bold they are with
God, though not saucy; how familiarly they will speak to God, yet know and
consider their distance; how plain they will be, how earnest and importunate,
how they will plead with him, and produce their Arguments and strong Reasons,
and with vehemence urge them, wrestling with him, as those that must have their
Petitions granted, and will too, before they have done; and yet they do herein
that which they have learned from above, and use those words which the Holy
Ghost teaches, who speaks in them: they do not herein forget themselves, or
take too much upon them; nor are they more bold than welcome, when they have
raised and enlarged their desires, and wound up their importunity to the
highest pitch; they do no more than what they have their kind and gracious
Father's allowance for, and then are their Prayers his Music. And when they
have done thus, who but themselves, and such as have taken the same course, are
able to tell or conceive the fruit and advantage which thereby comes into
them? when their Souls have had so large a vent, what ^ase do they find in
themselves! what peace, but such as passes understanding! how do their Faces
shine, even as that of Moses did when he came down from the Mount? what
delights have they had, what joys of Faith, what a satisfaction do they find
within. This is no more than what holy David did with highest confidence
promise unto himself; and I do not in the least question, but he was encouraged
to promise so much to himself for the future, by the experiences he had had in
former times, Psalm. 63. 5, 6. My soul, says he, shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness; He looked not only for a little taste, a drop of mercy, or
some crumbs of comfort, so much only as would set him a longing, or keep life
and soul together, but a full meal. He promised himself the best, not
brown-bread and water, ordinary course fare; but marrow and fatness; yea, and
enough too, a fullness, so that he should not rise up complaining, but admiring
and triumphing; my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: when he had his
sweet refreshing, his fill, then he would bless his Benefactor. But I desire
you to take notice of the time when, and the place where, he did promise
himself these rich and comfortable Enjoyments, it was in his retirements, in
his secret converses with God. When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate
upon thee in the night-watches. Upon which words Mr. Dickson has this
Observation very apposite to the business in hand.

The way to find refreshment spiritual, is, beside public Ordinances, to give
our selves to spiritual Exercises in secret, at such times as our civil and
natural necessities may best spare, and then and there to recall to mind what
we have heard, seen or felt of God's Word or Working, and to keep our thoughts
upon this holy Subject by Prayer, Soliloquy, and Meditation. This, this brings
in spiritual refreshment indeed; this warms the heart, this feasts it, this
delights it, this raises it, this furnishes it with new Songs.

Sixthly, Secret Prayer shall not be vain. Our Lord Jesus does not only walk in
the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, in the great Congregations, in the full
Assemblies of his Saints; thou indeed the Prophet tell us, Psalm. 87. 2. The
Lord loves the gates of Zion, i. e. says Ainsworth, the public Assemblies,
more than all the dwellings of Jacob: but* he will graciously condescend so far
as to afford his presence, and give a meeting to two or three of his friends
when met together in his Name; there he will be in the midst of them. You have
Christ's own word for your assurance in the Case, Matthew. 18. 20. as to assist,
so to accept, and bless, and do for them the good things which they desire;
yea, his Grace is so infinite, and his Love so great, that his condescension
shall be lower yet; for he will come into a corner, when he has a Child of his
alone praying and crying. Cantic. 2. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of
the rocks, and in the secret places of the stairs; let me see thy countenance,
let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.
When she is most retired and absconded, Christ loves both to see her and hear
her; though she be Sunburned with Persecution, and sooted with Infirmities, yet
her Countenance is comely in the eye of Christ, because there he sees his own
and his Father's Image; and though her Prayers be broken, and as the chatterings
of a Crane; yet the voice is sweet in the ear of Christ, because it is the
language of his own Spirit. And although our Lord spoke this to his Spouse the
Church, yet it may be applied to particular Christians, who are Parts and
Members of the Church, and may take the comfort of it to themselves. When
Elijah was, as you heard, and we noted before, under the Juniper-Tree, God was
pleased to come and join himself to him, and would have from his own mouth an
account of his Case, and the reason of his withdrawing himself, What do thou
here, Elijah? what was it that brought thee hither? and what is it that thou
would have of me? Know, O holy Soul, thou stand in the same relation to
God, and have the same interest in him, and may promise thy self the same
kindness; God will not think it too much for his Majesty to come to thee alone
when desired, and when he comes, to bring with him a blessing for thee: though
thou take none here to back thee, have not a Friend on Earth to join in the
Suit, yet do thou go and state thine own case, draw up thy Petition, and
present it unto God with an hand of faith, setting the name of Christ to it,
and God will presently add his fiat, his Amen; though it may be the answer
shall not presently be given in to thee, yet the grant shall be past in Heaven,
thy Father will say, Be it unto this soul even as it will. Nay, he will not
only give the thing, if it be good for thee, but more too: and while thou
ask like a Child, he will answer thee like a God.

A most gracious assurance hereof you have in the words of the Text from the
mouth of Jesus Christ himself, who is the faithful and true witness; Thy father
which sees in secre^, shall reward thee openly. He sees the sincerity of thy
heart, and the importunity of thy desires; he sees how thou labourest at the
Oar, and what pains thou have taken, and with what great wrestlings thou have
wrestled; and having seen, he will reward; the work is done, and the reward is
to come. So then, if thou will believe Christ, thou shall not lose thy labor,
thou shall not have pangs and throws of Soul, and after all bring forth nothing
but wind; never did any one Holy Prayer fall short of Heaven, and drop by the
way; the great God is not wont to set his Children about any unprofitable work.
Paul, I am sure, was of that mind, when he said in 1. Cor. 15. last, Be
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that
your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. As their grievous sufferings turn
them to a very good account, so shall all their holy actions: There is never an
appointment of duty for them, but it carries in its Bowels a design of Mercy.
He says not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain; the preparing and
engaging of their hearts to pray, speaks his readiness and resolution to
incline his ear to hear. When he bids them open their mouths, it is that he
might fill them; He would not have them give a knock at his door to no purpose;
but has promised when they do, it shall be opened to them; and when he opens
his door, he will open his heart and hand too, and not send them away empty.
When he bids them seek, it is in order to their finding; and that which they
find, shall be worth their while, and pay them for all the pains they took; to
be sure they shall not have cause to complain, as those that sit down losers,
and have a disappointment of their expectations. Nay, further, our Savior tell
us, that he will reward us openly. He will not be ashamed that the World should
see how he uses his Servants, they shall see there is a reward for the
Righteous; and though the Devil was a Fool in going about to charge rotten
sordid designs, and a mercenary selfishness upon Job, yet he himself was forced
to acknowledge, that Job did not serve God (...) naught. He will reward thee
openly, both here and hereafter, before Angels and Men* as you have compassed
his Altar with your Supplications, so will he compass you about with Favor and
with Songs; he will make it manifest, he will convince his enemies, a foolish,
wicked and ungrateful World, of all the hard speeches which they had spoken
against him, they themselves shall see it false, That it is a vain thing to
serve God; he will by his liberal rewards given them, extort from them this
acknowledgment, That the Lord is good to them that wait upon him, and to the
soul that seeks him; especially it shall be thus at the last and great day,
which will be the day of recompenses, the day in which God will make up his
Jewels, and set them, not in Gold, but in Glory. Then, as you have it in Mal.
3. 18. yea, then, indeed, shall ye discern between the righteous and the
wicked; betweem him that serves God, and him that serves him not; between him
that seeks God, and him that seeks him not; between him that prays, and
him that prays not. Then there shall be an apparent and manifest difference;
the stone-blind World, those that are wickedly, wilfully blind, shall see it to
their vexation and torment.

These are the motives by which I did design, and do hope to work upon your
hearts, these the Silken Cords of a Man, the Rational Arguments, with which I
would allu^e and draw you to the conscientious cheerful performance of this
excellent, necessary and Soul-chearing, Soul-fattening Duty of Secret-Prayer;
and oh that I might hear you have been wrought upon by them, and prevailed
with. Now, that you might do this work well, and not fail as to the right
management of it, and so not miss and fall short of those singular benefits and
advantages which come by it, I shall afford you what assistance I judge needful
in the case, and in silence passing over those Directions which refer to Prayer
in general, I shall give you up some that do particularly concern and relate to
Secret-Prayer, they are these: I beseech you mind and Practice them.

First, Make thy secret approaches to God with the greatest solemnity of Spirit
that thou can; though thou go in the multitude of mercies, and with faith
in Christ, and with hope of finding Grace, yet be sure that in his fear thou
worship toward his Holy Temple; though thou art alone, and without any here to
be an eyewitness, do thou draw nigh unto him with as great an ^we and dread
upon thy spirit, with as great ^umility and reverence in thy carriage and
deportment, as if thou had the eyes of all the World upon thee; though thou
may in thy retirements be more free and open, in giving an account of thy
self and thy condition, thy burdens, wants and desires, because no body sees
thee; yet thou must not be rude, unmannerly, and saucy, because God sees thee.
When thou art in a Corner, God is in Heaven, upon a Throne of Glory, attended
by innumerable Angles, who in his presence cover their Faces with their Wings,
as knowing their distance, their inability and unworthiness to behold him.
Remember thou have to do with Majesty, yea, with an Infinite and Glorious
Majesty; and Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall upon
you? Job 13. 11. And, indeed, then are we most excellent, when we do most fear
God's Excellency. David began Psalm 8. with the admiration of God's Excellency,
O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! And then in the
same Psalm he fell to humbling and vilifying thoughts and expressions of Man.
What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest
him? Abraham was the Father of the faithful, and the Friend of God; yet how low
was he in his own eyes, and how much filled with an awe of God, when he alone
stood before him* pleading for wicked Sodom? Observe how he carried, and what
he said, Genesis 18. 27. Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, which am but dust and ashes. And verse. 30. O let not the Lord be angry,
and I will speak. And yet again, verse 32. O let not the Lord be angry; and I
will speak yet but this once. By all this you see, how much he was afraid of
offending God; and this is that which God expects from his creatures, yea, from
his dearest Children; he stands upon his honor, and looks to be treated like
himself. Levit. 10. 3. Moses said unto Aaron, This is that the Lord spoke, I
will be sanctified in all them that come nigh me. See then that you have grace
to serve him with reverence and godly fear, as knowing that your God is a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Nadab and Abihu found him so, when destroyed
by fire that came from his presence upon their not observing his order in
matter of worship; they brought with them strange fire, and met with devouring
fire. Therefore do you fear before him when you pray to him; and though nobody
be by, remember and consider that God is by, as to hear your Prayers, so
curiously to observe both the frame of your spirits, and the manner of your
deportments before him; as he is of pitiful eyes, so of pure and piercing eyes,
which cannot endure to behold iniquity, and from which nothing can be hid; all
is naked and open before him with whom you have to do.

Secondly, When thou set about the work of Secret-Prayer, study and
endeavor secrecy to the utmost, and be as secret as ever thou can; do not
tell others the business thou art taking in hand; What though none know of it,
let it be enough for thee that thy Father does, for that is enough; he alone is
sufficient to be thy witness, and to do for thee all that thou desire. Never
go to it with a design, nor in such manner that others may take notice of it
for thy commendation. A Christian, indeed, may do Alms, and pray so as to be
taken notice of, and let his light shine before Men in order to the alluring of
others, and drawing them to the like acts of piety and charity: But to give
others, by any means, an item of our private Duties, in order to our own
applause, that we might have praise with Men, and be by them accounted in the
number of serious, strict and eminent Christians, is too low a pitch for the
Children of God to fly, it is Pharisaically wicked and abominable. And sure I
am, you your selves will find it true at the last, That a name thus obtained,
will not pay the charge, but cost you a great deal more than it is worth. It is
far better for us to take care of our duty, and leave it to God to take care of
our names. If we can please God, and get to Heaven, we shall be glad to be
there, though nobody knew all the steps we took in the way thither. When thou
art in the work, and warm at it, when the Fire burns, speak with thy tongue, it
is thy friend in Prayer, and thy glory in Praises; but command it to keep a due
decorum; be not so loud that others may hear; do not, like some, make the
street ring; I readily grant that the lifting up of the voice is sometimes the
effect of an oppressed spirit, whom speaking will not serve; there must be
crying, and that aloud; sometimes it is the effect of a soul fired and inflamed
with holy longings; and it may be allowed to be an help to the raising up of
the spirit and affections: Only when thou do make use of it, get as far as
thou can out of the hearing of others, that thou may not be as the
hypocrites are. If thou have not convenience for that, neither within doors nor
without, then go to God as he came to Elijah, in a soft and still voice. Thy
Father can hear thy whispers, for thou always speak in his ear; yea, more,
Romans 8. 27. He that searches the heart, knows what is the mind of the
spirit. He had in the Verse before, spoken of groans that could not be uttered;
desires that are in the Soul which it knows not how to express; but though
thou can utter neither sighs, nor groans, nor words, God knows your minds,
what your spirits are working out after: when you say nothing, he can tell what
you would have: All my desire is before thee. He understands the language of
thy sighs, yea thy very tears are to him articulate, when he does not hear the
words of thy mouth. We do not find that Woman said any thing who washed
Christ's Feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head; but in
those tears and actions Christ saw love and thankfulness; much is forgiven her,
therefore she loves much; yea he does know what you have a mind to, by your
very looks. Hence it was that when the floods compassed Jonah about, and all
the billows and waves passed over him, and he looked upon himself as being in a
perishing condition, he resolved upon giving God a look, before he was quite
lost; Jonah 2. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look
again toward thy holy Temple: and that look saved him, Verse 6. Thou have
brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God. He looks pitifully up to
God, and God looks graciously down upon him: do thou so act the Saint, as
carefully to avoid every thing of the Pharisee.

Thirdly, When thou art alone in prayer, make it thy great desire and care to
be with God. In all thy approaches to him, and in all thine appearances before
him, make sure that thou be with him. The Psalmist could say, Psalm. 139. 18.
When I awake, I am still with thee: this some understand of the constancy of
God's kindness. Though the most vigilant of the Saints sometimes fall into
sleepiness and drowsiness of spirit, that they perceive not God's presence with
them, nor care over them, nor love to them; yet when the Lord awakeneth up
their Souls, and renews their spiritual senses, they are made to see and
acknowledge, that the Lord does never leave them, no, not when they least
perceive his presence. But others do by this understand the gracious frame and
workings of David's Spirit. He was every morning with God; as soon as ever he
opened his eyes, he directed them to God. God was the excellent and endeared
Object that he would first converse with, and bestow his morning visit upon. I
am still with thee by meditation. Oh that thou could say the same in truth
as to this duty of Prayer. Lord, when I am at prayer, I am still with thee. I
am often upon my knees, and I am as often with my God; I John 1. 3. That which
we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Do you press after that, a fellowship with God: do you enquire for
that, as Elisha when he had got the Mantle which his Master had dropped, he cried
out, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? so do you: here is the Prayer, but where
is the fellowship? Truly that Person is both wickedly and miserably alone in
his duty, who is not with God in duty. He sins greatly in it, and he shall get
nothing by it. That is an accursed privacy out of which the great and
everblessed God is excluded. He is indeed with thee in all places, in thy
greatest retirements; Psalm. 139. 8. If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there;
if I make my bed in Hell, thou art there. So, if thou art in the Congregation,
God is there; if in the Chamber, God is there; if in the Field, God is there.
He fills all places, and he takes notice of all persons, and of all their
Actions; but that is not enough; no gracious Soul that does indeed love him,
will sit down satisfied with that. While God is with thee by his Omnipresence
observing thee, and all thy ways; what duties thou do, and how thou do
them; it must be thy great care to be with God in a way of holy meditation and
affection: to have the thoughts dwelling with God, the desires running out to
God, and the delights feasting upon God. Have a care, that when you pretend to
be alone in your duty, you do not lay the reins upon your necks, and allow your
minds in their loose and vain ex^ursions. Christian, go to thy duty, and go to
thy God too* So that good man wisely resolved; Psalm. 43. 3, 4. O send out thy
light and truth, let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy hill, and to thy
tabernacles; then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy.
He would not stop at the Altar, but get up to the God who was worshipped there:
and when thou art with him, keep with him, as close as thou can: let no
temptation draw thee away.

Fourthly, Whenever thou art in secret before God, reveal all thy secrets to
him: deal plainly and openly with him; anatomize thy Soul in his presence; tell
him all that is in thine heart, and all that thou remembrest has been in thy
life; and do not hide any thing from him: whatsoever thine own Conscience
preaches to thee, do thou go and repeat it all to God: confess to him those
evil Actions thou did in a corner, and under the covert of darkness, though
no mortal eye saw them, nor can any body charge thee with them. The keeping
back of part of thy sins, may be thy ruin, as well as keeping back part of the
price of the Land, and covering the fraud with a lie, was the death of Ananias
and Sapphira. Acknowledge to him those heartcorruptions which did never come
into act; the law in the members that warreth against the law in your mind; the
sin that dwells in you; that cursed root of bitterness which lies under
ground: the vicious fountain that is continually boiling and bubling up in
filthy thoughts and vile affections, though it never sent forth such muddy and
abominable streams as run in an impetuous and rapid manner in the lives of
others, overflowing all the banks that Religion and Reason do set them. In a
word, Do thou thy self acquaint God with the plague of thine heart, which
threatens the life of thy Soul, though there be no spots to be seen by others
upon thee, though it does not show it self in botches and boils. I have already
told you, that though you need not let men know, not your dearest, intimate and
most faithful Friends know all that you are chargeable with; yet you are bound
to do so to God, and it is indeed no other than a giving of him the glory of
his Omniscience, and (if you do it as you ought in a believing way) the glory
of his Mercy and Goodness too, as being a God ready to forgive and multiply
pardons. Besides, as I have said, it is in vain to hide any thing from him;
because he sees all, searches the hearts; possesses the reins, and has our
most secret sins in the light of his countenance; He that covers his sins,
shall not prosper; not in that action: when men go to eover, God will come to
discover. Adam having sinned, went like a guilty Malefactor to hide himself,
but God knew where he was, and fetched him out with a word. Achan having stolen
the wedge of Gold, and two hundred pieces of Silver, and a goodly Babylonish
Garment, went and hid them in the earth in the midst of his Tent, but God made
him fetch them out again. When all is done, plain-dealing is best, specially
when you have to deal with God. And let me here add, That freedom and openness
of heart in a way of humble confession unto God, is a very good argument of a
gracious frame of heart, and speaks a person acted by an ingenuous filial
spirit, that he is no friend to sin, no admirer of himself, but willing to load
himself, that so he might the more loath himself, and work his heart into the
greater admirings of that patience which, notwithstanding so many affronts,
has so long born with him; and that grace, which, notwithstanding so great
provocations, does yet open to him a door of hope. And take one thing with you
further: this freedom and openness of heart in confessing your sins to God, is
a singular and compendious way (mingling with it faith in Christ) to provide
for your own peace and comfort: when you do humbly and freely load your selves
with the acknowledgment of the sins you are guilty of, you may find them lie
more light upon you Consciences: when you bind them upon your selves, you may
find God loosing them, and taking them off by the assurance of a gracious and
full pardon. Till David came to this, poor man, he was in a most dismal
condition; Psalm. 32. 3. While he kept silence, his bones waxed old through his
roaring all the day: he kept silence, i. e. he did not confess sin; and then he
was fain to spend all his time in roaring, because of the torment and anguish
which he felt; and so long as he did not carry toward God in a way of
ingenuity, God carried toward him in a way of severity. Verse. 24. Day and night
thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer.
He was sunk under the weight of that hand, and broken almost to shivers, and
dried up like a potsherd. But now see what a comfortable change was wrought,
and how God appeared to his joy, when he brake off that sinful silence, yea, as
soon as he took up a resolution of doing it! Ver. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto
thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. So
then, this is the way, to remove Judgments, to pacify the wrath and
displeasure of God, to quiet the Conscience, to recover the sense of Divine
Favor, and to get for broken bones, the joy of God's Salvation.

Fifthly, When thou art in secret, keep a strict watch over thy self: Watch
over both thy Body and Soul; watch over thy body, that it may not sleep, as the
Disciples did very unseasonably, when they had the greatest reason to keep
awake. You know what our Savior said, That the body is weak where the spirit
is willing. It is a great sin, and therefore a great shame for people, (yea,
such as profess godliness) when they are about the Work and Service of God in
these Assemblies, hearing and praying, to sleep away so much of that precious
time as they do, as if these things were none of their business, and they were
not at all concerned in it. Sure I am, this is not to sit here as God's People
sits; this is no sign of a serious Christ^an, coming to hear for Life, and
to pray for Life, and working out Salvation with fear and trembling; and yet
they sleep in the midst of Observers, when they have some on all sides to give
them an awakening jog; and I desire you to make conscience of doing it, it is
an act of Duty and of Love; it is a friendly jog, and the party to whom you
give it, is obliged to take it thankfully at your hands as a kindness: He does
not know how much he may lose by a little Nap; some precious Truth may then be
spoken and passed, in which he was greatly concerned, and by which he might
have been greatly benefited; but it is gone and lost as to him, he slept it
away. But when thou art all alone, thou have none by to do that friendly
Office, to bestow a jog upon thee, then thou must do all the work thy self, and
look to thy self; therefore thou should be the more thine own Friend, and
take the more care and pains. And also watch thy Soul, thine heart; keep it, as
thou art commanded, with all diligence: And as Deborah said to her self when
she was in the midst of her work, Judges 5. 12. Awake, awake, Debroah; awake,
awake, utter a Song; so do you call upon your selves in your Duties, Awake,
awake, O my Soul; awake, awake, lift up a Prayer: Thou have now wrestling-work
in hand, do not be dull, heavy, and lazy at it; watch thine heart, for it needs
it; and two things in particular it is very subject to, wanderings and coolings;
the heart of man is a wandering heart* will not keep its way, nor dwell upon
its proper Object. David could say, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is
fixed: But could he say so always? or can thou? No, though it is fixed in its
choice of God, in its affection to him, in its resolution for him; yet it has
not that fixation of thoughts and meditations upon him, nor that fixedness of
fellowship and communion with him, which should be. Thou think thou carriest
thy heart with thee to thy duty; but do thou not often find it has given
thee the slip, and is gone before thou have done? Therefore look to it, keep
thine eye upon it, that it may keep its place, and to its business. But then
again, the heart of man has its coolings, as well as its wanderings: As it
should keep its way, so it should carefully keep its heat. Be much, therefore,
and frequent in stirring up thy self, when thou go by thy self, to take hold
of God; beware of all deadness and dullness, when thou art going to serve a
living God. When firebrarnds are together, they will help one another, and burn
to the last: but he that would keep a single one alive, had need to tend it
carefully, and be often blowing it, yea, and adding some fuel too.
Watchfulness is as great and necessary a Duty, as any the Christian has to do;
he must watch unto Prayer; that he may not go about it unseasonably, that he
may not lose a fit opportunity, but set up his sail as soon as the wind blows,
and that he also might make use of all advantages for the tuning of his
instrument, and getting his heart into a right frame; and he must watch
likewise in prayer: that when he is at the work, he may not idle in it, and so
lose his duty by losing himself, for want of looking to. Alas, what is Prayer
without the heart, unprofitable to man, abominable to God: it is like a
Carcass, when the Soul has once forsaken it, a stinking and offensive thing;
who would make a Present of it to a great King?

Sixthly, When thou art upon thy knees, engaged in secret Prayer unto God, be
sure that thou double thy diligence, and put thy strength forth to the utmost.
When a great many are lifting at an heary weight, every one may spare himself,
and put forth the less strength, because there is such a number to assist: but
when there is no more than one single person tugging at it, he had need strain
and labor hard, else he must leave it where, and as he found it. When we are
joined together with others in Prayer, when with a Church of Christ, an
Assembly of Saints, there is a number of Supplicants, a great many besieging
the Throne of Grace, wrestling with God, and pulling down the Blessings which
are desired; and then we may speak in the same manner as David did, Psalm. 7. 6,
7. Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine
enemies: awake for me, to the judgment which thou have commanded; so shall the
congragation of the people compass thee about (...) for their sakes therefore
return thou on high. Yea, when there is a Congregation of God's People
compassing him about, we may say, Lord, for their sakes show thy self, be
exalted in thy strength and in thy goodness and mercy. Yet know, this is no
Argument why any one single Member of that Church or Congregation should be
remiss, and abate of his zeal and endeavors; for we are (...), Romans 15. 30.
When we are together in Prayer, we must strive together in Prayer; the word is
very emphatical. When we are together, we must not be in Prayer only, but in an
agony too; we must not only seek Mercy, but strive for it; strive mightily, as
Wrestlers do, and Champions in the field: It is, says Beza, a Metaphor taken
from Military Affairs, and signifies such fervency and zeal as is used in
matters of Life and Death; there must be a laying hold on God's strength, and a
putting forth of ours, an acting to the utmost. Tho we are together, and that a
great number together, yet we must every one strive, else it would be our
shame; as in a School, if all the Boys are studying and conning their Lessons,
any one should not mind it, but be toying and loitering; or as in a Workhouse,
many should be laboring hard till the sweat run off their faces; but in the
midst of that industrious Company, there should be one sleeping, and there
another trifling: and also it will be to your loss; for tho the Church may
obtain a gracious Answer, and prevail for a Blessing, and delight themselves in
the goodness of the Lord; yet the lazy, lukewarm Christian, who did nothing, or
at best out of an indifferency of Spirit, will, an hundred to one, fall short,
and miss of a share, being one of those foolish slothful seekers, that are not
able: And while a Jacob, after his wrestling, is commended and rewarded, has
his Name changed, to his honor, from weak Jacob, to mighty Israel; from Jacob
a Worm, to Israel a Prince with God. While resolved and importunate Souls are
most graciously smiled upon, and sent away, as the Woman of Canaan, was, with
their desires fulfilled, and their joys running over; Be it to you even as you
will; I can, I will deny you nothing: thou may be sent away with a severe
rebuke from God: Thou wicked and slothful servant. And what shall I say, with a
flea in thine ear? no, no, with a sting in thy Conscience. Bu^ now if there be
such joint endeavors required, such utmost striving when you go before God
with your united forces, surely there is no reason why you should be cold and
freeze, why you should trifle and be careless when you are alone, and in secret
with God; No, no, then it does nearly concern you to summon all the powers of
your Souls, to muster all your forces, and to put all your affections into a
lively and fervant frame, and every grace to its post and business. Being you
have to do all your work your selves, get as much strength from Heaven as you
can, and employ all you get: whatsoever thy hand finds to do, thine own
single hand, be sure that thou do it with all thy might. Christians, you must
seek mercy diligently, if you would be succesful in your seeking.

Seventhly* Let not thy secret Prayer shut Prayer out of thy Family; do not
make use of that performance as a sufficient excuse for this neglect and
omission, neither think to stop the mouth of conscience now, with that which
will not pass for a good plea when thou shall come to appear before the
Tribunal of an holy God. It is indeed thy duty to pray alone; and if thou do
do it, thou do well; yet thou must not only pray alone, but with others
also; yea, this is an indispensible duty, incumbent upon you who are Governors
of Families; you should see to it, that your Houses be Churches, not Bethavens,
Houses of vanity, but Bethels, the Houses of God. We read of a Church that was
in the House of Precilla and Aquila, 16 Romans 5. and a Church which was in the
House of Nymphus, Coloss. 4. 15. and a Church that was in Philemon's House,
Philemon 2. It is a common Saying and a true one, That every man is to be a
Prophet, Priest and King in his own House: You do well enough remember your
being Kings, and as such do insist much upon your Authority and Power, and know
how to Lord it enough; only by the way take this short Advice which I shall
give you; So rule as Kings, as not to degenerate into Tyrants; You are Heads,
and to be honored for such; but let not your Crowns be Thorns, rending and
tearing, afflicting and vexing those that live under your shadow, and should
rejoice in it. And withal, do not forget that you are to be Prophets too,
teaching and instructing those that are under your Charge and Care. Genesis 8. 19.
I know Abraham, that he will command his children and his household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord. Yea, and you are to be Priests also,
Praying for your Families, and with them: What is more reasonable than this?
what more decent and comely? Do you not live together? do you not love
together? do you not eat and drink together? do you not rejoice and make merry
together? and I appeal to your own judgments; Conscience, what say thou?
should not, ought not these persons to worship God together? ought they not to
pray together, and to seek the face of God together? This is the way to make
your Communion an holy Communion, to sweeten your comforts and converse, and to
sanctify all your enjoyments. 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. Every creature of God is good,
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving; for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Prayer, Family Prayer, is needful for
the sanctifying of Family-enjoyments; without it, you sit down at unsanctified
Tables, and you lie down in unsanctified Beds; and I do heartily commend to
your consideration and imitation the holy and brave Resolution of Joshua. He
was a great Man, a Prince, Captain General, and Leader of Israel; do you see
how much he was fixed in this gracious purpose, Josh. 24. 15. As for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord: not only I, but we* not only we apart, but also
we together.

And let every one of you lay aside your vain pretenses, and weak reasons
against a great duty. Never pretend modesty in the case* thou art ashamed to
pray before others, but this is such a Fig-leaf as cannot cover thy nakedness;
be ashamed of thy folly and sins, of thy vain words and frothy talk, but be not
ashamed of thy work: be ashamed that thou do it no better, but be not ashamed
to do it: art thou ashamed to pray? but have thou not a great deal more cause
to be ashamed of thy not praying? Know for a certain, that is a sinful modesty
which does unfit and indispose thee for any part of thy duty.

Do not say, thou art not able to do it, thou are not furnished with gifts for
such a work. But let me ask thee, whose fault is that? whom will thou blame for
that? God for not giving them, or thy self for not getting them? not to be able
to pray, is both thy (...) and thy shame; and therefore thy shame, because thy
sin. Do thou know how to beg thy bread, and do thou not know how to beg thy
life? do thou know how to ask a kindness of Man, and not how to ask mercy of
God? thou may blush to say so: thou would be counted a wise man, but in
this thou do charge thy self with egregious folly. But I desire thee to
begin. I fear thou have nottried, be persuaded to try now. We have a Proverb
amongst us pertinent to the case in hand, Use legs, and have legs. Praying is
the ready way to get the gift of Prayer: practicing is the most effectual way
of learning. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. Hosea 6. 3.
and then shall we seek, if we follow on to seek the Lord: then shall we pray,
if we follow on to pray: thou did not know how to go at first, when thou wast
an infant, could not set one foot before another; but by thy frequent trying,
thou could do it in time, yea knowledge and strength coming^on, thou could
go, and run, and leap too; by doing thy duty, thou will attain to an ability
and fitness to do it.

Eighthly, Make a wise choice of the time when thou will set about this Secret
Prayer. Let it be done as in a right manner, so in the proper season. It is
true, whenever the wind blows, we should set up our Sails: open when Christ
knocks, and answer when he calls, and go about that which he sets thee to: we
should be very observant of the Spirit's motions, and comply with them: just as
it was with the living Creatures and the wheels, Ezekiel. 1. 20. Whithersoever the
spirit was to go, the living creatures went, thither was their spirit to go,
and the wheels were lifted up over against them, for the spirit of the living
creatures, or of life, was in the wheels. The spirit of God is to be the
Spring, and all our Wheels should move as that Spring draws. Therefore when he
puts thee upon Prayer, do not consult with this nor that, but apply to it
immediately, but withal know, the Spirit of God is a Spirit of wisdom, and
knows how to order motions regularly and seasonably, Eccl. 3. 1. To every thing
there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the Heaven; a time to
plant, and a time to pluck up; a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to
weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance, etc. but man
knows not his time, Eccles. 9. 12. Often he does not, therefore he does often
meet with troubles, snares and losses. Now the Spirit of God knows these times
exactly, and moves accordingly: therefore if there be any unseasonable impulses
and motions, reject them, as those that are not of God, nor his Spirit.

Always take a fit time; make it thy business to nick it. God has in his mercy
given thee time enough for all thy work, and in his infinite wisdom he has
given thee choice opportunities* for every part of it. Thou have thy seasons
for labor and for rest; seasons for buying and for selling; a season for
praying and for hearing: now look thou carefully to it, that thou do every
thing in its season: that is the excellent property of him whom the Scripture
pronounces a blessed man. He is, and he shall be like a tree planted by the
rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, Psalm. 1. 3. We
cannot well do two things at once; and that God who understands our frame,
has ordered out accordingly concerning us. There is but one thing thy duty at
one time. Now it is thy business to understand what that one thing is, and so
to do it. In short, Let not thy secret Prayer hinder thee from waiting upon
Public Ordinances and Public Worship on God's Holy Day; the Church being met
together in Christ's name, thou ought to meet with them, if able, because
thou art a Member of that Body. Thou sinnest if thou art praying at home, when
thou should be hearing abroad. So, God has given thee time for the duties
of thy general Calling, as a Christian; and for the business of thy particular
Calling too; and he would have thee to mind both. It is not his will that thou
should be cruel to the Body, or unnatural to thy Family, under a pretense of
being tender over thy Soul. He that provides not for his own House, is so far
from being a good Christian, that the Apostle Paul tells us in 1 Timothy 5. 8. He
has denied the faith, i. e. practically, and in his deeds, and is worse than
an Infidel, who does from a natural instinct take care of his own. Thou who
sit under the light of the Gospel, and have the Law of God revealed and
opened to thee, art far worse than the Heathens, because thou do neglect that
duty which they perform, who have no other Light to direct them, than that of
Nature. Know, O man, thou sinnest if thou art in thy Closet, when it is thy*
duty to be in thy Shop; or thou, O woman, when thou ought to be employed
about the affairs of thy Family; and thou, O Servant, when thou should be
doing thy Master's or thy Mistris's business: thy time, to be sure, is none of
thine own; thou must not injure them to serve him. He hates robbery for burnt
offering. Come, Christians, learn a piece of holy wisdom; do righteousness at
all times, and in all things. Keep all the Wheels going, and all in their
order. The right timing of what you do, is putting of a glory upon what you do:
if all men would keep their place, and wisely time their actions, we should
have better men, and a better World than now we have, Eccles. 3. 11. God has
made every thing beautiful in his time. How beautiful is frost in Winter, and
heat in Summer: joys and comfort, if need be; yea and heaviness, by reason of
manisold temptations, if need be: all the Works of God are done with the
greatest exactness as to every circumstance, in a proper time, and in a lovely
order; so let yours be done too to the best of your knowledge, and the utmost
of your power.

I astly, When thou art in secret at thy Prayers unto God, carry in thine head
and heart the cases of others, and be an humble Supplicant unto a God in their
behalf: tho thou should pray alone, yet not ^or thy self alone: tho thou
do shut others out of thy Closet and Chamber, yet give them a room in thy
remembrances, affections and P^titions. Take them in the arms of thy love, and
carry their Cases along with ^^ee to the Throne of Grace* and ther^ speak many
a good word for them in the ears of God, who gives thee free leave to beg for
others as well as thy self, and delights to see his Children come into his
presence clothed with bowels. He was so pleased with Abraham's importunity for
the sparing of S^dom, though the people thereof was exceeding wicked before him,
that he did not stick at granting all that Abraham desired, nor would he go
away till Abraham had done. When Christ was pleased to Tabernacle among men,
how was he flocked to! how did they throng about him, bringing with them their
Children and Friends, their Sick, Blind, Lame, and Possessed, that he might
cure them! and they had that of him which they came for. Have thou none of thy
Relations that are so spiritually? Is not thy Yoke Fellow, Brother, Sister,
Child, Servant, blinded with ignorance of the things of God, deaf to Reproof,
Counsel, Instruction and Entreaty? so lame, that they cannot take one right
step in the way of God and Duty? possessed with a lying Devil, or a swearing
Devil, or a drunken Devil, or an unclean Devil? Carry them in thy Prayers to
God, and beg of him that he would stretch out his Almighty hand, and cure them.
But that I may draw to a C^s^: When thou art most in private, do not (...) the
Public* in thy Cabin, bestow some thoughts upon, and spend some suits and
^ighs about the Ship; for in that thou are embarked, and in the peace thereof
it is that thou must have peace: Let the Nation be remembered by thee; it is the
Land of thy Nativity, the place where thou wast born and bred, and in which
thou have enjoyed and abounded with Mercies temporal and spiritual; thou owe
it Prayers. It is indeed a sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquity, that
hates to be reformed, and is settled upon its Lees: but upon that score it
needs Prayer the more. There are Thousands pulling down Judgments by their
Superstition and loud-crying Profaneness, and making a Breach for an whole Sea
to break in upon us: But Thou, O Saint, and such as thou art, have the more
need to stand in the gap. Let Sion, the Church of God, have a very large share.
David was resolved, that he would seek her good; and the poor* Captives that
sat by the Rivers of Babylon, when they remembered desolate Sion, did not only
drop a tear or two, but wept Rivers, and had rather their right-hands should
forget their cunning, and their tongues cleave to the roof of their mouths,
than that they should forget. Jerusalem, or not prefer Her before their
chiefest joy. O let the same mind be in you, now that her condition is very
low, and we cannot tell what may be the products of the ensuing year. And that
the Sacrifice of Prayer may be fired, and send up before the Throne of God, a
vehement and pure flame; often think, and seriously meditate upon that which
Jehovah has spoken to you, Isa. 66. 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her, all ye that love her. Rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for
her, that ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations,
that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.

There are some that need your Prayers, do you supply them; there are some that
have desired your Prayers, do you satisfy them; there are some to whom you
have promised your Prayers, be you as good your word to them: they expect much
good will come to them by means of them, do not you disappoint their
expectations. In this way help thy Relations, do good to thy Friends and
Neighbors, heap coals of fire upon the heads of thine Enemies, help to bear up
the Pillars of a shaking Nation, give a lift toward the raising of Jacob now
he is small, and a blow to Babylon: And thus, though our Prayers should
oftentimes be private, yet our Spirits ought to be public. It is no small
comfort to the Saints and People of God, That they have a Stock of Prayer going
for them all the world over: Now if thou would have any benefit and advantage
by that Stock, see carefully to it, that thou be every day putting something in.

FINIS.

