A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN SHORTER, Knight, Lord
Mayor OF THE CITY of LONDON AT GROCERS-HALL.

By Samuel Slater Minister of the Gospel.

Published by his Lordships Command.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultrey. 1688.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN SHORTER, Knight, Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of
LONDON.
My Lord,
THIS Sermon was not preached, nor is it published undesir'd: Your Honor has
had a very great stroke as to both. Tho many others did come with their
auxiliary hands to help the Midwifeing of it into the World. It has stuck long
in the birth, because I cared not to expose it and my self, now that the
comfortable ease, which God and his Majesty have graciously granted us, (who
were before unmercifully run down) does make too many very uneasy and wickedly
angry, as if to show kindness to the Oppressed, were not becoming of a great
King, nor to accept of it fit for a groaning Subject. But, my Lord, contrary to
mine own Inclinations, I am constrained to yield at last to Importunity. What
entertainment it will find with many, I neither know, nor am sollicitous.
Probably they will slight and laugh at it, and so let them till they are weary;
methinks, however, they may please to let this, and some other Works of my
Reverend Brethren pass as tolerable, since done by the clumsy Fists of Pedlars
and Tinkers, etc. as some out of their abundant civility and good manners have
been pleased to call us. But we can laugh as heartily at their Abuses, as they
can at our Discourses; so long as there are no Fists about our Ears, we shall
be contented. You are not, My Lord, without Reproaches, which for the sake of
Righteousness, are more Your Honor than Your Chair or Chain: these things are
frankly given out by men ready at any thing but what is good. Let us, My Lord,
give them to understand, if they have leisure enough to throw dirt, we have
none to be concerned at it. No, let us mind the duty of our several Places, and
be the more industrious in the doing of it, as the Moon holds on her journey
notwithstanding the bawling of Dogs.

En peragit cursus surda Diana suos. That God would direct, succeed and
strengthen the heart and hands of Your Lordship and worthy Brethren; that God
would make Your City a City of Righteousness, accompany this Sermon with a
blessing, that it may reach its wished-for end, Private and Public good: That
Truth and Peace may be in our days, and descend as a blessing upon the head of
all following Generations, is the hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Honor's most Humble Servant in our Dearest Jesus, Samuel Slater.
March 30.88.
A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN SHORTER, Knight. etc.
PSALM 11.16. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.


OUR dear and precious Lord Jesus, is the great and blessed Potentate, King of
kings, and Lord of lords, his Kingdom the most noble and glorious, his
Government the most excellent in its self, and most easy to his Subjects; yet
never did any meet with greater Opposition, than he has done, both in his own
Person, while he was conversant upon Earth, tabernacling among Men; and in his
Interest, Power and Authority, ever since. He strikes not at the just
Prerogatives and Sovereign Rights of Princes, nor at the Peace and Prosperity
of Subjects, but has been and still is carrying on designs of Mercy, Grace and
Love, seeking the good, welfare and happiness of Mankind; yet black and cursed
designs have been hatched in Hell, and vigorously carried on by some of the
Sons of Men against him. He says in Joh. 18.36. My kingdom is not of this
world. Such a Kingdom as is not terrene, decaying and fading, but spiritual and
abiding. Such a Kingdom as is not of the same nature with those of this World,
is not inconsistent with them, does not usurp upon them, does not prejudice or
infeeble them, has nothing in common with them, needs it not, seeks it not.
Yet for all this, in the Psalm before us, we find the World in a ferment and
violent Heat about it; great Consultations and Endeavors, among all sorts and
ranks of Men, high and low, rich and poor, honorable and base, for the
wresting of the Royal Scepter out of his hand, the shaking and overturning of
his sacred and highly-exalted Throne. In short, tho he be the best Friend that
ever the World had, not a Destroyer, but a Savior; yet he had and has a world
of Enemies, who would break his hands asunder, and cast away his Cords from
them, which is egregious folly, and ingratitude in the height.

But the question is, Why do they so? Why do they rage, and set their Wits at
work? Why do they combine and unite together against him? Why is all this stir
and bustle? Why cannot Men be quiet? Why do they thus bid defiance to the God
of Love, to the Prince of Peace? You find no Answer in this Psalm returned to
this Question, and surely no other reason of this aversness from him can be
assigned, but this, viz. His being an irreconcilable Enemy to the lusts of Men,
and their sinful Practices; his Government, wherever it is erected, not
allowing the reign of Sin, which the hearts of the Sons of Men are so much
devoted to, and mad upon, that they will not be divided from it, but prefer it
before the Lord of Life and Glory; and if they are fixedly resolved so to do,
let them go on till Divine Vengeance overtake them.

However these their actings upon Earth are taken notice of by one in Heaven.
There the Great Jehovah, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, sits as a
strict and curious Observer of the Spirits, and Ways, and Doings of men: He
sees what is the matter of their Debates, what the issue of their Consults,
what is agreed upon in their greatest Privacies, and what is done by them in
their open Hostilities; and as he observes all, so he does it with a perfect
Serenity, without any trouble or afflictive commotion, without any undue
concernedness for his Son's interest and honor. Notwithstanding all the
Confusions that are, and will be here below, all the attempts of wicked and
unreasonable men, he enjoys himself as becomes a God, in undisturbed Peace and
Quietness, and a plerophory of Satisfaction as to his own Counsels, and the
success of them. For his Understanding is Infinite, so that he cannot be
outwitted, nor overreached; and his own Arm is sufficient for him, so that he
cannot be mastered and over-powred. There is not any possibility of defeating
any of his everlasting Purposes, or frustrating any of his glorious Ends; his
Counsels shall stand, and the thoughts of his heart to all Generations.

Hence it comes to pass, that while they rage, he laughs; and while they are
putting forth the utmost of their skill and strength, he looks upon them with
an holy Derision and Contempt; and while they are raising the Posse Terrae, the
Powers of the Earth, against Christ, he knows there is no need of raising the
Posse Coeli for him; No need of raising his Hosts, or of arming and sending
twelve Legions of Angels to his assistance. No, no, in order to their Confusion
and fatal Disappointment, it is full out enough for him to speak to them, only
it is in his anger, and that will vex them by turning their Counsel backward,
and tumbling their Persons headlong into Destruction, which shall certainly be
in due time. The Word of God carries along with it, a mighty Power and
Efficacy. With a word he created the World, and brought this excellent Fabric
of Heaven and Earth out of nothing. It was but his Fiat, and the Work was done;
and by the word of his Power he upholds all things, so that they do not fall
and return into their first Nothing. And with a word he can blast all the
Projects of his Son's Adversaries, and wither every Arm that is stretched out
against him.

If any inquire what it is that God speaks to them; you have it in the words of
the Text; Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. In which you have
these things worthy of your Observation.

First, The will of God set in opposition to the Wills and Counsels of Men. Yet
I; they are doing so and so, but I have done quite otherwise; they are doing
their Pleasure, and I have done mine; their work is to do, and will never be
done; mine is done already, I am beforehand with them. Secondly, You have the
Act of God the Father, by which Regal Power and authority is conferred upon
Christ. I have set, anointed, constituted my King. Thirdly, The Seat of his
Kingdom, the place where his Throne is set, and where he is to exercise his
Sovereign power, The holy Hill of Sion. The Doctrine that I shall from hence
raise, and present you with, as the Subject of the following Discourse, is
this.
Doct. Let the discontent and rage, the designs and practices of Men be what
they will, yet there is a King set up in Sion by God the Father, and this King
does and shall Reign, and that in the midst of his Enemies, and in spite of
them too; they may as soon pluck the Sun out of the Firmament, as Christ out of
the Throne. I shall dispatch the Doctrinal part in opening the several Words of
the Text, which will be done by answering these following Questions.

First, What is meant by Sion? Secondly, Why is Sion called Gods holy Hill?
Thirdly, Who is that King, whom God has set up there? Fourthly, What is the
meaning of that phrase, setting him. Fifthly, What is the import of that
Particle yet. Yet have I set him; all which I shall pass through with
convenient Brevity, having a due respect both to his Auditory, and the time;
and then proceed to the Application.
1. Q. Our first Question is this, What is meant by Sion?

A. To which I answer thus, Sion is to be taken two ways, literally and
mystically. Sion in the literal Acceptance, was a considerable Mountain in
Jerusalem, which had been formerly in the Possession of the Iebusites, and was
by them kept until the time of David, the second King of Israel, but the first
good one, 2 Samuel 5.7. The King and his men went up to Jerusalem to the
Iebusites, the inhabitants of the Land, which spoke unto David, saying, Except
thou take away the blind and the lame, thou can not come in hither; thinking
David cannot come in hither; nevertheless David took the strong hold of Sion,
the same is called the City of David. This Hill had two tops, upon one of which
was built the Tower or City of David; and upon the other afterward, was built
by Solomon his Son, the Temple of the Lord, and that top was Mount Moriah, as
you may see in the 2 Chronicles. 3.1. Then Solomon began to build the house of the
Lord at Jerusalem in Mount Moriah, where the Lord had appeared unto David his
Father.

Sion in the mystical Acceptance is no other than the Church of God. We find
that Christ himself, who is the King of Saints, and Head of the Body, is
frequently in Scripture called by the name of David. Thus Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. I
will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant
David he shall feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd. And I the Lord will
be their God, and my servant David a Prince among them; I the Lord have spoken
it: So again, Hos. 3.5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return and seek
the Lord their God, and David their king, and they shall fear the Lord and his
goodness, in the latter days. Christ in these, and other such like places is to
be understood by David; and he has his Name given him, because he was to be of
the Seed of David, the Royal Line, and David was the Type of him, being (as was
before hinted) the first good and gracious King in Israel, tender over that
People of God, and faithful to their interest, ruling them with Wisdom and
Love, not tyrannically with a Rod of Iron.

Now as Christ the King, is called by the Name of David; So the Gospel- Church,
which is his Kingdom, the place of his gracious and spiritual Residence, is
called by the name of Sion; so you find it in Hebr. 12.22. Ye are not come to
the mount that burned with fire, nor to blackness, and darkness, and tempest;
but ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, i.e. to the Church, both Militant, in which you are
Conversant; and Triumphant, of which you are now Members; that Church which is
the Seat of Christ, and Habitation of God. So likewise in Revel. 14.1. I
looked, and lo, a Lamb stood upon mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty
four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. The Mount
Sion here meant, is the Church of God, where Christ stands to look to it, and
take particular constant Care of it, which he always did, and will still go on
to do. These hundred forty and four thousand that were with him, are the Elect
of God, and effectually called, who have submitted to him, are followers of
him, and take his part, and are ready to take up his Cross, whenever called
to it. And this Mark or Seal does signify, both the sanctifying work of the
Spirit in their Hearts, by which they are brought over to Christ; and also his
strengthening work, whereby they are kept steadfast with him, notwithstanding
all the discouragements they find in themselves, all the Temptations and
Oppositions that are made against them by Hell, and all the Afflictions and
Persecutions they meet with from the World. And it is said to be in their
Foreheads, to note out unto us, not only the blessed fruit which they bring
forth in the sight of all them that know them, Good and Bad, Friends and Foes;
but also their open, bold and undaunted owning and professing of Christ; whose
they are, and to whom they resolve to cleave in the darkest days, and most
menacing dangers. Like unto those Benjamites, who said, 1 Chronicles. 12.18. Thine
are we, David, and on thy side, thou Son of Iesse; peace, peace be unto thee,
and peace be to thine helpers, for thy God helps thee; and so he does our
David, and him we may set against all his Enemies, for in comparison of him,
they all (be they never so many, never so mighty) are less than nothing,
Vanity. Among many great and precious Promises, which are made to the
Gospel Church under the name of Sion, that is one, Isa. 60.14. The sons of them
that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised
thee, shall bow themselves down at the soals of thy feet, and they shall call
thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the Holy One of Israel. Now Mount Sion
is thus made use of, as the Type and Figure of the Church of Christ in new
Testament-times, the times of the Messiah, upon such accounts as these:

First, Because of the special Presence of God there, above any other place in
the World, Psalm. 132.13, 14. The Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired it for
his Habitation. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired
it. It was the place of his choice, and of his desire, and of his delight. It
pleased him to abide, and to give Audience to his People there; there he met
them, and heard their Prayers, and made Manifestations of himself to them; the
House built there, he filled with his Glory. Now the spiritual and gracious
Presence of God, is in his Church, and with his People. From the wicked he
stands at a distance, he looks upon them afar off. We read in the Revelation,
That mystical Babylon is a Habitation of Devils, a Cage of unclean Birds, and
foul Spirits. But the true Church is the Habitation of God; there he dwells,
there he gives forth his Light, and his Loves; there he makes his People
joyful; the midst of the golden Candlesticks is the pleasant walk of the
blessed Jesus. Hence it is, that (as the Apostle Paul says in Ephesians. 2.21.)
all the building fuly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord;
that is, the universal Catholic Church does so, that is the Temple of God; and
then he adds in ver. 22. in whom you also are builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit. Not only the universal Church (that which
is rightly so called) but also particular Churches, as that in Ephesus, those
in London, or in any other Country, City, Town, which are called, united,
constituted, ordered regularly, or according to the Pattern given in the Mount,
the Divine Will revealed and laid down in the Sacred Scriptures, are Temples
and Habitations, in which the great God does delight by his holy Spirit to
dwell; yea, and so are particular Saints, who have been really sanctified, and
made partakers of those Gifts, which do not only adorn and grace the Person,
but likewise render those that have them truly gracious.

Secondly, Sion was a Type of the Gospel Church, and its name is therefore
fitly given to it, because of the proceeding or going forth of the Gospel from
thence. The fiery Law, as you know, was given upon, and from Mount Sinai, in a
most terrible manner, so that Moses himself feared and quaked; but the
everlasting Gospel, or law of Grace, was from Mount Sion, Isa. 2.3. Many people
shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the
house of the God of Jacob, for he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in
his paths, for out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. The Law, i.e. not the law of Works, but of Faith. The Law of
the Redeemer, and the Word, i.e. the Word of Reconciliation and Peace, the glad
tidings of Life and Salvation, by him, who is the Fountain of Life, and the
Author of eternal Salvation to all those that accept and obey him. This came
first out of Sion and Jerusalem, from whence it appears, that those learned Men
did not speak without reason, who have asserted, that the Church of Jerusalem
had the best and most rightful claim to that honorable Title of the Mother
Church, whatever place besides does pretend thereunto: So consult Psalm. 110.2.
The Lord will send the rod of thy strength out of Sion. Now, what is that Rod,
but the precious Gospel accompanied with the Spirit, which is the Power of God
to Salvation, by which he conquers and subdues a People to himself, and also
Rules and Governs them.

Now upon this account, the Church may well be called Sion, because there are
made most blessed Revelations of Jesus Christ, and of Mercy, Grace and Peace,
in and thorough him; there are the Divine Oracles, there are unlocked, and
sweetly opened, those profound and glorious Mysteries, which were concealed and
kept hid from Ages and Generations. There is made known unto the Principalities
and Powers in heavenly Places, [(...)] The manifold Wisdom of God, viz. in the
whole Economy, both of man's Redemption by Christ, and of the Government of the
Church in its various Ages and Periods, from the beginning of the World.

Thirdly, Sion is fitly used for a Type of the Gospel Church, upon the account
of its Eminency; it was high and lofty, Psalm. 68.15. The hill of God, is as the
hill of Bashan, an high hill as the hill of Bashan. That of Bashan, was a very
high Hill, rising up with several tops, but not to be compared with Sion; for
as he says in the next verse, Why leap ye, ye high hills, this is the hill
which God desires to dwell in, yea the Lord will dwell in it for ever. So the
Church, which is the Kingdom of Christ, does excel in Glory all the Kingdoms of
the World. It is the most noble Society, it needs not go a begging to any
other, it needs no borrowed Beauty, it shines brightest with its own Beams,
when its Worship is performed according to the Divine will, without the
addition of humane Inventions; when its Ordinances are pure, without any
Adulteration, and imbasing Mixtures; when its Members walk in an Holy and
Gospel Order, according to the Law and Rule of the new Creature; Then is the
Beauty of the Lord its God upon it, and that Beauty is so great, so sweet and
ravishing, that it may very well despise and abhor Painting and little pitiful
Artifices to set it off; it need not be beholden to any in the World for
Ornaments and Dresses. This precious and amiable Spouse of Christ does then
look most lovely, and is then the fairest among Women, when it has only its
Lords comeliness upon it, and does not appear in any of the rotten Rags, or
gaudy Attire of a loathsome Harlot. And besides, there is a most gracious
Promise made to the Church, which shall have its certain and full
accomplishment in due season, Isa. 2.2. It shall come to pass in the latter
days, (and has he said it, and will he not do it? Yes, without all doubt he
will) that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and exalted above the hills; that is, there is a time coming,
and I would hope it is not far off, the nearer it is, the better, when the true
Church of Christ shall be the Head, and not the Tail; when she shall not be as
a Scullion among the Pots, but as a Bride made ready for her Husband; and when
that Religion which came down from Heaven, and will carry them to Heaven who
sincerely profess and practice it; that Religion which is pure and undefiled,
before God and the Father, shall prevail against all the false and counterfeit
Religions in the World; as it does now excel them all in Truth, Purity and
Glory, so it then shall in Virtue, Power and Efficacy. Dagon shall fall before
the Ark of God, and the Idols be utterly abolished, Yea, tho they be made of
Silver or Gold, which men have made, each one for himself to worship, yet shall
they be cast to the moles, and to the bats, Isa. 2.20. The Inventions of Men
shall be made to give place to the Appointments and Institutions of Christ; and
the Doctrines of Devils shall disappear, and vanish before the Doctrine of the
Gospel. Babylon shall be made a Hissing and Confusion, but Jerusalem a
Rejoicing, and her People a Joy; this we do now rejoice in the Faith of and
patiently wait for the glorious and happy performance. Amen, Come Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, Sion was a Type or Figure of the Gospel Church, because of its
Firmness and Stability. It is said in Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord,
shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever. So shall
the Church; yea, tho the Hills do depart, and the Hills be removed, even Sion
it self at the end of the World, yet the Church shall abide, and when it
cease to be in any part Militant, it shall be throughout Triumphant. Let Men
and Devils combine, and unite their Strength, and do their worst, the Church
shall stand the shock, and outlive their Fury. They may Rage, Persecute and
Kill, they may Imprison, Inslave, and by their Cruelties force multitudes from
their own Countries, and native Soils; but when they have done, Christ will
show himself to be above them. They may weary themselves in the greatness of
their way, and sweat and fret in their Gears, but they shall never reach their
designed and desired End. They may say, Raze her, raze her, even to the
Foundation; but Jerusalem is a burdensome Stone, upon whomsoever it falls, it
will grind them to Powder. This spiritual Vine, which Gods own right hand has
planted, may be cut and wounded, and bleed sorely, but it shall not be to
Death; the old and excellent saying, is at this day as true as ever, Sanguis
Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, The Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church.
The more Martyrs there are, the more Believers there shall be. Paul's bonds did
turn to the furtherance of the Gospel; and so have done, and shall do, the
patient sufferings and joyful comfortable Deaths of others, in the Cause, and
for the sake of Christ, and his Truths and Worship. Let all the Enemies do
their best, and their worst too, God will have a People in the World to praise
his Name, to load his Altars, and to serve him in the beauty of Holiness. In
the worst of times, when Ahab had the Throne, and Idolatry was grown rank and
rampant, there were seven thousand in Israel that had not bowed the Knee to
Baal; so, tho at some times the number of faithful Professors may be much
diminished by miserable Persecution, and far more miserable Apostasy; yet there
shall be so many preserved, as shall be a seed to serve him, and accounted to
him for a Generation, and that seed being watered with the Divine blessing,
shall happily spring up in its season, and yield a mighty increase. There is a
sweet and precious Promise of eternal Truth, gone out of the mouth of him who
is the faithful Witness, upon which it is our duty, and richly worth our while
to live, and in the assurance thereof greatly to rejoice, Mat. 16.18. Upon this
Rock will I build my Church. Upon what Rock? not Peter himself, for tho he was
a good Man, and an excellent Apostle, yet he was a frail, fallible and dying
man; But either upon the Truth which was then confessed by him, or rather upon
my self, who am the eternal Rock, i.e. upon the Lord Jesus Christ himself; and
what he has so built, none shall be able to pull down; The gates, the Policy
and Power of Hell shall not prevail against it. So much may suffice to be
spoken to the first thing, viz. what is here meant by Sion, and why the
Gospel Church is called so.

2. Q. Our second Question is this, Why is Sion called Gods holy Hill? Or, the
Hill of Gods holiness?

A. To which I thus briefly Answer: Sion is so called, because of the Ark,
which was there when the sweet Singer of Israel composed this Psalm, which was
a visible Symbol of Gods special, spiritual and gracious Presence; and also
because of the Temple, which was built there afterward, and was an eminent Type
of Jesus Christ. In that the great God was pleased to place his Name; that
house he was pleased to fill with his Glory, there he did meet his People,
hearing their Prayers, and returning his Answers; from thence it was that he
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133.3. There is no
argument to be drawn from hence, that can evince to us the holiness of Places
now. As in every Nation, Persons that fear God and work righteousness, are
accepted of him; So is that Worship in all places, which is performed to him,
according to his Will, in Spirit and in Truth. Jerusalem is not now an holy
City, nor Canaan the holy Land. Christ our Altar does sanctify indeed those
Gifts which are by a gracious heart in Faith offered up to God upon and by him;
but the mere place does not do it, it contributes nothing toward it, it puts no
beauty upon it, no savor nor relish that will take with God. Fervent prayers,
cordial praises, all holy duties, have as free an access to God, as speedy
admission with him, as full a welcome, as sweet, gracious reception and
entertainment, which are offered and performed in this place, in a Kitchen, a
Closet, a Chamber, or a Field, as those that are performed in any place which
man is said to consecrate. If men would look more after heart-holiness, they
would not talk so much of, nor insist so much upon the holiness of places. The
convenience of them is considerable, but the holiness of them (in these new
Testament-times) is a fancy, Joh. 4.21. Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe
me, the hour eometh when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem worship the Father. Ceremonious Worship is antiquated, and
distinction of places taken away. Christ prayed in a Mountain, and taught in a
Ship, and by the Seaside; and says Paul, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men pray
every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. Look to this,
that your persons be right, that you have holy hands and hearts, and that your
Prayers be right without wrath and doubting, accompanied with Faith in God, and
Love to your Neighbor; so you may pray every where [(...)] in any place, so
that you do not do it with the Pharisee and Hypocrite to be seen of men.
Prayers, says, Estius, are at this day no less grateful to God in any Church,
or any other convenient and fitting place, than at the Temple of Jerusalem.

But then take this Expression, my holy Hill, mystically, for the Church of
God, and we shall find the name does most aptly agree to it; it is indeed the
Hill of Gods holiness, because the Church is made up of holy ones. Thus Paul
speaks in his Epistles, 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is in Corinth,
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints. Ephesians. 1.1.
To the Saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus. So
Col. 1.2. To the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ, which are at Coloss.
This holy Temple is not to be made of any rubbish; all persons are not to be
admitted to the communion and enjoyments there, tho they come sometimes reeling
out of an Alehouse, and at other times reeking out of a Whore house; No, no,
Saints only are proper matter here. The Invisible Church is made up altogether
of real Saints, such as are born of God, renewed in the spirit of their minds,
have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, not only in his common gifts, but
also in his special and saving Graces; who coming unto Christ as to a living
stone, chosen of God and precious, are as lively stones built up a spiritual
house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. The Visible Church is, and ought to be made up
of such as are at least visibly holy; men openly loose and flagitious, known to
be of profane hearts and lives, whose lewdness is in their skirts, and who
carry the Devils mark in their foreheads; men that live a plain downright
contradiction to the Religion they profess, ought not to be admitted into that
Congregation of the Lord. All the Visible Members are foederally holy, they are
entered into Covenant with God, the Seal of that Covenant is upon them, the Vows
of God are upon them, they have been set apart for God, solemnly devoted to his
Fear and Service, and they ought to be such as make an open profession of God,
and Christ, and Godliness, and such as make it their endeavor, so to live up
to that their Profession, that Religion may not be dishonored and reproached
by them, nor others scandalized and offended. And among these holy Ones it is
that Gods dwells. It is in the Golden Candelsticks that Christ's walks. It is
unto the Saints that he communicates himself, and manifests himself. It is in
heaven above that he dwells by the presence of his glory, and in the Church
below that he dwells by his gracious presence, and therefore it may be, and is
most fitly called his Holy Hill.

3. Quest. The third Question we have to speak unto is this, Who is that King
whom God has set upon his holy hill of Sion? who is he that God the Father
does in the Text call his King.

Ans. To this the Answer is ready: It is no other than his own dearly beloved
Son the Lord Jesus Christ, him has God exalted to be a Prince as well as a
Savior; he has not only laid the burden upon his shoulders, the iniquities of
us all, but he has laid also the Government upon his shoulder, and put the
Scepter into his hand, all power, Regal, Magistratical power both in heaven and
in earth is delivered and committed to him. As he is the eternal Son of the
eternal Father, the second Person in the sacred Trinity, God equal with God, he
has a natural Kingdom: As he is Mediator, as God-man, he has Regnum
Oeconomicum, a dispensatory Kingdom, unto which he was appointed and anointed;
this was the Fathers Donative, he made him Head of the Church, and head over
all things to the Church. So that his Authority and Royal power extends it self
unto all the world; for at his name, that is not to be understood of the
Syllabical name of Jesus, but his power, and to that every knee shall bow, even
the stiffest; all in heaven, all in earth, and all under earth, Angels, Men,
and Devils, all are subject to him, all to be ordered, employed, ruled,
overruled, restrained by him as he pleases. Some he has in his heart, and
others he has under his feet, and there he will keep them, let them kick and
winch never so much. He is King of kings, and Lord of lords; come, ye earthly
Monarchs, lay your Crowns at the feet of Jesus, it is his due, for he is
infinitely above you when in your greatest height; and it is your wisdom and
interest; those that honor him he will honor. Whether you do or no, it is all
one to him, as to his own interest, yet he shall be glorious, and as to his
work and design, that shall be carried on his own pace, and according to his
own mind and pleasure, and maugre all opposition, brought to perfection. But to
bow to him, and take part with him, is to be your own Friends, and to do your
selves a kindness. Those that will not be ruled by his Laws, are and shall be
overruled by his power. If they will not cheerfully submit to him, they shall
be fatally broken by him. That voice will sound one day, and it will be a
dreadful sound in the ears of the profane and Antichristian world, Bring hither
those mine enemies that would not have me to reign over them, and slay them
before my face.

The special Rule and Government which Christ has, is over the Church, it is
in Sion, there he is a King of Righteousness, there a Prince of Peace. He is
that token of love which God has sent to his people, that glorious Sun which
he has set in the Churches Orb: Isa. 9.6. To us a Son is born, to us a child
is given; that is, the Son of God as to his Deity, the Son of David as to his
Humanity. He is given to us, and born to us, to the spiritual Israel, to us who
are the spiritual seed of Abraham, and who tread in the steps of the faith of
Abraham, to us who are Jews inwardly, and have that Circumcision which is of
the heart in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but
of God, Romans 2.28, 29. And the Government is and shall be upon his shoulder;
though he be a child, yet he has strong shoulders (humeros and Oneri and
imperio aptos) apt and fit for both burden and rule; and since the iniquities
of us all have been laid upon him, the Rule and Government is laid there too.
He is made Head over all things, they being under his power; and he is made
Head to the Church, that being his Body, which he does by his care defend, by
his Ordinances feed, and by his Spirit quicken, animate, influence and act. Oh!
my Friends, let us seriously and frequently consider, how excellent and
glorious a body, how blessed and noble a Society the true Church is, which has
such an Head; and withal how holily, how exactly, and how exemplarily all of us
ought to demean our selves, who profess our selves the members thereof, that we
may not be spots and blemishes in the Body, nor shame and dishonor the Head.
What should be our care! how even our walking! how clear our light! In a word,
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, 2
Pet. 3.11. Well then, Christ is King; he that was once Crucified, is now
Crowned. He that was once nailed to the Cross, is now advanced to the Throne.
He is King in Sion, he is set up there immediately by God the Father, and as
such his work is to rule both in the Heart, and in the Church.

First, It is the work of Christ to rule in the heart, The Kingdom of God is
within you, Luke 17.22. (Non in urbibus habitat sed in animis hominum) it has
not its being in Cities, but in the minds and souls of men; it is not enough to
bow the knee to Christ, but the soul must stoop to him, that must be ordered
and commanded by him. It is excellent to see the Interest of Christ in a Nation
commander in chief, and all other contrary interests made to truckle under it;
but it nearly concerns every person in particular to look to this, that the
Throne of Christ be erected in his heart, and that the Law of Christ be written
there. Not only our Understandings are to be irradiated and enlightened by him,
but our wills are to be commanded by him. His will is to be voluntas regulans,
the ruling will, ours are to be the ruled wills. Our affections are to be
ordered by him, placed first upon his Father and himself, and after that let
out to such and such objects, in such an order, and in such a measure as is
agreeable unto him. It is he that says, my Son give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26.
This is not exclusive of other things, according to the manner of some; be but
so and so in your hearts, and then you may go where you will, and do what you
will; but it must be a concomitant with other things; whatever thou give me,
give me thy heart with it, that is unquestionably his due; and we give him
nothing to purpose, nothing that he will accept, unless we give him that; this
is a command too big for a creature, the whole world does not deserve the heart
of man, and therefore has no right to demand it; but such a requiry does
highly become him who bought man with a price, gave for him more than he is
worth; and having purchased the whole, it is fit he should possess it; having
redeemed it, it is just that he should rule and reign in it. He is said to
dwell in the heart, Ephesians. 3.17. and he must dwell there not as an underling, but
as a King. Our consciences also are subject to him, he is the Lord of the
Conscience, and his Laws do immediately bind the Conscience.

Secondly, It is the right and work of Christ to rule in the Church, to give
Laws to it, to appoint Officers in it, and to order as to all matters of
Worship; and then is the Church as it should be, when it is governed by Christ's
Officers, and according to Christ's Laws. Moses was but a servant, and so have
all Church Officers been, and still are Pastors to the Church, Rulers in and of
the Church, but servants to Christ. Our work is Ministry; though let the world
know, it is an honorable Ministry, and we do magnify our Office; and as for
them that cast contempt upon us, let them see how they will answer for it to
him who is our Master and their Judge. But Christ is the Son in his own house,
i. e. He is the Lord of it, and all in it is to be ordered according to his
will; things ought not to be so or so, because this or that man, this or that
party will have it so, but all as Christ will have it, and the great business
is to inquire what is the good, acceptable and perfect will of our God and
Savior; for Isa. 9.6. He sits upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom,
to order and establish it with judgment and justice; which no men have done
that have gone about to order and establish without him; no, no, as we have
seen to our sorrow and smart, and so have our Fathers before us, they have
acted without judgment, and with great injustice. He is the Lord of the
Vineyard, out of which every plant ought to be plucked, which he has not
planted. He is the Lord of all, both persons and things; the Lord of Persons,
he was David's Lord, and by consequence the Lord of David's seed; as such Thomas
owned him when he cried out, My Lord, and my God. And he is the Lord of Things,
so of the Sabbath, Mark 2.28. The Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath. Understand
it not of every Son of man; as if a man may choose what day he will make his
Sabbath, or whether he will keep one or no, or do what he please upon the
Christian Sabbath; but understand it of that Son of man, who is the Son of God
as well as the Son of man, the ever blessed Jesus, he is the Lord of the
Sabbath, he has power to order and moderate concerning it; to relax as to the
severity, and abate the strictness of the Legal observation, to alter and
change it as to the time, from the last day of the week to the first, which
learned men conclude he did in the space of those forty days which he continued
upon earth conversing with his Apostles and Disciples between his Resurrection
out of the Grave, and his Ascension into Heaven, Speaking to them of those
things which pertain to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1.3. viz. the Church both
Militant and Triumphant, the state and affairs thereof. He likewise is the Lord
of Ordinances; he has power to appoint them, and to continue them as long as
he pleases, and to remove and abrogate them when he will. He gave out the
Ceremonial Law unto Moses, and by Moses to his ancient people the Jews upon
Mount Sinai, and it was taken away by him, Col. 2.14. He blotted out the
handwriting of Ordinances which was against us. The question is, what was that
handwriting? I answer, the Moral Law: But how? not as it was a Law binding us
to duty to God, our selves, and our neighbors; not as it is a rule of life,
for so it is irreversible, it stands still in force, and lays upon us an
eternal obligation; but as it was a Covenant of Works, and as it did so oblige
us to perfect and complete obedience, as withal to oblige us to punishment, and
damn us to Hell for the least neglect and disobedience, nay for the least
failure and defect in our obedience. I answer again, this handwriting was the
Ceremonial Law, wherein there was a public confession and acknowledgment of
sin, and of the sinners obligation to punishment, and deserving of death and
everlasting misery; and upon that account, or so far, it was against us; now
this Christ blotted out by his Doctrine, and after that he nailed it to his
Cross by his death, and at it, i.e. he finished it, he utterly abolished it. He
took it quite away, out of the way of our duty, we are no more to observe it;
and out of the way of our happiness, so that it cannot prejudice nor obstruct
that; as it cannot do us any good, so it shall not do us any hurt; as it cannot
purge and cleanse us from sin, so it shall not charge us with it; and this he
did as the Lord of Ordinances, and instead of that he has been graciously
pleased to introduce and set up another worship, less onerous and painful, more
easy and spiritual, and therefore more glorious, for which we have cause to
admire his goodness, and to bless his name; and this is his right to do, and
his alone; those that bring in worships and modes of worship besides his, do
usurp a power that belongs not to them. Men have no power to institute, because
they have no power to sanctify, bless and prosper any of their Institutions;
that is in the alone power of Christ as he is Lord and Head of the Church.
Moses the man of God did put up his sweet and excellent petition, which we
ought heartily to repeat, Psalm. 90.17. Let the beauty of the Lord our God be
upon us. Oh that it may be so: but when is it so? when, as I hinted briefly
before, the Church is constituted according to the mind of Christ; when all its
Offices and Officers are appointed by Christ, when all Ordinances in it are
administered according to the Law of Christ; when the lives and conversations of
Professors are ordered according to the Rule of Christ. It is not the beauty
and grandeur of the world which does become the Courts of Earthly Princes, it
is not the beauty of human inventions, how fine and pretty soever it may seem,
but the beauty of the Lord; but of this we have spoken before.

Q. 4. Our fourth Question is this, What God does mean when he says, He has
set his King upon his holy hill of Sion? Or what may be the import of that word
setting?

Answ. I answer, the word in the Original (...) signifies to anoint, and so
you have it rendered in the Margent of your Bibles. I have anointed my King,
perfudi, I have poured out my holy Oil upon him; it does import a plentiful
effusion, an abundant pouring out of the Oil upon him. The very same word is
used in Isa. 29.10. where it is translated, poured out. The Lord has poured
out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes; the prophets,
and your rulers, the seers has he covered; they are drowned in sleep, they are
in a dead sleep. He has poured out such a profound and deep sleep, that they
are covered with it; this word is metaphorically used to cover, yea so to cover
a thing all over as to hide it from the eye, and prevent any bodies seeing it;
and as our learned Critics observe, it is most commonly applied in the
Scripture to the pouring out of the drink offering upon the sacrifice, which
drencht it, and ran over it, Jerem. 32.39. They have offered burnt offerings
unto Baal, and poured out drink offerings unto other gods, to provoke me to
anger. And it is also applied to, and made use of, for the covering of Sin, in
a way of pardoning Mercy and Grace, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered; so covered, as that it is
quite hid, as a Body that is buried in the Grave out of sight, or as a weight
that is cast into the bottom of the Sea, from whence it shall never be fetched
up again; it shall be remembered, and mentioned no more to a Person's
Condemnation and eternal Reproach. Thus God makes good his gracious Promise of
pardoning abundantly. When once he justifies the Sinner upon his Repentance
and Faith, he wholly covers his Sin, tho not from the Eye of his Omniscience,
yet from the Eye of his revenging Justice.

This anointing in the Text, does import God the Father's ordaining,
constituting and appointing of Christ for King upon his holy Hill of Sion; or
as it is in your Translation, the Fathers setting of him up, placing him in the
Throne; Kings and Priests were by the Divine Order to be anointed, as those
know, that know the Scripture. And so were Prophets, 1 Kings 19.16. Iehu the
son of Nimshi shall thou anoint to be king over Israel, and Elisha the son of
Shaphat of Abel-Meholah shall thou anoint to be Prophet in thy room. All these
Offices meet together in Christ, which they never did in any other; David was a
King and a Prophet, but not a Priest. Samuel was a Prophet and Priest, but not
a King. Christ is all, the Prophet, Priest and King of his Church, he has a
fullness of Offices, and so has been anointed, as you find in Isa. 61.1. The
Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach
good tidings to the meek, that he does as a Prophet; he has sent me to bind up
the brokenhearted, that he does as a Priest; and to proclaim Liberty to the
Captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, this he does as
a King. And as he has the greatest fullness of Office, so he has the greatest
fullness of the Unction. But let us speak a little more particularly. This
plentiful anointing of our Lord Jesus Christ (from whence he has his Names,
the Messiah, and the Christ) does hold out to us these two things.

1. His being admirably, yea, thoroughly accomplished for the exercise of Royal
Authority and Power. 2. His Investiture, and being by the Father clothed with
it. Of both, which I shall say something, tho far short of the weight and worth
of the Subject.
1. This anointing of Christ does signify to us, his being perfectly fitted and
accomplished for the exercise of Regal Authority and Power, for the Office and
Work of a King. There is an excellent Spirit upon him; many have been in high
Places and of low spirits; some have had a spirit of Cowardice, and others a
spirit of Cruelty; a sanguinary spirit, as well as a Purple-robe. Antiochus,
nicknamed Epiphanes, was therefore by the Holy Ghost, called a vile Person,
because he was a Prince of a vile base spirit; but there is upon Christ a most
excellent and glorious Spirit; it is no other than the Spirit of the Lord God.
He did at his Baptism descend upon him in the likeness of a Dove, not of an
Hawk or Harpy, a Bird of Prey; but a Dove, Innocent, Meek and Loving; and this
Spirit does rest upon him, has an eternal abode in him; yea, and with this
Spirit Christ is filled with all the gifts of this Spirit, and with all his
Graces. You read therefore of the unsearchable riches of Christ, such as have
no bottom. He has enough for himself, and for all those that are united to
him, and designed by the Father for him; enough for thee, O poor disconsolate
Soul, who think thou have none at all. You read likewise of an all-fulness
which it has pleased the Father should dwell in him: So that, O Saint,
whenever thou labourest under the most pressing and pinching Wants, thou
may know whither to go for a full supply. That is an excellent passage to
this purpose, which you have in Psalm. 47.5. Thou love righteousness, and
hate wickedness, therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with oil of
gladness above thy fellows. If you ask who those be that are here called his
Fellows? Some say, they are Kings and Priests; or rather, if you please,
understand it of the Saints, true Believers, all of them, one and other; all
those who have received an Unction from the holy one, who have been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost in his sanctifying Influences and Operations. These
come to be Christ's fellows through his most gracious Condescension, for he by
assuming their Nature into unity with his Person, stooped so low as to become
one of them, Emanuel, God with us. He graciously descended to the state of
their Mortality and Meanness, that they through him might be advanced to a
state of Immortality and Glory. If it be asked what is that oil of gladness
with which he is anointed? The answer is ready, It is no other than the Divine
Spirit, the great and effectual Comforter, who does cheer, refresh, revive, and
make glad the Heart of those in whom he dwells. And of this, all the Saints of
God are made the blessed Partakers, 1 John 2.20. Ye have an Unction from the
holy-one, not only the gifts of the Spirit, Wisdom and Grace, but the Spirit
himself, which is, if I may use the Expression, diffused through the whole
mystical Body; so that every real living Member has a share, Romans 8.9. If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; he does not belong to
Christ, he is none of his genuine Disciple.

But now, tho there be a joint Participation, the same Spirit is in Christ and
Believers, the same Soul in the Head and Members; Yet there is a difference as
to the Measure and Degree thereof. All the holy Oil was poured out upon the
head of Aaron, but only some part of it reached down to the Skirts of his
Garments. All the Saints have the Spirit, something of his Light and Life, of
his Grace and Influence, but Christ has unspeakably more. He is seated above
them, and therefore anointed above them. He has a greater fullness of Office
than any of them, and therefore a greater fullness of the Spirit. He receives
the Spirit not only for himself, but for all and every one of them. God the
Father in pouring of it out upon him, had an Eye and respect to all the Cases,
Employments, Necessities and Wants of all his chosen and beloved Ones, and
furnished Christ accordingly. We find in one place, that when he ascended on
high, he received Gifts for Men; in another, we read that he gave Gifts to Men.
He received for this end, that he might give. His Work is to communicate, and
to influence his People. He is to be an Head, not only for Eminence, but
likewise for Influence; and as this is his Work, so blessed be his Name, it is
his Delight. Never did tender Mother take more pleasure in giving her Breast to
her Child, than Christ does take in his Communications to his People. Upon
these accounts, as it was fit and necessary that he should be, so he is most
richly stored. He has not the Spirit in measure; so you find, Joh. 3.34. He
whom God has sent, speaks the word of God, for God gives not the Spirit by
measure to him; i. e. He whom God has sent out of Heaven to Earth, he whom God
has sent out of his own Bosom, he speaks the Word of God, that and nothing
else; he speaks it in another manner than ever any did; for he had not the
Spirit given him by measure; all men else that have received this Spirit, have
it in measure only, so much every one and no more. Tho we may know to our
comfort, that measure is meted out with a most wise, judicious, and gracious
Hand, in a just and full Proportion to that place which every one holds in the
Body, and to that Work and Service which every one has to do in the World; but
the Spirit was given to Christ without measure. God the Father did not stand
upon measuring it out to him; no, no, he poured it out abundantly, he gave as
much to him, as his humane Nature was capable of receiving; so that he has not
only enough for himself, for the acting of his own part, and the bearing his
own burden; but enough too for all his People, in all Places and Ages of the
World. He has Wisdom enough to teach them all that is needful for them to
know, and to direct, and lead them into all those ways in which they ought to
walk. He has Grace enough to sanctify them, and to fit them for a Communion
with his Father and himself, while they are upon Earth, and to make them
completely holy, and so meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light. He has Power enough to support them under all their Burdens, so that
they shall break neither their Backs nor their Hearts, but they shall bear them
patiently, and carry themselves under them becomingly. Power enough to enable
them for all their Duties, so that they shall perform them to Acceptance and
Praise. Power enough to secure them in all their Temptations, and to carry them
through them, and to make them more than Conquerors over them, and so to carry
them from sore Conflicts to glorious Triumphs. Power enough to Protect and
Defend them from all their Enemies, so that they shall give them no more
trouble than will tend to the Honor of God, to the advantage of their Cause,
and to their own eternal Good. Power enough to perform all things for them, and
to save to the utmost all those that come unto God by him. In a word, he has
in him all the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily: So that, since the
Government is laid upon his Shoulders, there is a full and complete suitablenss,
or parity between the Shoulder and the Government. The Government is fit for
such a Shoulder, and the Shoulder is fit for such a Government.

Secondly, This Anointing or setting up of Christ, does signify God the
Fathers designation and appointment of him for this Office; the Commissionating
and Authorizing of him. For what he does in this donative Kingdom, he does by
virtue of his Fathers Commission and Authority derived from him. It is the
Father that places him as King upon the Throne, and puts the Royal Scepter
into his Hand, Ephesians. 1.22. and has put all things under his Feet, and gave
him to be Head over all things to the Church. He is given to be Head: By whom
is he so given? If you look back into the 17 th verse, you will find, it is by
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory. That God who is
infinitely Glorious, and the Author of all Glory, the Fountain of Honor has
put this Honor upon Christ, and given him to be Head; so an Head, and in such
a manner as there is none other beside him; Mat. 28. All Power is given to him
both in Heaven and in Earth. Authoritas disponendi omnia in Ecclesia and circa
Ecclesiam: An Authority of ordering and disposing all things in and about the
Church. This All Power is given unto him singly and solely. He has indeed his
Delegates and Officers under him; but he is Supreme; He only Plenipotentiary.
The Fullness of Power is in his hand, and in his alone: Therefore it is said,
Rev. 3.7. That He has the Key of David, He opens and no Man shuts, He shuts
and no Man opens i. e. He has supreme and absolute Power in the Church, both
Militant upon Earth and Triumphant in Heaven; so that He receives and rejects,
admits and excludes whom he pleases: One Ieanes, a late Learned and Reverend
Writer, observes the Fullness of Christ's Office is signified by the Power of the
Keys. The Keys of an House, Town or City, are the Badges of Power and
Authority: And therefore the yielding up of them, is a sign or token of
delivering up all to the Conqueror. In Garrisons the Keys are every night
deposited with the Governors of them. The Steward of an House has the Keys of
it committed to him. And, as Learned Deodate says, Christ's having the Key of
David, does signify his being the Sovereign Lord and Governor of the Church;
whose Will is to be its standing Law, and whose Commands and Orders are to be
Universally observed and obeyed; not subject to any Contradiction, Opposition,
or Dispute. Those Keys which were given in common to Peter and the rest of the
Apostles, were no more than the Keys of Ministry. The Key of Royal
Magistratical Power was put into the hand of Christ; and there it does rest,
and shall immovably remain, whoever they be that would wrest it out of his
Hand. Isa. 9.7. Of the increase of his Government and of Peace there shall be
no end; upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to
stablish it with Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever. The
Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

I now proceed to the last Question, which will be this:

Quest. 5. What is the import of that Particle in the Text, Yet? Yet have I set
my King upon my Hill of Sion. What may we gather from thence? I answer, Though
it be but a very little word, it is full of Matter, of Weight and Sweetness:
And I shall give up to you my Thoughts concerning it, briefly in these four
following Particulars.

First, It does hold out to us, that singular Contentment and Delight which God
the Father takes in the thing that he has done, the disposal which he has
made. He is most highly pleased with the Choice that he has made of his Son,
and with that superlative Honor that he has put upon him. His Soul is at
rest; things are now as God would have them. Let Men think and say what they
will; let them fret and murmur as much and as long as they will, yet have I set
him up, yet I have given him a Name above every Name, that at his Name every
Knee shall bow, be it never so proud and stiff. I have done it, and I am fully
satisfied. Time was, when it pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isa. 53.10. and to
put him to grief. Though he did infinitely love the Person of Christ, yet he
took pleasure in his Sorrows and Agonies; the shedding of his Blood was a
delightful Spectacle to him, as it was the repairing of his own injured Honor,
and the price of his Peoples Redemption. When he made his Soul an Offering for
Sin, it was a Sacrifice of a sweet Savor: And now he is as much pleased in his
having exalted him. You know what is said with reference to his Sacerdotal
Office, Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest
for ever, after the order of Melchisedek. He will never retract that. He has
resolved and determined it with an immutable Will. And we may say the same as
to his Regal Office, The Lord has sworn, and will not repent; Christ is and
shall be a King for ever: No, no, God does not repent of any thing that he has
done for Christ; He does not repent of the Glory to which he has advanced him,
nor of the Power with which he has invested him: And the truth is, He has no
cause to repent; and which is more, He never shall. He was fully and eternally
sure of that. Such a Power could be no where better disposed of, no where so
well as it is. The Royal Robe sits neatly upon the back of Christ; the Crown
becomes his Head. Go forth, O ye Sons and Daughters of Jerusalem! and behold
King Jesus with the Crown, wherewith his Father crowned him in the day of his
Inauguration, and in the day of the gladness of his Heart. It is a most lovely
Sight; He a most glorious Object: The Father himself counts him so, and loves
to look upon him. As it did greatly please Christ to obey his Father, and to
honor Him; the doing of the Fathers Will was his Meat and Drink; He was
straightened till it was accomplished: So it does as greatly please the Father to
honor Christ. Therefore He says, Yet have I set my King, etc. I rejoice in
the Thoughts of it, in a Reflection upon it; were it to do again I would do it.
Indeed, once he said concerning Saul, 1 Samuel 15.11. It repents me that I have
set up Saul to be King, for he is turned back from following me, and has not
performed my Commandments. But it shall never be said concerning the Lord
Jesus, that it repents God that he has made him King. Such a Thought will
never be in the Mind of God.

Secondly, This Yet does sweetly signify Gods settled and unalterable
Resolution in the case. This is so done, as that it shall never be undone. As
when Pilate had given order for that Inscription to be upon the Cross of
Christ, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews, it gave great offense to his
Enemies, they knew not how to brook it; the chief Priests being incensed, said
unto him, Write not, The King of the Jews, John 19.21. They cared not though he
had called him all to naught; such a Title they could by no means away with:
But He answered them thus, What I have written, I have written: The thing is
done, therefore it is to no purpose for you to say any more: So, says God, I
have set my Son up for King; and does any one think I will pull him down again?
No, far be it from me. What I have done, I have done. So Isaac said concerning
his Son Jacob, Genesis 27.33. So God has made Christ King, and he shall continue
so without being deposed: Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. His Kingdom
cannot be shaken, nor his Throne overturned; and indeed it is pity it should,
since the same verse tells us, That the Scepter of his Kingdom is a right
Scepter. The Counsels of God shall stand all of them, and the Thoughts of his
Heart to all Generations. There is no Act of his Will, but there is Counsel in
it; it is managed with infinite Wisdom: And therefore it shall continue,
because God sees none, not the least cause to revoke it. Job 23.13. He is in
one mind, and who can turn him? None can prevail with him to alter his Mind,
either by Power, or by Persuasion and Entreaty, or by Argument and Reason. And
as it is thus with God with reference to other things, so to this in
particular; and indeed, as there is not any Shadow of turning in God as to
this, so there is not any Shadow of Reason why there should. You may see that
which Samuel said to Saul, 1 Samuel 13.14. Thy Kingdom shall not continue, the
Lord has sought him a Man after his own Heart: He sought him and he found him*
That was spoken of David the Type; but it may be much more said so concerning
the Lord Jesus Christ, that he is a Man after the Heart of God. He is perfectly
such an One as God would have him. Take him as to the Qualification of his
Person, there is no defect in him, no fault, nothing amiss; He is all and only
what he should be. And take him as to his Government and managing of Affairs,
He is according to the Heart of God; for the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand, Isa. 53.10. He shall deal prudently and prosperously: And as He is
according to the Heart of God, so according to the Heart of his People, whom he
will rule with love, and save to the utmost.

Thirdly, This Yet does plainly speak the indignation of God the Father,
against all the Enemies of Christ. It is, as one says, Signum irae accensae; a
sign of Wrath kindled and burning in the Breast of God, which will certainly
have its vent, and break forth in fury, to their destruction: As you find it in
the verse preceding the Text; He shall speak unto them in his Wrath, and vex
them in his sore displeasure, When he shall speak to them, He will vex them.
His Words will be Swords and Daggers, that shall pierce and wound them to the
Heart. But what is that which He will speak? That which you have in the Text;
Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. How now? What is to do here?
What is the matter with this mad besotted and unchristian World? What mean they
by their Raging, Plotting and Combining? Is not my Will sufficiently declared?
Have not I made my Son Ruler over them, and will they not reverence my Son?
Have not I anointed him with mine Holy Oil, and will they spit in his Face?
Have not I given forth my command to all the Angels to worship him, Heb. 1.6.
and will these sorry contemptible Worms be wriggling and moving Disturbances?
Have not I put all things in subjection under his Feet; and will they
strengthen themselves against him, and run upon him, even upon his Neck, and
the thick Bosses of his Buckler? What! dare you, notwithstanding that which I
have done, dare you appear in desperate Opposition to him, and to rise up in a
flat and open Rebellion against him? Dare you for all this meet and consult,
conspire and contrive for the breaking of his Bands asunder, and the casting
away his Cords from you? Have you so much forgotten me? And do you so much
overvalue your selves, as to dare to run counter to my eternal Counsels, and to
act in such a way of contradiction to my declared will? Are not these mad Men
quite out of their Wits, and far more fit for Bedlams than for Thrones and
Tribunals, that do so wickedly and foolishly attempt to put him down, and wrest
the Scepter out of his Hand; and in his stead to advance the Man of Sin, the
Son of Perdition, when yet they have had notice given them by my Word, what I
have done, and how I have Authorized him, and that it is by me that he Reigns?
This does highly provoke and incense God; this makes the Fury to come up into
his Face: And therefore let all the Enemies of Christ know, they had better
desist from this their vain undertaking; they had better mind their own
Business, and study how to secure and provide for their own Peace, and let
Christ alone in the enjoyment of what is given him for an Inheritance and
Possession. God the Father takes the part of Christ, and will plead his Cause,
as one that is in Honor and Interest engaged so to do; for this is past all
question, those Persons that are so eagerly set for the unkinging of Christ,
would, if it were in their power, ungod the Father too: And since he sides with
Christ, he will be too hard for all his Adversaries, and break their Hearts,
and Necks and Arms, whose design it is to break his Bands. This brings me to
the last thing.

Fourthly, This Yet, speaks the Vanity and Unsuccessfulness of all the Attempts
which the Enemies of the Lord Jesus make against him, and Gods looking with
holy Scorn and highest Contempt upon all the grand and petty Antichrists in the
World. Yonder is a huge multitude of them, says God, Gebal, Ammon, Amalek, and
the Inhabitants of Mount Seir, with many more, however divided among
themselves, yet in a close and strict Confederacy against my Son; and though I
have, without any Merit or Desert of theirs, out of my mere bounty, given them
Riches and Honor, Pleasure and Power; all this avails them nothing, so long as
they see Him sitting in Sion. This is their Language, We will not have this Man
Reign over us. No, Barabbas rather than Jesus; a Lust rather than Christ. God
sees it, and he smiles at it. He that sits in the Heavens laughs, the Lord will
have them in derision: And then salva res est, there is no danger. As long as
God laughs, Matters are well, the Virgin-Daughter of Sion may shake her Head at
them, and laugh them to scorn. Poor Creatures, they are busy as Bees; but what
is it they would do if they could? What is that great thing which they are so
earnestly bent upon? What a most cursed design, in which Beelzebub and all his
Crew, do most heartily join with them? It is to dethrone Christ, and to raze
the Foundations of the glorious City of God, and to blot out from under Heaven
the Name and Memorial of Jerusalem. But God knows, it is a vain endeavor; Actum
est. The Matter is not only determined, but effected. I have set up my King:
And what, do they set themselves against him? They kick against the Pricks,
they will wound them; they dash against a Rock that will break them in pieces;
they had as good, and may with as much hope to speed, heap Pelion upon Ossa,
and wage War with Heaven; go about to pluck the Sun out of the Firmament, and
debase it into a Gloworm: They might with as much reason attempt to stem the
Tide, and to chain the Ocean. It is as easy for these proud, but silly
Projectors, to unhinge the whole Frame of Nature: For it is impossible (...), a
thing that can never be done. I have established his Throne in Righteousness
and in Judgment; and therefore it is not in the power of Earth and Hell, of Men
and Devils, to pull him down. Psalm 97.8, 9. Zion heard, and was glad, and the
Daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy Judgments, O Lord. For thou, Lord,
art high above all the Earth. Thou art exalted far above all Gods. So much may
suffice for the opening of the things considerable in the Text, and for the
Doctrinal part. I now come to the Applicatory; which will be composed of
Instruction, Exhortation and Consolation.

Use 1. First, By way of Instruction. This most excellent and precious Truth
may teach us to admire, and bless, and glorify God the Father: Yea, let his
high Praises be in our Hearts and Mouths, for his putting this Honor upon
Christ, and thus exalting with his own Hand him whom Man despised, and whom the
Nations abhorred. That thus to do is our unquestionable Duty, does evidently
appear by that which the Apostle says, 2 Phil. 8.9, 10, 11. Being found in
fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even
the death of the Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given
him a Name which is above every name: That at the name of Jesus every Knee
should bow, both of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the
Earth; and that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
Glory of God the Father. This is that which we Christians ought to confess,
which we must in the worst of Times, be free, and forward, and bold, in the
confession and public owning of, That that Jesus Christ, who while
Tabernacling among us, was by the blind and wicked Jews counted no more than a
Man, the Son of a Carpenter; yea, the worst of Men, the vilest of Sinners, a
mere Cheat and Impostor, a Blasphemer, that in his glorious Operations had
assistance from the Prince of Devils; He, even He is Lord; non cum limitatione
quadam; not with limitation; as other Lords are, who are but Men and no more;
and may be weak Men, and unrighteous Men, and cruel and unreasonable Men, and
so it is necessary they should be directed and bounded by Laws; but Jesus is
Lord absolute: He is unlimited, unbounded; He has all Power; He is Lord over
all the World, and over all Creatures, and does whatsoever He pleases; so to
do is his Royal Prerogative, his unquestionable Right. Now as he is God-man,
Head over all things to the Church, King of Sion and of Saints; He is Gods
King, made so by God the Father; and this is to be owned and confessed to the
Glory of God: And we are obliged to seek his Glory; for He has sought our
Good. We are beholden to the Father for our present Comforts and Hopes, and for
our future Salvation and Happiness, as well as to the Son: Yea, there was a
concurrence and contribution made to it by all the sacred Persons of the
glorious Trinity. But to the Matter before us: As God the Father has thus
honored Christ, so must we honor the Father for doing so; and there is great
reason for it. Take these two:

First, That which we mentioned even now, this advancement of Christ was the
Fathers Act. It was He that exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior; He that
gave him this excellent and super-eminent Name. It was He that set him up for
King, and delivered into his Hand all Power both in Heaven and in Earth. It was
He that put all things under his Feet, and gave him the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession. All is of
the Father. Heb. 5.5. Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest:
And by parity of Reason, we may say, He glorified not himself to be made a
King; but He that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee: So again in Psalm 118.22, 23. The Stone which the Builders refused, is
become the head Stone of the corner. This is the Lords doing; it is mavelous
in our Eyes. Well may it be so, for it deserves to be so; and may well command
our highest Admirings, and most grateful Returns. But besides this, consider,

Secondly, In this Honor and Power, which have been thus in infinite Wisdom
conferred upon the Lord Jesus Christ by God the Father, He had a special and
most gracious Respect unto Us and our Good. It was for our sakes as well as for
his. As herein the Father designed and aimed at the Rewarding of his Son for
all the hard things he had suffered, and the unmatchable Service he had done;
so the security, welfare, and happiness of those whom he had given to him:
Therefore he is made Head over all things to the Church. He is Head over all,
over the Devil and his Instruments, over Hell and Rome, over the worst and
greatest of Men; He is higher than the highest of them; in those things in
which they deal proudly, He is above them; and He is so to the Church, i.e. to
the benefit, advantage and comfort of the Church. All this Power is given to
him, that he might rule his Church, and defend Her, and preserve Her until She
be perfected, and a Bride made ready for Her Husband. It was a great comfort to
that Proto-martyr Stephen, in the midst of his Enemies and in the presence of
the Council; that when he looked up steadfastly unto Heaven, he had not only a
sight of the Glory of God, but likewise of Jesus Christ in his Exaltation,
standing on the right Hand of God; and surely it may be a comfort to us, and
all that love him, that he is not now a Priest upon the Cross, but a Priest
upon his Throne; that he is not now under the Feet of his Enemies, but at the
right Hand of his Father. Let us therefore think and speak of it to the Glory
of God the Father.

Use 2. We now come to the second Use, which will be of Exhortation. Is Christ
anointed, constituted, and set up by God the Father, King upon his holy Hill of
Sion? Then I would persuade you, and Oh that I might prevail with you, for two
things which most certainly will be your Wisdom, Interest and Honor, in the
sight of God, Angels, and all good Men: The one is, that you would bow to this
blessed King; the other is, that you would appear and act for Him.

Exh. 1. First, Be willing to bow your Necks to the Yoke of Christ, and to
submit your selves to his Government. Receive him, and own him as your King:
Which you may do without any breach of Loyalty, or violation of that Duty which
you owe to your King upon Earth. For Christ and Caesar may very well stand
together; nay, they stand best together. Our Jesus is no Jacob, no Supplanter,
no Enemy to the Crowned Heads; they may all have him for their Friend if they
will: And he can furnish them with all that which is necessary for the
directing of their Scepters, and the supporting of their Thrones; Prove. 8.14.
Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom. I am Understanding. I have Strength. And he
is ready to Communicate to them; v. 15, 16. By me Kings Reign, and Princes
decree Justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the
Earth. And Oh! how amiable a thing is it for Kings to stand up for Christ, and
Christ to stand at the right Hand of Kings? It was an excellent Speech of our
present Sovereign, to some Ministers waiting upon him with their humble and
grateful Address: Labor by your Preaching to make good Christians, for then I
am sure they will be good Subjects. It was a Saying becoming so great a Prince,
and worthy to be written in Letters of Gold. If you would be what I would have,
you should be the best Subjects in the World; and your own Carriages should
speak so loud for you, as to silence the Mouths of your Adversaries, and drown
the Voice of their base Calumnies and Reproaches. And that you may be so, my
present work is to beseech you to be good Christians. This is that Advice,
which in this Psalm is given to Kings and Judges; and sure I am, it will not be
misplaced upon Subjects of all sorts: Be wise, Be instructed, Serve the Lord
with fear, Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way. Kiss him
with a Kiss of Love, of highest and dearest love; give him your Hearts, and
inthrone him there. Kiss him too with a Kiss of Homage and dutiful Subjection.
And though other Lords have had dominion over you, this and that base Lust, now
by him only do you make mention of his Name, Isa. 26.13. Of his Name, as of one
whose Right it is to rule over you, and to give Law to you. If ever you desire
to be saved by him, be willing to be governed and commanded by him. There are
two very great Encouragements for you so to do, which I shall lay before you,
and make use of as Motives for the pressing of this Exhortation upon you. I
desire you seriously to consider them, and let them sink into your Hearts.

First, This Jesus, whom God has made King of Sion, is a King of
Righteousness. He will rule in Righteousness. The Scepter of his Kingdom is a
right Scepter. His Law is holy, and his Commandment holy, just and good. And
though he has his Yoke and Burden, yet that Yoke is easy, and that Burden
light. And though as you read, Psalm. 97.2. many times Clouds and Darkness are
round about him, yet Righteousness and Judgment are always the Habitation of
his Throne. His darkest Providence have an Exactness and Beauty in them. And
when his way is in the Sea, it is in the Sanctuary: And what we cannot
understand, we have reason to justify and admire. And we may be sure of this,
that he will do all his faithful Subjects right. Though they do often and often
meet with a great deal of wrong in the World, from a company of wicked,
malicious and unreasonable Men; the Sheep of his Fold are worried, and have
both their Fleece and their Flesh rent, and miserably torn by ravenous and
insatiable Wolves, and He for a while sits and looks on as one unconcerned, yet
in due time He will awake to Judgment, and thoroughly plead all their Causes,
and right all their Wrongs, and then let the proudest of their Enemies look to
themselves.

And let me add that which is more than this, a great deal more. Christ is so a
King of Righteousness, as that he has Righteousness enough for all his
Subjects, not only so as to do them right, but also to make them righteous.
They indeed have a great deal of Sin in them, but He has a great deal of
Righteousness in him. They have in them Sin enough to damn them, but He has in
him Righteousness enough to justify them. They have in them Spots, Deformities
enough to render them odious and loathsome to God, He has in him Comeliness
enough to make their Beauty perfect: So that, though Sin has reigned unto
Death, yet now, Grace does by Jesus Christ our Lord, reign through
Righteousness unto everlasting Life, Romans 5.21. So that Grace has got the
Victory, and Triumphs over Sin. When he was upon Earth, He did as a Priest
offer up himself a Sacrifice to Justice; and by that one Offering, satisfied
for their Offenses, and perfected for ever them that are Sanctified; and now as
a King, He does acquit, and discharge, and save them.

It is said, Ier. 23.6. God there speaking of the righteous Branch that he
would raise unto David, a King that should reign and prosper; This is his Name,
whereby he shall be called, Jehovah Tsidkenu, Iehova our Righteousness. And how
is it possible that any Person should want sufficient complete Righteousness,
who has Jehovah himself to be his Righteousness? In him all Fullness does
dwell. It has pleased the Father that it should do so. This is good News for
poor Creatures that have been made sensible how Matters stand with them. There
is a miserable Want and Emptiness in them, in whose Flesh there dwells
nothing that is good; but there is an All-fullness in Christ. And if there be
an All-fullness in Him, then of Righteousness, as well as of Wisdom, and Power,
and Grace, and Love. He has as much Righteousness, as the guilty undone ruined
Creature does need or can desire. There are in him unsearchable Riches of
Righteousness, an inexhaustible Treasure of it; and it dwells in him; it is
inseparable from him. There was in him not only Righteousness enough for those
who lived in former Ages, but there is enough now, as much for us who live in
the present Age: And so there will be for those that shall live hereafter to
the end of the World. The Fullness which is in Christ, is an abounding and an
abiding Fullness. Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and
for ever.

Secondly, As the Lord Jesus is the King of Righteousness, so He is the Prince
of Peace. He is called the Peace; This Man shall be the Peace. He made Peace by
the Blood of his Cross; and if you have in sincerity given your selves up to
him, and are become his Subjects indeed, then you shall be not only washed with
his Blood, and justified by his Righteousness, but likewise interested in, and
blessed with his Peace. God is now reconciled; Fury is not in him; you need not
run from him as an Enemy, but approach to him and converse with him as a
Father. For He himself is at peace with you, and so are all his Attributes. How
terrible an Aspect soever some of them have upon christless, graceless,
obstinate and impenitent Sinners, they all look sweetly and smilingly upon you.
As his Patience does spare you, though you have deserved to be cut off; and his
Bounty does supply you, though you are less than the least of Mercies, and at
his Hand did never merit a crum of Bread; and his Bowels do vern over you in
your Falls as well as in your Sorrows; and his Mercy passes and seals your
Pardon, when you repent and turn from your evil Ways: So his Holiness, which
stands at an infinite and eternal distance from Sin, is reconciled to you.
Therefore is that command, Psalm. 97.12. Rejoice in the Lord, ye Righteous, and
give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness. And so is his Justice likewise
reconciled to you. That will vote for your Discharge and Salvation; that will
pass the Sentence on your side, so that when you are judged you shall not be
condemned. For your comfortable and full assurance hereof, read and rejoice
while you read, Romans 3.25, 26. Jesus Christ God has set forth to be a
propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
remission of Sins that are past, through the Forbearance of God; to declare, I
say, at this time his Righteousness, that he might be just, and the Iustifier
of him which believes in Jesus: And again, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our Sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness. His doing this for us is in him an Act of Faithfulness upon
the account of his own Covenant and Promise, and an Act of Justice upon the
account of Christ's Obedience, Sufferings, and Satisfaction.

And as all the Attributes of God are thus reconciled and at peace with us, so
likewise are all his Providence; not only comfortable Providence, but cross
ones too. His most smarting Rods upon your Backs blossom with love. When he
seems to afflict in Fury, He really does it in Faithfulness. And while he
speaks and writes bitter things against you, He does earnestly remember you
still. All come upon an errand of Mercy, upon a design of Kindness; And We
know, says Paul, all work together for good, Romans 8.28. We believe it to be
so; yea, by our own Experience we know it to be so.

And the Creatures are at peace with you. Though wicked Men hate you, yet their
very Enmity and the Effects of it shall befriend you. They may do you a great
deal of wrong, but they shall do you no hurt. While those Plowers make long
their Furrows, God will in those Furrows sow that precious Seed which shall
spring up, and yield to you the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness. By their
adding to your present Exercises, they add to your future Crown; they will make
Heaven the more sweet to you, and your Glory there the more exceeding weighty.
And as for the good things which you now enjoy, they are all sanctified, all
pure; your Tables shall not be Snares to you, Riches shall not be laid up by
you to your hurt; you may rejoice in the Mercies you have, for they all are
Mercies in mercy, and all come to you in the Blood of a Savior, and with the
Blessing of your Father. Your common Blessings are Covenant-Blessings. And
there will be no After-Reckonings to your cost; all has been by Christ, and is
freely given to you. And therefore while you are in the way of your Duty, you
may sleep quietly in the Night, and walk comfortably in the Day, and eat your
Bread with a merry Heart; for God takes pleasure in your Persons, and accepts
your Works.

Once more; Conscience is at peace with you too; and as you shall be satisfied,
so you shall be cheared and comforted from your selves. Conscience, which is
mill testes, a thousand Witnesses, will speak to you, and for you; and in the
testimony thereof you may and shall rejoice. It will make you sing in Prison,
and smile at Famine and Destruction, and laugh alone; and if you have at any
time by your foolishness angered it, and made it to chide and take on at a
strange rate, Christ will, upon your humble, penitent, believing application to
him, reconcile it to you: There shall be the gracious Sprinklings of his most
precious Blood upon it, by which it shall be purged from dead works, and
pacified too, made good and quiet too; the Wounds which you made in it by Sin,
shall be healed, and then it shall not be your Tormentor, but your Comforter:
And if your Dejection being so great, and your Fears so many, that Conscience
alone cannot do the work, it shall have powerful and effectual Assistance from
above; The Spirit of Adoption will come in and bear witness with your Spirits,
that ye are the Children of God, and so enable you in the strength of Faith to
cry, Abba Father, Romans 8.15, 16. Therefore upon these Encouragements be
persuaded to submit your selves to the Government of Christ, and to take his
Yoke upon you.

Exh. 2. Let us now come to the second Exhortation, wherein I do entreat, and
with utmost earnestness beseech you, not only, as before, to bow to Christ, but
also to appear for him, every one of you to your utmost, in those several
Stations and Relations in which Divine Providence has set you. Let no Talents
lie dead upon your Hands and unoccupied, but be all employed and improved for
him to whom you owe your selves and your All. Do what you can for the Name and
Interest of Christ. This was the excellent Account which the holy Apostle Paul
was able to give of himself, Philip. 1.21. That to him to live was Christ. And
it will be well, very well for us, if we through Grace are able to give up the
like Account of our selves; that while to too too many to live is Sin and the
World, to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, to heap up Riches, to advance in
Honors, to pursue the empty and perishing Delights which the Creatures afford,
we fly a more sublime and lofty pitch; for to us to live is Christ. Our hearts
are immovably fixed upon Christ, and devoted to him: Our Projects and Designs
are laid for Christ: Our Lives and Actions are directed unto Christ, to his
Honor, and advancement of his Interest, the increasing of the number of his
Subjects, and enlarging the Bounds of his Empire. It is the positive and
declared Will of God, That men should honor the Son even as they honor the
Father. Now let us all conform and be obedient to this Will, as we will answer
the contrary at our peril. It is far better for us to live to Christ, than to
our selves, or to any thing else in the World. This will yield us the greatest
Peace and Comfort here, together with the greatest Profit and Reward hereafter.
They that live to Christ will never see cause to repent of it, whatever else
they repent of; they will never see cause to reflect upon it with a Blush; for
they live to good purpose, to the best and most excellent purpose. Those
Persons shall find no reason to be ashamed of so living, nor to be afraid of
dying when they are called hence, nor tremble at the thoughts of giving up
their Account, when called to appear before their Judge.

Let me therefore in the first place direct my Discourse to you who are private
Christians, and accordingly move in the lowest and narrowest Sphere of
Activity: If you have an Heart such as you should have, you, even you are in a
capacity of doing something for Christ, though not so much as others above you.
I pray give me leave to ask, What have you done? And now do you take up the
Question, and bring it home to your selves, and propound it seriously to your
own Souls: O my Soul, what have I done? You have lived several Years in the
World, some fewer, some more; you have some of you been great Talkers, and made
an high Profession of Faith in Christ, and Love to him; and I do not in the
least question, but some of you have taken a great deal of pains, and eaten
your Bread in the sweat of your Brows; you have wrought hard for your selves
and your Families; you have had multitudes of Thoughts, and been taken up with
carking Cares; you have risen up early, and sat up late, and eaten the Bread
of Carefulness; you have watched, and you have worked, and wearied your selves
with working, and when you have not met with the desired Success, you have
fretted and pined, and could almost for grief and vexation tear off your Hair:
But now inquire, What have you in the midst of all this done for Christ?
Certainly he deserves something of you. He humbled himself for you, he suffered
and died for you, he became a Curse for you: He did bear your Iniquities, and
his Fathers Wrath: He made peace, and purchased Heaven for you: And all this
deserves something. You owe him a great deal, no less than your All; and you
are shamefully disingenuous and ungrateful, if you do not study Returns.
Besides this, consider, as he died, so he rose again a Conqueror, and is a
King; upon his Vesture and his Thigh there is this glorious Name written, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords: And so he is able to reward you, to make up all
your Losses, to satisfy you for all your Labors, to answer all your Hopes,
and to exceed your highest Expectations. Well then, call your selves to an
Account, before God call you to it; for he will do it one day. What have you
done for Christ? If you have done much, if you have been steadfast, immovable,
and abounding in the Work of the Lord, take the Comfort of it, knowing that God
is not unrighteous to forget it; your Labor shall not be in vain, you shall
enter into Joy. But still go on, and endeavor to do more, and abound in it
more and more; for none of you have as yet done enough, but have cause to mourn
at your coming off so pitifully. If there be any of you that to this day has
done nothing for Christ, (and truly I do fear, yea I greatly fear there are too
many such in this Congregation, and in all) you have had a great many Irons in
the Fire, and all of them diligently minded and tended, while Christ has been
forgotten and neglected; let me ask you, Does Conscience say nothing to you?
Have you not sometimes some secret Checks and inward Gripes? If in such a Case
as this Conscience be silent, if it do not reprove you, and set this Sin before
you, really your Case is sad. But I shall do my Duty; and in the Name of God I
advise you to be ashamed, and to begin your Duty now, and double your diligence
upon the account of your former slothfulness, neglect, and woefully misspent
Time, not knowing how soon your Breath may be stopped, and all Opportunities
for Service taken from you. Now, now begin, and go on to speak for him; plead
the Cause of his Name, Ordinances, and Institutions; and do not do it with a
cold Indifference, but as becomes Persons nearly concerned: Commend him to your
Families, Relations, Friends, and Neighbors: See what Hearts you can get for
him. Love him your selves with all entireness of Affection, and do what you can
to allure and draw others to love him too, Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall
shine as the brightness of the Firmament: and they that turn many to
Righteousness, as the Stars, for ever and ever. Labor then, my beloved
Friends, labor hard, as those that have a dear and fervent Love to this lovely
Jesus, and as those who also have an eye to this glorious Recompense of Reward.

In the next place, I shall with faithfulness and earnestness, yet with all due
respect, offer my Advice and Request to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry, who hold the Head, by whatsoever Sentiments and Opinions they are
divided and distinguished. Of and among whom, all that are sound in the Faith,
and accompany their Labor in the Word and Doctrine with an unblamable, holy,
and exemplary Conversation, I greatly love, and highly esteem and honor. You
are Ambassadors for Christ; Oh do not forget that: You ought to be his
Paranymphs, the real and hearty Friends of this ever-blessed Bridegroom; and of
all Men it is your Duty, your Place and Office does strongly oblige you to make
it your main Business, to commend this Christ, who is so sweet, so altogether
lovely that you cannot commend him too much, you cannot rise so high as to
reach an Hyperbole in his praise. Will you woo for him, and rather speak ten
thousand Words for him, than one for your selves. Some Men's Persecuting
Spirits, Discourses, and Practices, have been a just Cause of Offense. The
greatest hurt I wish them is a sight of their Sin, and a Gospel-Repentance. And
since God has been graciously pleased to put it into the Heart of our King to
declare for those things which make for Peace, I also wish, that all Men would
make their Contributions thereunto, that though as yet there is no great
probability of having one Way, or worshipping together with one Shoulder and
Consent; though as yet there is no great probability of a full and through
Agreement one with another; yet we may be put out of a Capacity of being
injurious and mischievous one to another. And for this we may comfortably hope,
seeing it is the Matter of a Divine Promise, Isa. 11.6. The Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf and
the young Lion and the Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them;
and the Cow and the Bear shall feed -- they shall not hurt nor destroy in all
my holy Mountain. We are not offended at their preaching Obedience to Lawful
Authority, but own it a Duty incumbent upon us to be subject, and that not only
for Wrath or fear of Punishment, but also for Conscience Sake. But I would
desire them to prove themselves Gospel Ministers by their preaching up of
Christ, who is Evangelii Medulla, the very Pith and Marrow of the Gospel. Let
them be industrious in promoting the Interest of Christ, and willing that
others should do it too. Let us rejoice to take his Name, and pour it out as a
precious Ointment in our respective Congregations, that the Savor of it, and
of his Knowledge, being by us made manifest in every place, the Virgins may
love him. Really, my Brethren, I must take leave to tell you, there has been
too much Time, and Labor, and Heat, spent about things ( minoris pretii) of
less weight and value: There has been Tithing of Mint and Cummin: There have
been very unkind and unbrotherly Contendings about such things as will not
commend Men to God, nor add any thing to them when laid in the Balance of the
Sanctuary. Let us now at last, (though indeed it is pity that it is so late,)
learn to love one another, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, and convince the
World that we are his Disciples; and let us love Christ better than our selves.
Let us learn of Paul, who was a better Man, and had more Learning than any of
us can in modesty or reason pretend to; the best of us are not worthy to have
carried his Books after him: I say, let us learn of him, who determined to make
Christ the great and main Subject of his Discourses; 1 Cor. 2.1, 2. When I came
to you, I came not with excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom. Not with
Philosophical Notions, or Platonic Speculations, or Plutarchs Morals, nor with
Rhetorical Flourishes, ( verborum phaleris,) the trappings of words: No, not I,
says He: I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and
him Crucified.

And now, my Lord, let me address my Discourse to you and those Worshipful
Aldermen your Brethren here present, whom God and the King have vested with
Authority, and armed with civil Power: I do desire you, and by virtue of his
Authority, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, in whose Name I come, I
charge you to appear, and that vigorously in your several Places for Christ. I
know that you are Gods Vicegerents, and have a very considerable share of the
Government laid upon your Shoulders; which is indeed a great Honor to you, but
a far greater Burden. And as you have need of divine Guidance and Assistance,
so the effectual fervent Prayers of righteous Ones, of those who are faithful
in the Land, will do you a kindness and avail you much; and I can assure you of
them; while you sit at the Helm of this great and populous City, there are many
at the Throne of Grace putting up their Petitions and Requests for you, of whom
I profess my unworthy self to be One. Sensible we are, that it is, ( dura
provincia,) an hard Province, difficult Service, unto which you are called, and
that you have many curious Eyes upon you, and it may be many Adversaries; the
good Lord furnish you with proportionable Wisdom, Courage and Grace. You have a
great deal to do for the King, and be you diligent and faithful in the doing of
it. Oh! that it may be said of you as it was of Daniel, when the Presidents and
Princes sought occasion against him concerning the Kingdom, i.e. some
unfaithfulness to his Prince, some abuse of his Power, some or other
Miscarriage and Maladministration; Dan. 6.4. They could find no occasion nor
fault, for as much as He was faithful, neither was there any Error or Fault
found in him. I heartily beg of God the same for you.

And now I desire you frequently and seriously to consider with your selves,
that the Honor and Interest of Christ ought to have a room in your Hearts,
yea, to lie uppermost: And will you act for Christ, and rule for Christ? Will
you study what you shall do for him? Let it not be said by others, nor charged
upon you by your Consciences, that you minded your own things, but not the
things of Jesus Christ. Every one of you repeat these thoughts; let them dwell
with you, and be powerful in their Influence. God has done nothing in vain;
God did not send any one into the World in vain. He did not give me my Life and
Being for nothing. He has not brought me to this place of Magistracy for
nothing. He has not sent me into the Vineyard to loiter there, not set me in
the Chair to sleep there. He has not put this Talent into my hand, that it
might lie dead there. As I am a Man in Authority, so under Authority, and must
be accountable to my Sovereign upon Earth, and (which carries with it a
greater awe) to my God in Heaven. What now shall I do for this God? How shall I
improve my Time? How shall I make use of my Power? How shall I fill up my
Place? I beseech you to show your selves worthy Men, worthy of the Honor put
upon you, and the Power concredited to you. Oh! study this, and bestow your
best and most serious Thoughts upon it. And whatever your hand finds to do,
be sure to do it with your might. I will commend to your Care only these two
things:

First, Do all that in you lies for the honor of the Day of Christ. The first
Day of the Week, which is in Scripture called, (...), the Lords Day; Rev. 1.10.
I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day. This is the Day, wherein that Jesus who
died for our Offenses arose again for our Justification: This is the Day
wherein he was let out of Prison, as one that had fully discharged the Debt we
owed, for which he as Surety was arrested and clapped up: This is the Day
whereon he finished the work of our Redemption, and gloriously Triumphed over
Death and Hell, all the Enemies of our Salvation: This was the Day whereon he
was declared to be the Son of God with Power: This is the Day which the Lord
has made, and separated from the rest of the Days: This is the Day which the
Apostles and Primitive Christians observed and met upon for Divine Worship, and
Christ did honor those their Meetings with his Personal Appearance among them:
This is that Day which is now to be particularly remembered and kept holy by us.
Read what God says, Ezekiel. 20.12. I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between
me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them: And
again, v. 20. Hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you,
that ye may know that I am the Lord your God. What God there speaks concerning
the Jewish Sabbaths is true, and to be affirmed of the Christian Sabbath. It is
a sign between Christ and us, and by our keeping of that, we own him for our
Lord-Redeemer, for our Prince and Savior; a polluting of that Day is a
practical renouncing of Christ. And it has been and always will be found, that
Religion gains or loses in a Nation or City; Godliness flourishes or withers,
according as the Inhabitants are more strict or remiss in their Observation of
that Day. Therefore it concerns all Persons, and particularly Governors,
whether in Families or in Cities, to be exceeding careful to this Purpose. And
I do lay this upon you as a burden of Duty, that you do not suffer the Lords
Day to be profaned, either by opening of Shops, and following of Trades, or by
Sports, and playing in Streets or Fields, or by Tippling and Gaming in Public
Houses for Entertainment. Follow the Pattern which that excellent Governor set
you, Nehem. 13.15. etc. Be you as careful for the observation of Christ's Day,
as others are for the observation of their own Days: So may you with an humble
confidence pray as that good Man did, Nehem. 13.22. Remember me, O my God,
concerning this, and spare me according to the greatness of thy Mercy.

Secondly, Do all that you can against the abounding and growing Immoralities
of Men. His Majesty has graciously been pleased to issue out his Royal
Declaration for a Liberty of Conscience, but not a word for Licentiousness of
Life. But what multitudes take that lawless Liberty, which neither God nor Man
allow? It is strange to see what flagitious Wickednesses are redundant among
us, what Abominations of all sorts and sizes. O London! how art thou fallen
from what thou wast, and some of us can well remember thee to have been? After
a dreadful Conflagration thy Houses are raised out of their Ashes more
glorious, but many of thine Inhabitants are grown more vicious. Instead of a
lovely, beautiful Face of Religion, what and how much of the Power of
Ungodliness is visible and apparent among us? Instead of reading the sacred
Bible and other good Books, Catechizing Children and Servants, singing of
David's Psalms, what horrid Oaths and Curses are there to be heard in our
Streets, as if without them Men could not speak? What more than swinish
Drunkenness? What brutish and monstrous Whoredom? All which are a reproach to
the English Nation, a dishonor to the Christian Name, and a disparagement to
the precious everlasting Gospel, which has for so long a time been preached
and professed among us. Mend those things which you can, and mourn under what you
cannot mend. I beseech you, labor to stem this Tide of Profaneness, lest
overflowing Sin be quickly followed with an overflowing Scourge. If there be,
as there are, those that will not live like Christians, soberly, righteously
and godly, let not them have liberty to live worse than Heathen. Make them
know, that though there be a great Degeneracy, yet still there is some fear of
God in this place.

And I beseech you to do this in your Day, which how short it may be none
knows. All your Hours are golden Ones, and it is pity that any of them should
be lost. Blessed be God, that you have begun. I read your Precept, my Lord, and
rejoiced in it; see that it be put in execution. Let it not be brutum fulmen.
Do not only shake the Rod over the Backs of obstinate Offenders, but lay it on
and make them feel it, unless they will grow better. Make them know, you are as
much resolved for Justice as they are for Wickedness. And do not only command
and employ others, who may wink and be bribed, and some of them be as deep in
Guilt as any, but do you and your Brethren act your selves. Let inferior
Officers have your Zeal and Activity for their President and Encouragement.

And having begun well, go on, and hold out to the last. Let nothing hinder
your Progresses, cool your Zeal, nor blunt your Edge. Let your Bow abide in
Strength: And Oh! that in the work and duty of your Office, the Arms of your
Hands may be made strong, and kept from flagging by the everlasting Arms of the
God of Jacob, that so your Resolutions for God may not abate any thing of their
Vigor, nor any of your righteous and religious Purposes be broken off. Be of
good Courage, and show your selves Men. And if others dare to be bold, and
audacious, and impudent in those things which are Evil, let them see that you
also dare to be Good, and to do Justice, and to walk with an upright Heart in a
perfect way. Regard not the Face nor Fury, not the Flouts and Jears, not the
Envy nor Malice of those that bear ill will to you. The great God will own you
and stand by you; and I do not doubt but His Majesty, who under God has given
you the Power, will be ready to encourage you in the due Managing and
Improvement of it. Look carefully to the Principle you act from, that it be
Right; and to the End you level and aim at, that it be Noble; and to the Way
you walk in, for the attaining of that End; and then hold on that Way, and grow
stronger and stronger, more and more resolved and active, though there be in it
never so many roaring Lions and hissing Serpents. And I counsel you to be much
in Prayer; certainly, praying Magistrates are great Blessings, when Debauchees
are Plagues and Curses. You will be often waiting upon his Majesty to receive
Orders and Commands from him. Go more often to God, and beg Wisdom and Strength
from him, and the raising of you up as high as you ought to be, that is, above
the Fear of Man, so that nothing may be able to divert you from, nor hinder you
in the Path of Truth, Justice and Holiness. Cowardice and Timorousness speak a
low, mean and base Spirit. It is intolerable in a Soldier; truly it is as bad,
if not worse, in a Magistrate. As the former will in a time of danger fly from
his Enemy, so the other will in times of Difficulty and Discouragement turn his
back upon his Duty. When one was hired by Tobiah and Sanballat, to persuade
Nehemiah's going into the Temple and shutting the Doors, for fear of the
Enemies Designs, He returned to him this brave and truly Heroic Answer, Nehem.
6.11. Should such a Man as I flee? And who is there that being as I am, would
go into the Temple to save his Life? Thus do you think with your selves, every
one of you, Does such and such a thing become me? Should such a Man as I, one
that has made such a Profession as I have done, one that is advanced to such a
Place as I am in, do so or so? And if a well informed Conscience says no, then
do not do it; if it says yes, this is your Duty, this becomes your Profession
and Place, then apply to it, whatever Flesh and Blood, this and that sort of
Men say to the contrary. But it is high time now to come to the third and last
Use.

Use 3. And in that I shall speak some things by way of support and comfort to
those in this Congregation, yea, and all others to whom this Discourse shall
come, that bear good will to Sion, and to that blessed Lord Jesus who Reigns
there. Though the Times into which we are cast are very cloudy, and evil, upon
many accounts; and though the Providence of God up and down in the World, are
abstruse and mysterious, hard to be understood; they are such Riddles as we do
not know how to interpret them. In many places the dark side of the Pillar is
turned toward the Israel of God: Yet let me say at this Day as the Holy Prophet
said formerly, in Psalm 149.2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the
Children of Sion be joyful in their King. It cannot rationally be denied, but
that we have cause of Fear and Mourning when we look into our selves, and take
a view of our own Hearts and Ways, and there discover Sins more than enough, to
provoke the fierce Wrath of God against us, and to bring down his desolating
Judgments upon us; and also when we look abroad into the Nation and the World,
and consider the Designs of bad Men, and the Divisions of good Men, the Heats
and An^mosities among professed Christians, and how great strangers they are to
that Healing Spirit by which they all ought to be acted; yet I am sure we have
great cause of Comfort and Rejoicing when we look up to Christ: And therefore
that Command of the Apostle, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I
say, rejoice. He repeats the Command because of the excellency of the Duty, and
of how much concernment and advantage it is to the Christian: For this Joy is
his Strength, while Dumpishness and Melancholy infeebles him, unfits him for
Service, and exposes him to Temptations: Yea, and of how much Concernment it
likewise is unto Religion. This Joy is its Honor; It is a comely and beautiful
thing, and makes it shine even in the Eyes of Bystanders: Therefore he says,
Rejoice always, (...), at all Times, in all Places, and in all Conditions, not
only when the Sun of Prosperity shines upon your Tabernacles, and divine
Protection hedges your way, and Mercy paves it; not only when Goodness follows
you, and Favor compasses you about, and you have as much as Heart can wish,
but even when the Fig Tree does not Blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the
Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no Meat,
Hab. 3.17, 18. At such a time and in such a case do you rejoice; but remember
in what and in whom; not in things below, that is a mushrom Joy, that is
rejoicing in a thing of naught; it is not worth your while: Your Joy must not
be Carnal, but Spiritual; your Faith must draw it up out of the Well of
Salvation, fetch it into you from Christ, in whom there is cause enough. You
can never form to your selves right Thoughts of Christ, never look upon him
with a believing Eye, but in him you will discover abundant cause of Rejoicing,
yea, of Triumphing: As you meet with that Expression, 2 Cor. 2.14. Thanks be
unto God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ. Yea, the Apostle would
have Believers so full of Joy in Christ, as that he would have them quite empty
of all disturbing and carking Cares. In the same Phil. 4.6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let
your Requests be made known to God. And indeed, He would have us live
comfortable and cheerful Lives in the World, as well as holy and gracious
Lives; and if we do not, the Fault is our own, we are miserably wanting to our
selves; for he has in his Revelations of himself, and in his Covenant and
Promises, made ample and abundant Provision in order thereunto. And therefore
let us now in the close of all, a little look to Jesus, a little consider the
Apostle and High Priest of our holy Profession, this glorious King of Sion and
Saints, and take notice of some things in him which very well may raise, feed
and maintain our Joy.

First, We have great cause to rejoice in this, that Christ always lives:
Others do die; it is appointed for all Men, for mean Men; the Shrubs shall be
stubb'd up, and great Men too, the Cedars must fall. Dives died as well as
Lazarus. Death does not regard their Honors, nor will it be bribed with their
Riches. Great Men must die; they are not too big for Death to wrestle a Fall
with; and so do good Men too, yea, the best of them, those that have been most
holy and useful. Moses the Typical Mediator, was commanded to go up to Mount
Nebo and die there. David was a Man after Gods own Heart, and he served his
Generation according to the Will of God, so long as God would have him, and in
good measure in such a manner as God would have him. He walked in Communion
with God, and he ruled in the Fear of God; but when he had done his work, he
fell asleep: The Sleep of Death came with a Commission from Heaven, and closed
his Eyes; the Scepter dropped out of his Hand, and he dropped into his Grave. That
is the House of all the Living, Princes and Nobles, Kings and Emperors, must
take that for their long home; Psalm. 82.6, 7. I have said, Ye are Gods, and all
of you Children of the most High. They are Gods Vicegerents, Gods
Representatives; they are Terrestrial Gods. But be not proud of that, be not
high minded, but fear; and to that end, he whispers in their Ear, or rather
tells them upon the Housetop, but ye shall die like Men. You may ask, what may
be the meaning of that? I Answer, You may take it thus: They shall die like
Men, i.e. they know no more when they shall die than other Men, whether some
years hence, or to morrow, or to day; and they can tell no more than other Men
how they shall die, whether a natural or violent Death; whether on a sudden, or
by some lingering and tedious Distemper. And again, they die like Men as to the
Consequences of Death. They must be stripped of all their Ornaments and Royal
Robes, and their Bodies must return to Dust, and both Soul and Body must come
to Judgment. Kings that are Supreme, and all Inferior Magistrates, must stand
before the Tribunal of Christ, and there be judged; their Rule shall be
inspected, their Government examined, all their Words and Actions considered,
and all the Sentences that have been here past by them, all the Punishments
that have been inflicted by them, by their Authority and Order, shall be
curiously and exactly weighed in the Balance of Justice. Oh! be wise, and
consider this, and remember your latter end. But though Christ died once, He
died but once, He shall not die a second time. Death has no more Power over
him. This Friend may fall, and that Comfort may wither, and that Prince may
die, under whose Shadow the People rejoiced; but so does not Christ; He abides
for ever. Psalm 102. Thou have laid the Foundations of the Earth, the Heavens
are the work of thine Hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all
of them shall wax old like a Garment, as a Vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

Secondly, Christ shall reign as well as live. He shall live, and that like
himself, in State, and in Power, and Glory. His and our Father who has set him
up for King upon his holy Hill of Sion, has settled him there, and fixed him
there; the Sacred Scriptures do abound with Expressions to this purpose, that
we might have a full assurance of Faith in the Matter which is so important:
As, to instance in a few, Ps. 45.6. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever: So
Ps. 110.1, 2. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine Enemies thy Footstool. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy Strength
out of Zion; rule thou in the midst of thine Enemies. He now rules in the midst
of them and in spite of them, and the Father will subdue them all. Christ sits
expecting till it be done. And as the Father was not failed in his Expectation
from Christ, so Christ shall not be failed in his Expectation from the Father.
All his Enemies shall be brought to an under, either in a way of gracious
Conversion, or in a way of most dreadful Confusion: Either they shall willingly
bow to him in the day of his Power, or else they shall against their wills be
broken by him in the day of his wrath; either they shall submit to his golden
Scepter, or they shall be dashed in pieces, like a Potters Vessel, by his Iron
Rod. In a word, Either they shall by a cheerful Resignation put themselves into
his hand, to be molded, guided and ordered by him; or else they shall be under
his Feet, to be trampled upon with Scorn and Indignation, and at last kicked to
Hell, as fuel for those unquenchable Flames. And yet further, He must Reign
till he has got the actual and full possession of all that unto which he has
an unquestionable Right by virtue of his Fathers donation, i.e. till the
Heathen and uttermost parts of the Earth be brought in to him. Of the
continuance of his Kingdom and the increase of his Government there shall be no
end, till that happy time come wherein all the Kingdoms of the World shall
become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, i. e. they shall renounce
all Idolatry and false Worships, and embrace the Gospel, and walk in the Light
thereof, and according to its Rules: Yea, it is said, Rev. 11.15. He shall
Reign for ever and ever, till time shall be no more.

Thirdly, Rejoice in this, That the Church of the living God shall be preserved
and continued in the World. Though there have been dreadful concussions, and
are so at this present, and are like to be, till all be shaken down that God
has not set up, yet there shall be no overturning of this House, no ruining
thereof. The Ship may be and frequently is sorely tossed with Tempests, but it
shall live since Christ is Pilot, and sits at the Helm and steers the Course; I
say, it shall live, as the Ark did in the Deluge, when the Waters were at the
highest. Notwithstanding all the Rage and Malice, all the Power and Plots of
Men and Devils, Christ will have a Church upon Earth. Though they may prune
this Vine which Gods right Hand has planted, yet they shall never be able to
pull it up by the roots. It may bleed grievously, even to Fainting, but not to
Death. It is true, this or that particular Church may fail. The Church of the
Jews did, though once dearly, yea only beloved, and so have the seven Famous
Churches in Asia: And so may others. Therefore that was excellent, and no more
than necessary Counsel which Paul (more likely to be an Apostle to them than
Peter,) gave them, Romans 11.20, 21. Because of unbelief, they (i. e. the Jews)
were broken off, and thou stand by Faith; be not high-minded, but fear:
Which Counsel he follows with this weighty Reason; For if God spared not the
natural Branches, take heed lest he spare not thee. That was Paul's advice to
the Church at Rome, when he wrote this Epistle to them. But whatever has
become of Her, or may of this or that particular Church, our Lord Jesus will
certainly take effectual care that there shall be a true Church upon Earth. And
though at first it be but as a little Stone, yet shall it smite the Image upon
his feet, and break them to pieces, and become it self a great Mountain, and
fill the whole Earth. Let every one look to it that they be true and living
Members of that true Church, and continue so, without turning aside to any
Synagogue of Satan, or having any Fellowship with Devils.

The End.

