A SERMON Preached at CROSBY-SQUARE, Jan. 8. 1692.

Upon the FUNERAL Of that Faithful Servant of Christ, Mr. John Reynolds, Who
Died in the Lord the preceding 25 December.

By SAMUEL SLATER, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for I. Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1693.

TO Mris. Reynolds.
Dear Sister,
ALL these things shall be dissolved, the very Heaven and Earth, and so must
our Relations, however delightful, for they are only for a time. Death with its
cold hand will easily loose the straitest Knot that coupled the most suitable
and affectionate Pair: You frequently have heard and seen it, now you feel it.
God has been pleased to make a breach upon you, Oh that he would fill it up by
standing himself in it: By the Father of Mercies, and God of Bowels, great and
precious Promises are made to the solitary, Widow, which are Yea and Amen; sue
them out by Prayer, and live upon them by Faith. It is well with your Deceased
Husband, and whatever straits and Difficulties you may for a time meet with, I
hope it will be so with you. What I heartily pray for you, is, that you may
have a full Enjoyment of God in the end, and receive Supports from him by the
way, together with fresh and full supplies of Grace, Peace and Comfort. You by
and with your Son desired the printing of the following Discourse, I could not
deny you: Now it sees the light, may it do good to you, and many more through
the Blessing of God accompanying it; which will be the Rejoicing of

Your Sympathizing Friend and Brother, Samuel Slater.
From my Study, Ian. 19. 92/3
Newly published, and sold by John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
A Sermon Preached on the Thanksgiving-day, the 27th. of October, 1692. at
Crosby-Square. By Samuel Slater, Minister of the Gospel. Quarto.

A good Minister of Jesus Christ. A Funeral Sermon for the Reverend Mr. Richard
Steel, a Faithful and Useful Minister of the Gospel. Delivered November. 27.
1692. By George Hamond, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel. Octavo.

Mr. Addy's Shorthand is newly Reprinted, the Bible being Printed in the same
Shorthand. Octavo.

2 SAMUEL I. 26. I am distressed for thee, my Brother Jonathan, very pleasant
have thou been unto me.
THE last Chapter of the former Book of Samuel, gives us an account of a Battle
fought between the Philistines and Israel, in which the former had the Victory,
and the latter were put to flight, no less than three of Readiness Sons were
slain, and alas! of them Jonathan was one; and Saul to avoid being killed and
abused by such loathed hands, took a Sword and fell upon it, which however it
may be by some applauded as a Brave and Heroic Action, was certainly unlawful
for him to do, wicked and abominable, whereby he became Felo de se, and brought
upon himself the guilt of his own Blood; but as he had lived, so he dyed under
the power of an evil Spirit.

The doleful tidings hereof being by an Amalekite brought to David, it much
affected and afflicted him, he lamented over them with a great Lamentation, of
which the Words of my Text are a part; and in them two things present
themselves to our Observation.

1. What Jonathan had been to David while he lived, very pleasant, and sweet,
by consequence his Life was exceeding desirable.

2. What David found himself to be, now that his Jonathan had been so cut off,
a poor distressed Man, I am distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan; for thee,
i. e. for the loss which I, poor I have of thee, in whom so much of my Comfort
was laid up. Thou art gone, for ever gone, thy place will know thee no more,
and I both do and shall dearly miss thee. Although he was sure shortly to
possess the Throne of Saul the Father, yet he should want the Company of
Jonathan the Son. By how much the Life of Jonathan had of all outward
Enjoyments been to him most sweet, by so much was his Death of all Temporal
Losses most grievous. I am distressed for thee, my Brother Jonathan, very
pleasant have thou been unto me. The Doctrinal Conclusion which I shall draw
from these Words, and prosecute in the following Discourse, will be this,

Doct. When God does take away from his own People their pleasant things, it
brings them into distress. Depriving Providence are distressing Providence.

If you look into the 13 Job 26. you will find that good Man complaining to
God, that He did write bitter things against him* If you ask, how did God do
that? I Answer, by the hand of his Providence; though he had set down most
precious things for him in his Eternal Purposes, yet he wrote bitter things
against him in his present Dispensations. He had stripped him of all his outward
Comforts; his Estate was melted down, his Cattle driven away, his Servants
slain, his Children all buried in the Ruins of the House which fell upon them
while they were Feasting together: God had in this way brought him from Plenty
to Penury, and from great Abundance to pinching Want. He took his pleasant
things from him, and in so doing he wrote bitter things against him.

Jonathan had been very pleasant to David, his tender and immovable Love had
very much sweetened to him the implacable Hatred and violent Rage of Saul
against him; but now his Death did imbitter his Enjoyments and Expectations,
whatever he had in his Hand, whatever in his Hope, yet he had not his Jonathan;
No, No, He is gone, He is gone never to return, He is slain in his high places,
and therefore he lifts up a great and bitter Cry, I am distressed. There are
three things that I shall speak to in the Doctrinal part, and then proceed to
the Application, which I principally have in mine Eye. We shall enquire, 1.
What rendered Jonathan so pleasant unto David? 2. What brought David into
Distress? 3. What his being in Distress does import and hold out to us?


We begin with the first of these, What was it that rendered Jonathan so very
pleasant unto David? to this I Answer, There were sundry things which did
happily concur, and greatly contribute thereunto; so many remarkable things
did unite and meet in that one excellent Person, so many singular Ingredients,
as that they could not choose but make in him such a Composition of Sweets, as
would make him the Pleasure and Delight of David's Soul. You may take some of
them in these following particulars.

First, The nearness of that Relation in which he stood: This is mentioned in
the Text, my Brother Jonathan: Not that he was his Natural Brother, but by
Marriage: Not Consanguinity but Affinity; David having married Michal the
Daughter of Saul, and Sister of Jonathan.

But had this been alone, had it been all, it would not have been enough to
make him so very pleasant: Many times Relations are bitter, they prove Burdens
and Vexations to one another, and instead of rejoicing in the nearness of their
Union, they could even Curse the first day of their Acquaintance. How often is
the Wife a Thorn in the side of her Husband? such was Job's Wife to him; the
Child an Heartbreak to his Father? such was Absalom to David; and the Brother
an Affliction and Terror to his Brother? so Esam was to Jacob, and Cain to
Abel. There must be something beside the Relation to sweeten it, otherwise the
Persons related will be mutual Crosses and Torments, instead of being pleasant,
113 Psalm. 1. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to walk
together in Unity: This is like the Precious Ointment, like the Dew of Hermon,
the Dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zion; there God commands the
Blessing. It is not nearness of Relation, nor oneness of Blood, nor any other
strictness of Bond that will be sufficient alone, but together with that there
must be an oneness of Mind and Heart. Thus it should be in Families, and thus
in Churches, 2 Acts 42. They continuing daily with one accord in the Temple,
did eat their meat with gladness: And again; 4 Acts 32. The multitude of them
that believed were of one Heart and of one Soul. Brethren and UNITED BRETHREN,
this is amiable indeed and delightful, when they Dwell together, Meet and
Converse together, and all in Unity; so that there are no Animosities and
Heart-burnings among them, no Divisions and contrary Motions, no Quarrels and
Contentions, but Harmony and Agreement, this is good, a lovely sight, God and
Man count it so; and it is pleasant, the Joy and Comfort of those Persons
Lives. Well then, this was not all in the present Case; there was not only a
nearness of Relation, but also

Secondly, There was in Jonathan unto David a dearness of Affection. Not only
such as was suitable to the Relation, but above it; such as too too often is
not to be found in an own Brother. For the proof of this, do but observe the
expressions used in the Scripture for the setting of it out; 1 Samuel 18. 1. When
he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, the Soul of Jonathan was knit with
the Soul of David. They were glewed together, fastened one to another, and
bound together by the Holy Spirit of God: There was between them, as the
Philosopher says, but (...), one Soul; and read on, Jonathan loved him as his
own Soul, which words are repeated in Verse 3. He did really desire his good as
his own, and sensibly felt his Afflictions as his own, and heartily rejoiced in
his Prosperity, Successes and Honors, as if they had been his own; they
rejoiced and mourned together; they sung and sighed, laughed and wept together.
Again, it is said in 1 Samuel 19. 2. That Jonathan delighted much in David: He
was not only pleased with him, but he delighted in him too, and that not a
little, but much: He was delighted to see his Face, and to hear his Discourses,
and to be in his Company.

David was sensible of this, could not but take notice of it, you may see he
did in the words immediately following the Text, where he speaks of it in an
high and lofty strain, that so he might the better show the Price he himself
set upon it, and raise up in others the greater Admirings of Jonathan. Thy Love
to me was wonderful, passing the love of women. As if He were a Prodigy of
Love, the Nonesuch of the Age, yea of the World, and had such a pure and
vehement Flame as could not possibly be matched: Among men there was none to be
found that came near it, nay it exceeded the Love of Women: Which may be
variously understood, and is by the Learned. Either thus: Thy Love to me is
above that which men have, yea that which thou, my dearest Brother, had for
Women: Or thus, That Love, which was in thine heart unto me, was above the Love
which is in the Heart of Women themselves. Though they have strong Affections,
and violent Passions, yet they come short of thine, are not to be compared with
thine; the most endearing Wives do not love their Husbands, the most
affectionate Mothers do not love their Children, the fruit of their own Wombs,
at such a rate, to such a degree, as Jonathan did his David. Now this could not
but make him very pleasant, for Love is the Beauty of all Relations, it puts a
sweetness into, and a gloss upon all Societies; yea it is the Glory of Heaven
it self, where it is advanced to, and shall Eternally continue in it is highest
Perfection, without the least languishing or diminution. But further, This Love
of Jonathan to David was not dull and sluggish, a sleepy habit, but lively and
active, hastily catching at, and laying hold upon all opportunities offered for
the venting and expressing of it is self. And therefore,

Thirdly, The Love of Jonathan did signally evidence its self in a way of Self
denial, and by the unparalled humility of his Spirit. He was no conceited and
lofty Person, puffed up with Pride, wholly confined to his own Interest, and
looking with contempt or jealousy upon them who were below him; but most
readily yielding to the interest of his Brother, and cheerfully welcoming and
embracing all means of promoting it. We may learn this from 1 Samuel 18. 4.
Jonathan stripped himself of his Robe that was upon him, and gave it to David,
and his Garments, even to his Sword, and to his Bow, and to his Girdle. Good
Man, he now would have his David go like himself, arrayed in a Courtly Habit,
as became the Son-in-law to a King: He must put off the Shepherd, and put on
the Prince, yea he should have his own Robe; that all who met with him might
see Jonathan in him, and accordingly respect and honor him as another
Jonathan; yea, he gave him his very Girdle, or Belt, which was a great Ensign,
or Badge of Honor, and the principal Ornament of a Soldier; thus he accounted
nothing too good or too great for David. And though he full well knew that David
should succeed his Father in the Throne, and be King in Israel, yet he had no
rising of Heart against it, he did not at all envy him that Royal Preferment:
No, no; 1 Samuel 23. 16. He went to him into the Wood, and strengthened his hand
in God: i. e. with the gracious Promises that God had given him, putting him in
mind of former Assurances he had received, as is clear from the 17th. Verse, He
said unto him, fear not, for the hand of Saul my Father shall not find thee,
and thou shall be King over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee: He was very
well content not to insist upon the Right Line, but though as Prince, Heir of the
Crown, yet to resign it to David, and to be himself his Inferior and Subject:
Nor was he at all heated in his Spirit against him, or alienated from him in
Affection by his Fathers angry taunts, and upbraiding him with his having
chosen the Son of Iesse to his own confusion, and to the confusion of his
Mothers nakedness. As if he should have said, Thou do by this means expose
thy self and thy Mother to reproach, none will look upon thee as my Son, but a
Bastard, and of some mean and base Original.

Fourthy, Jonathan was true, and immoveably faithful to the interest of David.
He was a cordial and sincere Friend, as did appear by his stedfastness: As he
was united to him in Affection, so he would bind himself to him yet faster by a
Covenant. As in the 1 Samuel 18. 3. Jonathan and David made a Covenant, and they
did again renew it, in the 20 chapter 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16, Verses. Thus he added
Obligation to Obligation, as if he thought he could never lay bonds enough upon
himself, nor give unto David sufficient assurance of his Sincerity and
Faithfulness, and that never dying Friendship and Kindness which he had with,
and for him: He so loved David, that he feared himself, and was jealous of his
own Heart, lest it should afterward prove false and treacherous, and therefore
he would bind it to its good Behavior.

Fifthly, Such was the Love of Jonathan to David, that it put him upon being
his Advocate. Oh how ready and forward was he at every turn to appear on his
behalf, and plead his Cause with his angry Father, though he knew him to be very
jealous of him, and desperately enraged and set against him, and could not but
foresee that his standing up on his behalf would certainly bring his Fathers
Displeasure, Frown and Indignation upon himself, yet he was resolved to act the
part of a Friend and Brother to the utmost, and put his Life in his hand, and
speak, rather than by a timorous silence be wanting unto David. We find in the
1 Samuel 19. 1. that Saul spoke to Jonathan his Son, and to all his Servants,
that they should kill David: He gave them Command and Commission to do it, but
notwithstanding this, we read in the 4th. Verse of the same Chapter, that
Jonathan spoke good of David unto Saul his Father, and said unto him, Let not
the King sin against his Servant, even against David, because he has not
sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very good. It
was an argument of dear Love, and a brave Spirit, to speak so to his Father at
such a time. And he did the like again in the 1 Samuel 20. 31, 32. As long, says
Saul, as the Son of Iesse lives upon the ground, thou shall not be
established, nor thy Kingdom, wherefore now send, and fetch him to me, for he
shall surely dye. What now! this went to Ionathans Heart, it was as a Sword in
his Bones, the Fire burned; Then spoke he with his tongue, and said unto his
Father, wherefore shall he be slain? what has he done? i. e. What Evil has he
done, what one thing has he done for which he deserves to dye? And it is said,
ver. 34. He did eat no meat the second day of the month, for he was grieved for
David: He could not but think of David's Case, and when he did think of it, it
could not be without great sadness.

Sixthly, I shall add but this one thing further, Jonathan was unto his David a
ready and faithful Counselor: Ready to give him timely notice of any danger
that threatened him, and to acquaint him with the true state of things, and how
matters went as to him, and to afford him the best Advice he could for the
steering of his Course, and preservation of himself in so critical a time. Thus
in the 1 Samuel 19. 2. When Saul had declared his Will to have him butchered,
Jonathan told him, My Father seeks to kill thee; and thereupon directed him
what to do, I pray thee, take heed to thy self until the morrow, and abide in a
secret place, and hide thy self. And again afterward in the 20th. Chapter, by
the Arrows which he shot, and the words which he spoke to the Lad, he gave him
to understand how exceeding hazardous his continuance thereabout would be, and
how necessary it was for him to provide for his own Security as well as he
could, and with all possible speed; Make speed, haste, stay not. Shall we now
take all these six Particulars, and bind them up togegether thus: Since
Jonathan was in so near a Relation to David as his Brother, and did bear him
such a sincere and entire Affection, could freely wave his own Interest, and
lay it at the foot of David, continued so faithful to him, and at all times
ready to plead for him, and careful to give him the best Advice and counsel
that he could, he must needs be very pleasant, exceeding desirable and
delightful, he was very loving, and therefore very lovely.

But alas! David was not always to have his Jonathan; the knot is soon untied
that had united and coupled this excellent pair. Jonathan has breathed his
last, his Soul has made it is escape out of his wounded Body, and taken its
flight into the other World. He is slain in his high places, and that brought
David into distress; and it brings me to the second thing which I promised to
enquire into, viz. What was there in the Case, that David should be so
distressed? What Reason was there, that so Good a Man should be in such a
plunge? Time was when we found him at Ziklag, 1 Samuel 30. which was burnt by the
Amalekites, the Wives, and Sons and Daughters were taken Captives, and the
People spoke of stoning him, and then he plucked up a brave Spirit, and
encouraged himself in the Lord God. How then comes it to pass that upon this
Occasion, though sad enough, he cries out of his being distressed? I shall give
you my Answer in these three things.

First, I do not think he was brought into Distress by any Fears or dark
Apprehensions concerning the Eternal State into which Jonathan was now entered:
Surely he did not question but he was now in the Bosom of Divine Love, though
he had fallen by the Cruel hand of a barbarous Enemy, for he was a good Man;
whosoever reads the Story of his Life, and considers his Spirit and Carriage,
will find therein sufficient reason to conclude him not only truly gracious,
but a Person of an excellent and more than ordinary Spirit, and from thence
gather whatever was his Exit out of this World, He had an entrance ministered to
him abundantly into the glorious Kingdom of his God and Savior: His dying upon
the Mountains of Gilboa, could not at all hinder his direct, speedy, and
joyful ascent to the Mountains of Myrrh and Beds of Spices, where he shall
take a sweet and undisturbed repose to all everlasting. He had indeed his Head
not incircled with a Crown, but laid in the Dust, and so the earthly Throne was
left for David to fill, but he was advanced to one much above it, a Throne of
Glory in Heaven. I do not in the least doubt that David was abundantly
satisfied about the happy Exchange Jonathan had made, and the goodness of that
Condition in which he now was, that if he might return again to be as he was
before, he would not; nor leave the clear Vision, and immediate Communion with
the Son and Lord of David, for a fresh and further Enjoyment of David himself.
Instead of making a descent to this lower, dirty and troublesome World, he would
choose to continue where he now is, and take some delight in the thoughts of
David's coming to him as soon as he had served his Generation according to the
Will of God, and finished the Work given him to do. But

Secondly, I judge him brought into this distress, by a reflection upon the
manner of Ionathans Death: That he did not Die in a Natural way, but was cut
off in his prime and flourishing Age by a violent stroke, and that (which was
Gall in the Cup) given by the hand of the Uncircumcised; it pained him at the
very Heart, to think, that that brave Prince, who had been so eminently valiant
and prosperous in fighting the Battles of Israel, whose Bow turned not back
from the blood of the slain, nor from the fat of the mighty, had now fallen a
Sacrifice to their Fury, and was become the Object of their boasting and
triumph. Hence it is that he did, as in an Agony, cry out in the 20th. Verse of
this Chapter, Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in Askelon: Conceal it from
them, if it be possible conceal it from them, lest the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. Poor
Soul, he knew not how to bear up under the thoughts of this, that those
desperate Enemies to his God and People, should rejoice in the fall of his
beloved Jonathan, and with their unhallowed feet trample and dance upon his
precious Dust. But then

Thirdly, That which increased his Distress, and did yet much more straiten
him, was the Consideration of his own Loss. We all know, that cordial Friends,
of good humor, are the great Comfort of our Lives. Suppose a man has a great
confluence of mundane Delights, Waters of a full Cup wrung out to him, more
indeed than Heart could wish, yet would he be miserable in the midst thereof,
if he were Friendless. God did not think it good for Man to be alone, though in a
Paradise: He enjoys himself pitifully, that has not a Friend to enjoy. The
Sacred Scripture speaking of a Friend, adds this Expression, 13 Deuter. 6. Who
is as thine own Soul; i. e. as near and dear to thee as thy self, he is an
alter Ego, another self, a second self: So that when an intimate, entire Friend
is taken away by Death, a Man is almost torn in pieces, and loses a very
considerable part of himself. The wisest of Men tells us in the 17 Proverbs 17.
A Friend loves at all times, and a Brother is born for adversity. This was
verified in Jonathan, he was such a Brother, endearing David in the clearest
Sunshine, and under the blackest Clouds in fair Weather and soul, in Halcion
days, and most tempestuous blustering Storms, being always the same, whatever
Changes were to be found abroad; he being tried by Adversity, was found
faithful. When his Father was his implacable Enemy, he was his fast Friend;
Saul could not be more resolved to ruin him, than Jonathan was studious of
saving him. He stuck to David, and would not leave him, any more than Ruth
would her afflicted Mother-in-law Naomi, who spoke thus to her, 1 Ruth 17.
Where thou die will I die, and there will I be buried, the Lord do so to me,
and more also, if ought but death part thee and me. His Fathers Enmity and
Hatred of David could not part them; if for that he did not love him the
better, for certain he pityed him the more. His Fathers Displeasure and
Indignation against him for loving of David, could not part them: But Death
came, it may be, unexpectedly, and by way of surprise, and did that which
nothing else could do, it parted them, and now whatever Friends David still had
about him, he had lost the best. He had not his Jonathan, among all the rest he
could not find one like Jonathan; and therefore when he thought of it, yea
dwelt in his thoughts upon it, as he could not choose but do, he found himself
wounded, and in pain, so that he could not forbear crying out in our Text, I am
distressed for thee my Brother. So we are got to the third and last thing which
I said was to be enquired into, viz. The import of the word: What may we look
upon as the meaning of David, when he says, He was distressed? I shall give
you my Thoughts of it in these two things. By this word he intimates.

1. The greatness of the Loss he sustained. 2. The intimate sense he had of it.
First, By saying he was distressed, he signifies the greatness of the Loss,
the soreness of the Affliction. It lay heavy upon him, being no common stroke,
no ordinary blow; not the blasting of a sorry Gourd, but withering a Plant of
Renown, a principal Stud was fallen. This was such a loss, as every one could not
meet with; none but a David could lose, so lose his Jonathan. It must be
granted, his Death was a public Loss, all Good Men had a share in it, but his
own was more than double. His Brethren had a Loss, let their Eyes be fountains
of Tears; his Family had a Loss, let them put on Sackbloth, and be clothed in
Mourning; all Israel has had a Loss, let them hang their Harps upon the
Willows, but their Loss, put them all together, is not comparable to mine, mine
is by far the greatest: I have lost my Right Hand: I have lost my Companion, my
Counselor, my Comforter: My Loss is such, as that it cannot be made up to me
by any Man upon Earth, but only by a God in Heaven, from whom came all that
sweetness that I found in Jonathan, and in whom there is infinitely more.

Secondly, By saying he was distressed, he gives us to understand the deepness
and intimacy of that sense which he had of this his Loss. He felt it, for it
went to the quick, and struck him to the very Heart; this was such a blow as he
did not well know how to bear, he was troubled at it, and bowed down greatly,
feeble and sore broken, so that he was scarce able to outlive it; therefore
here he draws up the Floodgates, spends the strength of his Sorrow, pours out
his last and heaviest groan. We may conceive him speaking thus to himself: I
easily yield some Sorrow to be due to Saul, as bad as he was, because Isreal's
King, chosen and appointed of God, one that had been anointed with Oil, yet I
can bear with his Death; for though he was King, and my Father-in-law, yet he was
my irreconcilable Enemy, who hated me with a cruel hatred, and hunted me as a
Partridge upon the Mountains, therefore his Death I look upon not as my
Affliction, but Deliverance; accordingly some Tears I will drop over him, and
bestow a sigh or two there, but can soon wipe mine eyes, and dry my Cheeks
again, leaving sorrow and mourning upon his account as a business more proper
for them who find themselves concerned: 2 Samuel 1. 24. Ye daughters of
Jerusalem, weep over Saul, who clothed you in Scarlet, with other delights,
who put on Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel. You have reason, for he was
your Friend and Benefactor. As for mourning over Jonathan, that is my Province,
my Business, and I undertake it, and will go about it with all my might, there
is none to be found in Israel that I will trust with it, none that can do it so
well as my self, there being none so much concerned, none so inwardly sensible,
none so great a Sufferer, none so deeply wounded, I am distressed for him,
brought into a great strait: While I had him, my Heart was enlarged with Love
to him, and Joy in him; how did it flame, how did it leap, how strong was my
Affection, how high my Delight; but now he is gone, those Comforts are gone
with him; my Heart is pent and oppressed, my Sun is set, and I am clouded,
benighted, left alone to bemoan my self. We have finished the Doctrinal part,
and now come to the Improvement of all in a way of Application: And there are
only three things which I shall bring in as so many Corollaries, and speak to,
in order to the making the late Providence and my present Discourse profitable
to you.

USE 1. From hence learn the weak slippery hold you have of all your worldly
Comforts. Though your Title to them be good, the best that can be, founded not
only upon Providence, but Covenant, yet they may slip through your Fingers before
you are aware, your Possession is not sure: Whatever sweetness you taste in
them, whatever expectations you have from them, they may take their leave, and
disappoint you, there by at once proving their own Vanity, and your Vexation.
Hence they are called things that are not, because they have so little of
being, are of so uncertain continuance, and no further removed from nothing.
They are here to Day looking pleasantly, but may be gone to Morrow, yea before,
and leave you drowned in Tears: Fragrant Flowers they are, by which you are at
present greatly refreshed, but know not how soon they may wither in your hands.
You greatly rejoice in your loving Friends, dear Relations, faithful Ministers,
but their Breath is in their Nostrils, and wherein are they to be accounted of?
Jonah was exceeding glad of the Gourd, under the refrigerating shadow whereof
he sat comfortably and at ease in a scorching day, but a Worm smote it that it
dyed, by this the good Man was transported into an excess of Passion, and
disordered throughout. Job complained not without Cause, Job 10. 17. that
Changes and Wars were upon him, or against him; a multitude, a variety of
Changes, they trod upon the heels of one another, so that he was at no time
safe, knew not what a Settlement meant, could not say, the Morrow will be as
this Day; nay, he could not commend one Day before the Night; the fairest
Morning he had seen overcast, and converted into a blustering Afternoon. He
that has the most Eagle-eye, and pierces into Mysteries, cannot look into the
Purposes of God concerning his present State, nor into the Womb of Providence,
so as to tell aforehand what a Day will bring forth. The gross Mistakes of
every Almanac about the Weather, proclaim the Impudence and Ignorance of the
Star-gazers, and it is to be attributed to the Patience and Mercy of God that
he does not strike those Diviners mad. As God has a variety of Mercies and
Blessings, so that Day unto Day shows Love, and Night unto Night
Faithfulness, he compasses his Children with Favor as a shield, loads them
with Benefits, and we may say, many such things are with him, so has He great
store of Afflictions and Exercises for them too; an House of Bondage, an
howling Wilderness, and a red Sea. Before you have finished your Course, passed
through the World, and entered into your Rest, you may be sure of Changes, but
none of you can tell what those Changes will be, how God will try you, nor in
what Vein bleed you: Now through Mercy you have your Comforts, but know not how
little awhile you shall have them, Ruth 1. 20, 21. Call me not Naomi, call me
Marah, for the Lord has dealt bitterly with me: I went out full, and the Lord
has brought me home again empty: The Comforts of Life are not sure, for Life
it self is not, that is at best a Vapor, and may be soon exhaled. Upon this
account, let the Advice I shall give in four things be acceptable to you.

First, Do not overvalue any of those outward good things you have: Do not
withhold from them that which is meet. There is a Love and Delight due to them
according to the several degrees of Excellency which they have, and of nearness
in which they stand to you; this is a Debt you owe them, and what you owe you
are obliged to pay, if you do not, Divine Justice may come upon you for it. Oh
that you would wisely consider how dreadful and tormenting a sting it would be
to you at the last, if Conscience (which is now a Curious Observer of you, and
all the Passages of your Lives) should arrest you, and say, Man, Woman, thou
art now fetching thy last Breath, a dying Creature, ready to launch into
Eternity, and to appear before the Tribunal of God; but know, thou die
desperately in debt to thy Friends, thy Relations, and thy Family; thou have
lived with them, and conversed with them, but not carried toward them as thou
ought to have done; thou did not abound in those Expressions of Love which
thou should; nay, thou did want the Love its self; thou did not take
that Care of them thou should, neither Care of their Bodies nor of their
Souls: Indeed it is no wonder that their Souls were neglected by thee, since
thou did not at all mind thine own, thou wast not so kind to them as Civility
would have taught thee to have been, but morose and chubbid; at one time thy
Carriage was strange, at another thou did put on the Countenance of a Fury;
thy Words were cutting like sharp Swords, nor did thou hold thy Hands, but
they lighted heavy upon the Wife of thy Bosom, (unnatural Brute as thou art)
whom thou should have been tender over, and loved as thine own flesh. As for
you that are herein guilty, I cannot but tell you, Your Relations now feel the
want of your Love, and Care, and Kindness, but you will then feel the Smart and
Horror of your having been so willingly and wickedly wanting to your Duty:
Therefore amend your ways, and put away the evil of your doings from before
the Eyes of God; learn your Duty, and cheerfully apply to the doing of it, do
it all, do it more and more, take Delight and Pleasure in doing it: Love them,
love to Love them, let your Love continue, let it abound, convince them of your
loving them, that whatever other wants they may have, they may be sure of this,
that they do not want your Love.

But still, do not overdo: Love God as much as ever you can, because him you
cannot love too much; you cannot bestow too much upon him to whom you owe more
than all you have amounts to, therefore there give your Affections their full
liberty, lay the Reins upon their Neck; but when you have to do with Creatures,
take heed to your selves, and love with Caution; let there be a true, honest
and faithful Heart, but yet a weaned Heart. There is a great difference between
Endearing and Doting, study and practice the former, avoid the latter, 1 Cor.
7. 29. It remains that they that have Wives be as though they had none: And
the same is to be said of others, Let those that have Husbands be as though that
had none, and they that have Children, and they that have Brethren, Sisters and
Friends: Too much Love lays a foundation, and makes way for too much Sorrow;
if while you have Comforts you are not as though you had none, I am sure, when
you weep, you will not be as though you wept not: Alas you will scarce find in
your Heart how to resign that which you have fixed your Heart upon. In such a
Case, and unto such a Person, the taking away of a Comfort, or the dissolving
of a Relation will be not as the putting off a Garment, but rending the very
Caul of your Heart.

Secondly, Wisely and carefully Improve your Comforts while you have them: Be
as good Husbands as possibly you may, they may not abide long with you,
therefore while they do, suffer them not to lie dead upon your hands. Have you
Friends and Relations? draw from them all possible Soul advantages; labor you
to be the better for them, and do your utmost, that they may be the better for
you; be mutually helpful one to another, quickening, warming, strengthening one
another, provoking to Love and Good Works. That Proverb is not to be slighted,
for Wisdom is in it, Make Hay while the Sun shines. By present Diligence
prevent those idle and unprofitable Wishes that come too late; Oh that I had
been wiser, Oh that I had done so and so. Do you now, and every Day think and
repeat the Thoughts of this, who have Husbands and Wives, Brethren and Sisters,
Children and Servants, Ministers and People; and you that walk together in an
Holy Communion, meeting in the same Assembly, attending upon the same
Ordinances, and sitting at the same Table, and let these Thoughts be mighty in
their Operation.

And as it ought to be thus with reference to your Friends and Relations, so to
your Estates and Possessions. Many are all the Year round digging like Moles in
the Earth, scraping, raking and heaping up of Riches, as if there would be no
end of their days, but they should live here always: Like the Horse-leeches
Daughter, they never say it is enough, as some never think they have sinned
enough, but drink in Iniquity like Water, and draw it with Cart-ropes; so these
never think they have got enough, in the fullness of their sufficiency they
apprehend themselves in straits. Would these Persons hearken to me, I would
advise them to be ready to communicate, and do all the Good they can to others,
since they do not know how soon they may die, and so have no more Opportunities
for Charity and Usefulness in the World. By Acts of bountiful Compassion make
sure of something considerable, that you may carry with you, before Death comes
to take you from all, and all from you: What thy hand finds to do, either in
Works of Piety or Charity, speed the doing of it, do it with all thy might,
considering there is no work, nor device, nor invention in the Grave, whither
thou art going, Eccl. 9. 10.

Thirdly, Provide for Changes: Expect them, and arm your selves, that when they
come, they may not do you a fatal Mischief. Do not say as David did in his
Prosperity, 30 Psalm. 6. I shall never be moved, though thou think the Lord by
his favor has made thy mountain to stand strong. Dream not of such a
settlement upon Earth, as knows no shaking, thou may quickly be moved, and
thy Mountain too; thy Mountain, as big as it looks, may dwindle, and shrink it
self up into a Molehill, or the hand of Divine Providence may take it and cast
it into a Sea of Trouble. Notwithstanding the height of his Confidence, he soon
found it so, and in the next words has left his Experience upon Record, for
the teaching us to cherish in our selves more solid and sober thoughts, Thou
did hide thy Face, and I was troubled. God does not need to arm against us,
nor throw his Thunderbolts, it is but hiding of his Face, that is enough to
cover us with the shadow of Death, and put all into Confusion; and this, or any
thing else that God pleases to do, may be done in the twinkling of an Eye:
Therefore under the warmest and most comfortable Beams of Divine Favor, under
the brightest shinings forth of the Face of God, we should think of a Cloud,
and in the highest Spring tide of Creature comforts prepare for as low an Ebb.
It does not indeed upon any account become us to give way unto those Fears,
that would deprive us of the comfort of our Enjoyments; nor when God has put a
Cup of Consolation into our hands go about to imbitter it to our selves with
the frightful apprehensions of that which may never be. But it is our Wisdom in
the serenest day, and when there is Peace round about, to cherish those prudent
fears which may enable us to look Terror in the Face, without being distracted
by it, and to endure evil, without having our Hearts broken by it. There is
nothing lost, no hurt done by a calm, sedate propounding difficult Cases to our
selves. As thus: Now I am full, but I may be emptyed as from Vessel to Vessel.
Now I am clothed with Silk and beautiful Garments, but God may strip me of
these and put Sackcloth upon my Loins: Now I have a convenient stately House,
richly hung and furnished, but Sons of Violence may break in and steal, or a
Fire may burn it down to the ground, so that I shall not have where to lay mine
head: Now I have a dear and Loving Husband who cares for me, but I may lose
him, and be brought to a State of desolate Widowhood: Now I have enough, and to
spare, an overplus for the relief of the Poor, but the time may come wherein I
shall want Necessaries, and pine away, stricken through for lack of the fruits of
the Field. My Soul, how will thou be able to bear up, if it should please God
to bring it to this? Thou know how to abound with Joy, and to eat thy Bread
at a plentiful Table with a merry Heart; but do thou know how to be contented
in a time of Want and Scarcity, and to rejoice in the God of thy Salvation in a
Day of Famine, as the Holy Prophet could, 3 Habbuk. 17, 18.

Fourthly, Seek for, and diligently look after those things which you cannot
lose, nor be deprived of. In the midst of the uncertainty you live at, as to
all the Comforts of this present World, make sure of something; I mean,
something that is worth your pains to get, and that it is your interest to
keep. In the 17 Psalm 14. we read of the Men of the World, that their Bellies
are filled with hid treasures; and possibly so is their Bags, and their Cherts,
and their Houses too, all full, and that not of Trash, but Treasure: But poor
Creatures, this is their Misery, that they have their Portion in this Life.
They have a Portion, and it looks great, makes an huge noise, but alas! it is
only in, and for his Life. We read also of the sure mercies of David, 55 Isa.
3. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your Soul shall live, and I
will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David; now
be you so wise as to mind them. It is very good to be sure, excellent to have
that which is so. Christ told Martha, in a way of friendly Reproof to her, that
Mary her Sister had chosen the good part, which should never be taken from her;
neither by God, who was too good to do it, nor by Men and Devils, who were too
weak: That was a wise Choice, be you persuaded to make it. Take not up with
that which may leave you, and which sooner or later you must leave. Sit not
down with any thing that Thieves may break through, and steal, or that Moths can
corrupt, or Rust can fret, or Time shall see the end of. Look out for Christ,
who is the everlasting Father, and able to save to the utmost of your Needs,
and Dangers, and Desires, and of Eternity too; pray for the Spirit, he will
abide with you for ever; Grace will grow up to Glory, and Holiness bring you to
an Happiness that knows neither measure nor end. Follow the Noble Example which
was set you by the Holy Apostles, and Primitive Christians taught of God, who 2 Corinthians. 4. 18. Looked not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen, because the things which are seen are Temporal, but the
things which are not seen are Eternal. Spiritual Blessings in heavenly places,
and things, are of all good things the best, and also the most lasting. Riches
and Honor are with Wisdom: But what! such Riches as take unto themselves
wings, and flee away, such Honor as is a vain and vanishing breath? No, no;
durable Riches and Righteousness, 8 Prove. 18. When all worldly Enjoyments take
their last Farewell, leaving you for ever, you need not look upon your selves
as Persons undone, but say, for all this the lines are fallen unto me in a
pleasant place; still I have a God here, and I shall have an Heaven hereafter.

USE 2. Learn, that it is both the Duty and Interest of Persons in Relation, to
study and endeavor the being pleasant to one another. Jonathan was so to his
Brother David, and by being so, He obtained a good Report, in the Text, Very
pleasant have thou been unto me. This is a fair and lovely Copy for us to Write
after, drawn by an excellent Hand; let us all imitate it, and come up to it as
near as we can: Whether we stand in Natural or Civil, or Church-Relation,
whether Conjugal, Parental, or Filial; whether we are Masters, Mistresses,
Servants, Fellow-Citizens, or Church Members, let us labor to sweeten that
Relation, and to render our selves as easy and acceptable as possibly may be
to one another, that we may not be as Thorns in one another sides, nor pricks
in one another eyes; there will be Aloes enough, we had need bring good store
of Honey. It is an excellent Command the Scripture gives, Follow peace with all
Men, go and do it; follow Peace abroad, though it run from you follow it, but be
sure to keep Peace at home; yea, not only Peace, but Pleasantness too, and both
these are to be found in the ways of Wisdom, 3* Prove. 17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace: See then that ye walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise. A great deal of benefit will be the fruit and effect
hereof; your Relations will have the Comfort of it while Providence continues
you with them, and so will your selves also: and besides that, you will have
the Comfort of it when you come to die, a reflection thereupon will be
exceeding cordial, and over and above you will have the Honor of it after
Death. Nabal was a very Chub, a morose and ill-natured Fellow; Well, what did
his Servants say of him behind his back while he lived, see 1 Samuel 25. 17. He
is such a Son of Belial, that a Man cannot speak to him: And what did his
prudent Wife say of him after he was dead, 25 Verse of the same Chapter, Let
not my Lord regard this man of Belial, even Nabal, for as his Name is, so is
he, Nabal is his Name, and folly is with him; whereas by your being pleasant to
your Friends and Relations, you will raise a Monument to your own Honor, far
better than Absolam's Pillar; and though your Body will corrupt in the Grave, and
return to Dust, yet your Name will be embalmed, and your Memory blessed. And to
this end I commend to you by way of Advice, these three things, desiring you to
put them in practice.

First, Let your Love be sincere, hearty, constant and free; a self-evidencing
Love, that there may be more ground and reason to believe it than your bare say
so: Be sure that your Relation carry along with it all the Affection that it
calls for, and all the desirable fruits of that Affection. It is this, my
Friends, that makes every thing savoury, and puts a good relish into it; take
this away, and all that remains is nothing else but bitterness. What is
Communion and Cohabitation without Love, but a constant Burden? And what are
Services but ungrateful? and what is it that makes them so, when they are good
in themselves? Nothing but their coming from such an hand. The Conjugal Yoke
will be very heavy, and pinch and gall if it be not lined with Love: and is
there not reason? Did not God reject and abhor all that the hypocritical and
profane Jews did in his worship upon this very account, because he knew they
did not love him: Isai. 29. 13. This People draw near me with their mouth, and
with their lips do honor me, but have removed their Heart far from me. And for
that cause he delighted not in the blood of Bullocks, or Rams, or He-goats, but
their Oblations were Vain, their Incense an Abomination, and their solemn
Meetings Iniquity. Why was Jonathan so very pleasant to David? The words
immediately following the Text tell us, Thy Love to me was wonderful.

Secondly, Labor for, and in all your Converses be expressive of a sweetness
of Temper; there is without peradventure, a great deal lies in the Natural
Disposition. Many Persons, who are enriched with the true Grace of God, are
notwithstanding that, Burdens to themselves, and very uneasy to their Friends,
because of the Untowardness of their Temper. I have heard of a Person very
Eminent for his Place and Learning, yea and Godliness too, of whom yet it was
said, Though he had Grace enough for ten men, he had not Grace enough for
himself: The Soil was rank, and the Weeds that grew in it got to such an
height, that too often they overtopt the Divine Plantation. Is it not too
ordinary and common to find some Imperious and Lordly, others fretful and
peevish? Some are Lions, and others are Wasps; every little thing almost
unhingeth, and puts them out of humor; they are angry for Trifles, the very
wagging of a Feather, by no means enduring a contradiction in their Speeches,
or a being crossed in their Wills; but all must study their Humor, and comply
with it, otherwise they will be all on a Flame, and soon make the House too
hot: But this will not do, they are to be greatly condemned, and those that
live with them to be as greatly pitied, specially those that are staked down,
and must bide by it. The Lord give them of his Comforts, for indeed they have
Cross enough. As for you that are so much Friends to your selves, as to desire
a being pleasant to those that are concerned with you, labor to file off this
Ruggedness; rectify your own Spirits, conquer your selves, pray and labor for
a Mastery over your unruly Passions. Get that meek and quiet spirit, which is
an Ornament of great price in the sight of God, 1 Pet. 3. 4. A singular Friend
of mine, by nature hasty and furious, attained to so great a Victory over
himself, by Prayer, Reading of and Meditation upon the History of Christ, that
none could put him into a Discomposure. Make you use of the same Remedy,
remembering; that which is to sweeten other things, must it self be much more
so. Wormwood and Gall are very improper Means for so excellent an End.

Thirdly, Give diligence that ye may know the whole duty of your place, and
make Conscience of doing whatsoever you know to be so. Contribute all that is
within the compass and reach of your Power, to the spiritual, eternal good, and
temporal comfort of those with whom you have to do. It is a very good
Commendation which Lemuel's Mother gives of a virtuous Woman, 31 Prove. 26. That
she opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her Tongue is the Law of Kindness. She
has a Liberty to speak, it is her right, but she uses it with discretion and
affection; and when her Lips are opened, specially to her Husband, they drop
like an Honeycomb: There you see the amiableness of her Temper and
Conversation. But that is not all, there was another curious stroke given in
her Picture before, a choice Character in the 12th. Verse, She will do him good
and not evil all the days of her life. She is careful to avoid doing evil,
ready and constant in doing good, yea all the good she can, being, as Paul
would have every one, unwearied in well-doing. Oh! this is a noble Life, what
our precious Lord and Savior led while upon Earth: He went up and down doing
good, therein leaving us an Example, that we may tread in his steps. Do good,
all of you, in those several places in which Providence has set you, all the
good you can, fill them up with Love and Duty; and do good to the several
Persons you have to do with: Let nothing be wanting in you in order to their
being really the better for you, their Souls being the better for you, that
they may have cause to say, Blessed be God that ever I lived in such a Family,
that ever I had such a Wife, was married to such an Husband, descended of such
Parents, served such a Master and Mistress. You will then be pleasant indeed,
when you are profitable, when you teach the Ignorant, and reduce the Wanderer;
when you enlighten the dark Mind, and blow up the languishing Flame; when you
strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble Knees. And I beseech you,
seriously consider with your selves, why God did make the Woman, and order out
the Conjugal Relation; and we may say the same of others: It was that Persons
in those Relations might be Helps meet for one another. And truly that Person
lives to no purpose, that does not live to good purpose; and he does not live
to good Purpose, who does not live to that Purpose for which God made him, and
sent him, and set him in the place where he is: That person who is an useless
Vessel, I do not, and you need not wonder, if he be a Vessel in which there is
no pleasure. All that know him, may look upon him as an unprofitable burden to
the Earth, and so he may be to his Friends, for he does nothing else but take
up a room, and cumber the ground.

USE Third.

Since the taking away of pleasant things does bring Saints themselves in
distress, we may learn how weak, impotent and inconsiderable a Creature man is.
The Royal Prophet tells us, 39 Psalm. 5. Verily every man at his best state is
altogether Vanity. This is a Truth, I have searched it, I have found it, I am
sure of it; Verily it is so, not only some men, those that are poor and sickly
and silly, but every man, the youngest, the strongest, the wisest, the most
holy; and that not only at some times, and in some Conditions, when he is
diseased and discomposed, but at his best state, when he is most himself, when
his Faculties and Powers of Soul and Body are raised up to the highest pitch,
and most in tune for work, then, even then, He is vanity. He not only has some
Vanity in him, some mixture of vanity, some Dross with his Gold, some Water
with his Wine, but He is vanity: He may even be defined by it; nay more, He is
altogether Vanity, it over-spreads him, it runs through the whole, from the
sole of the Foot to the Crown of the Head he is Vanity. In se uno omne genus
vanitatis complectitur: In himself alone he contains all sorts of Vanity: If
any one is lost, it may be found again in Man. The several and manifold lines
of Vanity meet in Man as in the Center of them. The Doctrine we have been
discoursing of, is one proof and Evidence hereof. David was a good Man, a godly
Man, a man after Gods own Heart, a Man of War, a man of Metal and courage;
when but a Stripling, he did not fear Goliath an huge and mighty Giant, before
whom all Israel trembled; yet when God was pleased to deprive him of his Friend
and Brother, to take from him his Jonathan, he was distressed. How great
Strangers are all of us at home, and how much unacquainted with our selves! It
is very usual for good men to be mistaken about themselves, and that among
others in these two cases: They do not know how much they can do and suffer,
when God is with them: That which to them seemed intolerable at a distance,
feels light when upon them; they can sing under that which they thought would
have broken their Hearts. Hence a good man once said, I was in Prison till I
was in Prison. On the other side, They do not know how little they can do or
suffer, if God be pleased to subduct from them, and comes not in to their
assistance. This made confident Peter tell our Lord, Though all men should deny
him, yet he would not; whereas, when the Temptation came, though Judas betrayed
him, and the rest of the Disciples forsook him, yet Peter was the only man of
them that denied him. But let us return to the business before us. Afflictive
Providence may, and oft-times do, bring the best Saints into distresses; and
those not only outward in their Condition, so that they shall be compast about
with Difficulties, and hemmed in on every side, as Israel was at the Red Sea;
but likewise inward in their spirits, so as to be brought to their Wits-end,
and almost to their Faiths end; they know not which way to turn them, nor what
course to steer: They are at a loss both how to bear the Affliction upon them,
and what to do in the case.

First, Afflictions, such afflictions may be ordered to good men, as may bring
them into those distresses that they shall not know how to bear it. This is
often seen and felt. David did not know how to bear the Death of Absalom, but
went up and down like a Bedlam, wringing his hands, and crying, Would God I had
died for thee, O Absalom, my Son, my Son, 2 Samuel 18. 33. Jonah could not bear
the non-fulfilling of his Prophecy concerning the Destruction of Niniveh, nor
the withering of his Gourd, for he would have had God take his Life from him,
and told him to his Face, He did well to be angry, even unto Death, 4 Jonah 3,
and 9 Verses. Thus the spirit is roil'd, the Patience is spent, and the Heart
fires and flames. In the 73 Psalm, holy Asaph seeing the Prosperity and
flourishing state of the Wicked, while he was daily under a pressing load of
Afflictions, and the violent hurries of Temptation, cried out, Ver. 26. That
his Flesh and his heart failed. Have not some of us heard poor Creatures under
some sore and heavy blow given them by the hand of God, crying out in the Agony
and bitter Anguish of their spirits, This is such a loss I cannot bear it?
Little considering that Job did bear more than is laid upon them, and when all
was gone at a Clap, fell down and worshipped, saying, The Lord has given, and
the Lord has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Neither do they consider,
that nothing is happened to them, but what is common to man; and what reason is
there for extraordinary passions, when there is nothing but ordinary
Providence. Once more, they do not consider, what the Apostle says, viz. That
God is faithful, who will not suffer his People to be tempted above what they
are able, but will so graciously and tenderly order that they shall be able to
bear it. Forbear such Expressions. The Church understood her self, and spoke
very wisely when she said, 7 Micah 9. I will hear the Indignation of the Lord:
And if she could bear indignation, you may very well resolve to bear affliction.

Secondly, Afflictions do sometimes bring good men into such afflictions, as
that they do not know what to do under them. That is an usual cry, Things are
so and so with me, that I cannot tell what to do: I do not know in all the
World what I shall do. And indeed it must needs be exceeding sad with that
Person who is brought to such a loss: Now I shall say these two things to such
Persons as these are.

First, Those distresses which amount to this, are too much, and rise to too
great an height; and you may thank your selves for them. Be the affliction
which you meet with what it will, it is not too much, nor too great; not such
as God could have laid on, nor as you did deserve: So Ezra acknowledged in his
9th. Chapt. 13 v. Thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities
deserve. Remember it is of Gods ordering out, all whose ways are Mercy and
Truth, to them that fear his Name, and keep his Covenant; who does all things
to his People with Wisdom and in Love, measuring out the Potion, and weighing
the Burden, that there may not be a grain more than is necessary and fit. But
this sore distress is a great deal too much, into which thou have thrown thy
self by thy unbelief and Impatience.

What meanest thou by saying, This I cannot bear? from whom comes it? Was it
not from God? and if from God, it is thy Duty to bear it. The Lord Jesus knew
better, and spoke better, when He said, Shall I not drink of the Cup which my
Father has given me to drink of? 18 Ioh. 11. and how will you avoid it? how
can you help your selves? Can you shake off the burden? If not, you must bear
it. Thine arrows stick fast in me, said David, 38 Psalm: 2. v. Yes, too fast for
him to pull out with all the strength he had. See to it, that you bear it
becomingly, submissively, like a Child whose will is bowed to the Will of God,
and swallowed up by it. Let Patience have its perfect work. Be the present load
what it will, if you will not bear it, you take a Course to bring upon your
selves an heavier. What does a wild Bull in a Net do when he tosseth, and
kicks, and flings, but intangles himself the more? He had better be quiet.

Again, Art thou thy self when thou say, I know not what to do? Have you
been in the School of Christ, and taught of God, and yet such a Dunce as not to
know what to do? You ought to know and do too. Your work is before you, and
will you not see it? I beseech you to sit down, and recollect your selves,
seriously commune with your own Hearts, propound the Question, What is the will
of God concerning me? There is no State or Condition in which you are or can
be, but therein you may find something, yea enough to do. You may do something
to please and honor God, and something to help and profit your selves: You may
therein set Faith at work, and Patience at work: A time of Affliction is the
proper season for those Graces to yield their Fruit, those Spices to flow
forth. Now act submission to the Divine Will: Here am I, let him do what
seems good unto him: Fall to Improving of the Affliction, get Meat out of the
Eater, Honey from the Carkase of the Lion, that what has devoured thy
Comforts, may seed thy Graces; see if you cannot by an holy Chimistry extract
Gains out of Losses, and turn Iron into Gold: Try what advantage you can make
of the Sickness that consumes you, of the pain that grinds and tortures you;
what Life you can fetch out of the Grave, the death of such a Friend or
Relation; there is no Affliction with which we are exercised, but it puts into
our hands an opportunity for some special work or other; there is no Condition
but what has a particular duty belonging to it. Do not say, I am now
altogether useless and unserviceable; who is it that has made thee so? God
has not, have a care thou do not make thy self so: What tho thy Work does
not lie where it did, it lies somewhere, find it out, and do it.

I most freely and readily grant, you cannot do your present Duty, nor any
thing else in your own strength, as it ought to be done. You cannot stir a
Finger without Divine Concurrence, nor lift up a Prayer, unless the Spirit set
his hand to it; there must be an helping of the Infirmity, else no performance
of the Duty. It is one above that works both to will and to do, of his own
good pleasure: But however, go you about your Work, set to it heartily, and in
good earnest, going for strength where it is to be had: Seek it in, and from
Christ, in whom it is laid up for you. To this purpose, for your Encouragement,
remember that of Paul in the 4 Phil. 13. I can do all things through Christ, who
strengthens me. Upon the gracious conveyances of Life, Spirit and Power from
Christ, he is able to do the work of a Christian, and of an Apostle, to resist
Temptation, to bear Affliction, and glory in Tribulation: He was able wisely to
improve what he had, and willingly to part with it; able to deny himself, and
yet enjoy himself, when he had done so. In short, while you bitterly complain,
that you know not what to do, have a care you do not overdo, in inflaming your
own wounds, afflicting and sinking your own Spirits, when the hand of God has
touched you.

Secondly, Labor to extricate your selves, and with all possible speed procure
your own deliverance and enlargement out of these Distresses. Submit to the
Loss God has ordered out to you, and to the Affliction with which you are
exercised: Has he brought you into the Dust, lay your Mouths there, and lie
quietly till he bring you forth to the light, and show you his Smiles and
Salvation; but get out of the distress as fast as may be, only see that it be
in the right way. Be content that a Storm should be upon thy Tabernacle as long
as God will have it there, but command thy Soul to be silent, and still, and as
soon as thou can, recover the calm of thy Spirit. Our Lord and Savior of his
own accord came to do the Will of his Father, and without hesitancy yielded to
a suffering Condition, not running from it to the last, but breathing out his
last upon a Cross, but his Agony did not last long; very sharp indeed it was,
so that therein he sweat drops of Blood, but it was short, and quickly went
over again, and in all his after Trials he expressed a full and most sweet
Composure of Soul, and carried it with a true greatness of Spirit. There should
be in us a due sense of Losses and Afflictions; otherwise we shall be guilty of
offering an Affront unto God, and putting a slight upon him; and we shall
prejudice our selves by not serching that good out of an Actiction which we
might: But still we must be careful to moderate our grief as much as possibly
we can, both as to degree and duration, returning to a right and even Temper.
It is most honorable for the Christian, and comfortable to him, when Grace
does that which Time will. In order hereunto, I advise these four things.

First, Ease your selves in a way of Prayer. It is indeed very good, when an
Oppressed Person can broach the Vessel, and give his Sorrow vent in Tears: I my
self have known some (among others an Eminent and Noble Lady) so full of
Sorrow, that their Hearts were ready to break, relieved by Weeping, when all
their Friends that came to Comfort them, proved Physicians of no value; but the
best, and most excellent way, is to mingle Tears and Prayers together. Weep
over your Afflictions if you can, but withal go and tell your Father of them,
pouring out the Complaints and Desires of your Souls into his Bosom. Poor
Hannah was in great distress, having an Adversary in the House with her, who
multiplied provocations to make her fret, whereupon she became bitter of Soul:
In that Case she tried what God would do, and sought unto him, 1 Samuel 1. 10.
She wept sore; that she could not help, nor did she endeavor it, Tears have
their Rhetoric, but she also prayed: And O! how much did she gain by it, what
abundance of Peace, what Quietness and Comfort did her Prayer fetch into her!
It is said, ver. 18. She went away, and her Countenance was no more sad: While
she was praying, God gave her a Gracious Smile, a look of Love, and she was a
cheerful Woman ever after. Faith and Prayer will do the work, notwithstanding
the difficulties of it, and scatter the Clouds, be they never so thick. The
more a gracious Soul relies on God in a way of Believing, and seeks him in a
way of humble, fervent Supplication, the easier will every Burden be to it, the
lighter every Affliction, and the more comfortable every Condition.

Secondly, Put the most fair and candid sense you can upon Providence; and
make the best interpretation of every thing God does with you. We should have
both Honorable Thoughts of it, and Amicable too, for He is too Righteous to do
wrong to any of his Creatures, and too Gracious to do hurt to any of his
Children. When our Lord had opened the Ears of the Deaf Man, and loosed his
Tongue, the People said 7 Mark 37. He has done all things well: say the same
of God, for it is true: He does not fail in any of his Undertakings, nor
miscarry in any of the works of his hands, but does all things like himself,
like a God. Do not only assert this of his Providence in General, but bring it
down, and apply it to particular Dispensations. He has done well in this, and
well in that, 119 Psalm 65. Thou have dealt well with thy Servant, O Lord,
according to thy Word: 71 Verse, It is good for me that I have been afflicted.
75. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me; Go ye, and do likewise. He has done well in emptying me,
for had I continued full, I might have grown proud, and denied him, saying, who
is the Lord: He has done well in taking my Husband, my Father, my Teacher from
me, for being ripe for Heaven, he was gathered. He had finished that Work which
was given him to do; and it is more than a thousand pities that a Good Man
should outlive his Work, or stay in a place where he has nothing to do: It is
pity but that a Faithful Servant of Christ, when he has dispatched the
business he came for, should forthwith be taken up to his Rest, and have an
entrance granted him into the Joy of his Lord: Believe this also, That in all
God's dealings with you, he intends you a Kindness; if a Raven be sent to
Elijah, it shall carry Food for him; the very Rod blossoms with Love, and bears
the peaceable fruit of Righteousness. Jacob was mistaken, when he said, 42 Genesis
36. All these things are against me: Good Man, he little knew then what God was
doing for him. Do you rather say with Paul, 8 Romans 28. We know that all
things work together for good, to them that love God; this shall work so, and
that likewise.

Thirdly, Look off from the Afflictions you feel, to the mercies you have; from
the Comforts you have lost, to those that are yet left. God might have stripped
you of all, for you have made frequent forfeitures. We took notice before of
God's dealing with Upright Job, who in a little time was deprived of all,
brought to the Ashes, having his Body over and above smitten with fore Boils,
from the sole of his Foot, even to his Crown, yet had he then something left
him for his Support and Comfort, viz. The witness of his Conscience. Though his
Wife was very unkind, a Thorn in his side, and spoke bitterly, when she bade
him Curse God, and die; yet Conscience was within him like a Bird of Paradise
that sung sweetly, while it told him, he was not wicked, and bare Testimony to
his Integrity. God has taken from you an Husband, a Father, a Wife, a Mother,
a Child, one Child after another, a dear Brother or Sister, a faithful Friend,
a diligent Labourer in the Vineyard: But ask your selves the Question, what
has God left me? And be sure that the present Loss, be it what it will, do not
so corrupt and vitiate thy Palate, as that thou should not taste the
remaining Mercy: Rather let the Mercy which remains influence thy Spirit to the
alleviating of the present Loss, and enabling thee to bear thy Burden the
better. Possibly some here have lost the Husband, or Father is dead, Estate is
spent, Debtors are broke, Trade fails, all is gone, and no visible way for a
Livelihood. Be it so, yet there is something left for you; namely, a God, can
you not live upon him? Cannot you rejoice in him? You may read of one that
could, 3 Habbuk. 17, 18. and you have Promises left, which are exceeding great
and precious: Go feed upon them, believe them, plead them, and turn them into
Prayer.

Lastly, Often relieve your selves with Meditations upon the fullness and
sweetness of Christ. Was Jonathan pleasant to David? how pleasant then is
Jesus, far more than Jonathan was, or ever could have been? And though Jonathan
be dead, yet Jesus is risen. He is said to rejoice over his Church as the
Bridegroom over the Bride: And he says, 7 Cant. 6. How fair and how pleasant
art thou, O love, for delights! And shall not Saints reckon Christ so? They
that know what he is, and what Communion with him is, do, and will witness with
the Spouse in 1 Cant. 16. Behold! thou art fair, my Beloved, yea, and pleasant.
O, how fair must he needs be, who is the Sun of Righteousness, who outshines
all the Beauties in the World, all the Angels in Heaven, and who is the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, the express Image of his Person, 1 Heb. 3. And
how pleasant must he needs be, who puts a sweetness into our worst things, so
that the Saints have taken joyfully the spoiling of their goods, 10 Heb. 34.
and a deliciousness into their best things. It is He that makes Truths sweet,
being the Marrow of the Gospel; and Ordinances sweet, they are but the Dishes,
he the Feast. It is He that makes Heaven sweet: What would that place be
without his Company? There indeed Saints are, and shall be without Sin, and
without Sorrow, above Affliction, and above Temptation; all this is very good,
but that which commends it, and is its self yet better, is, they shall there be
with Christ. 14 Ioh, 3. Where I am, there ye shall be also: And said Paul, 1
Phil. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better.
Yea, it is Christ that commends God himself to us, for out of him he is a
consuming Fire, and everlasting burnings; 33 Isa. 14. We could not endure his
Presence. In him He is reconciled, a Father of Mercies, and God of Comforts, 2
Cor. 1. 3. So that he must needs be pleasant, and with this comfort your
selves: Whoever is dead, whatever is gone, you have Christ still, who has
said, He will not leave you comfortless, but will come to you.

It may now be expected I should speak something concerning my Dear Brother,
who fought a good Fight, kept the Faith, served his Generation according to the
Will of God* and has now finished his Course; but there is no need, his Works
praise him: You have known his Doctrine, and manner of Life, and so have others
who were gainers by his Ministry, being begotten, nourished and built up by the
Gospel he Preached. Take therefore what I shall say in short; thus: He was well
accomplished with Learning, and furnished for the Work to which God had called
him. His Abilities and stock of Knowledge were very considerable, as they found
who conversed with him. He was, I am persuaded, truly Gracious, an humble
Christian, a profitable Preacher, an able Catechist, and a Faithful Friend: He
was a wise Man, and a Man of Peace, one that did adorn his Profession by his
unreproveable and exemplary Conversation. God has been pleased to take him
from us, I do bewail my Loss, and so do many of you yours: But he had done his
Work, and is now, I doubt not, taking an Everlasting Rest in the Bosom of his
dearest Lord. His Faith let us follow, considering the end of his Conversation.

FINIS.

