THE Souls Return to its God, IN Life, and at Death.

A Funeral Sermon, Preached upon occasion of the Death of Mr. JOHN KENT, Late
of Crouched Friars, Who Departed this Life December. 16. 1689.

By Samuel Slater, Minister of the Gospel.

1 These. 4. 14.

Them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Black Raven in the Poultry. 1690.

To my Worthy Friend Mrs. MARY KENT.
AT your desire this Sermon was preached, and at your repeated desire it is now
published. God grant that it may be accompanied, wherever it shall come, with
the Divine Spirit and Blessing, that being so backed and in^uenced, it may
accomplish the thing for which it is thus sent abroad, and prove a singular
means of good to precious and immortal Souls. The hand of that God, before whom
it becomes the whole Earth to ^eep silence, has made a very great breach upon
you, by depriving ^ou of your dear and affectionate Husband, whose Life was
very desirable unto those that were his acquaintance, but much more to ^ou. The
good Lord stand himself in the breach, for he alone is ^ble to make it up, who
out of his infinite fullness is able to sweeten ^ll our comforts, to supply all
our wants, and to fill up all vacancies, and to do far more abundantly than we
can ask or think. It is your wisdom not to stand poring upon your Loss, but to
endeavor ^he turning it into gain: for meat may be fetched out of the eater,
and life out of death; that which devours our comforts, may feed ^ur graces.
Every thing shall one way or other befriend that person who is indeed a friend
to himself. Your Husband is taken from you, and this is heavy upon you, that
you shall see his face no more; yet see carefully to this, that you mourn not
as one that has no hope, rather believing that he is gone to a place of peace,
rest and happiness; gird up the loins of your mind, and by a diligent speedy
preparation of your self, make all the haste you can after him, so you shall
see him in a better place, and better state, and more than that, you shall see
your God and Savior too in all his glory, which shall reflect a glory upon
you. It may be our comfort to think that it is but a little time which you and
I, and the rest of the people of God have to mourn in, and to conflict with
Enemies and Troubles in; and if we can through the assistance of grace obtain a
Victory over our unruly and imperious lusts, we ^ rows. Make we it our care and
labor to get sin out of our hearts and the hand of Infinite Love and Goodness
will infallibly wip^ away all tears from our eyes. My hearts desire and prayer
t^ God for you and yours, is, that ye may be saved, and so follo^ those blessed
Souls that are gone before, and have through Fait^ and Parience entered into
the possession of those glorious things which are contained in the Promises,
and an intimate Communi^ with that God who made them, as that you may be
comportioner^ and fellow-sharers with them. Oh that the prevailing Comforter,
who^ our dearest Lord sent to his Church, may take up his abode wit^ you, and
do that part of his Office to you in the midst of all yo^ disconsolations! May
be direct your feet into the way of peac^ and your hearts into the Love of God,
and a patient waiting f^ the coming of our Lord, and the day of your
Redemption. T^ Lord himself be your Sun and Shield, give you grace and glory
with whatever else he sees good. May be teach you to live holiy and to all
well-pleasing, and then enable you to die triumphantly To his grace, guidance
and blessing I commend you; and as I hope (...) find you, so I desire to leave
you under the healing and refreshing wings of the glorious Sun of
Righteousness; My self remaining,

From my Study, Ian. 24. 1690. Yours in our most precious Jesus Samuel Slater.

Psalm 116. 7. Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul! for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee.
THE words before us are part of a Psalm of Praise (in which we have reason to
conclude David's heart well tuned, and wound up to an high pitch of
Thankfulness) and therefore may by some be looked upon as somewhat improper for
a Funeral Occasion and Solemnity. But for the silencing and satisfaction of
such as may so judge; I shall only say, this was the Scripture, upon which the
heart of our deceased Friend and Brother was much set, and in the time of his
health he did frequently mention it as the subject of that Sermon which should
be Preached after his departure out of this World into an Eternal State; and if
I am not greatly mistaken, it will freely and plentifully afford matter very
fit for you to be entertained with at such a time as this: For though when a
Child of God dies, there is just cause of mourning among his Friends and dear
Relations, and in the Church of God, of which he was a living Member, not upon
his account, who is an unspeakable gainer, but their own, who are sensible of a
great loss, yet surely it ought to be such a mourning, as does not exclude joy
as a thing with which it is utterly inconsistent, because we are by the Word of
Truth assured, that the day of such an ones death, is better than the day of
his birth; and in the midst of those tears which are shed, there may be
triumphs because of a blessed and glorious Victory that is obtained; and a
desired complete deliverance wrought from all those troubles and pressures
which tried his Faith and Patience while a Pilgrim here; and likewise because
then in a more special manner, after all his afflictive wanderings from Mountain
to Hill, after all his sinful rambles and excursions, and after all his tedious
travels, pursuits and runnings to and fro after Creature-enjoyments and
comforts, which did often run faster from him than he could after them, so that
he was forced to lie down in sorrow upon the score of his disappointment; I
say, after all this, his Soul does at death take its flight for the other
World, and joyfully returns unto that God with whom it longed to be, and in
whom it shall take up a perfect, undisturbed, and everlasting Rest. There are
but two things in the Text which need and call for Explication. Return unto thy
rest, O my Soul!

The Question will be, What are we here to understand by Rest? To which I
answer in these three things briefly.

First, Some do look upon it as importing a quiet state and condition, after
all those tumblings and tossings which he had had; the hurries of his life
caused by the uncertainty and variety of Providence, the many and great
afflictions that had been ordered out to him, God had now brought him ad lo^ ^
and take possession. The Waters are assuaged, the Ark is upon firm ground, now,
my Soul, go forth; and offer such a Sacrifice as will be of a sweet savor.

Secondly, Others do by Rest understand a still and pacate frame; He had been
before very uneasy, and thereupon unquiet in his Spirit. He had been under
great and furious tempests, which had raised much filth and corruption that
greatly royl'd him; while there were fightings without, there were fears
within, and those fears did bid defiance to his Faith, and in many Encounters
prevailed against it, so that his Soul was dejected and disquieted within him:
Now he would have those storms to be laid, and his Soul to return unto that
blessed tranquillity and calm which in former times it did enjoy through the
comfortable shinings of God upon it. But I shall pass by both these; therefore

Thirdly, Others do here by Rest, understand God himself; so that when the
Psalmist says, Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul! his meaning is, Return unto
thy God, redi ad illum, apud quem summam invenies tranquillitatem, nempe ad
Deum, return to him, namely, to God, with whom thou will enjoy thy self as thou
would, in whom thou will have the greatest peace, and sweetest repose. Thou
have been going to this, and to the other, scattering thy ways; now, my Soul,
give them their last farewell, and go to thy God, for with him it will be better
with thee than it is now.

As for that other phrase, the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; it is
variously rendered. He has recompensed thee, he has given thee a reward; He
has done thee good; viz. in delivering thee from thine Enemies, from thy
dangers, and from thy distresses, and from all thy fears. He has satisfied
thee by granting thy desires, and accomplishing thy hopes; but I see no just
reason why we should leave our own Translation, the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee. There is nothing else in the words that carries in it the least
appearance of a difficulty. In them we may take notice of these two parts.

First, A gracious persons inviting or calling his Soul home; calling upon his
Soul to leave its idle extravagancy, and to go back to the place from whence it
came, to direct its steps or motions to that God with whom it should both be,
and love to be. Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul! Return unto thy God, O my Soul!

Secondly, Here is the Argument he uses for the prevailing with his Soul, and
persuading it to steer this holy and blessed course; for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee; thy Experiences may very well be thy Encouragements. The
Doctrines which I shall present you with from hence, are of the same number
with the parts; unto both which I shall speak at this time

First Doctrine is this; A gracious Soul should be glad to think of returning
to its God, and often call upon it self to that purpose: Return unto thy Rest,
O my Soul!

The second Doctrine is this; The Experiences that gracious Souls have had of
God; or, his former gracious and bountiful dealings with them, should be a
covent and prevailing Argument for their returning unto him. This was ^ the
Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. We shall handle them in their order, and
so begin with the former.

Doct. 1. A gracious Soul should be glad to think of returning to its God, and
call often upon it self to such a blessed purpose. Return unto thy Rest, O my
Soul! Now the very mentioning of a return to God, does naturally and directly
lead us to the consideration of a distance at which the Soul before was from
God; for if there had not been a departure from God, there would not be any
need of, nor occasion for a return to him, Ier. 3. 12. Return, thou backsliding
Israel, says the Lord. And again he calls, verse 22. Return, ye backsliding
Children, and I will heal your backslidings. They had not walked with God, nor
kept close to him, as they were by their duty and interest obliged to have
done, but were gone from him: Though they had once come up to him, and went
after him in a Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown, yet they drew back
again; kindness would not hold them, nor Covenant, nor the Cords of a man, but
back they did draw, yea and that not a little way, but as the Lord himself
complained in Ier. 2. 5. They had gone far from him, and walked after vanity,
and were become vain: But whither did they go, when they left God? you may be
sure, they changed not for the better; they went to base Idols, to them that
were not Gods, and that was a great way; they went far from God in going to
Pagan Heathenish Idolatry, as those among us are gone far from God, who have
renounced the Protestant Religion, and are gone over to the Tents of
Antichrist, to Popish Idolatry. Yet for ever to be admired is the Divine mercy
and goodness; those that had gone from God, yea that had gone so exceeding far
from him without having any just cause given them for so doing, he was
graciously pleased to call back again to himself, Return, O backsliding
Children! so that a return does speak a distance that is between God and man.
Now this distance is to be found in a threefold state, and answerable to that
threefold distance there is to be a threefold return; there is a distance from
God at which man stands in a threefold state. 1. In his Unregenerate State. 2.
In his Imperfect 3. In his Mortal

1. Men, all men are at a distance from God, during their corrupt and
unregenerate state; those that are in their sins, are, as the Apostle said of
the unconverted Ephesians; Ephesians. 2. 12. without God in the world; let them have
what they will, never such natural and acquired accomplishments, such friends
and relations, such honor and power, such estates and revenues, they have not
God; let them make never so great a figure in the world, they are without God
in the world. You that are in your impure naturals, the Servants of sin, under
the power and dominion of your lusts; you that have not been born again, nor
quickened by the Divine Spirit, nor made partakers of Grace and Holiness, you
are to this day far from God; you may indeed frequent the Assemblies of the
Saints, and walk in an outward Fel^ ^ (...) external performance o^ commanded
duties; you may sit (...) the Table of the Lord: Foolish Virgins had their
Lamps, and walked with the Wife. Simon Magus was baptized; Judas* received the
Sop; but you never yet came to God: All this amounts to no more than a drawing
nigh with your lips, the shadow of an approach, a coming before him (...) his
People, in pretense and show, there is nothing of truth and reality, nothing of
soundness and honesty in what you do, it is all complement and hypocrisy, for
your bearts are far from him. I doubt not but you will easily grant, that those
who are bitter and mortal Enemies one to another, are far one from another,
though, as to their bodies they may be in the same room, now a state of sin is
a state of enmity; so the Apostle Paul tells us, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is
enmity against God; enmity in the abstract, enmity in the height of it: The
carnal mind votes against God, and the carnal heart hates him, and all that
bears his Image and Superscription; it hates his Law, his Government, his Word,
his Ways, his People, any thing that savours of God, any one that resembles
him. As God does perfectly hate the carnal man's wickedness; so does the carnal
man hate Gods holiness, yea all holiness, except it be an holy day of his own
making. The unregenerate man cannot endure the splendour of the Sun, no, not so
much as the twinkling of a Star: My meaning is, he cannot bear with the perfect
holiness of God himself, no, not with the imperfect holiness of his People.

Secondly, There is a distance from God in our imperfect state, while we are in
our nonage and minority. The gracious Soul is indeed said to be brought nigh;
as you may see in Ephesians. 2. 13. Now in Christ Jesus ye Who were sometimes far
off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ: So that as ye have it in verse 19.
Ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens of the Saints,
and of the household of God: You are now some of the family with some of the
house; all those that are sincere Converts, sound Believers, persuaded to be
not almost, but altogether Christians, are brought into a near relation to God;
they are his Children, and have a right to go up to his very Throne, and there
call him Father, and they are also brought into a near Communion, 1 John 1. 3.
That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye might have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. And as God has made it their duty so they do make it their
delight to be drawing nigh to him in those Ways which he has appointed them;
hence they love praying and hearing, Sabbaths and Sacraments, means of grace,
and actings of grace; and many sweet meeting they have with him, and abundance
of benefit and advantage they find coming into their Souls by it, Psalm. 73. 28.
It is good for me to draw near to God, pleasant and profitable; good as it
affords me peace, and good as it promotes my growth; good as it increases my
grace, and as it adds to my comfort; it is every way, and upon all accounts,
good to, draw ^igh to God; but yet, as near as the Saints themselves are to
God, they are not so near to him as they would be, nor as they should be; and
therefore ^ things of the enamoured Spouse, Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run
after thee. And the Language of all holy Souls is the very same, for they are
not satisfied with, though thankful for what they have, but are, and while
here, will be making out after nearer approaches, and still nearer, not only
the banquettinghouse-entertainment, Cant. 2. 4. but chamber-fellowship, Cant.
3. 4. and after clearer sights, Show me thy glory, said Moses; and after fuller
enjoyments. Stay me with flaggons, comfort me with apples: Straw me with them,
compass, load me with them; and as none of them are so full as they would be,
so, none of them so fixed as they would be; they cannot dwell upon God as they
would do, but are guilty of wanderings from him, both out of duty, and in it
too; their minds and affections are running away from God, so that they have
them to seek while they should be wholly taken up with him; woeful flutterings
and rovings are the matter of their frequent and sorrowful complaint.

Thirdly, There will be a distance during the time of this their mortal state
while they do inhabit the earthly house of this Tabernacle; so long as the
Christian is upon Earth, he is not where he would be, unless it be for
work-sake, and for duties-sake; this is not his own home, but the house of his
Pilgrimage; this is not his Country, but a strange Land; this is not his rest,
for it is polluted, and he is uneasy; and when he can make his escape, and be
upon the wing, and get to Heaven, by raised meditations, flaming affections,
and a Gospel-adorning conversation, still he is not there so as he would be,
not in such a manner, nor to such a degree. He is not so often there, nor so
much there, nor so long there as he would be; Rara hora, brevis mora. He can
get up thither too seldom, and he can abide there too little. He is not wholly
and altogether there as he would be: when he has taken a great deal of pains
to wind his Soul up, there are heavy weights that press it down, and so there
are miserable, vexatious declensions and descensions; through weakness the holy
Soul cannot mount up to Heaven so strongly, and through wantonness it cannot
abide there so constantly as it would; and besides this, the present state is a
state of absence, which the gracious heart does not like nor approve; it is
grievous and ^rksom to it, as the wilderness-condition was to Israel, though
they had Manna sent them from Heaven, and Water fetched for them out of a Rock,
and that following them in a neverfailing stream, yet it was but a wilderness,
not the Land flowing with Milk and Honey, which they had in the Promise, and in
their Hope, 2 Cor. 5. 6. While we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord; we do not enjoy his glorious presence, nor lie in his bosom; we do
walk by faith, and not by sight; we rejoice in hope, and not in fruition; the
sights which we have of him, are but as in a glass, darkly, and not face to
face: Our enjoyment of him is mediate, we have his tokens, and not those
endearing embraces that we would: Yea and while we are absent we are burdened
with this load of corruptible flesh, in which we cannot be completely happy,
and with a (...) of sin, the body of death which stinks in our nostrils, and
with a load ^ accounts there follows an uneasiness and restlesness of spirit;
verse 2. We gro^ earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is
from Heaven, to have a Robe of Immortality and Glory put on over this Garment
of the body. Thus I have shown you that there is a distance from the Lord, and
that in all men, even the best and most holy, those who have attained to the
largest measures, and highest degrees of grace while they are Pilgrims and
Strangers here. Now according to this threefold distance from God there is to
be a threefold return to him, if ever we would come to the enjoyment of a
perfect happiness and rest; which I shall give up thus to you.

First, There is a return to God at the time, and in the work of Conversion,
when there is a sanctifying change wrought in a person; when he is of a Sinner
made a Saint, and of an Enemy a Friend of God. This is evident from that speech
of our Savior to Saul, Acts 26. 17, 18. I do now sen^ thee to the Gentiles, to
open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God, from ignorance to knowledge, from Idolatry and wickedness, to the
owning, acknowledging, worshipping an^ serving of God. Converting Grace is the
begetting of a Soul to God, the bringing of the Prodigal Son to his Father, the
reducting of the lost an^ wandering Sheep home to its fold; and this is the
first return; this is the first step; until this be taken, the Soul is not only
far from God, but, which is both its sin and misery, it is going further and
further from him: For every act of sin is a step from God, and a continued
course of sin, is a constant departure from him: As men sin against God more
and more; so they do revolt from God more and more; while they add to sin, they
add t^ backslide: But in Conversion there is a returning to him; this sets fac^
and heart Godward, and now the feet are guided into the way of peace* Thrice
happy you that have thus returned; this is the beginning of you^ life. As the
Father said with joy concerning his returning Prodigal; This m^ Son was dead,
but he is alive; and this is the beginning of your blessedness* Therefore Peter
Preaching to the Jews, told them, Acts 3 26. That unto the^ first God having
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless them, in turnin^ away every one of
them from their iniquities. Yea, my Friends, whatsoeve^ cheats are put upon you
by the Father of Lies, and your own self-deceivin^ hearts, you will never be a
blessed people, till you are turned from you^ iniquities, till then you are
under guilt and wrath, and a curse; but a turn^ ing from iniquity, is a
returning unto God: The turning you from sin, i^ the breaking down of that
middle wall of partition which did before sta^ between God and you: Let me
therefore speak to you, O sinners! in the same words that P^ter used, Acts 3.
19. Repent ye and be converted, the your sins may be blotted out, when the
times of refreshing shall come from t^ presence of the Lord.

Secondly, There is a further return unto God in the actings, exercis^ and
increases of grace; for though there be a turning to God in the fir^
Conversion, yet we must not stop there; returning to him ought to be the ^
^earer to morrow, and ^o nearer and nearer every day. Now, as every ^ct of sin,
is a step from God; so every act of grace is a step to God. Faith ^aiseth the
Soul above the things that are seen, and mounts it up as upon ^he wings of an
Eagle. Love carries the Soul up as in a fiery Chariot, a pure and holy flame,
so that it dwells in God, and God in it. Ardent and importunate desires are
the feet upon which the Soul runs out to God, and follows hard after him; and
the more the Soul tramples upon the things that are below, and by acts of
self-denial goes out of it self, the more does it find it self in God: And so
it is with reference to the happy additions which it makes to the grace it
has; the more it grows in grace, the more does it grow up unto God. All the
improvements it makes in grace, are blessed progress^s in its way to God; that
is indeed going from strength to strength, till it appear before God in Sion,
Psalm. 84. Oh who is there that considers this, that would be retrograde in his
motions; and languishing and decaying in spirituals! who would be content to
stand at a ^ay? who would not be possessed with, and acted by a spirit of holy
covetousness, always receiving out of the ^lness of Christ, and yet always
begging? and while he draws up one Bucket-full, letting down another for more.
Remember it, O Christians? the more you are as by the Spirit of the Lord
changed from grace to grace, the more considerable advances you make from lower
to higher degrees of holiness; the more will you be transformed in the spirit
of your mind, and changed from glory to glory, the more will you have in you of
a Divine Nature, and the more of the Divine Image upon you. In a word, by this
means you will come to have a greater conformity and likeness unto God, and so
a sweeter communion and intimacy with him. So then this is a further return
unto God; this is a getting nearer and nearer to him; and truly this should be
the work of every day. This is that which we should have in our designs and
aims in all the holy duties that we perform, and in all the precious Ordinances
upon which we do attend, that by every one of them we may have a lift given us,
and he brought more over, and more close to God than we as yet are.

Thirdly, There is a return to God at death: So the Royal Preacher tells us,
Eccles. 12. 7. The dust shall return to the Earth as it was; of that it was
made, and into that it shall be resolved. When once the Soul leaves it, the
body drops into the grave, and there first it putrifies, and at length it
crumbles; but the Spirit shall return unto God that gave it. All the Souls of
Men and Women, one and other, both the good and the bad, shall at death be upon
their return; whether with their will, or against it, this must be done: They
did at first come from God, when they were formed: he created them, he infused
them, he united them to the body, and when that union shall be dissolved, when
Death shall u^ie the knot, and snap the hand asunder, then does the spirit
return to God. The polluted and regenerate Souls of wicked men shall in all
their guilt, filth and deformity, ^eturn to God, that they may from him receive
their final and irreversible ^ (...), (...), to be (...) as a (...)
malefactors, carried into a dungeon of darkness, the bottomless Pit, where
there is unquenchable fire to torment them, but not the least beam of lig^ to
comfort and refresh them; and so they shall be punished with an everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power* 2.
These. 1. And the Souls of Saints which have been washed from the^ filthiness in
the blood of the Lamb, and had their nature changed, the^ principles made holy,
and their beauty perfect through Christ's comeline^ put upon them, shall also
then return unto God as their reconciled Friend, and everlasting Father, to be
by him received graciously, heartily welcomed, and put into those glorious
Mansion^ which have been designed and prepared for them, in which they shall
enjoy God, and in him a perfect happiness without danger or fear of losing
either him or it. Our blessed Lord Jesus made way for this return of the Soul
to God by his most precious blood, which is pacifying to God, and purifying to
man, by it he made peace, such a peace as cannot be broken, and so cleared the
passage, that all the Devils i^ Hell cannot shut it up again. The blessed and
Divine Spirit, whom our Savior promised to send, does make it his work and
business to bring Sou^ back to God by his quickening, renewing and sanctifying
grace, and t^ carry them on further and further by fresh influences,
assistances and supplies And then when they come to be duly qualified, ready,
and meet to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, so
that they may be presented before the presence of the Divine glory with
exceeding joy, the holy Angels who are now appointed to be ministering Spirits
unto them who ar^ the Heirs of Salvation, are sent forth by their tender and
ever-loving Father as his Messengers to fetch them home, and as a powerful
Guard to convey them safe through the Regions of the Air, and Legions of
Devils, into the seat of the blessed, those celestial and sure resting places
which their Lord and Head purchased, and has taken possession of in their
names, and now keeps for them. And this is that return which I shall discourse
to you about as that which is most proper, because most pertinent and suitable
to the present occasion. This is that return which the holy Soul should have
much upon its thoughts, and which it ought to desire with longings; and when
the time is come, call upon it self to make with all cheerful readiness; and w^
have a very good reason for it in the Text before us, because it is a returning
to our rest. There is a sweet and desirable rest which Death brings along with
it to the People of God: A rest to the body, that it lays to sleep in the
chamber of the grave, in the bed of dust, Isa. 57. 1, 2. The righteous perish,
an^ merciful men are taken away; if you ask from what, he tells you, it is from
the evil to come; if again you ask, what becomes of them? he tells you^ they
go, or enter into peace, and shall rest in their beds, and that out of the
reac^ of them who would discompose them, as Job spoke when he was disconten^
because Death was so slow-paced, and came no sooner for him, for if it h^ says
he Io^ 3. 17. then I should have been where the wicked cease from (...) ^ ^ear
not the voice of the ^ressor: But that which is far more and better than that,
when Death knocks at the door of a godly man, it brings along with it a rest
unto his Soul: Or that I may speak more properly, it brings the Soul to i^
rest; to the best rest it can have or desire; viz. a rest in its God, a rest in
the Center, a rest in the arms and bosom of him who is the supreme object of
its love, and pleasant for delights. That rest can want nothing to complete it,
which is a rest in Heaven, a rest in God. But in order to the commending to you
this return unto God by Death, we will briefly show these two things. 1. What
those things are, from which the Soul does after Death rest? 2. What are the
properties of that rest, which the holy Soul shall then be put into the
possession of? First then, What are those things which the holy Soul does after
Death rest from? Unto this I shall answer in these four things.

First, There will be a rest from all Conflicts, for then it enters into peace,
and is encompast about with it. The life of a Christian here is thoroughout a
combating life; there is not any that flees to Christ as a Savior, but must,
if he would find him so, submit to him as a Lord, and list himself under him as
a Captain. Therefore we are expressly commanded to put on the whole Armor of
God, and to fight the good fight of Faith, and to endure hardship as the good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ. You must not think to live here wholly at ease and
in quiet. Christianity is a warfare. No sooner are you reconciled, and made the
Friends of God, but others will be enraged, and become desperate, yea
implacable Enemies unto you. Great Enemies there are, potent, cruel, and a
great many of them. Intestine Enemies, those of our own house, yea nearer yet,
those of our own hearts; and because they are so very near, therefore they are
exceeding dangerous. A Legion of lusts which war against the Soul; who indeed
can tell the number of them? There is flesh which lusts against the spirit;
sin against grace; fears, and doubts, and jealousies of God against Faith;
sensual and self-love against the love of God; and there are foreign Enemies
too. Satan and the World; the World one while undermines the Soul by its
flattering promises, and another while batters it with its terrible menaces.
Now it fawns with Delilah, anon it frowns like a fury; and then the Devil, who
will never be quiet, at one time he comes forth against the Soul in a disguise,
like to an Angel of Light, that he may so deceive and surprise it; at another
time he will appear in his own shape, as ugly and deformed as it is; for Devils
do not know how to blush; I say, he comes as a Prince of darkness, to carry it
captive, and fright it into his Net; sometimes the Saints find him hissing as a
Serpent, and nibbling at their heels, at other times roaring like a Lion, and
coming upon them with open mouth, as if he would swallow them at once; so that
what with the one and the other, the sin that dwells within, and the Enemies
that beset and lay close siege without, the poor Christian is oftentimes weary
of his life; but when Death comes, it puts an end to all this, it takes the
Christian and carries him out of the field, and ^ of Salvation, having come off
with honor, and obtained the Victory, yea, been more than a Conqueror, shall
maintain an everlasting Triumph, with their Robes of Glory, and Palms in their
hands. When once Death lays them asleep in their graves, the last stroke is
struck as to them; they shall not learn nor prosecute this holy War any more.

Secondly, There will be a rest from trouble and sorrow: As there will be no
fightings, so no mournings; as no dangers, so no fighs. This World is a place
of trouble, it is full of it. Man is born to trouble, and as it meets him at
his birth, so it will accompany him to his grave. When our first Father Adam
had once transgressed the Law of his Creation, there was immediately introduced
a dismal and astonishing change; the face of the Earth was covered with Briars
and Thorns; and who is there among all the Children of men that has not his
fingers pricked with them? who is there that can pass thorough this Wilderness
without multiplied wounds? Indeed the same measure is not meted out to all;
every one cannot say, he is plagued all the day long, and chastened every
morning, yet there is not one but has so much as he thinks enough; yea and, it
may be, more too. We are sometimes troubled by those that live about us, Psalm.
57. 4. My Soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire,
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongues are sharp swords: And we
are troubled oftentimes by those that live with us, Micah 7. 6. The Son
dishonors his Father, and the Daughter her Mother; the Daughter-in-law
rises up against her Mother-in-law; a man's Enemies are those of his own
house. How usual a thing is it to see and hear of persons greatly afflicted by
their friends and acquaintance; Caesar by Brutus, David by Achitophel, Christ
by a Judas, one of his own Discipl^s; nay, by our near Relations, those that
came out of our bowels, rise up against us, and work our ruin? How many are
there that have Vipers and vexations in their bosoms? one a treacherous
Delilah, another a flouting Michal; their very Beds are strawed with Thorns, so
that they lie uneasy, and in the morning rise up with aching heads and hearts.
Nay, to come nearer yet, how many in the World are their own tormentors, and
carry, as if they made it their business and sport to trouble themselves, by
their sollicitous and carking cares, and by their melancholic apprehensions
and thoughts, upon which they sit brooding, and hatch an hundred Monsters to
their own affrightment, and by their unbelieving fears, whereby they affront
the Veracity of God, and question such a Covenant as is everlasting, ordered in
all things and sure, and such Promises as are firm like Mountains of Brass, Yea
and Amen; and also by their vain janglings, and peevish quarrels which they
raise without any sense or reason? In short, some have a great deal of trouble
in the flesh, and others have a great deal more in the spirit, and not a few in
both, and so are in a place where two Seas meet, so that all the waves and
billows go over them. But when a Saint dies, all is over, the Winter is past,
the Rain is over and gone, and he is at rest from ^ not one thing left to
trouble him: Everlasting joy shall be upon his head, but sorrow and sighing
shall flee away; there shall not then be one single tear left upon his cheek,
no nor the least thing that should be the cause of it. As the wicked man's
jollity does at death end in an extremity of anguish, so at death the godly
man's troubles shall end in a fullness of joy.

Thirdly, There will also be a rest from all weariness and toilsom labor. Man
had work to do in his state of Innocence, being then put into the Garden to
dress it, and to keep it, Genesis 2. 15. But tedious labor came in upon the fall,
was the fruit and punishment of sin; it was not till after that he was to eat
his bread in the sweat of his brows; but that is the burden bound upon us in
our lapsed and degenerate condition, which we cannot shake off. We must all
take a great deal of pains, not only she that grindeth at the Mill, but he too
that sits upon the Throne. Earth is not to be got by idleness; Solomon tells
us, The sluggard shall be clothed with rags; and surely then, Heaven is not to
be got without pains: It will not drop into men's laps while they sleep; it was
wont to suffer violence, and sure its price is not so much fallen, as that now
it should come for nothing. It is true, there are gracious influences and
assistances from God, but there is required iudustry and utmost diligence of
man. It is God that works both to will and to do of his own good pleasure;
but notwithstanding that; nay, because of that man is obliged and concerned to
work out his Salvation with fear and trembling. Many there are that pretend to
Religion; and usurp the name of Christians, which belongs no more to them, than
that of Man to a Monkey, and bless themselves in a vain confidence of coming to
Heaven with less a do, but as great safety as the best and most precise, and so
spend their days in mirth and jollity; in s^h and sensuality, but they shall
find themselves mistaken, and to have run away with a Lie in their right hand.
Those that are truly gracious, can and will from their own daily experience,
tell you, that it is no easy matter to be a Christian, and to walk with God in
an holy close Communion, and to live in the World according to the Law of the
New Creature. It does cost such an one a great deal more than I can tell you to
raise his heart, and get it up to a spiritual holy frame fit to attend upon God
in an Ordinance, or to approach him in a duty, and it stands him in full out as
much to preserve it in such a frame when it is once in it, and to prevent its
going down again after it has been wound up. Heart-raising, and heartfixing,
are two works of no mean difficulty, too hard indeed for a Child of God, when
at his best, if taken alone. We labor, says the Apostle, that whether present
or absent, we may be accepted of him, 2 Cor. 5. 9. As they were ambitious of
it, so they were industrious. But, Rev. 14. 13. A voice from Heaven said,
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; yea, says the Spirit, that they may
rest from their labors, and their works do follow them: There is no idleness
in Heaven, but constant action, but such action as is rest; no laboring to
sweat or weariness, but reaping the fruit of ^ of his name, and admiring of his
mercy, contemplating his glory, and living in his joy.

Lastly, and which is yet more, There will be a rest from all desire. It is a
very good observation which that excellent Divine Mr. Joseph Symmonds, who is
now with God, made upon that expression of holy Asaph, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom have
I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire beside thee.
Heaven is the place of having, but Earth is the place of desiring. And indeed
so it is; while the poor Saint is upon Earth, his wants are so many, and his
necessities so great, that he is abundantly more in his desires than he is in
his seize. I have not already attained, says Paul, neither am I already
perfect; O that I might know him! O that I might apprehend that for which I am
apprehended of Christ! O that by any means I might attain to the resurrection
of the dead! I forget that which is behind, and reach forth to that which is
before, and press on toward the mark; and there is the same spirit of faith,
and love, and desire, and longing in all those that have past through the new
birth. Seize in many of them are little and low, but in all of them
desires are high. And though these desires are exceeding good, yet they are
very painful, as ^arp hunger is to an almost starved creature. How uneasy is a
longing Woman! it makes her sick at the very heart, not seldom causes a
faintness and swoonings, and puts her into a great discomposure throughout. So
do the desires of a longing Saint; too too often he over-looks, and pays not
unto God due acknowledgments for, nor does he himself taste the sweetness, and
take the comfort of what he has, because he cannot as yet get what he wants.
Oh how much does such an one hasten after a deliverance from sin! How eagerly
does he thirst for increases of grace! How does he aspire to an holy fixation
of mind, free from those avocations and diversions which afflict him! And as
the hunted, parched Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so does his Soul pant
after the Living God, and an intimate unbroken Communion with him; and it is
even sick with love and longings, because it finds not what it thus seeks. It
does hardly enjoy it self, because it has not those enjoyments that it would.
But when once Death has done its work upon him, there is a rest from these
things too; not because the Souls love is in the least cooled and abated, for
then it is perfected, and raised up to the purest, hottest and highest flame,
in which it shall everlastingly continue; but because it has plenary fruition
of that which it loves, of all which it loves. While the gracious Soul is here
in the body, it has its sallyings out, its earnest reaches, and lofty flights:
Oh that it were so and so! Thus poor Job, as you have it in Job 29* v. 2, etc.
O that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me; when his
Candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked thorough darkness,
when the secret of God was upon my Tabernacle, when the Almighty was yet with
me! So, O that it were with me as sometimes I have found it! O that it were
with me as it is with such an one, and such an ^ God more, and love him more,
and live him more! But when the Soul comes to Heaven, it takes the place
appointed and prepared for it, and there it sits down at ease, because it is
where it would be, and as it would be. There is no desire, because a complete
satisfaction, Psalm. 17. ult. As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness: There
desires are turned into, and swallowed up of delights. There is indeed in
glorified Souls a natural desire of the resurrection of their bodies, and a
reunion to them, but that desire is no impairing of their happiness, not in the
least afflictive, because moderate and rightly tempered, and sweetened with a
full assurance that it shall be done at the time appointed by the Father: And
in the mean while they are abundantly pleased, having a fullness of joy in the
vision and fruition of God, Father, Son and Spirit, who is to them infinitely
better than the body can be. Come we now to the next thing propounded; viz. the
properties of that rest into which the holy Soul does enter after death, or
what kind of rest it is; and that I shall endeavor to show you in these three
particulars.

First, It is a complete rest, every way perfect, there is not any thing
wanting thereunto. There is indeed a sweet and blessed rest which those have
here in this life, who come to Christ, and make a believing closure upon the
terms propounded in the Gospel; though they have not the rest of the World, yet
they have a rest in the World, and that in the midst of concussions and
confusions, when they are tumbled and tossed up and down, they have a rest out
of their Enemies reach: This our dear Lord and Savior has promised, and he
cannot but be as good as his word, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; not only a right to it, but the
possession of it; that which they could not meet with before, neither in
themselves, nor in the creature, they meet with in him; as the Dove that could
find no place for the sole of its foot when it was abroad, as the Raven could,
that would light and feed upon Carrion, the dead carcasses floating upon the
surface of the waters, yet it found rest in the Ark upon its return to it.
Those that before were through the stingings of Conscience, and the
apprehensions of Divine wrath, and impending Judgments as persons upon a Rack,
are through the sprinklings of the blood of the Covenant upon them, and the
sealings and witnessings of the Spirit within them as in a Bed of Down or
Roses: Those wounds that formerly smarted, are graciously healed, and their
Agonies are over, unless they cause new ones by their foolishness; but for all
this, here aliquid deest, something is wanting, as well as something amiss.
Paul in 1 These. 3. 10. speaks of something that was lacking in their Faith, and
truly the same may be affirmed of the best improved, and most grown Saints on
this side of Heaven, that there is something lacking in their Faith, yea and in
their Love, and in their Humility, and Meekness, and Patience, and in all the
graces that have been by the blessed Spirit of God wrought in them. And we may
be sure of this, that as long as there is something lacking in the grace, there
will be something ^ not be arrived at a perfect state. But after death all
these wants will be supplied, and all these defects made up, there will be no
vacancy in the Soul, nothing lacking, then that which is perfect will be come,
and so that which is imperfect shall be done away, and hereupon that rest which
the Soul shall have when it comes to Heaven, will be greater and fuller than
that which it had when it first came to Christ, or all the while that it lived
a sojourner in the World, there will be perfect holiness, and by consequence
there will be a perfect happiness. God will not in any thing be behind hand
with his people, or wanting to them, there they are continually before the
Throne of God, always in his presence, and David tells us, Psalm. 16. 11. That
in his presence there is fullness of joy, and a fullness of joy does necessarily
imply and carry along with it, a fullness of rest and that which follows
hereupon.

Secondly, It is an undisturbed rest. Here our peace is oftentimes broken, and
our rest is gone. It is said of Ahasuerus, that he could not sleep, his sleep
fled away from him, he did all that in him lay to compose himself, he would
gladly have slept, but he could not. So it is Spiritually with the Saints
themselves, their rest flees from them. Sometimes they break their own rest,
Psalm. 38. There is no rest in my bones because of my sin, and as there was none
in his bones, so none in his flesh, and none in his Spirit; and sometimes God
breaks their rest, one while he gives them rest round about, at another time he
makes them fear round about, Job 7. 13, 14. When I say my Bed shall comfort me,
my Couch shall ease my complaint, then thou scarest me with Dreams and
terrifiest me with Visions. Oh the dismal thoughts that some good people have
in the night, they lie down with holy and gracious thoughts, with believing
thoughts, with God admiring thoughts but in their sleep they have Vain, Absurd,
Defiling and Disquieting thoughts; so that they wake in an affright, and as the
Psalmist, tells us, sometimes sorrow endures for a night, and joy comes in the
morning. So experience tells us that at other times joy endures for a day, and
sorrow comes in the Evening. The bright and comfortable sun sets in a dark
Cloud. David reckoned without his host when in Psalm. 30. he thought his
Mountain stood strong, his State of Peace and Prosperity was firm and
unalterable, so that he should never be moved, that he should never more feel
what broken bones meant, nor be any more hunted by his enemy as a Partridge
upon the Mountains, nor be again smitten and almost consumed by the blow of the
Divine hand, nor have his moisture turned into the drought of Summer. But he
was quickly convinced of his mistake, God hid his face and he was troubled. So
troubled as that he was at his wits end, almost beside himself, both Counsel
and Courage failed him. But now when once the Soul comes to Heaven, there shall
be nothing of a disturbance, no such inroads made upon its peace, but a
perpetual Serenity and Calm, a clear Sunshine without any Eclipse or Clouds,
or Overcastings. No hiding of the face of God, no damp upon the Soul. No frown
without, no fear ^ an holy reception, no anger in God to obstruct and stop his
gracious communication. God will be continually giving out of himself and the
Soul shall be continually taking in. The glorified Soul shall be always full up
to the brim, and as God shall please according to the exceeding riches of his
grace and kindness to dart forth new beams and rays of his glory, so he will
strengthen the eye that it shall behold them with inconceivable delight and
pleasure, as he shall please to open his hand of Love, so he will widen the
Vessel, and enlarge its capacity.

Thirdly, It will be an everlasting rest, as it knows no disturbance, so no
end. The Soul for certain shall not sleep, as some have fondly and foolishly
imagined, the body indeed does, that enjoys a sweet sleep in its bed, of dust,
where it lies in Jesus, for death has not broken the Union between it and
Christ, 1 These. 4. 14. Them which sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him. But
the Soul sleeps not, it is not suitable to the nature of it, it meets with
enough to keep it awake. Yea, it will be so far from sleeping, as that it shall
not so much as wink, for it shall not know any such thing as lassitude or
weariness. It shall be continually acting, and that with Strength and Vigor,
to the utmost of its power, and yet not be tired by those actings. The bow
shall be always bent, yet not hereupon grow a Slug, but abide in strength. But
though the Soul shall never sleep, yet it shall always rest, when it is once
entered into it, it shall abide and never come out more; there are, as you have
heard from the Word, pleasures for evermore, and therefore there shall be rest
for evermore. O Eternity, Eternity, its length is not to be measured, but its
weight and importance to be seriously considered, that is the sweet ingredient
in the joys above, and that the Gall which is put into the Cup of trembling and
astonishment below; the damned in Hell shall be in everlasting misery, their
worm dies not, and the glorified Souls shall have an everlasting felicity. Let
us apply to this those sweet expressions which we find in Rev. 7. 15, 16, 17.
They are before the Throne of God, as Heavens Courtiers and Favorites whom the
King of Kings loves to look upon. They serve him day and night in his Temple.
They shall be altogether taken up with God, their whole business and employment
shall be about God. And he that sits upon the throne shall dwell among them.
And there cannot be better Company, none so good. His presence is enough alone,
they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more. It is impossible they
should be hungry who are at such a feast, or thirst, who have not only their
Cups running over, but are continually refreshing and bathing themselves in a
River of pleasure and of life, clear as Crystal, which proceeds out of the
Throne of God and of the Lamb, neither shall the Sun light on them nor any
beat, there shall be beams to refresh them, but none to scorch them. Nothing
that shall render them faint or uneasy. For the Lamb which is in the midst of
the Throne shall feed them. He loves to do it, and he will be sure to give them
the best, and with a large liberal hand, and shall lead them to fountains of
living water, all fresh and pure, and at the first hand, and God ^ removed all
sorrow from their hearts, if there be not a tear, then not a sig^ no, nor a sad
thought, and further you may be also sure, that since God do^ with his own
gracious hand, wipe away all their tears, none of them sha^ return, nor shall
any new ones succeed and come in the room of the forme^ a tear shall not be
found in the eye, nor upon the cheek, throughout all ete^ nity. Thus have I
done what I promised as to the first Doctrine, the us^ whereof I shall defer
until I have spoken to the second Doctrine, and then shall make some short
application of them both together. Now that Doctrine as was said before, will
arise from the reason of David's calling upon his Soul (...) return unto its
rest, or if you please, from the argument and motive he uses f^ the persuading
it so to do, taken from Gods former providence and gra^ ous dispensations
toward him. For the Lord has dealt bountifully w^ thee. Which is such an
argument as does become every Saint, every one (...) his Children; for upon
them all he has shown and magnified his mer^ The Doctrine shall be this.

Doct. 2. Gods dealing bountifully with a Soul should be a powerful a^ cogent
argument with it, for its return to him. It does carry a great d^ of weight and
reason in it, and it should come with a proportionable streng^ upon the Soul.
It should be effectual. It should endear him to us, and hig^ ly commend him,
and accordingly draw us to him, and inflame our desi^ and longings after an
immediate communion more and more. If men w^ but give themselves leave to
consider and w^igh all things in a just ballan^ they will find and be
constrained to acknowledge that there is no solid (...) sufficient reason, nay
not so much as the shadow of a reason in all Go^ carriages to his people, why
any one should go away from him. Therefo^ when upon the subducting of many of
his common hearers, our Savio^ propounded to his Disciples this Question, Will
ye also go away? Peter (...) the name of the rest made this reply, Lord, to
whom shall we go? We are well as we are, find such Love and Sweetness, and good
entertainment w^ thee, that we do not know in all the world where we can mend
our selv^ where we shall be better, nay where we may be so well; for with thee
al^ are the words of eternal life. And as there is no reason why any should go
(...) way from him, so in case any have been so foolish, and imprudent, and en^
mies to themselves, as to go away, there is no reason at all why they she stay
away. Indeed if such deserters do return, it must be with shame a^ blushing:
And that they may thank their former folly for, they had (...) thousand times
better come to shame than not come to God. But as was sa^ there is no reason
for their staying away altogether, Ier. 2. 31. O Gene^ tion, see the word of
the Lord, have I been a wilderness unto Israel, or a L^ of darkness? wherefore
say my people, We are Lords, we will come no more un^ thee? How now Israel,
what is the meaning of this language? why have y^ taken up such an hasty
resolution? What is it that does displease yo^ Wherein have I offended you?
charge me if you can; what have I (...) or what have I done, what cause I have
given you? What, will you co^ ^ter? In this case sinners must be speechless, or
they will not be able to say any thing to purpose: Whereas on the other side,
there is a great deal of reason why those that have gone from him should return
to him. As Soon as ever the Prodigal came to himself he thought it his best and
wisest course to go to his Father. And there is also highest reason why those
that live here in his love and fear, should desire to go from hence that they
may live with him in his Kingdom and Glory. In the remainder of this discourse
I shall speak only concerning the Souls return to God at death, and its willing
and cheerful readiness so to do. Christians, let me suppose you standing upon
the Worlds higher ground, having the Sun of prosperity shining upon your
Tabernacle, with waters of a full Cup wrung out unto you. Let your conditions
here be never so full and pleasant, your life never so sweet, not made up of
nights of trouble and months of vanity, but all good and halcyon; let your
enjoyments be never so abounding, and your Communion with God never so close
and intimate; though your peace be as a River, and your righteousness in the
delightful fruits thereof as the Waves of the Sea, yet this should not glue and
fasten you to the World; in the midst of all this your heart should be weaned,
and willing to be gone, as knowing this is not your rest. Peter is looked upon
as forgetting himself when upon the transfiguration of Christ, he said, Lord it
is good to be here, if thou will let us make here three Tabernacles, etc. Where
says one, there are plura absurda quam verba, more absurdities than there are
words. Paul that had been in the third Heaven was not for building but for the
pulling down and dissolving of the Tabernacle. Nay the comfortable enjoyments
which you have now, and Gods dealing bountifully with you at present both in
temporals andSpirituals, should make you willing and desirous to be gone, that
you may know what the best will be, whenever God is pleased to call for you,
and by that grim Messenger Death, says, come up hither, you should with
gladness, and rejoicing say, Go my Soul, make no tarrying, show no lothness,
but with a smile and holy transport take thy last farewell of all these Earthly
Friends and Enjoyments, of all these sublunary drossie delights, and welcome the
Messenger that is sent for thee; though he should handle thy body roughly, yet
let patience have its perfect work, and take it kindly, because thou shall
return to thy rest, and quickly be with that God from whom thou did first
come, whose face thou shall behold in righteousness. Now that gracious and
bountiful dealing which you have found at his hand all the time that you have
spent in the world, notwithstanding your ill deservings and unanswerable
walkings may very well contribute greatly to this willingness, and be a mighty
encouragement; as they do strongly oblige you to duty here, so they should do
more than reconcile you to a departure hence. That, I hope, will appear
evidently to you upon a threefold account.

First, This bountiful dealing of God with you is a plain and evident
demonstration of that fullness, which is in him; by the liberality of his hand,
you may judge something of the greatness of his stock; Who is a God like ^ what
a blessed exchange do you make when you come to die! You leave a company of
broken Cisterns, that are little, and leaking, can hold no water, but
frequently fail your expectations, and leave you at that loss they find you in,
and then you go to a living Fountain, that is ever full and overflowing: You go
out of an earthly Clay Cottage, which is crazy and tottering, and the keeping
of it in repair puts you to a great deal of trouble and charge, and when you
have done your utmost, it must tumble, and then you take possession of an house
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, whose builder and maker is God,
and which was by him made for the place of his everlasting residence, the
habitation of his holiness and glory; so that by all you part with here, you
will be no losers, but change unspeakably to your advantage. Are there any of
you that have got good hope through grace, that have had your Faith of
Adherence crowned with that of Assurance? one would rationally conclude you as
willing to go to Heaven as Israel was to see Egypt upon their backs, which had
been to them an house of bondage and great servitude, or to make haste through
an howling and inhospitable Wilderness, that they might come to a Canaan, a
Land of desire, flowing with Milk and Honey. I beseech you, Christians,
seriously to reflect upon things that are past, and consider what does now come
from God, what you have received since you did accept and embrace an offered
Jesus, and what you are still receiving. How many common mercies, than the
least of which you are less; and how many special mercies upon which you may
read Love: you are not able to number them, being more than the hairs upon your
heads. How many messages of peace have been brought to you by his Ministers and
Spirit? How many comfortable Answers has he given? so that you have been
constrained to say, He has not turned away your prayer, nor his mercy from
you! How many rich tokens has he blessed you with, every one of greater value
than an Orient Pearl, or glistering Diamond? How many marks of Covenant-favour
has he set upon you! In short, how often and how greatly has he made your
Souls to rejoice, and your Hearts to leap within you! and then how well may you
argue thus with your selves, If there be so much coming from God, what is there
in God? If there be such conveyances made by the Pipes of Ordinances and
Duties, what is there in him, in whom are all my Springs? If messages be so
delicious, what are the closest embraces? If there be such beams at a distance,
such comfortable beams and vital influences communicated in this state of
absence, what light and life, what beauty and glory is there in the Eternal Sun!

Secondly, From this bountiful dealing of God with you, you may argue to his
liberality, and the singular pleasure which he takes in giving forth of that
his fullness to his People, which is infinitely beyond the delight of the most
affectionate Mother in drawing her full and pained Breast to her sucking and
smiling Infant. Death, it is true, will carry you from all your enjoyments in
this World, it will strip you to your skins, and not so much ^ you do now taste
the greatest sweetness, and from which you fetch your greatest comfort: You
must shake hands with faithful Friends, dearest Relations, and Possessions;
your places and preferments, your worldly honors and preheminences will know
you no more. If a man die, says Job, shall he live again? Yes, he shall, but
not in the same place, not in the same state, not to the same ends and purposes
that he did before. But what of all that? if you be such as you ought to be,
and mind that for which you were sent hither, you shall at death go directly to
him who is able to do for you far more abundantly than all these things could
do, and to supply all your needs according to his riches in glory; and since he
is able, you may by the sufficient warrant both of his Promise, and your own
Experiences, say, I am sure also that he will do it. That God who has been so
good, so exceeding good to you here, you have no reason to question but he will
be as good to you there. You have seen how mindful he is of his Covenant, and
faithful to his Promises, and how much his heart is set upon your good, and his
name is, I am; though the Heavens wax old like a garment, and shall be changed
as a Vesture, yet he is always the same, without any variableness or shadow of
turning, as great as ever, as full as ever, yea and as good as ever. It is not
strange that good old Jacob, and all his family were forward to go into Egypt,
when Joseph, who had already been so kind to them, sent this encouraging
invitation, Come to me, for I will give you the good of the Land of Egypt, and
you shall eat the fat of the Land; regard not your stuff, for the good of all
the Land of Egypt is before you. Oh! says the Text, when they had told him all
the words of Joseph, and when he saw the Wagons which Joseph had sent to carry
him, his spirit revived, and he said, It is enough, Joseph is yet alive, I will
go and see him, Genesis 45. 27, 28. How much more may you be of the same mind? how
much more readily may you set up your Sail for the other World, when God says,
Come, my Son, my Daughter, come away, come to me, regard not your stuff, all
the good of Heaven is before you? And when you see the Messenger that must
carry you hence, you may take Heart, this may be, as they are wont to say, a
lightning before death; my God is still alive, and my Savior still alive, and
he lives for evermore, I will go and see him, and live with him; I can tell
what he is, I am sure he has been a loving God to me, and that he delights
in mercy. I have many and many a time tasted that he is gracious, and therefore
I will not fear him now: Since mercy and goodness have followed me all the days
of my life, I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever: What though I am
going to another world, yet I shall be with the same God; and blessed are they
that dwell in his house, for they are still praising. Heaven, whither I am to
go, is filled with glory and admiration, and rings with Allelujahs. And then,
which follows hereupon,

Thirdly, These bountiful dealings of God with his people are a very firm and
solid foundation upon which they may without fear build their comfortable hopes
and expectations for Eternity. Mercies to such are like ^ pay the debts she
owed, and upon the rest she was to live. So in mercies which you receive from
God, there is the mercy it self to answer the present occasion, to discharge
the present expense, and then there is the experience to live upon for the
future. Thus the Saints have argued from Gods former dealings with them to his
further dealings with them. So David did, 1 Samuel 17. 37. The Lord that
delivered me from the paw of the Lion, and out of the Paw of the Bear, he will
deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And such were the noble and
heroic actings of Paul's faith, he having received the same Spirit of Faith,
and being at that time under the like influence, 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. We had the
Sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in
God which raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does
deliver; in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver. And the like we meet with
in Psalm. 23. 5, 6. Thou preparest a Table before me in the presence of mine
enemies, thou anointest mine head with Oil, my Cup runs over. But possibly,
David, this will not last, God has done all for thee that he intends, he will
now stay his hand, nay but says he, I am certain that he will not. Surely
mercy and goodness shall follow me all the days of my life. Thus they have
argued unto further mercies in time, and you may take a further reach and argue
from your present experiences to mercies for Eternity, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord
God is a Sun and a Shield. That our sense speaks him to be. We are now
refreshed with his beams, and secured by his shadow, but what will he be, and
what will he do? Let faith answer, he will give grace and glory. Grace enough
for time, and glory enough for ever. Grace to enable us for our duties, glory
to satisfy our desires. Grace to fit us for glory, and glory to Complete and
Crown our Grace. These are the proper arguings of faith, and exceeding strong
in the hand of a true Believer, the premises are Gods own, and the conclusion
drawn from them is undeniable. He is a loving Father to me in this World, and
he will be so in the next too. He that now is a fountain opened, sending forth
such precious and plentiful Streams, will not then prove a Spring shut up and a
Fountain sealed. He that affords me such large Clusters while I am in the
wilderness, will not starve nor stint me when I come to Heaven. He that feeds
me with Manna here will never grudge me the Honey and Milk of the Land of
promise. Certainly I shall not there enjoy least where according to the promise
I look for most, my God will then do far more abundantly than I am now able to
ask or think. These present bountiful dispensations of God to his people are
great grounds of high expectations, if we consider,

First, While the People of God are here they are in their Nonage and
Minority. There is an apparent and sensible difference between them. In their
growth, some are as Cedars, others but Shrubs; and in their strength some are
as mighty men to run a race, others can hardly draw their Leg^ after them. A
great deal of difference there is in their knowledge and in their Grace, but
both one and other are under age; but when God does come by ^ Children home to
Heaven, they are arrived at their ripeness of years. Now if they receive so
much from God as they do, and are maintained at such a rate while they are
Children, what is it that God designs them for, what is it that he will bestow
upon them at last? When you see young ones brought up in Splendour and Bravery,
you immediately conclude them to be some great Persons Children, and that they
shall have a great Estate, and that something is intended for them suitable to
their garb and education. Take your measures from the pains that God takes with
his people now, and the cost he is at upon them, and then judge what he has in
his heart and purpose concerning them, when that which is perfect shall come,
that which is imperfect shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. When the eye is
fully strengthened there shall be no more use of a Glass to see in, which gives
but a dark sight. When the heir comes to understand how to manage his Estate,
he shall be put into possession of the whole. So when once the Saints come to
be perfected in themselves, all imperfections shall be removed from their
enjoyments. When once they come to be fit for great things they shall be sure
to have them; the inheritance of the Saints in light shall be given them when
meet to be made partakers of it. The marriage of the Lamb will come when the
B^ide has made her self ready; and the far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory will be laid on when the shoulder is in a Capacity of bearing it.

Secondly, In this life the Children of God are fitting for the enjoyment of
that which God intend^ them. This life is not a season for a full possession,
but for the bringing them into a due preparation. And accordingly here they
have only their allowances because as yet they are not fit for more. You read
in Esth. 2. 9. That when E^ther was brought to the Custody of Hegai the Keeper
of the Women, she had the things given her for purification, with all that
belonged to her, and seven Maidens that were meet to be given her. All that was
suitable to that State, and no more. It was not before her being thoroughly
prepared, purified, and presented to King Ahasuerus and by him accepted and
chosen to be his Wife, that she had the Crown set upon her head, and the Robes
and Ensigns of Majesty given her, which were suitable to her advancement and
Royal State. Come, Christians, you have now no cause of murmuring and
discontent, but of grateful acknowledgements and admirings, God is exceeding
gracious, you receive very much, and are daily laden with his benefits; there
are blessed allowances which he is pleased to make unto you, such as are
suitable to your present condition, day unto day shows hislove, and night
unto night his faithfulness, what is the report, what the account that you are
obliged to give of him? Must you not say that you have enough to support you
under all your burdens, when they are most heavy, enough to maintain you at
your work, and to carry you thorough it when most difficult, and also enough to
sweeten your bitterest afflictions to you, and such beams of light breaking in
upon you, that you can walk thorough darkness, and comfortably proceed in your
^ by God, which will prepare you for the Crown of Life and Righteousness, which
God the Righteous Judge shall give unto you at that day, and make you meet for
the Throne of Glory, unto which you shall be advanced, so that you may become
it, and fit you for the presence of God, that you may be brought into it with
exceeding joy, that you may be able to bear his presence without terror and
trembling, and he to bear you in his presence, without hatred and loathing. In
a word, you have that now afforded you by God, which may suit you both to the
place, and company, and employment, so that when you come there, there may be
an amicable agreement, and perfect harmony, without any thing of jarring and
discord, that you may not be weary of Heaven, nor Heaven of you. And do you
seriously consider how much this stands God in? what abundance of cost he is at
for your preparation, and what a great deal of pains he takes with you in order
thereunto; which clearly shows it to be no small or inconsiderable thing which
he has in his everlasting love and kindness designed you for? The beauty of
the Wedding Garment, which every one of the Guests must have on in order to his
acceptance, does loudly proclaim the greatness of the Solemnity, and the
splendour of the Entertainment; and when once full preparation is made in the
Soul, full possession shall be given to it. When once the Vessel is thoroughly
cleansed, it shall be filled up to the brim. When once the Divine Spirit has
made you meet, you shall receive the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Matthew.
25. 10. The Bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to the
Marriage, and the door was shut.

Thirdly, Consider what that life is which God will have his People to live
while they are here in the world; viz. the life of Faith; so the Lord himself
has told us, Hab. 2. 4. Behold his Soul which is lifted up is not upright in
him, but the just shall live by his faith. And this must be at all times, and
in all conditions; not only when it is with us as it was then, when Caldeans,
mighty and cruel Enemies are in the Land, but when they are not; when we have
Enemies under our feet, and fullness in our hands, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We, says the
Apostle, walk by faith, and net by sight; faith leads, faith expects, faith
supports, faith comforts. Thus it is with all the Saints; therefore he speaks
in the plural number, we, meaning both himself and all the followers of the
Lamb; and of himself he particularly tells us, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me. Christ lived in him; all his life came from
Christ; he was the Author and Principle of it; he both breathed and maintains
it; he it is that quickens me, acts me, moves me how and whither he pleases;
and whatever that life be which I shall live hereafter, that life which I now
live, in this world, in this mortal body and state, I live it by the faith of
Christ, in whom I have both righteousness, and life, and strength; for he is,
and he is to me all in all. And so it is with all the ^ sense, more by hope
than by having; and yet this present and imperfect life is an exceeding
excellent and noble life: It is as much above the life of the most rational man
in the world, who is a stranger to the grace of faith, as the life of such a
man is above the life of a brute; it brings in to him far more sweetness and
pleasure: Hence it is that in the Scripture you read of peace in believing, and
of the joys of faith, with which those which the sensualist does enjoy, are not
worthy to be compared, for his peace is but the product of a delusion, his joy
as the crackling of thorns under a pot; but this is peace which passes all
understanding, Phil. 4. 7. and this joy such as ^s unspeakable and full of
glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. It is too big for words, it has ^n it something of the
heavenly glory: It is such a joy as does ravish the Soul, it sometimes puts it
into an e^stasie, it fills it up to the height, so that there was one cried out
like a man oppressed under the weight of it, Stay thy ^and, Lord, stay thy hand,
for I can hold no more. Now if there be such abounding delights brought in by
the hand of faith, what beams of light and glory will the eye of sight let in
to the glorified Soul? If there be such consolations springing, such holy
raptures caused from and by that good ^ews that faith brings from that far
Country, when it has but a Pisgah ^ght, and that in a Wilderness, and can but
peep within the Veil, what will ^he blessed fruits of a clear Vision and
complete Fruition be, when once the ^oly Soul is after a long and tedious
Journey happily arrived there, and has ^ee liberty to walk up and down in the
length and breadth of that good ^and, and to take its fill continually of all
that it affords? But once more.

Fourthly and lastly, Here Gods communications and lettings out of him^f to his
People, are correspondent with, and managed in such a way and ^nner as shall be
pursuant of his purpose and design of keeping them, as in (...) well-liking and
thriving state, so in a longing frame; as to preserve their ^irits, and promote
their growth, so to maintain their desires in strength ^d vigor, and also to
whet and raise them up to an higher and higher ^itch. The perfection which our
heavenly Father does intend the dearest ^f his Children while they are here,
consists more in the sincerity of ^eir hearts, and in the fervency of their
earnest and industrious desires, ^an in their actual seize. Come,
Christians, what report can you ^ake? what account can you give of your selves?
do not you find that this (...) the language, and these the breathings of your
Souls? O that I might ^ow God more, and come to all the riches of the full
assurance of understand^g, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of ^rist, Col. 2. 2. Oh that I might love him more! that this
lukewarm, ^ld, frozen, Icy heart, might burn within me, and be all on a flame!
Oh ^at I might fear him more, not with a base, servile and slavish fear, but a
^l and godly one, and pay him such a reverence as is his due, and he receives
^om the glorious Seraphims above, and the spirits of just men there made
^rfect! Oh that I could resemble him more and more, and find the in^rd man
renewed day by day, and my Soul changed into his Image from ^ God, and showing
forth the virtues of my Savior, shining with his beams, treading in his steps,
and being in the world even as he was in the world! O that I could see and
enjoy him more! Oh that I could converse and walk with him more! And when he is
pleased to open his hand most liberally, they will be reaching out theirs for
more, and still crying, Give, give. When they have in a Duty, or at an
Ordinance, fed most heartily, and received the greatest refreshing, they rise
with an appetite, and go away with desires: If you have tasted that the Lord is
gracious, you must desire: After-draughts in the Banqueting House; the Spouse
called for flaggons. I say, God in his infinite wisdom does so order it, that
his Children shall be dieted here, that so they may be always hungry. Not,
says Paul, that (...) have already attained, or am already perfect. Now you
may safely from hence draw this Inference, That if God be so liberal to his
Children here, where yet his purpose and good pleasure is to keep them in the
state of expectants, and both to raise and preserve their desires and longings
in streng^ and vigor, that must needs be great goodness which he has laid up
for them in Heaven; What is there behind? What is yet to come? What i^ that
which will be given out to them in the other world, where it is in hi^ heart to
complete their state, and so to order out concerning them, that their
transcendent and inconceivable delights shall swallow up all their desires and
their painful longings shall at their first entrance into those gloriou^
Mansions be immediately converted into a fullness of joy? We have now finished
the doctrinal parts; it remains that we apply our selves to the practical
improvement of them, which is to be the work of every one tha^ reads these few
leaves for his own Soul. Only I shall help you a little b^ speaking to three
things in a way of Exhortation.

Use first. I do earnestly desire you all, to be without any further
unreasonable delays upon your return unto God. Look where you ar^ sinners; in a
state of sin and wrath: and is it good to be so? Look whithe^ you are going, is
it not to Hell? and do you think it will be good to b^ there? Do not go on, but
stand, sinner, I do in the name of the great God b^ thee stand, and come back
too; remember from whence you are fallen, a^ from whom you have departed, and
come back. The expressions that our Lord Jesus used to the Church his Spouse,
come into my mind, Cant. 6. 13. H^ bespeaks her thus; Return, return, O
Shulamite* return, return, that w^ may look upon thee: What will ye see in the
Shulamite? as it were, t^ company of two Armies. Let me speak to you in the
same manner; onl^ let me first propound to you this one serious and weighty
Question; Ho^ do you find matters are within you? Is there such a sight as this
to be seen* I mean, to be seen in your Souls? Do you feel strugglings in you as
R^ bekah once did in her womb? Is there the company of two Armies? O^ that
there were in some of you! it would be welcome news to me, I should be glad ^t
heart, and with my Soul bless God for it. I know there is on^ Army in the very
worst of men, the greatest Debauchees and vilest Monste^ ^ trenched and
fortified themselves, and fight against God, and War against the Soul; and it
is not improbable but that there may be a Legion of Devils too, which side with
them, and yet all this while there is no noise, no disturbance of the sinners
rest, but he goes on in his way and enjoys himself; for, as our Savior has
told us, while the strong man armed keeps the house, his goods are in peace,
there is a sinful quietness, though indeed that is a dismal and woeful one. But
what say you, is there the Company of two Armies in you? Is there a Law in your
minds warring against that Law of Sin and Death which is in your members? Is
there a Spirit within you lusting against the flesh; is there a contest and
combating within you? And that not only between one faculty and another, but
between the same faculty and itself? So that you cannot sin with that freedom
and plenary consent that you were wont to do, but you find a reluctance and
opposition in your selves. Oh that it were so with you, that you were able to
say, you hate what you do, though you cannot do what you would: And to you I do
now call, return, return, O sinners, return, return. That we may look upon you
and love to look; that your Ministers, and Relations, and Friends, your Parents
that have travailed in birth to see Christ formed in you, your dear Yoakfellows
who love you, and longed for your Spiritual and Eternal welfare, and have
looked upon you with sad hearts, Sighing, Shaking their Heads, wringing their
hands and shedding Rivers of tears, may now look upon you with comfort and
rejoicing, and count you their blessings; That when they look upon you they may
see your faces Sion ward, and Heaven ward, and your feet directed into the ways
of peace, and that when God (who looks from Heaven upon all the Children of
men) does look upon you, and into you also, he may see your hearts are toward
himself, really set for his Service and honor, and the enjoyment of him. You
that are Elder, and are yet in your sins, walking on in the vanity of your
minds, suffer the word of exhortation, do you return, and that presently, for
you have nothing to show why you should not; you have taken your swing, and
rambled far enough, and lived without God long enough; a man would think you
have had your belly full of wind and ashes, and husks, that you have had enough
of base sins, and what is worse than childish vanities, and are guilty of such
egregious, and ruining follies that you have reason to be weary of them. I
beseech you learn to be wise, it is, indeed it is high time, if you will not be
wise now, when will you? You that are younger, do ye apply your hearts to true
wisdom, come, ye Children, hearken to me, come, ye young men and maidens, come
in to God, who desires you, who calls you, who stands with his arms ready and
stretched out to receive you, come to him in whom you will find rest to your
Souls, and have such joys as will be great and cheap, and never end in sorrow.
It is much more easy for you to return than it is for old sinners, who have
grown gray in their rebellion and obstinacy, for you are not gone so far from
God as they have done, and you have not so many Chains and Fetters, as Satan
and lust and a continued ^ conceive how exceeding welcome you shall be, how glad
Heaven will be of you; Oh how does God, Father, Son and Spirit embrace the
young converts, how ready will the blessed Angels be to watch over you, to
encamp about you, to minister to you, and to do you acts of kindness? What
huggs and kisses did the affectionate Father bestow upon his repenting and
returning Prodigal! He ran to meet him, and that while he was a great way off;
he could not sit still when he saw him coming, but must get up himself, and
while the good old man's feet did run, I doubt not but his heart leaped within
him.

Use Second. Under this I shall direct my discourse to you who already are
converted, and have hearkened to the voice and calls of God in the Gospel, and
come in to him. And you I advise to improve all your experiences to the utmost
for the drawing of your hearts more out to God, and bringing you into a closer
Communion with him. Thou have been my help, said David, Psalm. 63: 7. What then?
my Soul follows after thee. ver. 8. Because thou have been my help in work,
in trouble have assisted me in such and in such a case, yea in every case,
therefore my Soul now does and still shall follow hard after thee, that I may
have more of thy help as I need it, and more and more of thy self too, so as
you have heard in the Text, return unto thy rest, O my Soul, unto that God who
is thy rest; for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. Consider and call
to mind, what sights have you had of Gods power and glory in the Sanctuary.
What tastes of his sweetness in the banqueting house of Ordinances, what tokens
of love sent in, in various ways, what Messages of peace by his holy and
blessed Spirit, what returns of prayer by the hand of gracious providence; how
great things has God done for you, consuting your fears, and exceeding your
expectations, how good and gracious has he been to you, compassing you about
with his favor as with a Shield, and daily loading you with his benefits? let
all this be called in and set before your eyes, and then from all these Topics
reason the case with your selves, and plead with your Souls, yea plead and
argue them into a dearer affection to God, and a further return to him, and a
nearer, closer Communion with him. The name of Jesus is as an Ointment poured
forth, Cant. 1. 3. And when the Spouse had once got the scent, and to her
comfort and delight felt the savor of it, found that sweetness which was both
in his name and in himself, she loved him, her affections presently took wing
and made out to him, she run, and yet thought her pace was too slow, and
therefore begged she might be drawn that so she might run. Her senses had been
exercised and pleased with so excellent and glorious an object, and now she was
satisfied neither with what she had, nor what she did, she thought her strength
was too small, her motions too faint and heavy. She could not rid ground fast
enough, and though she followed hard after him, she was yet too far from him.
Draw me, and we will run after thee. We will run after thee faster than now we
do, and get nearer to thee than now we are, and this calling in of divine help
was not in vain, it was presently (...), (...) ^ound (...) comfortable effect
of it, as appears from the next wor^, The King has brought me into his
Chambers, into a most intimate fellowship with him, not only into his Court,
but into his Chamber, and there she was willing enough to sit down and rest,
yea take up her eternal abode, yes there, but no where else, not at a distance,
not at the door, but in the Chamber, in the Bride Chamber of heaven, there we
will be glad and rejoice in thee, and remember thy love more than Wine.

Use Third. I shall speak a little to you who are concerned in the late
providence, and others of the same nature, and do your selves feel the smart of
that blow which struck your Relations dead. Do you possess your Souls in
patience, be quiet, content and satisfied, since you believe them to be
returned unto God; though they be dead to you, and you shall know them no more
after the flesh, yet they now do, and eternally shall live to God and with him.
There are none of you that have been made partakers of a Divine nature, but
would fain have your Husbands, Wives and Children, etc. turned from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan, to God; you would have them converted and
saved: I do not question but you desire that, and pray for that, and weep for
it, and long for it, and it would be the joy and comfort of your Souls to see
it; and herein you do exceeding well, there is much of a Gospel Spirit in it,
it does highly become you, and it is an argument of that dear love which you
bear unto them; it is the best and noblest expression of Love. Well, now when
their Spirits are returned to that God who gave them; now that they are gone
from you to their Father; now that they are so gone as that you shall here see
their face no more, and hear their voice no more, and enjoy their Company no
more, make it appear that you have been well taught in the School of Christ,
and there learned in every State wherein you are, therewith to be content, yea
in your solitary and lonesom state. Let them go, since he has sent for them
who has the best right to them, and in whose hand is the power of life and
death, do you freely let them go. Now they have a fullness of joy, and are
bathing themselves in Rivers of pleasure, do not you lock up your selves in a
dumpish retirement, nor sit down, sullen and discontented, drowned in tears,
oppressed and overwhelmed with sorrow; Be not you froward and angry with God for
loving them so well as to take them home to himself, and do not you disparage
that Heaven where they are triumphing, as if they had changed to their loss.
They are dead indeed, but sweeten that thought ^th a better, even this, that
they are gone to God, and so are where they ^ould be. So our Savior told his
Disciples. I go to my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God.
Remember, God dealt bountifully with them. As in your case who are now made a
Widow indeed. God dealt bountifully with you, in continuing him to you so
long, who might much sooner have dissolved your conjugal relation, but he did
not, many years you lived, and loved and rejoiced together; and he dealt
bountifully with him. I shall pass by his worldly estate, and only mention some
other things, ^t for the commendation of the deceased, but the honor of his
great Lord ^d Master, of whom we can never (...) too much.

^ 1. He gave him a great measure of life, for he lived to a good old age.

2. He afforded him a great measure of health, for he scarce knew what sickness
meant.

3. He had a great measure of Spiritual strength, for as I have been informed,
he kept his ground in the midst of Persecutions, and his integrity in the midst
of temptations, unto which his very calling did expose him.

4. God blessed him with a great measure of patience, so that he was to
admiration silent under that blow which consumed him.

5. A great measure of submission, being brought to Gods foot, willing to be
(...) his dispose.

6. A great measure of comfort, there being no Cloud upon his brow, no doubt of
his future happiness, but the assurance of Faith. Thus God dealt bountifully
with him, and so he does with other of his faithful Servants, though no^ with
all in all these respects. And we have therefore no reason for excessive sorrow
upon their return to God; for that God who dealt bountifully with them on earth
will deal satisfyingly with them in Heaven. Here the did see his goodness,
there they behold his glory.

Books lately Printed for John Dunton at the Rav^ in the Poultry; Viz.
CAsuis^ical Morning Exercises, The Fourth Volume: By several Ministers; and
about London, Preached in October, 1689.

1. The Saints readiness for their Lords coming: A Funeral Ser^ Preached upon
the Death of that Faithful and Laborious Servant of Ch^ Mr. John Oaks.

2. A Sermon Preached to Young men, Dec. 25. 1689. At that wh^ was Mr. Oaks
Meeting place.

3. A discourse showing the Duty of Magistrates from the highest ^o (...)
lowest for the suppressing Propha^eness, being one of the Sermons in the New
Morning-Exercise.

All three written by Samuel Slater Minister of the Gospel in London.

FINIS.

