portrait of John Sleidan IOANNES SLEIDANVS PATRICIVS ARGENTORATENSIS
Natus Sleidae. A. D. MDVI. Legatus in Anglia pro Protestantibus. A. D. MDXXXXV.

Legatus Argentorat: in Concilio Trident. A. D. MDLI. Obijt II Kal: November: A.
D. MDLVI.



Printed for Henry Bonwicke and Abel Swalle

THE General History OF THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH, From the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of ROME: Begun in GERMANY By Martin Luther, With the
Progress thereof in all Parts of Christendom, From the Year 1517, to the Year
1556.

Written in LATIN By John Sleidan, L. L. D. And faithfully Englished.

To which is Added, A CONTINUATION To the End of the Council of Trent, in the
Year 1562.

By EDMUND BOHUN, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by Edw. Jones, for Abel Swall at the Unicorn, and Henry
Bonwicke at the Red Lion, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

The Testimony of the Reverend and Learned Doctor Burnet, in the Preface of his
Celebrated History of the Reformation of the Church of England, Page 1. wherein
he gives an Honorable Character, not only of Sleidan, but also of Thuanus, and
Father Paul, two of the Authors Cited below.
THe Changes that were made in Religion in the last Century have produced such
Effects every where, that it is no wonder if all persons desire to see a clear
Account of the several Steps in which they advanced, of the Counsels that
directed them, and the Motives, both Religious and Political, that inclined Men
of all Conditions to concur in them. Germany produced a Sleidan, France a
Thuanus, and Italy a Friar Paul, who have given the World as full satisfaction
in what was done beyond Sea, as they could desire. And though the two last
lived and died in the Communion of the Church of Rome, yet they have delivered
things to Posterity, with so much Candor and Evenness, that their Authority is
disputed by none, but those of their own Party.

Jac. Aug. Thuanus, Historiar. Lib. xvii. page 542.
Sub Exitum Octobris, etc. The last day of October, in the year 1556, John
Sleidan; when he had brought down his History to that time, with an Exact Faith
and Diligence, died of the Plague at Strasburg, in the One and Fiftieth year of
his Age. He was born at Sleidan, a Town in the Dukedom of Juliers near Duren,
and from thence he took his Name; He was a Person, who for his Learning and
great Experience in Affairs, was much esteemed by that Age: He had spent the
greatest part of his Youth in France; and being entertained in the Family of
Bellay, had both Learned and done great things in the Service of Cardinal John
Du Bellay; but a sharp Persecution arising in France against those who were
suspected of Lutheranisme, he went and lived at Strasburg, and served that Free
City, and being, by his own public Employments, well informed of the Carriage
of Affairs, he added to what he had seen, what he had learned from Men worthy
of Credit, and Wrote his Commentaries.

Joannes Bodinus Method. Ad facilem Historiar. Cognitionem, page 66, 67.
Sleidanus Franciscum Regem, etc. John Sleidan greatly and truly commends
Francis I. King of France, the Duke of Saxony, Bellay, and Alenzon; and yet
declined all odious Comparisons. And if he at any time was forced to set down
any thing which tended to the Dishonor of any Man, he either proved it by good
Arguments, or put it in the Number of the Rumors or Reports. He notwithstanding
Imitated Guicciardin, Plutarch, Machiavel, Tacitus, and many others in the
disclosing the Counsels and Concealed Frauds of Men; for Sleidan was
Interpreter to Francis I. and was Employed in many Embassies for the City of
Strasburg; after which, resolving to Write the History of Religion (as he was a
Pious and Religious Man,) he has comprised in it not only a vast number of
Speeches and Letters, but has also some times abridged the Books which were
written on both sides; which, though it may seem very tedious to some Men, yet,
on the contrary, those that are true Lovers of Antiquity, and desirous to be
thoroughly informed concerning the great Changes which then happened in
Christendom, think nothing the less honorably of him on that Account.

Pietro Soave Polano Hist. del Concilio Tridentino, page 1.
Il Proponimento mio, etc. My purpose is to Write the History of the Council of
Trent, for though many famous Historians of our Age have made mention in their
Writings of some particular Accidents that happened therein, and John Sleidan,
a most Diligent Author, has related with Exquisite Industry the Causes that
went before, yet notwithstanding, all these things put together would not
suffice for an entire Narrative. This Author supposes his Reader well
Acquainted with Sleidan's History, and on that account, gives a very short and
imperfect Relation of the Rise and Progress of the Controversies which
necessitated the calling of that Council; so that it is scarce possible,
thoroughly to understand that History without having first Read Sleidan's.

TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
THIS Work was designed and begun when Our Church was in the Lowest degree of
Danger, out of a belief that it might contribute something to her Preservation,
in that Storm which lay so heavy upon her; the Duration of which could then be
known to none but God.

I thought That a seasonable time to Imitate the Divine Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, and to set before us that Cloud of Illustrious Persons who had
with an Heroic Courage baffled the Rages of former Persecutions by their Faith
and Patience.

The Reflections I had, in private made to my self, on the many Deliverances
the Holy God has, in these last Ages, so often wrought for his distressed
Church, when she seemed ready to be swallowed up by Popish Fury and Fraud, was
so great a support and comfort to me, in those Melancholy days, that I
passionately wished I had had some means of communicating them to others.

To that End was undertaken the Translating this Excellent History, as the best
means I could think of to raise the same Thoughts in others: And as Your
Majesty was ever in our Minds, I wished I might have some favorable
opportunity of laying it at Your Feet, though I could then have no prospect of
that Happiness.

Since then the late Wonderful Revolution has put so sudden and unexpected an
End to our Sufferings and our Sorrows, and brought Your Majesty back to
England, to be the Defender of our Holy Faith, and the Deliverer of our
oppressed Church; I humbly beg Your Gracious acceptance of this History, which
is due to Your Majesty, as the chief Patroness of the Reformation.

That God would, for many years, continue us under Your most Auspicious
Government, and at last reward Your Piety and Virtues with a more Glorious
Crown in Heaven, is, and ever shall be, one of the most fervent Prayers of

Madam, Feb. XX. 1688-89. Your Majesty's most Dutiful, Loyal, Faithful and most
Devoted Subject Edmund Bohun.

The Author of the Continuation to the Reader, containing an account of the
Life of the Learned John Sleidan* and of the Reception of his History.
JOhn Sleidan, The Life of John Sleidan.
the Author of this History, was born in the Year 1506. at Sleidan, or Sleiden,
a small Town in the Dukedom of Juliers, seated upon the River Roer, which
passing by Duren and Gulick at Ro^^mont falls into the Maes. I have not been
able to find of what quality and condition his Parents were, but it is certain
he was sent to Study in the University of Paris, when he was Twenty years of
Age; and that he was taken into the Service of John ^ardinal D^ B^ll^y, a
Great, Learned, and Wise Prelate of the French Church, and one that very
earnestly desired a Reformation, as the Great Thuanus tells us.

By him he was employed in affairs of great consequence; and he having by his
fidelity, industry and prudence, gained a great share in the Cardinals
affection, he was Recommended to Francis I. King of France, who employed him as
his Interpreter for the German Tongue, as Bodinus says: He himself tells us,
he continued nine years in France. But in November 1534. a sharp Persecution
arising in that, Kingdom against the Lutherans, which, he says, he saw with
his own Eyes; he became so far disgusted or affrighted at it, that he left
France and retired to Strasburg, which was probably in the Year 1^35 our Author
being then about Thirty years of Age; so that by that computation he was about
Twenty years of Age when he travailed into France.

The Reputation he had acquired in France, prepared the way to a good reception
in that Free City; and he was entertained by James Sturmius, who was their
principal Minister or Stateholder, with great kindness. About the Year 1540. he
first took up the design of Writing the History of the Reformation, at the
request of this great Statesman and many others, but very unwillingly. In the
Year 1543. he sent the first Book to the Diet at Worms, where it was read, and
so well approved, that he was sent as one of the Ambassadors to Henry VIII.
into England, by the whole Body of the Protestants; which Embassy is mentioned
by him in his Sixteenth Book.

In the Year 1551. he was again sent Ambassador, for the City of Strasburg, to
the Council of Trent, where he arrived the 21 of November, as he informs us in
his Twenty third Book.

He continued at Trent till the 27th of March* 1552. and then desired leave to
return, which at first was granted, but then the next day they recalled this
permission, and forced him to stay till the 6th of April, when the News coming
to Trent, that the Elector of Saxony had taken Ausburg three days before, the
Fathers fell into such a Consternation, that the Council broke up in an hurry,
and soon after the Emperor himself was forced to pass the Alps, from Inspruck
where he then was, by Torch-light, in the Night; which gave our Author the
opportunity to return to Strasburg, at his own leisure, well satisfied that he
was escaped out of that Den of wild Beasts.

The third of May, of the same year, he was sent by the City of Strasburg to
Sarbruk, a Town about seven miles from that City, to the West, to the French
King, who being then entered into a War against the Emperor, was come thither,
in person, with an Army; he having thereupon demanded Supplies of the City of
Strasburg, our Author with two others was sent as a Deputy to that Prince, as
he sets forth in the Twenty fourth Book. After this I do not find he was any
more employed abroad, but fell seriously to the composing of his History, in
which Work, he says, he entirely employed the three following years; and the
23 of April 1555. he dedicated the first Twenty five Books to the Elector of
Saxony. The Twenty sixth Book was Published after his Death, being found
amongst his Papers.

This Work was no sooner sent into the World than our Author found cause to
complain; The fate of this History in the Life of the Author.
for whereas he had employed one Rihely, a Printer of Strasburg, to Publish it;
there was presently Published, without the Authors knowledge or consent, a
German Version very ill done; and soon after that the same person presumed to
Print it in Latin too, to the great damage of Rihely, which Sleidan took very
ill, and in the next Edition complained of it to the World.

The Roman Catholics, on the contrary, presently set up a cry against this
History, and employed all the interest they had in the World to run down the
Credit of the Author; not by making any Objection against any parts of it, but
by general Slanders and misrepresentations of the whole Work in a lump; to
which kind of Defamations they knew it was very hard to make any Answer; but
however our Author put out an Apology in his own Vindication.

The last part of our Authors Life was employed in Writing his Twenty sixth
Book, And in after times.
which I believe was never finished by him, that which we now have being only
his first Rough Draught, unpolished and uncorrected; Death suddenly surprising
him, the last day of October in the Year 1556. He died of a Plague or Epidemick
acute Disease, in the Fifty first year of his Age begun, to the great Regret of
all Learned and Pious Men, who might justly have expected great things from so
Learned, so Modest, so Honest, and Candid a Pen.

The Roman Catholics could not bury their Resentments against this noble
History, in the Grave of its Author, but fell to invent and spread abroad
several made Stories to defame him; amongst which none is more frequently
insisted on than that Charles the V. should always call this Book his Liar, and
never ask for it by any other Name; for which we have the Faith of Suri^^, and
some other of that stamp; La naissance de l' Heresy, l. 1. Sect. 4. p. 4.
but none is so outrageous against him as Florimond de Remond, who tells us
that there was found in this Book Eleven thousand Lies and Falsities. Not that
they were so exact as to tell the mistakes, but this was a good (...), and if
the Reader would but believe there was half the number, it was all he desired;
but then he has quite spoiled his own design, by telling his Reader, that the
variety of the Subjects he treats of, which are imbellished with great Art, and
the great quantity of Memorials which the Lutherans put into his hands, when he
was set to compose (...), give so great an entertainment to the Reader, that it
is not possible he should ever be weary of it, but will ever end with a good
gust and a great desire to pursue the thread of this History, and see the end
of it. Now this is plainly to give himself the Lie for that great quantity of
Memorials which were put into his hands, the greatest part of which were from
time to time Published in Print, as he tells us in his Preface, and which our
Author only Transcribes, or at most Translates or Abridgeth, will not leave
Room for 11000 Lies, especially when he rarely makes any the least remark of
his own; and if after all, there had been but one thousand Lies, the Reader
must have been very Ignorant, and very Dull, that should not have stumbled on
^now of them to have disgusted him long before he had reached the end of the
Book: But Florimond was a true Jesuit^, and remembered the old Rule, Slander
stoutly and something will stick.

Palavicino, Chap. 4. Sect. 1.
another Jesuit, in his Apparatus to his History of the Council of Trent, lets
loose at the same rate against our Author, with an Assurance which becomes that
Society he was of, only because the Author of the former History of that
Council had commended his Fidelity and Industry: And thus he bespeaks his good
Roman Catholic Reader, You must know (says he) that Sleidan did so openly
profess himself a Favourer of Heretics, and an Enemy of the Sea of Rome; That
he Dedicated his Book to Augustus Elector of Saxony, and he commends that
Prince too, because the Sect of the Lutherans first (...) shelter in his
Country. After this he sets down the three first Lines of his History, and then
tells us, that Sleidan acknowledges that James Sturmius furnished him with
materials. Now (says he) this Sturmius was in great esteem among the
Calvinists; and then he concludes, That no body would believe Father Paul, as
to those things which went before the Council, and which were the foundations
of that History, but such as had some Faith for Sleidan; and that he was sure
none of the good Sons of the Infallible Church would be guilty of: But however
to make all sure, he tells us Surius, Fontanu^, Possevinus and Spondanus have
all charged him for a great Liar: and since that Maimbourg and Varillas have
transcribed all this over again, and by pure Number, and dint of Impudence,
they are, or at least seem, well resolved to Ruin Sleidans reputation forever.
But when all is done, the very Papers out of which Sleidan transcribed the main
of his History, are still, for the most part, extant, and prove the veracity of
our Author; the consequence of which is, that all these godly Fathers are found
to be mere Defamers, Sec^^^dorf
and not worthy of any credit.

In the interim the Book spread at an incredible rate; and tho Rihely, the
first Publisher had it Reprinted upon him, within the first year in German and
Latin, yet he Reprinted it again in 1561, and in 1566 in Octavo, and in 1572 in
Folio, and in the year 1560 it was Translated into English, by one John Daws,
and Dedicated to the Earl of Bedford; and I have seen very ancient Versions of
it in Italian and French: so that no Book ever had a more general Reception in
the World than this, nor was better approved by the candid Writers of the
Church of Rome it self, as will appear by the Testimonies by me cited in the
beginning of it.

And so far has his Enviers been from convicting him of that falsehood and
disingenuity, which they have so falsely charged him with, that most of their
Books, like Images which the Pagans Worshipped, are long since cast to the Bats
and to the Moles, and the very memory of them almost perished from off the
Earth: So that his Defamers have been forced to Transcribe from him the
choicest of the Memorials they needed to fill up the History of those times.

Brietius a Jesuit, In Anno 1556.
in his Annals, says, He was called Sleidan, from the Place of his birth,
because he was a Bastard, and so had no Surname; that he had but one Eye, and
was brought up by the Cardinal du Bellay; that becoming a Lutheran or a
Calvinist he fled to Strasbourg, where he wrote his History: Sed ea fide
humana, quam expectare debes ab eo qui divinam ejurarat; but with that humane
faith which one would expect from one who had abjured the Divine faith. The
bitterness of which confutes the Slander; the taking Names from the Place of
their birth being usual then and now too in Germany: The easy Admission he
found into the family of Bellay shows more probably that he was a person of
good Birth, and well descended; and as for his being Blind there is no mention
of it any where else.

Lewis a Seckengdorf, Praeloqui^. p. 8.
a Privy Counselor to the late Dukes of Saxony, in an Answer, Published this
year, to Maimbourgs History of Lutheranisme, thus Apologizeth for our Author.
It is certain that John Sleidan has so very well written the History of the
Reformation, that all impartial men ought to be satisfied with it, he having
very much excelled all the rest who have written on that Subject. And yet they
of the Church of Rome charge him with falsehood, pretending a Proverb of Charles
the V. to that purpose; how truly cited I know not, but as I verily believe,
out of pure Envy and Malice. For if ever they should attempt to prove, what
they so often pretend, they would certainly fall short and be able to produce
nothing to that purpose, but a few light things, and silly reports, which are
not worth relating. On the otherside, without the Assistance of Sleidan, very
few Men have or ever will be able to Write any thing of those times worth the
Reading. For how, I pray, was it possible for him to Lie, who has spent the
greatest part of his History of the Reformation in mere Transcripts, out of the
Public Records word for word, to the wearying of many of his Readers who are
in too much haste to see the event; and he every where appeals to Acts and
Writings, which for the most part are still extant, and render the Faith of
this great Man unquestionable? Nor is there any other Historian almost to be
found (as I believe) who so very rarely passes any censure upon what he
Writes. Nor is it possible for Envy it self to deprive him entirely of the
Honor of this Work, which, I believe, will last till the General Conflagration
of the World.

The same Author informs us, in his Additions, page the 7th, That one Frederick
Hortelder, a Counselor of the Duke of Saxony Weymar, in the year 1618
Published a very large Vindication of the Veracity of Sleidans History in the
German Tongue, which he Printed in the Preface of his History of the
Smalcaldick War, etc. which was after Reprinted in the year 1648. and in the
Conclusion of that Section, Seckendorf adds, Sleidan lived but one year after
he had finished his History, in which, and all the times which have since
followed, he has not (to my knowledge) been convicted of any one single
falsehood which has been shown and made good against him. And in Opposition to
those few who have traduced him, there is no end of the Number of those who
have approved this Work, Memoires Touchant les Ambassadeurs. p. 442. 8o. part.
I.
and amongst them John Bodinus and Thuanus, who ought not to be named without
Honor: And they alone in my Judgment are worth a Thousand Maimbourgs and
Varillasses. To these I may add the Judgment of Monsuer Wickfort, a great Man
of this present Age, who says, that Sleidans History is very Good.

It will, An account of this Version.
I suppose, be expected that I should give an account of this Translation. That
the Original deserved to be read in more Languages than one, is I believe
unquestionable: and that favorable Reception it has already met with in the
German, French and Italian Languages, besides that universal Applause with
which it has been Celebrated, by the Learned in all the Countries of Europe,
did bespeak such a Translation into English, as might in some measure answer
the native Beauties of this noble Work; of which I shall only say, that in this
all imaginable care has been taken to keep up that truly great simplicity,
which is the distinguishing character of this History; how far this has been
performed is left to the Judgment of the judicious Reader. What I have to say
of my Continuation, is already set down in my Introduction before it.

To the most Illustrious Prince AUGUSTUS Elector and Duke of SAXONY,
Landt-grave of THVRINGE, Marquess of MISNIA, and Lord High Marshal of the
EMPIRE; His most Gracious Master and Lord, John Sleidan wishes much Health and
Happiness.
Illustrious Sir,
Diverse Authors have discovered to us the manifold and various Accidents which
attend humane affairs, and the changes in States and Kingdoms: And God himself
has been pleased heretofore to instruct us, and with his Own voice, as it were
to foretell us what should happen of this Nature, many Ages before it came to
pass. And as to the first four Great Empires of the World, He has been pleased
by Daniel the Prophet to inform us, of their Order, Changes and Successions:
The greatest part of whose excellent Predictions are now (by the event) exposed
and made very plain to us, and afford us a knowledge which is both very sweet
and full of Consolation. The same holy Prophet has also foretold the changes of
Religion, and the contests concerning its Doctrines; and the Apostle St. Paul
who followed him, has clearly also discovered beforehand many things of that
Nature. And the accomplishment of these Predictions has been delivered down to
us, and explained by various Writers who have lived in the intermediate Ages.
But then that change which has happened in our times, is one of the most
Illustrious Events which has come to pass.

The Prophet has foretold that the Roman Empire should be the last, and the
most powerful, and that it should be divided; and accordingly it is reduced to
the lowest degree of weakness, tho it was once of an immense Bulk and vast
extent, so that now it only subsists within the Confines of Germany; and its
Fortunes have been very various and unsteady, partly by reason of its Intestine
Divisions, and partly on the account of Foraign Combinations against it. Yet
after all, God has at last given us the most Potent Emperor that has reigned in
many Ages: For in the Person of this Prince are united the Succession of many
Rich and Powerful Kingdoms and Inheritances, which by reason of their
Situations have afforded him the opportunity of performing great things, by Sea
and Land, above any other of our Princes. And as his Power has very much
exceeded all the Emperors of Germany which have Reigned since Charles the
Great: So the things which have happened in his time, and under his Government,
have rendered him the most Conspicuous and Memorable of all our Princes.

And amongst these, the Reformation of Religion does justly challenge the first
Place, which began with his Reign. For this Controversy had not been moved
above XIV months, when Maximilian the Emperor (his Grandfather and immediate
Predecessor in the Empire) died: And when he was chosen by the VII Electors,
Luther being at the self same time provoked by his Adversaries, entered the
Lists, and maintained a public Disputation against Eckius at Leipsick; by
which the minds of both the contending Parties were put into a great Commotion.
The Reign therefore of this great Prince is diligently to be considered, and
for the better understanding of it, ought to be compared with those of the
former times. For God has ever used to raise up Illustrious and great Princes,
when the Ecclesiastical or Civil State were to be changed: such were Cyrus,
Alexander the Macedonian, C. Julius Caesar, Constantine, Charles the Great, and
the Otho's of Saxony, and now in our times at last, CHARLES the V.

That change I have here in this Story unfolded, is such that no man who does
clearly understand it, can think of it without astonishment, and the utmost
degree of Admiration and Wonder. Its beginning was small and almost
contemptible; and one man alone, a while, bore the hatred and violence of the
whole World: And even he too might easily, at first, have been quieted and laid
to sleep, if the condition he so often offered his Adversaries, had been
accepted by them. For he Promised he would hold his Peace, if they would do so
too: But when they refused this, and would force him to recant, and stood
stiffly in this Resolution that he should do it: And he on the otherside as
stoutly replied, That he could not retract what he had Advanced, till they had
shown him wherein he had erred; The debate between them improved and grew
greater, and the business was brought before the Diet of Germany, by which
means it dilated it self to that degree we now see it in.

But then upon what reasons it was done; What share the Popes of Rome, the
Universities, and the Kings, Princes, and States of Christendom had in this
Affair; How Luther defended his Cause before the Emperor and the Princes of
Germany in the Diet; How many men of great Learning joined themselves with him;
How this business was from time to time agitated and debated in the Dyets; What
ways were proposed for an Accommodation; How the Popes solicited the Emperor
and other Christian Princes; How they frequently promised a Reformation and a
General Council; What Persecutions and Slaughters were in several Places were
stirred up against those who embraced this Doctrine; What Conspiracies and
Leagues were set on foot to the same end, not only in Germany but in other
Countries, as this Religion spread it self; How some forsook it, and others
persevered constantly in it; What Tumults, Contentions and Wars were occasioned
by it; These thing, in my judgment are so great, and so full of Variety, that I
think it were a sin to suffer them to perish in silence, and not commit them to
writing.

To this I may add, that I think it very reasonable to give an account what the
state of the Empire of Germany has been during the Reign of this Prince, by the
space of XXXVI years; what Wars he has managed; What Commotions and
Disturbances have happned; And what has been the fortune of the Neighbor
Kingdoms and Provinces in these times: (But then I shall show hereafter the
method I have followed in this Work.) For as this Princes Dominions are of
great Extent, so he has been attacked by very Potent Adversaries. The things
therefore that have happened during his Reign, and in our Memory, are strangely
great. Some years since, many men of eminent Learning and Virtue, when these
things happened to be accidentally mentioned, began to be earnest with me that
I should commit to Writing the Affairs of our times, especially what related to
Religion; And this they did, not out of an opinion that I was better able to do
it than another, or because there were not abler men to be found for that
purpose; but because they saw me particularly fancy and love these Composures;
and thence they concluded that I being by Nature designed to this employment,
and by her powerfully excited to it, might perhaps not altogether lose or
mispend my time in the attempt. On the other side, I who knew what a large Sea
of Matter I was to enter into, and that this design needed a man of greater
Ingenuity and Eloquence than I could pretend to, and therefore I almost
despaired of ever being able to accomplish it; yet being at last overcome by
the Authority of those who had made this motion to me, I resolved to make a
trial of it: And accordingly beginning with the time when Luther first opposed
the Venal Indulgences, and bringing the Relation down to the Disputation
appointed by George Duke of Saxony at Leipsick, I sent what I had Composed, as
a kind of Specimen, to those who had solicited me to undertake it, about ten
years since, to Worms; there being then a Diet of the Empire in that City, to
the end they might read and judge of it. They thereupon became more earnest
with me than before, both by their Letters and Personal applications that I
should go on with it: But about that time Germany was involved in a Calamitous
War, which as it gave great hindrances to all the Learning and Arts of our
Country, so it discomposed my design, and for some time forced me to delay it.
For neither was it possible for me to go on as I desired, and besides I met
frequently with stops and interruptions. But then as soon as ever this storm
blew over, and especially in the three last years, I applied all my Study and
Labor to this Work; nor would I give my self any rest till I had arrived at
that period of time I intended.

The main and principal scope of my design is to set forth the Affairs of
Religion; but then I thought it needful for Order sake to set down also the
Civil Transactions. As to the nature of the Story every man that reads it will
very easily see what it is.

Candor and Truth are the two most becoming Ornaments of an History; and in
truth, I have taken the utmost care that neither of them might be wanting here:
To that end I have taken up nothing upon surmise or light report, but I have
studiously collected what I have here written from the Public Records and
Papers; the Faith of which can justly be called in question by no man.

Besides, I had great assistances from James Sturmius, a Person of Noble Birth
and great reputation, who was employed for above XXX years in the Public and
most difficult Affairs of his Country, which he at all times managed with much
commendation; He having been pleased to admit me (such was his Goodness) into
his Acquaintance and Friendship, like a good Governor very often showed me the
right and even way, when I was at a loss, and doubtful which way to turn me,
and at other times stuck on the Rocks and Shallows; and after all, read over,
at my request, the greatest part of this Work before his last Sickness, which
took him from us in the year 1553, and with great industry and care admonished
me of what he thought was needful.

The Reader will meet frequent mention of Foraign affairs, especially the
French and English, and in these I have pursued the same method, and I have
inserted nothing but what I had good Authority for. And as to the French
transactions, I saw many of them in the IX years I lived in that Kingdom. So
that the greatest part of the Persecutions and Burnings, and the Royal Edicts
against the Professors of the Reformed Religion, which I have mentioned; the
Disputation undertaken by the Divines of Paris against some of their Ministers;
the Confession of their Faith which was Published in Print soon after, and the
Court Factions which then were on foot, do all of them fall within that time
also. As to Military actions, and what passed in the Wars, I have not wholly
passed them over, nor indeed could I, and yet I have not made them any
principal part of my business, because that of Religion was my main design. And
therefore when my Reader falls upon any thing of that Nature, I would have him
know beforehand, he is not to expect an exact and large account: That being
contrary to my undertaking, and which may easily be found in other Authors who
have made those things their principal care, tho I have not.

The second Ornament which I mentioned of History, is Candor or Impartiality,
which is ever to be observed to prevent the Writers being drawn from Truth by
his affections, which seems the more difficult, because it is so rarely to be
found in Historians. Now tho perhaps I shall not be able to persuade all my
Readers that I have used more than an ordinary diligence, as far as it was
possible for me, as to this: Yet I do with repeated earnestness conjure them
not to load me with an unjust suspicion beforehand. This whole Work, as I said
above, is extracted out of Public Acts, Papers, or Records; collected together
with great diligence, and a great part of which have been already Printed,
partly in Latin, and partly in the Vulgar Tongues, viz. the German, Italian,
and French. It contains many Orations, Petitions, and Answers; very many
Accusations and their Answers; in all these I nakedly, simply, and with good
Faith, recite all things as they were particularly acted. For here I do not add
any thing of my own, nor do I make any Judgment on them; but willingly and
freely leave it to my Reader. I make no Rhetorical Flourishes, nor do I write
any thing out of Favor or Envy to any man. No, I only furnish the Style, and
use my own words, that the tenor of my Language may be equal, and always alike;
and digest every thing, and fix it in its proper place, as it happened to be
done in order and time.

In the first years Leo the X, and Adrian the VI, Popes of Rome, wrote many
things with great Bitterness against Luther. Now as I take nothing from their
Words, so I add nothing to Luther's Answers; nor do I make their complaints
worse than they were, or his Defenses and Replies better. The two Popes that
followed these, Clement VII, and Paul III, and especially the latter, when
Luther's Doctrine was spread very much abroad, turning from his person, did
very odiously accuse and reproach some Princes and Free-Cities: Here I go on in
the same manner, and indeed throughout the whole Work. Therefore I beseech my
Reader to lay aside all prejudice, and that he would first consider the things
proposed, and my Labor, which was very great, and then bestow his good will
and favor on it. For it is certain, that if those motives which induced me to
begin to Write, had not spurred me to go on, notwithstanding all the trouble, I
had long since deserted, and left this very difficult undertaking, when I found
by experience the variety and extent of it. But my mind and strength were very
much supported, first, When I considered that it was for the glory of God, who
was thus pleased to discover his Almighty Power, and admirable Counsel in our
times: Next that the common Good and Advantage, which would result from it,
very much wrought upon me. For even here in Germany very few clearly understand
in what order every thing was done; and Foreign Nations know nothing at all of
them: but the far greatest part of men being prepossessed with prejudices,
judged of the greatest part of the things quite otherwise than they ought. To
all this, I may add, I have had some consideration for Posterity, if yet these
my Writings will bear the Light, and last any long time. Besides it rarely
happens that things of this Nature are by others related with any degree of
Truth and Moderation: And there is a Book (on this Subject) Printed above six
years since at Mentz, Written by a German, and stuffed with Accusations,
Slanders, Trifles and Reproaches: And within the space of a few years past
there were two Volumes published at Florence, the Author of which has very
largely handled, in them, the History of his own Times; but wheresoever he
speaks of the Affairs of Germany, and especially of what concerns Religion,
there he will certainly discover the sickness of his Mind: The greatest part of
what he writes, being not well known to him, False and Slanderous, as might
very clearly be shown. Besides, whereas these two Writers have occasion
frequently to mention some Orations, Letters and Prefaces of Books, which have
been Published from the Press, yet even here they presume to Treat all these
things not only with great Enmity and Envy, but they go very far also from the
Truth.

These Considerations, I say, prevailed upon me, so that I thought I was
obliged to go on, and not to suffer the Story of this Revolution to be falsely
delivered to this or the succeeding Age. For what can possibly be more base and
insufferable, in this kind of Writing, than to suffer that which ought to make
men wiser, by false relations to be depraved and turned to a contary end? The
greatest part of the Historians of our times, by a fault too common in our
days, seek to gratify and please some one person, but in the mean time this
makes them injurious to many more, whom they thus deceive and cause to err. As
to my self I do assure my Reader, without any boasting, that I am ready, and
well disposed, if I have set down anything in this Work which is not exactly
true, to blot it out, and give the World a caution not to believe it too. But
then I am very confident that nothing of vanity can here be charged upon me;
because there are many good men who can testify what great study and industry
I have employed, for some years now past, to gain an exact Knowledge of every
thing; and besides I trust the Work it self will prove it.

Now tho I Write the History of those things which have happened during the
Reign of Charles V. who is yet living, and at the Helm, of our State, and so
many other great Actions may perhaps follow in his times; yet because those
that are past must of necessity be the first, principal and greatest part of
the events of it: Therefore I would not delay this Work any longer, wherein I
have gratified many Learned Men, not only of Germany, but also of other
Countries, who desired to see it. Without doubt there are great Commotions and
strange and wonderful changes coming on; and the S. Scriptures seem clearly and
plainly to foretell as much; and the present state of Affairs intimate the same;
so that those who are disposed to Write, are not like to be destitute of
Matter. But in the interim, as the Public good inclined me to undertake this
task; so it has now at last prevailed with me to Publish these XXV Books.

Illustrious Sir,
I desire to Dedicate unto Your Highness this my Labor and Work; because you
are descended of that Family which was first pleased to give entertainment and
Protection to this Doctrine: Your Father readily embraced it, Your Brother has
settled a considerable Estate for the Education of Children in Learning and
Piety, and Your Father in Law (the King of Denmark) is a famous Defender of it
also; and lastly, because You too, Great Sir, pursuing with much Glory their
Example, I cannot but be confident, this Work, which I hope will be profitable
to many, will be therefore acceptable to You. May God Preserve Your Highness.

Given the 23 of March 1555.
John Sleidan's Apology for his History.
BEing informed that many speak very unfriendly of my History, and as I clearly
see, reward my great Labor very ill, I am thereby enforced to Publish this
Apology in my own Defense. I have already in my Preface set forth the causes
that induced me to Write, the methods I pursued in it, and that I designed no
man's disrepute, or favor; that I was very desirous of setting down nothing but
what was exactly true, and disposed beforehand, in case I were shown I had any
where mistaken, to correct and blot out what was amiss, and to caution my
Readers not to believe my Errors. I thought this would satisfy all mankind,
and the rather, because the very perusal of what I had Written would clear my
reputation and create a firm belief of my fidelity: but being on all hands
informed, to my great dissatisfaction and sorrow, that it has happened quite
otherwise, I am necessitated to add what follows to that preface.

I say then, that from the beginning of the World, it has ever been the custom
of Men to Write the Civil and Sacred History of their times: That this usage
(as appears by their Books) has most flourished in the most free and
illustrious Nations, especially amongst the Greeks and Romans. That the
principal Law and Ornament of History is Truth and Sincerity, and therefore it
was that Cicero styled it, The Witness of Times, the Light of Truth, the Life
of Memory, and the Mistress of Life. By these Words the great Orator has given
a noble commendation of History, and an excellent description of what ought to
be aimed at in the Composing of it. Now there having happened, in our Times,
such a change in Religion, as is not to be paralleled in any age since the
Apostles; and there having followed it a great Commotion in the Civil State, as
is usual. Tho I was not the fittest person to undertake this Work, yet at the
request of many good Men, I entered upon it, for the glory of God, and with
great fidelity and diligence have brought it down to our own Times: And I have
some hope, that all who are not highly prejudiced, will confess that I have not
given the Reins to my Passions, in any thing in this affair; and that I have
behaved my self, perhaps, with more Moderation than any other Writer.

For though I willingly profess that Doctrine of the Gospel, which by the mercy
of God was now restored, and rejoice exceedingly that I am a Member of the
Reformed Church; yet I have carefully abstained from all exasperating Language,
and simply delivered every thing as it came to pass. I call God to Witness
also, that I never designed to injure or hurt any man's reputation falsely; for
what a madness would it have been to have delivered any thing otherwise than it
was, in an affair which is fresh in all men's memory? And, I hope, those who are
intimately acquainted with me, have never yet discovered any such vanity in me:
And yet if after all, I have by chance committed any Error or Mistake, I will
readily confess it, when ever I shall be shown it, and also caution my Reader
openly, that he may not be mislead by me, as I have said in my Preface. As to
the pains I have taken, and the diligence I have used in this Work, no man
could possibly have done more to find out the Truth, as many men can bear me
Witness, and the very Work it self will in great part show.

In this History of Religion, I could not omit what concerned the Civil
Government, because, as I have already said, they are interwoven each with
the other, especially in our times, so that it was not possible to separate
them. This union of the Sacred and Civil State, is sufficiently discovered in
the Scriptures, and is the cause that the change of Religion, in any Nation, is
always attended presently with offenses, distractions, contentions, strifes,
tumults, factions and wars. For this cause, Christ says, the Son shall be
against the Father, and the Daughter against the Mother, and that his Doctrine
would not bring Peace, but a Sword, and raise a fiery contention amongst the
nearest relations. And that this has ever been the state of affairs since the
beginning of the World, cannot be denied, and is also very manifest from the
thing it self. For in our Times no sooner did this benefit, vouchsafed us by
God and the Doctrine of the Gospel, begin to be preached against the Papal
Indulgences and the Traditions of Men, but presently all the World, but
especially the Clergy, became tumultuous and unquiet. This occasioned the
bringing this affair before the Diet, or Public Convention of the States of
Germany; and when there upon some Princes and free Cities embraced this
Doctrine, this fire spread it self, and the cause was exagitated with great
variety, till at last it burst out into a War.

Now in the Description, I have made of it, will appear what care and diligence
the Emperor employed to put a stop to this dissension; what the Protestants
also from time to time Answered, and what Conditions they frequently offered.
And when it came to a War, the event was various and perplexed; as for
instance, the Emperor (to give one Example out of many) wrote to some of the
Princes and Cities, and afterward Published in Print, a Declaration of his
intentions and designs. This Declaration was the foundation of the Emperors
cause, and by the Laws of History was to be represented, together with the
Answer of the Adverse Party. For, without this, what kind of History would it
be thought which should only represent what one party said? And yet in this,
how I behaved my self, how I managed my Style and tempered it, may be easily
seen, by comparing my Latin Version of that Declaration with the German Edition
of it, to which I refer my self. When the War was prolonged till the Winter
came on, the Emperor at last prevailed upon the return of his Enemies into
their Countries. These his Victories and Triumphs, first, in the Upper Germany,
and then the Electorate of Saxony, are related by me with great Truth: And I
observe the same method every where. For I neither take from, nor add to any
man's Actions, more than the truth of the thing requires and allows: And in
truth it is apparent this has been done by few: For the greatest part of the
Writers give their own Judgments both of the things and persons they mention in
their Histories.

To omit the more Ancient Historians, we know how Platina has Written the Lives
of the Popes, and Philip Comines, a Knight, has in our Memory published an
Illustrious History of his own Times, and among other things which he there
delivers, tells us, that after Charles the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, was slain
before Nancy in Battle; Lewis XII King of France ravished from his Daughter,
and Heir, Artois and both the Burgundies; and although Comines was a sworn Subject
of France, and a Counselor to that Prince, yet he says this was ill done.
About XXIV years since Peter Bembus was employed by the Senate of Venice, to
Write the Story of the War between that State, and Maximilian the First,
Emperor of Germany, Lewis King of France, and Julius II Pope of Rome, and some
others, which he has done in twelve Books: And he too tells us how Lewis XII
denounced War against the Venetians, and that his Herald appearing before the
Senate, and the Duke, spoke these Words, Luredano Duke of Venice, and ye the
rest of the Citizens of Venice; Lewis King of France, my Master, has commanded
me to tell you, that he is coming with an Army against you, because like a
parcel of perfidious men, yea have possessed your selves by force and fraud of
the Towns belonging to the Pope, and other Princes, and are rest lesly
endeavoring by crafty means to Ravage, and subject under your Dominion, all
that belongs to your Neighbors, which he is now resolved to require at your
hands. Perhaps some may think that Bembus ought to have taken no notice of
these Words, because they reflect so bitterly upon his Countrymen; but he
thought otherwise, and transcribed them from the Public Records into his
History, adding the Answer which was given with equal sharpness to the Herald;
and this Work was after Printed with the Privilege of the Senate at Venice.
Paulus Jovius, besides his Lives of the Illustrious Men, has lately Published
two Tomes of the History of our Time; how freely he Writes will appear to any
one who reads them; and although he treats the Germans very injuriously, yet
his Work comes forth with many Privileges to defend it. He that pleases may
examine what he says, Tom. II. Fol. 9. and in the Life of Leo X. Fol. 93, 94.
and in the Life of Alfonso Duke of Ferrara, Fol. 42. and in truth the Works of
all good Authors have many Examples of this Nature.

Comines is chiefly commended because he Wrote so equally, but then he ever
pursues this Method, as I have said already, that he not only sets down what
was done, but also gives his own Judgment of it, and tells us what every one
did, well or ill; and although I would not have done this, yet it is the most
usual practice of Historians. But then, that what was done or said by both
Parties should be exactly related, is not only just and equal, and the constant
usage from the most Ancient times, but also absolutely necessary; for without
it, it is impossible to Write an History. Where ever there are Factions, Wars
and Seditions, be sure there are Complaints, Accusations and Answers, and all
places are filled with opposite and contradictory Papers: Now he that truly
relates these as they are, does neither of the Parties any injury, but follows
the Laws of an Historian. For in these Brawls and Contentions, every thing
which the Parties object against each other is not presently true and certain.
Where there is Contention, Hatred and Enmity, it is very well known and
experienced how things are managed for the most part on both sides: If what the
Popes, and their Adherents, have within thirty six years last past belched out
against the Protestants were all true, there could be found nothing more wicked
and impious than they.

Paul III. Pope of Rome sent the Cardinal of Farnese his Son, in the year 1540.
to the Emperor, into the Low Countries: He gave some Advices against the
Protestants, which were afterward Printed and are recited in the thirteenth
Book of my History. After many other reproachful expressions, he says, the
Protestants fight as much against Christ as the very Turks do, for they only
kill their Bodies, but the Protestants bring their Souls too to eternal
destruction: Here then I make a stand, and desire to know what could possibly
have been spoken more grievous and horrible than this? Now if these things had
not been related, certainly the Protestants would have had just cause of
complaint against me: But the thing is quite otherwise, for neither is it true
because the Cardinal said it, and if I had passed it by, I might justly have
been suspected as one that was too much addicted to a Party, and so would not
tell the Truth,

I do not doubt but all impartial men will yield that I have in this, which I
have said, clearly given the true Laws of History; and I can as little think
they will judge that I have broke those Laws; the far greatest part of my
History being extracted out of Pieces which were Printed before. They act
therefore very unfriendly, or rather injuriously with me, who traduce and
defame my Writings, and the more are they guilty if they understand the Laws of
History: but if they know them not, then I desire they would learn them from
what I have written and from other Historians. But then when I mention other
Historians, I do not mean those of our times, whose only business it is to
extol their own Party with immoderate praises and wonderful commendations, and
to overwhelm the other Party with slanders and reproaches; for these men are
not worthy of the Title of Historians.

Above six years since John Cochleus Published some Commentaries, containing an
History of the same nature with mine, but then he has stuffed them with
horrible, unheard of, and invented slanders. Cardinal Pole, in a Book which he
lately Printed, calls the Protestant Religion, lately established in Germany, a
Turkish Seed: And their Books are generally full of such reflections. But what
is there like this in my Work? In truth I have made it my business to Write in
order, and as truly as I could, the Story of that wonderful blessing God has
been pleased to bestow upon the men of this Age: And to that purpose, about
sixteen years since, I Collected all that I thought necessary to that Work: nor
have I since made any headlong haste in the Writing of it, but gone leisurely
on with a steady Judgment. The labor I have taken, in this great Work, is
known to none but God and my self: and I had respect to nothing but the glory
of God in it; and laying aside the Study of the Civil Law, which is my
profession, I accordingly almost spent my whole time upon it: so that all
things considered, I think, I may aver that I was drawn to it by an Impulse
from God, and I will commend my cause to him, seeing I have met so ill a
recompense from some men, for my great labor and pains; it being his cause I
have defended, and I am fully assured he will look upon that Work as a most
pleasing and acceptable Sacrifice; the conscience of which sustains and
comforts me; and the more, because I see many Learned Men approve and applaud
my Work, paying me their thanks for it, and acknowledging the benefit they have
reaped by it. Therefore I desire all those who are the hearty Lovers of Truth,
that they would not believe the slanders of ill men, but kindly entertain my
Work, and approve my faith and diligence, without admitting any suspicion of
me. Lastly, I profess that I acknowledge Charles the V. now Emperor of Germany,
and Ferdinand King of the Romans his Brother, to be the supreme Magistrates
appointed by God, whom I ought in all things to Obey, as Christ and his
Apostles have commanded, excepting only those things which are forbidden by God.

portrait of Martin Luther SS. TD. ACERRIMVS. E.R. HOSTIS. MARTINUS LUTHERVS.
Nascitur Islebiae X Nov: 1483.

Monasterium Augustine: Ingreditur. Ao. 1505.

Titulum Dis. Assumsit Ao 1512.

Obijt in Patria XVIII.o die Februarij. 1546.



THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church, BEGUN IN GERMANY BY Martin
Luther, etc.
BOOK I.
The CONTENTS.
Martin Luther bravely withstands the Venal Indulgences, dispersed abroad by
Leo X, Pope of Rome; not only in his Public Sermons, but also in some Theses
and Positions, which he offered to defend, and which he sent to the Archbishop
of Mentz. The first that opposed them were Tetzel, Eckius, Silvester, Prierias
and Hogostrat. In the mean time the Pope sends Cajetane Legate to the Emperor
Maximilian. Luther is Cited to appear at Rome: By means of Frederick Elector of
Saxony, he Answers Cajetane in the Diet of Ausburg. Cajetane by Menaces, and
the Thunder of the Canons, endeavors to maintain the Papal Power and Tyranny.
After the departure of Luther, Cajetane sollicites Duke Frederick by Letters,
but in vain. By a new Bull, the Pope confirms and publishes the Indulgences in
Germany. To draw in Duke Frederick, he presents him with a Golden Rose. The
Emperor Maximilian, in the mean while dies. Many Heads at work about the
Succession to the Empire. At length, Charles Archduke of Austria is chosen
Emperor; the News whereof is brought to him in Spain. An account of the Bulla
Aurea, the Golden Bull, and Laws of the Empire. Erasmus his Testimony of
Luther. Whilst they were Disputing at Leipsick, Ulrick Zuinglius began to
teach at Zurich, and manfully opposed one that preached up Indulgences.

POPE Leo X, 1517.
a Florentine, of the Family of Medices, making use of that Power, which his
Predecessors, the Popes of Rome, had Usurped, Pope Leo sends out Indulgences.
and he himself thought he had, over all Christian Churches, sent abroad into
all Kingdoms his Letters and Bulls, with ample Promises of the full Pardon of
Sins, and of Eternal Salvation to such as would purchase the same with Money;
and the Collectors, and those who were sent out, to Preach up the Value of this
so great a Favor, not only defended their Doctrins in Books they published,
particularly in Germany; but also settled public Offices in all Provinces for
the Receipt of the Money, that was raised this way, and by the Licenses which
they likewise sold, for eating Eggs, Milk, Cheese and Flesh, on Fasting Days.
Now this Remission and Pardon of Sins, they named an Indulgence, a Word of
their own coining, which had been of a long time in use among them.

There lived at that time, Luther Preaches against Indulgences;
in Wittemberg upon the Elbe, a City of Saxony, one Martin Luther, a Doctor of
Divinity, and an Augustine Friar; who being excited by the Sermons and Books of
these Collectors, and perceiving that their Doctrine was believed, and past
current among the People, began to advise Men to be Wise, and not to purchase
such Commodities at so dear a Rate: Because what they laid out that way, might
be far better employed. And this happened in the Year of our Lord one thousand
five hundred and seventeen.

That he might, And writes about them to the Archbishop of Mentz.
therefore, proceed in his Design with better Success, on the last of October,
he wrote to Albert of Brandenburg Archbishop of Mentz, acquainting him with
what they Taught; and Complaining that the People were so persuaded, as that
having purchased these Indulgences by Money, they needed no more doubt of
Salvation, as if no Crime could be committed which was not by that means
Pardoned; and as if the Souls which were Tormented in the Fire of Purgatory, so
soon as the Money was cast into the Box, were presently discharged of their
Pains, and took their Flight straight up to Heaven. He tells him, That Christ
commanded the Gospel to be Preached; and that it was the proper Office of
Bishops, to instruct the People in the Right Way: Wherefore he puts him in Mind
of his Duty, and prays him that he would use his Authority in suppressing those
Books, and enjoining the Preachers to teach better Doctrine, lest it might give
Occasion to some more grievous Dissension, which would undoubtedly happen, if
they were not restrained. The Reason why he wrote to him, was, Because he being
also Bishop of Magdeburg, it belonged to him to take care of these things.
Luther's Theses concerning Indulgences.
With this Letter, he also sent the Theses, which for Disputation sake, he had
lately published at Wittemberg, to the number of ninety five, wherein he fully
handled the Doctrine of Purgatory, true Penance, and the Office of Charity, and
censured the extravagant Preachings of the Collectors; but only for discovering
the Truth, as has been said. For he invited all Men, not only to come to the
Disputation, and object what they had to say; but begged also, That such as
would not be present, might send their Opinions in Writing, protesting that he
affirmed nothing positively, but referred all to the Judgment of the Holy
Church; nevertheless, that he admitted not of the Doctrins of Thomas Aquinas,
and such like Writers, unless they were found to agree with the Holy
Scriptures, and the Decrees of the Ancient Fathers. The Archbishop of Mentz
made no answer to these things; Tetzel the Dominican opposes Luther.
but not long after, John Tetzel, a Dominican Friar, at Frankford upon the
Oder, a Town within the Territories of Brandenburg, published some Positions,
quite contrary to those of Luther, wherein he mightily extolled the Authority
of the Pope, the Benefit of Indulgences, and that Wooden Cross, which then, by
the Command of the Pope, was set up in all Churches, insomuch that he compared
Leo X, to the Apostle St. Peter, and that Popish Cross, with the true Cross,
whereon Christ suffered for us.

But when no Man of the contrary Part came to the Disputation proposed at
Wittemberg, Luther published an Explication of his Positions,
and that the Theses we mentioned, were read by many with great Applause,
Luther wrote a very large Explication of them, and sent it, first to Jerome
Bishop of Brandenburg, to whose Jurisdiction he belonged, and, then to John
Stupitz Provincial of the Augustine Friars, 1518.
praying him to have it transmitted to the Pope: Nay in the Month of June, he
wrote to Pope Leo himself, informing him, And wrote to the Bishop of
Brandenburg, to John Stupitz and Pope Leo.
That these Collectors, relying upon, or abusing his Authority, taught very
rashly, and behaved themselves covetously: That he made no doubt but heavy
Accusations were brought against him; but that therein he was wronged, since he
had been forced by the Sermons and idle Books of the Collectors, to publish
some things, only for Disputation sake, which now he more fully explained; that
therefore he prayed his Holiness, Not to give Credit to those Accusations,
because Frederick Elector of Saxony, was so Religious a Prince, and of so great
Prudence and Integrity, that if those things were true, which his Adversaries
reported of him, he would not suffer his Province to be in such a manner
Profaned; neither would the University of Wittemberg connive at it: That in
short, he submitted all his Writings, nay his Life and Safety to his Authority
and Disposal; that he would look upon what proceeded from his Holiness, as if
it flowed from Christ, and were delivered by an Oracle; nor did he refuse to
lay down his Life, if so it seemed good to him.

Besides others who oppugned his Theses, and the Explication annexed to the
same, John Eckius, a Divine, wrote also against him; whom Luther answered,
affirming, Eckius writes aganst Luther, and he answers;
That he alleged nothing from Scripture, nor the Authority of the Fathers, but
only some Dreams of his own, such as by bad Custom had now long prevailed in
the Schools.

After Eckius, So also does Silvester Prierias:
Silvester Prierias, a Dominican, Master of the Sacred Palace, as they call it,
wrote against him also, and set out a Dialogue, with a Preface to Pope Leo, and
that in a very Huffing and Confident Style, boasting, That he would make a
Trial, if Luther were so Strong and Invincible, as that there was no Worsting,
nor overcoming of him; and that if he answered that first Essay, he would then
ply him with far Stronger and more Elaborate Arguments. He also addressed
himself to Luther, telling him, That though he was now stricken in Years, and
had not of a long Time entered into any such Lists, yet he would do all that was
in his Power for the Roman Papacy, praying him withal, And lays down the Heads
he is to insist upon.
to return into the right Way. Before he enters into Disputation, he lays down
some general Positions, as the Groundwork of his Opinion; as that the Pope of
Rome, is head of the Universal Church, That the Church of Rome is the Chief of
all others, and that in Matters relating to Faith and Religion, it cannot err,
no more than a Council, where the Pope is present; That the Holy Scripture
receives all its Force and Authority from the Church, and Pope of Rome, as from
a most certain Rule; and that they who think otherwise, who follow not the
Doctrins of the Church of Rome, or question its Authority, are without doubt,
Heretics. Having laid down this for a Ground, he comes to debate the Matter.

To this Writing Luther afterward made Answer, Luthers Answer to Silvester
Prierias.
and in his Preface to Silvester, told him, That he admired, more than
understood, his Positions; and then following his Example, in his own Defense,
laid down some Positions also, but such as were drawn from Holy Scripture:
Wherein he affirmed, That we are not to believe the Doctrins of all Sorts of
Men, but prudently to weigh all Things, and embrace that which is agreeable to
the Word of God: And that no Doctrine was to be received, though never so
Specious, besides that which was left us by the Prophets and Apostles: That the
Writers who came nearest to them, were to be admitted; but that we were to
judge of the rest: And that as to Indulgences, the Collectors ought not to
forge any Novelties, but therein follow the Direction of the Canon Law.
Afterward he objects against him, That he alleged no Text of Scripture, and
only quoted the Opinion of Thomas, who himself had handled most things,
according to his own Fancy, without the Authority of Scripture; wherefore he
rejects both, and for so doing, gives for his Warrant, not only the Injunction
of S. Paul, but also the Example of S. Austin: That it is an usual thing with
Lawyers, to say, That nothing was to be asserted, but what was clearly grounded
on the Law; and that in Divinity it was far less tolerable to admit of any
Allegation, without the Authority and Testimony of Scripture: That S. Paul
commands, That they who teach the People, should be furnished, not with
Syllogisms, or the various Devices of Men, but with sound Doctrine, left to us
by Divine Inspiration; but that, because most part slighted that Command, thick
Darkness had overspread the Church, and jangling about frivolous and needless
Questions had broke into it. Having thus made Way for himself, he comes to the
Refutation, and toward the End, says, That he was not at all moved at his
Threats, nor his lofty and swelling Expressions, for that, though he might be
put to Death, yet Christ still lived, and was Immortal, to whom all Glory and
Honor ought to be given: That if afterward he intended to have another Brush,
he must make use of other Weapons, and that else he would come but sorrily off
with his old Friend Thomas.

Silvester makes his Reply, Silvester's Reply.
That he was exceedingly pleased, That he submitted to the Determination of the
Pope of Rome, and wished that therein he might have spoken truly, and from his
Heart. Luther had twitted him with Ambition and Flattery, which he altogether
disowned, but strongly defended Thomas Aquinas, affirming, That his whole
Doctrine was so well Received, and Approved of by the Church of Rome, that it
was even preferred before all other Writings: He therefore rebuked him for
speaking with so little Reverence of so great a Man; and told him, That he
looked upon it as an Honor, to be called a Thomist: But that nevertheless, he
was also acquainted with the Writings of other Men, which sometime or other he
would make appear. To this Preface he subjoyned a Short Book, wherein he
strangely commended the Power of the Pope of Rome, so that he raised him above
Councils, and all the Canons, and affirmed, That the Force of Scripture,
depended wholly on his Authority.

Thomas Aquinas, Who Thomas Aquinas was.
being nobly descended, gave himself altogether to the Study of Learning, and
leaving Italy, came first to Cologn, and then to Paris, where he attained to
the chief Place amongst the Learned Men of his Age, and published many Books,
both in Philosophy and Divinity: He had been a Friar of the Dominican Order,
and the Scholar of Albertus Magnus, and about fifty Years after his Death, was
Canonized a Saint, by Pope John XXII. He had, indeed, been a rare Champion for
the Papal Dignity, for he gave him Power, not only over all Bishops, the
Universal Church, and Kings; but also both Spiritual and Civil Jurisdiction,
affirming it to be necessary to Salvation, That all Men should be Subject unto
him, and that he had full Power in the Church, both to call Councils, and to
confirm the Decrees of the same: Nay, and that from National or Provincial
Synods, Appeals might lawfully be made unto him. In short, he attributed all
things unto him, save only, that he could not make new Articles of Faith, nor
abrogate those which were handed down to us from the Apostles and Fathers. He
wrote also largely of Indulgences, and made the Pope an absolute Monarch, in
dispensing them. He is said to have died in the Year one thousand two hundred
and seventy four; and because of the sharpness of his Wit, he is commonly
called the Angelical Doctor.

To Silvester's Reply, Luther answers Silvesters Reply.
Luther made Answer, only by an Epistle to the Reader, wherein he affirms, That
little Book of his to be so stuffed with Lies and Horrid Blasphemies against
God, that the Devil himself appeared to be the Author of it; That if the Pope
and Cardinals were of the same Judgment, and that if that was the Doctrine
taught at Rome, it was no more to be doubted, but that Rome was the very Seat
of Antichrist; and that happy was Greece, Bohemia, and all the rest who had
separated from it: That if the Pope did not restrain him, and force him to
retract his Writings, he protested that he Dissented from him, and not only
acknowledged not the Church of Rome, but would look upon it for the Future, as
an Impure Sink of Errors, wholly Devoted to Impiety: That new and unheard of
Elogies, of the Pope of Rome, were cunningly and craftily devised daily, with
intent that there might be no place for a Lawful Council; since his Flatteries
raised him above a Council, and affirmed, That the true Sense and Meaning of
the Scriptures was to be sought from him, as from an Infallible Judge: That if
they went on in this Madness, and Imposed so upon the World with their Juggles,
there remained no other Remedy, but that the Magistrates should Punish them:
That Thieves, Robbers, and such like Malefactors, were put to Death; but that
it was more Reasonable, That all Men should join, in repressing these most
pernicious Enemies of the Commonwealth of Christendom: That their Pope was no
more than other Men, and no less obliged by the Laws of God than the Meanest
Person whatsoever; and that they who taught otherwise, offered the highest
Injury to the Divine Majesty. James Hogostrate writes against Luther, whom he
answers.
At that time James Hogostrate, a Dominican, wrote bitterly also against
Luther, exhorting the Pope to prosecute him with Fire and Faggot. Luther gave
him a short Answer, upbraided him with Cruelty and Blood-thirstiness, and
sharply played upon the Ignorance of the Man, advising him to go on in his
Course; for that to be Censured by Unlearned and Vicious Men, was a ready Way
to attain to Honor and Reputation: However, he said, He hoped for better
things at the Hands of Pope Leo.

Whilst these things were in a Scholastic manner managed and debated by
Writing on both Sides, A Diet at Ausburg.
the Emperor Maximilian held a Diet at Ausburg, whither Pope Leo ^ sent his
Legate, Cardinal Thomas Cajetane. All the seven Princes, who because of their
Right of Choosing the Emperor, are called Electors, were present at this Diet,
to consult about a Turkish War; for S^lym the Emperor of the Turks, having
lately subdued the Sultan of Egypt, had reduced Syria and Egypt under his
Obedience; and Cardinal Cajetane, having made an Hortatory Speech, and in the
Pope's Name offered the Treasures of the Church, implored Aid of the Emperor
Maximilian, as being the Protector and Defender of the Church. The Archbishop
of Mentz made Cardinal.
At this Time Pope Leo X, made Albert Archbishop of Mentz, a Cardinal, and
ordered him to be installed at this Diet, by Cajetane, with the usual Rites and
Ceremonies. The Emperor afterward waited upon the new Cardinal from the
Church home to his House, and sent him Presents, a Royal Litter, with Horses,
Carpets, and a great deal of very Rich Furniture: But the Pope made him a
Present of a Cap, embroidered with Gold, Pearls, and precious Stones; and of a
Sword with a gilt Scabbard: For generally all the Bishops of Germany have a
Civil, as well as Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Now it was thought, That Leo
conferred this Honor upon him, That the Church of Rome might have a Champion
in Germany, conspicuous both for Nobility of Extraction and Dignity; for though
all Bishops are bound by an Oath to the Pope of Rome, yet they who are called
Cardinals, are much more obliged unto him: Besides he was not Ignorant, how
great a Stroke this Man had in the Affairs of the Empire, as being, by Ancient
Custom, the First of the Princes, and, as it were, perpetual President of the
Electoral College.

Maximilian being informed of the Controversy raised by Luther, Maximilian's
Letter to Pope Leo, about Luther and his Doctrine.
in the Month of August, wrote to Pope Leo, That he had learned, that Luther
had vented many things in his Disputes and Sermons, which for the most part
seemed to be Heretical; that he was the more grieved at it, the more
obstinately he maintained his Doctrine, and had the more Approvers of his
Errors, and amongst those, some also of great Quality: That he exhorted his
Holiness, that by Virtue of the Chief Authority, which he had, he would cut off
all Idle and Useless Questions, and put a Stop to all Sophistry and Contention
about Words; for that they who gave their Minds that Way, did a great deal of
Mischief to Christianity; since all their Scope was, That what they themselves
had learned, should be approved and embraced by all Men: That care had been,
indeed, taken in the former Age, That able Preachers should be appointed to
teach the People, and avoid all Idle and Sophistical Nicities, but that that
Decree, was by degrees brought into Contempt, so that, it ought not, indeed, to
seem strange, if they who should be the Guides of others, themselves mistook
the Way: That it was long of these, That the Writings of the Ancient Fathers
and Interpreters of Holy Scripture, had lain now long neglected, and were
become Faulty and Corrupted: That it was also to be imputed to them, That in
these our Times many Controversies were broached in the Schools, and amongst
the rest, that this dangerous Deba^^^ about Indulgences was started: That this,
indeed, was a Matter of so great Moment, as that it required a present Remedy
to be applied to the growing Evil, before it should propagate its Contagion,
and spread further; for that Delays were dangerous: That for his part, he was
ready to approve whatever his Holiness should Determine, and take care to have
it received throughout all the Provinces of Germany.

We told you before of the Clashings and contrary Writings of Luther and
Silvester: Luther Cited by the Pope to appear at Rome.
Now since this Man having a public Place in Rome, eagerly pursued the Cause,
Pope Leo Cites Luther under a Penalty, to appear at Rome; and then, August 23,
wrote to Cardinal Cajetane, his Legate in Germany, to this purpose. That whereas
being informed, That not only in Universities, but also amongst the People, and
in Books published and dispersed over Germany, Luther maintained some Impious
Opinions, contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the Mistress of Faith
and Religion: He, who out of a Paternal Care and Affection, desired to put a
Stop to his Rashness, had commanded Jerome Bishop of Ascoli, to whom the Matter
properly belonged, to Summon him to appear at Rome, to answer the Accusations
brought against him, and give a Confession of his Faith. That the Bishop of
Ascoli had, indeed, done as he was enjoined, but that he was so far from being
thereby Reclaimed, that obstinately persisting in his Heresy, he had published
Writings far more Dangerous, to his great Grief and Trouble: That, he should
therefore endeavor to have him brought to Ausburg, by means of the Emperor
and Princes of Germany, whose Assistance he should crave herein; and that being
come, he should put him in safe Custody, that he might be sent afterward to
Rome: But that if he repented of his own accord, and begged Pardon for his
Fault, he might receive him into Favor, and restore him to the Communion of
the Church, which never uses to exclude Penitents; but if not, that then he
should Excommunicate him; commanding all Men also to obey this Bull, under the
Penalty, if they be Churchmen, of the loss of all the Church Livings they
possessed, and of being incapable of enjoying any for the future; but if
Laymen, and in Civil Office, under the Pain of being declared Infamous,
degraded from all Honors, deprived of Christian Burial, and the Forfeiture of
all Ecclesiastical Preferments, which they held of him, or of others also: But
to those who should perform faithful Service therein, he orders either that
Plenary Indulgences and Remission of Sins, or else some Place and Reward should
be given; and to this Bull he subjects all Men (the Emperor only excepted,)
notwithstanding any Privilege or Dispensation they might have to the contrary.

The same Day, Pope Leo writes to Frederick Elector of Saxony.
he wrote to Frederick Elector of Saxony, who then was at Ausburg: That among
the other Ornaments of the House of Saxony, it had been always peculiar to it,
to be most zealous for Religion; that therefore it was not probable, that any
of that Family would so far degenerate from their Ancestors, as to protect and
defend a Man, who entertained Erroneous Thoughts as to the Christian Religion:
That nevertheless, to the great Grief of his Heart, he daily heard many and
grievous Complaints of Luther, a profligate Wretch, who forgetting his own
Order and Profession, acted many things sawcily, and with great Confidence,
against the Church of God, bragging, That being supported by the Favor and
Protection of the Prince, he stood in awe of the Authority of no Man; That he
made no doubt, but that was falsey given out by him, but that nevertheless, he
was willing to write these few things unto his Highness, and to advise him,
That being always mindful of the Splendor and Dignity of himself and his
Ancestors, he would not only avoid giving any Offense, but even all Suspicion
of offending: That he knew for a certain, That Luther taught most impious and
Heretical Doctrines, which both he and the Master of his Palace, had carefully
observed and marked down; That that was the Reason why he had both Cited him to
Appear, and also sent his Instructions to Cardinal Cajetane, his Legate, as to
what further he would have done in the Matter; and that seeing this was an
Affair of Religion, and that it properly belonged to the Church of Rome, to
enquire into the Faith and Belief of all Men, he exhorted and charged his
Highness, That being thereunto required, by his Legate, he would use his best
Endeavors to have Luther delivered up into his Hands, which would be both
acceptable Service to God, and very Honorable to himself and Family; that if
upon Trial he were found Innocent at Rome, he should return Home Safe and
Sound; but that if he proved Guilty, then would his Highness be Blameless, in
no longer protecting a Criminal; and that he himself was so mercifully
inclined, as that neither he would oppress an Innocent Man, nor deny a Penitent
his Pardon. And thus he left no Way unessayed, that he might undo Luther.

The same Year, Pope Leo writes to the Provincial of the Augustine Friars.
also, he wrote to Gabriel Venize, the Provincial of the Augustine Friars,
exhorting him, That by the Authority of his Charge, he would put a stop to
Luther, a Friar of his Order, who attempted Innovations, and taught new
Doctrins in Germany, and solicitously ply him both by Letters, and Learned
Agents: But that Expedition was to be used in the Matter, for so it would not
be difficult to quench the Flame newly broken out, since things in their
Infancy and Commencement, could not resist Attempts that were any thing brisk;
but should it be deferred till the Evil had gathered Strength, it was to be
feared, that the Conflagration might afterward carry all before it; for that
it was a Contagion that spread more and more daily, so that nothing seemed more
to be feared than Delay: That therefore he should set about the Affair with all
Pains, Diligence and Industry, seeing he had Authority over him.

When Luther perceived that he was cited to appear at Rome, Luther desired his
Cause might be tried in Germany. And the University of Wittemberg write to the
Pope in his behalf;
he was very solicitous to have his Cause tried before Competent and
Unsuspected Judges, in some Place of Germany, secure from Violence. But when
that could not be obtained, the University of Wittemberg sent a Letter to Pope
Leo, dated September 25, wherein they gave Luther an ample Testimony both of a
Pious Life and Learning; that seeing he was for some Positions proposed, Cited
to Rome, and could not, being a Sickly Man, without endangering his Life, make
an Appearance; they prayed his Holiness not to think otherwise of him, than of
an Honest Man; that he had only for Disputation sake, offered some things to be
argued, which were misinterpreted and highly exaggerated by his Adversaries;
that for their parts, they would not suffer any thing to be asserted in
Opposition to the Church, and that at Luther's Request, they could not but give
him this Testimony, which they earnestly entreated his Holiness to give Credit
to.

With this Letter, And also to one of the Popes Bedchamber, that Luthers Cause
may be heard in Germany.
they sent another to Charles Miltitz, a German, and Bedchamber Man to Pope
Leo: Wherein they represent to him, That Luther was undeservedly exposed to the
Anger and Hatred of the Pope, insomuch, that being Cited to appear at Rome, he
could not as yet obtain, That his Cause might be tried somewhere in Germany:
That for their own Parts, they were so zealous, not only for Religion, but also
for the Holy Church of Rome, That if Luther were guilty of any Impious Crime or
Error, they would not bear with him: But that he was a Man so Learned, of so
upright a Life and Conversation, and had deserved so well of the whole
University, that as Affairs stood, they could not but stand by him: That Duke
Frederick also, so Religious and Prudent a Prince, would not so long have
suffered him to go unpunished, if he had not thought him to be a good Man: That
therefore he would use his Interest and Familiarity he had with the Pope, that
Impartial Judges might he assigned him, not at Rome, but in Germany: That they
did not doubt, but that he would act as became a Christian and Divine, and make
it appear that he did not Wantonly and without a Cause hunt after an Occasion
of Contention: That they begged this the more earnestly of him, in that they
had the greater Hopes, that he who was himself a German, would not, in so just
a Cause, be wanting to a Countryman, who was born down by Calumnies, and in
danger of his Life.

Besides the Intercession of these Friends, Duke Frederick deals with Cardinal
Cajetane at Ausburg.
Frederick Prince Elector, spoke also to Cardinal Cajetane at Ausburg, and so
far prevailed, that Luther being excused from going to Rome, should plead his
Cause before the Emperor at Ausburg. Being come thither, in the Month of
October, it was three Days before he was admitted to the Speech of Cajetane;
for they to whom Duke Frederick, (who upon dissolution of the Diet, was gone
Home,) had recommended him, forbad him to go to him, before he had obtained a
Safe Conduct from the Emperor Maximilian; but that being, at length, granted,
he came; and the Cardinal having civilly received him, Cajetane's conference
with Luther.
told him, That he would not enter into any Dispute with him, but end the
Controversy amicably; and at the same Time proposed to him two Commands in
Name of the Pope; First, That he would repent what he had done, and retract the
Errors which he had published: And next, That for the Future, he would abstain
from such Writings, as disturbed the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church.
Luther makes Answer, That he was not Conscious to himself of any Error; and
desires, That if he had erred, it might be proved against him. With that
Cajetane objects, That in his Theses he had affirmed, That the Merits of our
Savior Christ, were not the Treasure of Indulgences, which Opinion was
repugnant to the Decretal of Pope Clement VI. Again, That it was necessary that
they who come to receive the Sacrament, should have a firm Belief that their
Sins were forgiven them. Luther replies, That that was not so, telling him
withal, That he had read the Pope's Decree, and gave his Judgment of it; but
mention being made of S. Thomas, he said, The Authority of Holy Scripture was
to be preferred far before his.

The Cardinal then extolling the Dignity of the Pope, prefers him before all
Scriptures and Councils, and quotes the abrogation of the Council of Basil,
which had decreed otherwise; condemning also Gerson the Parisian Doctor, and
the rest who approved that Opinion. On the other hand, Luther denies the
Authority of the Pope to be greater than that of a Council, and quotes the
Parisian Divines, as the Approvers of his Judgment. When after much Debate,
they could not agree, Luther desired Time to consider; and coming again next
Day, in presence of Notary and Witnesses, and some of the Emperors Counselors
also, he professed, That he Reverenced and Submitted to the Holy Church of
Rome; that if he had said any thing to the contrary, he disowned it; but that
since he was admonished and commanded, To Renounce his Error, and meddle no
more for the future, he was of the Opinion, that he had asserted nothing, that
disagreed with the Scripture, the Judgment of the Fathers, the Decretals of the
Popes, or right Reason it self; that he did not deny, indeed, but that he might
err and be deceived, that being incident to Man; and that therefore he
submitted to the Judgment of a Lawful and Holy Church; and referred his Cause
to be tried thereby: Nay more, That he was ready, in any Place, to give an
account of his Doctrine; that if he was not pleased with this, he would answer
his Arguments in Writing, and submit to the Judgment of the Universities of
Germany and Paris. Cajetane urged again, as he had done the Day before, that
Decretal of Clement, as making for him; and at length allowed him to exhibit
his Mind in Writing; which was to this purpose: That at the Time he published
his Theses, and when after, he wrote the Explication of them, he had read the
Decretal of Clement, but that it had not satisfied him; for that though it be
made a Rule, That the Decretals of the Pope of Rome are no less to be received
than the Words of the Apostle S. Peter, yet that ought so to be understood,
provided they agree with Holy Scripture, and deviate not from the Decretals of
the Ancients; that S. Peter's Voice was, indeed, Sacred and Holy, and yet he
had been sharply rebuked by St. Paul, and his Doctrine not received till the
Church, which then was at Jerusalem, consented to it. That the Sayings of Men
were to be heard, but that every thing should be referred to the Voice of
Christ, who alone could not be deceived: That that Decretal was repugnant to
many places of Holy Scripture, which was the Reason that at that time he
Published his Position, and afterward Commented upon the same: That from that
time forward, he had resolved to dispute no more about it, and rather to listen
to the Opinions of others; but that now, though he had rather be instructed by
others, and especially the Pope of Rome, yet since there lay a necessity upon
him of defending his own Assertion, he would essay, and use his endeavors to
reconcile his Positions to that Decretal, if by any means it could be done.
Having thus addressed to the Cardinal in a Preface, he falls to the handling of
the matter it self, and explaining the Decretal, affirms, That it made for him,
yet so, that he did not thereby derogate from the dignity either of the Pope or
him. Then he comes to the other branch of the Accusation, and by many Texts of
Scripture, fully proves, That it is Faith which Justifies us before God: And
therefore he prays him to deal kindly with him, and show him his Error; for
that the Texts of Scripture which he had alleged, were of so great force, that
he believed them to be Self-evident; wherefore he could not forsake that Truth,
since it was better to Obey God than Men. That therefore he desired to be
excused from that over-hard condition of Retracting, and to be Reconciled to
the Pope: That it was not out of Arrogance, or any desire of Vainglory, that
he had entered the Lists, and that he wished for nothing more than that the
Truth might be discovered by any more Learned and Pious than himself; so that
he begged, he might not be compelled to wound his own Conscience. Cajetane took
this Writing from him, and upon reading, made slight of it, but promised
however to send it to the Pope. In the mean time he urged him to retract, else
he threatened him with the Punishment appointed by the Pope, and with that bid
him be gone, and see his face no more, unless he changed his mind*

Three days after Luther had been thus threatened, October the Seventeenth, he
wrote a very humble and submissive Letter to the Legate; for after that the
Legate had chid him, as we said, and sent him away, he had dealt privately with
John Stupitz, Provincial of the Augustine Friars, that he might incline him to
make a voluntary Recantation. Now in that Letter, Luther gives him an account
of what passed betwixt Stupitz and him, who had omitted nothing that could be
expected from an honest Man, and faithful Friend. He thanked him for his
Good Will and Kindness toward him, which he had understood from Stupit's
discourse, whereby he had been so much comforted, that there was no Man-living
he would more willingly gratify, than His Eminence. He confesses that he had
been too sharp, and had not behaved himself with the respect and reverence that
was due to the Papal Dignity, but that all that was to be attribu^ed to the
impertinence of the Collectors: He begs Pardon for what he had done, and
promises greater modesty for the future, and that he would hereafter do his
Holiness Right in his Sermons: That he would not mention the Indulgences in
time to come, provided his Adversaries were enjoined to do the like; but that
he should retract the Opinions which he had divulged, and hitherto defended, he
could not with a safe Conscience, so long as he was not convinced of Error by
clear Testimonies of Scripture. He therefore craves that the Trial of the Cause
might be referred to the Pope, for that nothing would be more pleasant to him,
than to hear the Voice of the Church about such Controversies.

Since Cardinal Cajetane made no Answer to this Letter, and had uttered some
threatening Words, he took his Friends counsel, and two days after departed,
leaving behind him a certain Appeal, which should afterward be publicly
affixed; and about the time of his departure, he wrote again to the Legate,
That he had omitted nothing which was his duty to do: That being a weak sickly
Man, he had made a long Journey on Foot and come to Ausburg, Luther writes to
Cajetane when he was going home, and appeals from him to the Pope.
that he might manifest his Submission to the Pope; but now that his Money was
almost spent, and that he would not be any longer troublesome to the Carmelite
Friars who had lodged and entertained him in their Convent, he would return
home, especially seeing His Eminence had discharged him to come any more into
his presence: That generally all his Friends had advised him to appeal from him
to the Pope: That he would not indeed have done it of his own accord, as not
thinking it to be very necessary; but that he could not but respect their
Admonitions, and the rather that he believed Duke Frederick inclined more to
have that Appeal made, than that he should rashly and unadvisedly make any
Retractation.

The Appeal was conceived in Words much to this effect; The Form of Luther's
Appeal.
That the Question about Indulgences, which had been variously handled by many,
was never clearly determined; and that about such dubious Questions, it was
lawful, especially for Divines, to dispute; that he had also done so at that
time, when some Preachers, not only Wrote and Taught rashly and unadvifedly,
but also used strange ways and Tricks to draw Money from the People; and that
he did it, not as affirming any thing positively, but only that he might
discover the Truth; that he had, in like manner submitted the whole Debate to
the Determination of the Learned, and also of Pope Leo; but that these Men had
devised many Calumnies against him, abused him grievously to the Pope, and at
length prevailed so far, that the Cause was committed to the Bishop of Ascoli,
and Silvester Prierias; that by them he had been cited to appear at Rome, but
that because both of them were suspected, and one of them unfit to judge in
such a Matter: Again, because no Man doubted of the unavoidable Danger, he
would have been exposed to, if he had gone to Rome, and that he had been
commanded by his own Magistrate, not to go: Upon these Considerations, and in
such an Apprehension also, which might affect the Stoutest, and most resolute
Man, he had prayed Frederick Elector of Saxony, That he would procure his Cause
to be Tried by some fit and competent Persons, in a Place, secure from
Violence, in Germany; that so, the Pope had referred the whole Matter to his
Legate, Cardinal Cajetane, which doubtless was brought about by the Instigation
of his Adversaries, who knew the Mind and Intentions of the Cardinal. And
though the Legate himself might have justly been Suspected, yet he had obeyed.
That the Cardinal had, at first Meeting, commanded him instantly to retract
what he had written; to which he then made Answer, That he would give an
account of what he had done, either in a Personal Disputation, or by Writing,
and refer the whole Matter, not only to Universities, but also to the Decision
of the Church of Rome; but that the Legate being wrought upon by none of these
Things, had still enjoined him a Retractation, and when he could not extort it,
had threatened severe Punishments, both to him, and others also that were of his
Opinion. That since then, he found himself liable to such unjust
Prejudications, he Appealed from the Pope, not rightly informed in the Cause,
to the Pope to be better informed, and that he publicly protested.

Now, Pope Clement's Decree about Indulgences.
that Decretal of Pope Clement, which has been mentioned is extant, in that
Part of the Canon Law, which they call the Extravagants. There Pope Clement
reduces that Time, they call the Jubilee, from an hundred Years, as it was
appointed by Boniface VIII. to fifty; and speaking of the Blessing of our
Savior Christ, affirms, That one Drop of the Blood of Christ, was sufficient
for the Redemption of all Mankind; but that seeing he shed so much Blood, that
there was no sound Part left in his Body, nothing more Lamentable to be seen,
he had left all that was over and above, as a vast Treasure, for the use of the
Church, and commanded S. Peter, who keeps the Keys of Heaven's Gates, and after
him, his Successors, to distribute that Treasure like good Stewards, amongst
Men, who were truly Penitent, and confessed their Sins, pardoning the Temporal
Punishment that was due unto them for their Trespasses: Besides, he says, That
the Merits of the Virgin Mary, and all the Saints, were put into the same
Treasure, so that there was an inexhaustible Stock for Indulgences. This was
the Decretal then, upon which Cajetane grounded the Efficacy and Validity of
Indulgences: But Luther affirmed, That there was nothing committed to S. Peter
and his Successors, but the Keys and Ministry of the Word, whereby Christ
impowers them to declare to Penitent Believers, who trust in him, the Remission
of their Sins; that that was the true and genuine Sense of the Scripture: That
if that was the Meaning of Pope Clement's Decretal, he liked it; but if not, he
could not approve the same: That what, moreover, it said of the Merits of
Saints, was wholly repugnant to Scripture; for that the best of Men, were so
far from doing more, that they could not do what they ought, and that we were
not saved by their Merits, but only by the Mercy of God; since it ought to be
our daily Prayer, That God would pardon our Sins and Trespasses, The Decrees of
the Councils of Constance and Basil concerning the Power of the Pope.
and not enter into Judgment with us, lest we should be condemned.

As to what Cajetane alleged of the Pope's Power, the Case is this: It was
decreed in the fourth and fifth Sessions of the Council of Constance, That the
Pope himself should be subject to the Decrees of a Council. The same was also
renewed, and again Decreed, in the third and eighteenth Sessions of the Council
of Basil. But Eugenius IV, refusing to go to that of Basil, though he had been
often warned and cited to come, declared it null, and appointed another to meet
at Ferrara, whither also came John Paleologue, the last Emperor of the Greeks,
save one, with Joseph Patriarch of Constantinople, and a great many Bishops,
and that was in the Year 1438. From Ferrara, afterward, they all removed to
Florence, and there a Decree past, with consent of the Greeks, That the Church
of Rome was the Chief of all Churches; and the Pope of Rome, the Successor of
Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, the true Vicar of Christ, the Head of the
Universal Church, the Father and Teacher of all Christians, and that full Power
was given to him from Christ, of Feeding and Governing the Catholic Church.
This Decree Cajetane now insisted upon, when he preferred the Pope before a
Council. Nay, and six Years before, also, when he was not as yet Cardinal, but
only General of the Dominicans, he made a Speech in the Second Session of the
Council of Lateran, of which more hereafter; and having spoken many things
against some Cardinals, who had made a Separation, he had a glance, by the by,
at the Councils of Constance and Basil, because the Fathers at that time, had
taken upon them Power and Authority over the Pope; that therefore it was well
done by Eugenius, when he curbed that Faction, and suffered not his Power to be
diminished. Pope Julius II, in whose Favor this Speech was made, commanded it
afterward to be entered amongst the Acts and Records of the Council; though
Cajetane obtained not the Cardinals Cap, An account of Gerson.
before the Pontificat of Pope Leo. Gerson, whom he mentioned, was a Parisian
Divine of great Reputation, who wrote several things; he was present at the
Council of Constance, and wrote much in Praise of that Decree, which subjects
the Pope to a Council, saying, That it deserved to be hung up in all Churches,
and public Places, for perpetual Memory; for that they were most pernicious
Flatterers, who introduced that Tyranny into the Church, as if the Pope ought
not to obey a Council, nor be judged by it; as if a Council received all its
Authority and Dignity from him, as if it could not be called without his
Permission, and as if he were not obliged by any Laws, nor to be called to an
account for his Doings; that these monstrous Words were utterly to be avoided,
which were repugnant to the Laws, common Equity, and natural Reason; for that
all the Power of the Church was in a Council, that it was lawful to Appeal from
him to it; and that they who asked, Whether the Pope or a Council was the
greater? did just, as if they should demand, Whether the whole were greater
than a part? since a Council had Power of Making, Judging and Deposing the
Pope, and had given a late Instance of it at Constance; for seeing some seemed
to doubt of that, and attributed a little too much to the Pope, that Question
had been decided, before Pope John XXIII was degraded. These things, and much
more to the same purpose, Gerson writes, and was therefore now rejected by
Cajetane. He dyed in the Year 1429. But the Doctors of the University of Paris
were of the same Opinion, confining that vast Usurpation of the Popes within
these very Limits, so that some Months before Luther published any thing of
Indulgences, they appealed from Pope Leo X, to a Council, because of his
abrogating the Pragmatick Sanction, which was very useful to the Students and
Scholars of France, and opened a way also to Honor and Preferment.

After Luther was gone, Cajetane's Letter to the Elector of Saxony.
Cardinal Cajetane wrote to Duke Frederick, October 25, That Luther had come to
Ausburg, but had not spoken with him, 'till he had obtained a Safe Conduct from
the Emperor; and that he wondered very much, That they put so little Confidence
in him; that after much Discourse, he had admonished the Man, To come over and
retract; and that though he had been somewhat obstinate, yet he had come to
Terms of Reconciliation with Stupitz and some others, so that both the Dignity
of the Roman Church, and his own Reputation were saved: But that when there had
been a good Foundation of the Matter laid, Stupitz first, and then Luther, had
departed privately; which happened quite contrary to his Expectation: That he
pretended, indeed, as if all he had done, was only for Disputation sake, and to
discover the Truth, but that in his Sermons to the People, he positively
asserted all, which was not to be suffered, since his Doctrine was both
different from that of the Church of Rome, and very pernicious also, as might
be affirmed for a certain Truth: He therefore advises him, That he would
consult his own Honor and Conscience, and either send Luther to Rome, or
banish him his Country; that such a Pestilent Business could not long subsist,
nor was it to be doubted, but a Sentence would pass at Rome, and that he
himself, as in Duty bound, had acquainted the Pope with the whole Matter, and
the crafty Trick that had been played him: That he prayed him not to give credit
to those who seemed to favor Luther's Writings; and that he would not cast
such a Blemish and Stain upon his most Noble Family, as he had often promised,
he would not.

Duke Frederick, The Elector's Answer.
on the eighth of December, answered this Letter, which was delivered unto him
November 19. to the Effect following. That he had promised to take Care, That
Luther should come to Ausburg; which being fulfilled, he could do no more: That
he on the other Hand, had past his Word, That he, would in a friendly manner
dismiss Luther; but that, in the mean Time, he would have had him to retract,
without hearing his Arguments and Plea, or he having been fairly tried, seemed
very strange unto him; for that there were a great many Learned and Good men,
not only within his Territories, but in other Places also, who were far from
condemning his Opinion: And that they who withstood him, were moved to it
through Covetousness and Malice, because he had spoiled their Trade, and
lessened their Profits: That if it had been plainly made appear that he had
erred, he had so great regard to the Glory of God, and the Peace of his own
Conscience, as of his own accord, he would have long ago discharged the Duty of
a Christian Magistrate: That what he told him, then of continuing the Process
against Luther, at Rome, was a thing he did not so much as dream of; and that
what he also demanded of him, that he should either make him appear at Rome, or
banish him his Country, he could not do it: First, because his Error was not
as yet demonstrated, and then, because it would be a great loss to the
University of Wittemberg, founded by himself; which being famous for many
Learned and Studious Men, had a great esteem for Luther, for his Merits and the
good Services, he has done there: That he had sent him his Letter to read; and
that he had protested, as he had often done before, That he was ready to
maintain his Opinion by Disputation, in any unsuspected Place, and hearken to
the Judgments of others, who could better inform him, or else to answer in
Writing: That, indeed, it seemed Reasonable, That he should be allowed to do
so, which he also desired might be done, that it might, at length, appear,
both, why he was to be accounted an Heretic, and also what he himself was to
follow; for as he could not wittingly and willingly approve any Error, or
withdraw himself from the Obedience of the Church of Rome, so neither would he
condemn Luther, before his Error and Crime were detected.

Duke Frederick had sent Luther Cajetane's Letter, Luther's Answer to the
Elector of Saxony.
as we said just now; Luther therefore presently made Answer to the Prince:
That he had been advised by his Friends, not to appear before the Legate, till
he had obtained a Safe Conduct from the Emperor; that he would have had him
retract what he had written concerning Indulgences, and of the Necessity of
Faith, in going to the Sacraments: That for the former, indeed, he was not much
concerned; but that he should deny the other, he could not do it, he said,
Since the Stress of our Salvation rested upon it: That the Texts of Scripture
were depraved and wrested by the Papists: He also gave a Relation of every Days
Proceedings, and how Cardinal Cajetane, at length, fell to Threatenings: That in
Reality, he desired nothing more, than to be convinced, wherein he had erred;
that he would willingly submit to better Information: That if they would not be
at so much Pains, for so mean and inconsiderable a Person, as he was, they
ought, at least, to write to his Highness, or to the Emperor, or else to some
Eminent Bishop of Germany, and appoint a free Disputation to be held in some
Place; that hitherto they had denied him all these things; but that if they
persevered therein, it might easily be judged who were in the Fault, he or
they: That since, therefore, they offered nothing but Severity and Cruelty, he
ought not to be moved at their Words; for that it was far more easy for them,
to mark down, what they thought to be Erroneous, and to publish them for such
through Germany, than for him to be at vast Charges, and endanger his Life, in
going to Rome, to have his Errors examined and discussed there: That, after
all, as to what he boasted of, That the Cause should be judicially tried at
Rome, unless he either went thither, or were banished the Country; he did not
refuse Banishment, for that he very well knew, no Place could be safe for him,
so long as he was pursued by the Malice and Treachery of his Adversaries; that
it would be also a great Grief and Trouble to him, if any Man should be brought
into Danger for his sake; that therefore to prevent their Enterprises, he would
leave the Country, and go whither God pleased to call him. At length, he
concludes with hearty Thanks to his Highness, and prays for his Welfare and
Prosperity; rejoicing in himself, That God would think him worthy to suffer any
thing for the Glory of the Name of Christ.

Afterward, The University of Wittemberg interceeds with Duke Frederick for
Luther.
the University of Wittemberg, on the 21 November, wrote to Duke Frederick,
That they had been informed by Luther of Cajetane's Letter, what it was he
demanded, and what again Luther offered at Ausburg; that, therefore, since
Luther desired both that his Error might be made appear to him, and that he
submitted to the Holy Church of Rome, they prayed his Highness, to endeavor
that they might not take any Severe Course with him, but convince him of his
Error, by Arguments taken from Holy Scripture; that he, indeed, had great
Confidence in the Courteous and Gracious Disposition of Pope Leo; but was much
afraid, lest his Flattering Adversaries might incense him, and abuse the Name
of the Church. Though the Elector Frederick, complied not with the Papists, and
took special Care, that Luther should not suffer any Injury, as may
sufficiently appear, from what has been said, yet to that very Day he had not
read any of Luther's Writtings, nor heard his Sermons, as he himself professed,
in a Letter, which at Ausburg he wrote to Cardinal Raphael Riario, who, upon
account of Ancient Acquaintance, had friendly admonished him, not to undertake
the Protection of Luther.

In the mean time, Pope Leo's Bull for the Indulgences.
during these Transactions, Pope Leo being apprehensive of some defection, in
that State of Affairs, on the eight of November, published a Bull in
confirmation of Indulgences; affirming it to be the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches; that the Pope, the
Successor of S. Peter, and Vicar of Christ, has Power of granting that great
Blessing, which avails not only the Living, but the Dead also in Purgatory;
that that Doctrine was to be embraced by all, if they would not be separated
from the Communion of the Church. This Bull he therefore sent to his Legate
Cardinal Cajetane, to be by him published. He in obedience to the Command,
published it at Lintz, a Town of Austria upon the Danube, in presence of some
Public Notaries and Witnesses; and having caused many Copies of it to be
written out, sent them in the Month of December after, to the Bishops
throughout Germany, charging them in the Pope's Name, under severe Penalties,
That they forthwith publish, and seriously recommend them to the People of
their Diocesses.

Because Luther had understood by Cajetane's Letter, Luther's Appeal from the
Pope to a Council.
That they would proceed to a Sentence, against him, at Rome, on the 28 of
November, he made a new Appeal. In the beginning whereof, he professes, That he
would not impeach the Authority of the Pope of Rome, so long as he was sound in
his Judgment, and far less dissent from the Church; that nevertheless, seeing
the Pope was like other Men, it was possible he might err and do amiss, and
that it was not to be attributed to him, as if he alone could not err, nor be
deceived. This he affirms by the Example of S. Peter, whom S. Paul rebuked
openly and sharply, because he had erred in the Sound Doctrine: That seeing the
Pope had so great Power and Wealth, that he both commanded what he pleased, and
could not be restrained by the Authority of any Man, the only Remedy that
remained for those, who thought themselves injured by him, was in Appeal: Then
he relates, How that being forced by the too great Austerity of Cardinal
Cajetane, he had Appealed to the Pope, thinking he might have had some
Protection in his goodness, seeing he had offered most reasonable Conditions,
and promised to do any thing, provided he were convinced of his Error; but
that now seeing he perceived that this Appeal being slighted, and the
Conditions also rejected, there was no Hopes of Help or Relief from the Pope,
as appeared by Cardinal Cajetane's Letter to the Elector of Saxony; he was by
extreme Necessity brought to make his Appeal from the Pope to a future Council,
which was every way to be preferred before him.

Afterward, Pope Leo sent Charles Miltitz, whom we mentioned before, into
Germany, and presented the Elector Frederick, with that Golden Rose, which is
yearly Consecrated by the Pope, with great Pomp and many Ceremonies, and
commonly presented to some great Person, as a Mark of singular Good Will and
Favor. He wrote also to Degenart Pheffinger, a Nobleman, and one of Duke
Frederick's Council, entreating him to assist Miltitz in what he was to
negotiate with the Elector in his Name. that Luther, the Son of Satan, might be
restrained, and that the most Noble Family of Saxony, which had been always
reckoned zealous for Religion, might not be sullied by any Blot or Blemish. To
the same Purpose, also, he wrote to George Spalatiner; and the more to persuade
him, told him, That he was wholly taken up in rooting the hurtful Weeds out of
the Field of Christ. In like manner, his Vice Chancellor writing to Degenart,
prays him, That he would exhort Duke Frederick to imitate the Example of his
Ancestors, that he might not do any thing unworthy of their Memory. When
Miltitz arrived in Saxony, he presented the Rose, and vigorously set about the
Discharge of his Commission: This coming to Luther's Knowledge, on the third of
March, he wrote a very submissive Letter to the Pope; 1519.
That he had been grievously accused to Frederick Elector of Saxony, Luther's
Letter to Pope Leo.
as if he behaved himself perversely toward the Church of Rome; which troubled
him not a little; for that it exceedingly grieved him to have fallen into his
Holiness's Displeasure, and that nevertheless, he could not tell what he had to
do, nor how to carry himself; that he was constantly urged to retract his
Writings; that if that could any way contribute to the Advantage and Dignity of
the Church of Rome, he would not refuse to do so; but that there were a great
many ingenious and learned Men, in Germany, who could rightly judge of the
whole Controversy; so that, though he should retract, yet it would redound
more to the Disgrace and Detriment, than to the Dignity of the Church of Rome:
That for his Part, he had done his Holiness no Injury, but that it was rather
those Collectors and Preachers, who, put on by Covetousness, and greedy of
Lucre, had spoken foul and ignominious Things to the People; that by these he
had been grievously accused and informed against; whereas he stood so well
affected toward the Church of Rome, and his Holiness himself, that he had no
Thoughts of Attempting any thing against it; for that the Power and Authority
of the Church was so great, that next to Christ, it was the most excellent
thing in the World; that he prayed his Holiness not to give credit to his
Adversaries: That he would never hereafter make mention of the Indulgences,
provided, his Enemies, on the other Hand, were also enjoined Silence; that he
would also advise the People, in his Sermons, to entertain Reverent and
Honorable Thoughts of the Church of Rome, not to impute to it the Boldness and
Covetousness of some of its Members, nor yet, imitate his Example, who being in
some manner necessitated by his Adversaries, had treated the Church somewhat
irreverently and unbecomingly: In short, that he would do any thing for Peace
sake. That in all his Proceedings he had had this constantly before his Eyes,
That the Church of Rome should not be aspersed by the wickedness of some Men,
nor the People imposed upon by false Doctrine; and that this his Care and
Diligence could not be liable to any Censure. That he was not much concerned
about Matters indifferent, provided no Error nor erroneous Persuasion
possessed Men's Minds.

Before Miltitz arrived in Germany, The Emperor Maximilian dies.
the Emperor Maximilian dyed in Austria, January 12. the Electors then were,
Albert Archbishop of Mentz, Herman, Archbishop of Cologne, and Richard
Archbishop of Treves; Ludovick Prince Palatine, Frederick Duke of Saxony,
Joachim Marquess of Brandenburg, and Lewis King of Bohemia, who was also King
of Hungary. These being, according to the Custom of the Empire, summoned by
the Elector of Mentz, met in the Month of June, at Frankford, a City upon the
River of Main, whither the King of Bohemia sent his Deputy Ladislaus
Sterneberg. The Archbishop of Mentz spoke first; and having said much, of the
greatness of the Affair, exhorted them to Unity and Concord; showing by many
Instances, in former times, how much mischief the Dissension of the Electors
had done to Germany; and that they all ought to be the more unanimous now, that
they were threatened with great Dangers from the Turks, and from others also,
who sought the Division of Germany.

There were two Competitours that stood for the Imperial Dignity, Competitours
for the Empire Charles King of Spain, and Francis King of France.
Charles Archduke of Austria, who three Years before had succeeded to Ferdinand
King of Spain, his Grandfather, by the Mother, and Francis King of France, who
having defeated the Switzers four Years before at Marignano, was in Possession
of the Duchy of Milan. And the Ambassadors of Charles, about that time, were
come as far as Mentz, four German Miles distant from Frankford; but the French
Ambassadors stopped at Coblentz, a Town belonging to the Archbishop of Treves,
upon the confluent of the Rhine and Moselle. They severally by Letters and
Agents recommended their own Princes to the Electors, and used what Arguments
they could to persuade them; but especially the French, who easily understood
that their Pretensions were not so acceptable, as differing from the Germans in
Language, Customs and Manners. The French King, having overcome the Switzers,
as we have said, was in Possession of Lumbardy; but seeing he looked upon their
Friendship to be in a manner necessary for the Safety of his own Kingdom, with
high Promises and great Losses, he purchased it the next Year after. Now
therefore, the Empire being void by the Death of Maximilian, he sent
Ambassadors, to acquaint them with the Reasons why he desired to be chosen
Emperor, and withal, to crave their Assistance and Intercession for him with
the Electors: Their Answer was, That when they had made Friendship, and entered
into a League with him, they had excepted the Church of Rome, and the Empire:
That it concerned the Majesty of the Empire, that the Voices of the Electors
should be free, so that they could not forestal that Liberty, by making any
previous Declaration of their Inclinations. Thus the Ambassadors being
dismissed, they wrote to the Electors, acquainting them with the Application
the King had made unto them, and with their Answer thereunto; praying them,
withal, that they would have no regard unto it, but choose some German Prince,
and thereby infinitely oblige them. They wrote, besides, to Pope Leo; and
seeing it belonged to him, to confirm and inaugurate the Emperor elect, they
besought him, that he would bestir himself, to hinder that that Dignity should
not be bestowed upon any Foreign Prince. To this he made answer, That he heard,
there was one who aspired to that Honor, that could not lawfully do it; for
that the Kings of Naples were the Vassals of the Pope of Rome; and had obliged
themselves of old, not to aim at the Roman Empire, but to rest satisfied with
one of the two; and that he had already given intimation of this to the
Electors. By this he meant Charles Archduke of Austria; for after the
Overthrow, which the French King gave the Switzers, September 13. 1515, when he
carried with him Maximilian Sforza into France; Pope Leo following the Fortune
of the Victorious, in the Month of December, came to Bolonia, and there having
had an Interview, and long Conference with King Francis, he confirmed
Friendship with him: And this, among others, was one Cause, why at this Time he
favored his Pretensions. Now, as to what he said of the Kingdom of Naples,
this is the Case: When Manfred, natural Son to the Emperor, Frederick II, Made
War against the Church of Rome, Pope Clement IV, in the Year 1365, that he
might repress him, took the Course, which his Predecessor Urban IV, was about
to have taken, as it is reported, and having sent for Charles, Count of
Provence and Anjou, into Italy, declared him King of Sicily and Naples, but on
Condition, First, That he should hold the same in Fee of the Church of Rome,
The Speech of the Elector of Mentz about the Election of the Emperor.
and therefore pay the sum of forty thousand Crowns yearly; and then that he
should at no Time aspire to the Dignity of the Roman Empire, nor accept of it,
though freely offered unto him.

When the Matter was brought into Deliberation, the Arhbishop of Mentz, having
first consulted apart, with Frederick Duke of Saxony, who was of great
Authority amongst the Electors, opened the Case, and told them, That the whole
Question consisted in three Points, to wit; Whether Francis King of France,
Charles King of Spain, or else some German was to be chosen? As to the French
King, says he, I think we are barred from choosing him, by our Oath and Laws,
whereby it is provided, That this Dignity of the Empire should not be
transferred to Strangers; and no Man doubts, I think, but that he is a Foreign
Prince. Again, though his Country were no Hindrance, yet it is not for the
Interest of the Public, because the French King will think of enlarging his
Dominions, and make War against Charles King of Spain, whom he hates, nay, and
has already denounced it, so that Germany will be involved in great Troubles:
But we ought to take Care, That no Civil-War be raised among us. Austria
belongs to the Dominion of Charles; If the French King invade this, as
certainly he will, shall we leave it to his Mercy? Has the Emperor Maximilian
deserved no better of us and the Empire? Do you think that our own Liberty will
be long safe, if these Provinces be once subdued? He has lately enlarged his
Borders, by the accession of the Duchy of Milan, the same will he attempt to
do in Germany. We ought not to be moved by their large and magnificent
Promises, for Covetousness and Ambition transports Men commonly, and makes them
forget their Duty. There were many Princes heretofore in France; but now their
Number is contracted within a very narrow Compass, for the King now is in a
manner sole Monarch; they say he is a Prince of great Courage, but that aims
wholly at Monarchy; Aristocracy is the Government we ought chiefly to retain.
They promise great Matters, of making War against the Turks, that were to be
wished, indeed, as a thing of greatest Advantage to the State; nor am I
ignorant of how great Moment a conjunction of Germany, France and Italy, would
prove; but he will make the first Essay of all their Power and Prowess, upon
the Provinces of King Charles; He Will attempt the Netherlands, and set upon
Naples, that he may recover it, as an Hereditary Kingdom, belonging unto him:
And shall we Arm him for the accomplishment of these things? Nor is it to be
said, that I am Prophesying of future and uncertain Contingences; for he is
already raising an Army. Since therefore the Laws, our Oath, and the Love of
our Country, lay an Obligation upon us, I declare it to be my Opinion, that we
cannot choose him. Now will I proceed to the other parts: Some of you, I believe
are against the Election of Charles, because Spain lies at a great distance
from us, and that Germany will suffer by his Absence, either through a Turkish
War, or Civil Dissensions. For my own part, I not only acknowledge these things
to be true, but when also I consider them more attentively, I am stricken with
horror and apprehension: For I think with my self, that if the Emperor being
any way provoked, should come into Germany and bring Spaniards with him, our
Liberty would be in great danger: Nay it runs in my mind too, that the
Spaniards will be very loath to part with, or ever restore to us again this
Imperial Dignity; but if they chance by their force and valor to recover
Milan, will endeavor to keep it to themselves. So that I am almost inclined to
think it safest to choose a fit Person of our own Country, in Imitation of our
Progenitors, who passing by Strangers, have been often content with Natives. I
would not be thought to deny this; however the State of Affairs had another
face then, and the Age was much happier. But now if we have an Emperor weak in
Power, do ye think that those of the Netherlands and Austria, the Subjects of
Charles of Spain, will be Obedient unto him? Or should the French King make War
against Charles, as he certainly will either in Flanders or Italy, must he be
an idle Spectator? And must this our new Emperor suffer a great part of the
Empire to be dismembered by Foreign Nations? Nay, as the Times are now, it is
probable, that the Princes of Germany, despising their own Emperor, will make
Alliances and Join, some with the Austrians, and others with the French. In the
time of the Emperor Frederick III, Charles Duke of Burgundy, made War in
Germany, as Philip Maria Duke of Milan did in Italy, without control, and
certainly much to our disgrace: Nay, which was more ignominious, the Emperor
was at that time blockt up in Austria, and driven out of his own Country by the
Hungarians; and nevertheless the Bohemians were then joined with him, as were
also my Grandfather Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, and Albert Duke of Saxony*
If that happened then, you see what is to be expected at present, when some
will be Pensioners to some, and others to other Princes; not to mention many
causes that may intervene, why Princes and Cities will refuse to give
obedience. Grievous Troubles and Stirs seem now also to be threatened upon
account of Religion; for there are Debates arisen about Indulgences, the Power
of the Pope and Ecclesiastical Laws, which look indeed, as yet, as if they were
curable, but will in a short time bring along with them great Desolation and
Alterations in the Church; for very many espouse that Cause, and especially the
Saxons and Switzers, most valiant People; nor can the evil be remedied but by a
Council: Now how can an Emperor low in Power, either procure the calling of a
Council, or defend it, especially if other Kings oppose the same? There is a
Turkish War also to be thought on, and that not only Defensive, but Offensive
also, that we may regain what we have lost, and above all things restore Greece
to its Liberty. Now for accomplishing of this, there will be need of the Forces
of many Nations; And how shall an Emperor of small Power and Authority be able
to procure them? For these Reasons then, it is my Judgment, that we should
choose some Potent Prince, and that Charles, Archduke of Austria, ought to be
preferred before the other Princes of Germany. As for those Inconveniences
which may seem to scare us, I think they are far less than those that would
arise, if the chief Government were put into the hands of any other: For he is
both a German by Extraction, and has many Provinces holding of the Empire; nor
will he permit our common Country to truckle under the Bondage of any, but will
give us a solemn Oath, That he shall neither suffer the Empire to be
transferred, nor our Rights and Liberties diminished. The Reasons I have
alleged, are indeed of very great weight; and yet I should not have been moved
by them, if his Temper and Disposition were not known; for he is Religious,
Just and Modest, a hater of Cruelty, and a Prince of pregnant Parts. These his
Virtues will always mind him of his Duty, and of the Care of the Government.
They who know him familiarly, much Extol him; and if we consider his Father
Philip, and Grandfather Maximilian, we cannot doubt of the truth of what they
say. He is but Young indeed, but however of years fit enough for Business and
Action. He will also make use of his Grandfathers Counselors, and some select
Princes of Germany. I told you before, its true, that it will be very
inconvenient for the Public, if he happen to be long absent from Germany: But
that shall be provided against by Articles and Conditions made with him
beforehand: Besides, seeing he himself has large Territories in Germany, he
must needs come now and then to visit them. The Turk must be driven out of
Hungary, the French of Italy; the Church is to be settled and reformed. And when
I reflect on these things, I Am the less moved at those inconveniences which his
absence threatens, for the natural Briskness and Activity of his Temper, the
Love of his Country; nay, and the Necessity of his Affairs, will oblige him now
and then to return to us.

When the Archbishop and Elector of Mentz had made an end of s;peaking, The
Speech of the Archbishop of Treves.
he prayed the rest to speak their Opinions: And his Colleagues having spoken in
few words, put it to the Electoral Archbishop of Treves to speak next, for he
was had in great Reputation upon account of his Industry and Experience. He
therefore, having in a short Preamble taken notice of a certain Prophet, who
had foretold that Maximilian should be the last German Emperor, Now, said he,
things seem to me almost to tend that way, since the Archbishop of Mentz, who
has indeed said many things prudently, is wholly for having the Government of
the Empire conferred upon a Stranger. Yet I much wonder that he should prefer
the King of Spain before the French King. I am really grieved at the condition
and state of Germany; for if we walked in the steps of our Forefathers, we
should not stand in need of Foreign Protection; but now that we invite in
Strangers, what do we do but purchase to our selves Servitude? but setting
aside this Complaint, I shall follow the same Order, that the Elector of Mentz
has done, and shall speak first of our Law and Oath. The Reason of the making
that Law, in my Opinion, was, Lest if a Stranger, should be chosen, who had no
fixed Residence in Germany, the Dignity of the Empire, might be by degrees,
transferred to Foreigners. Now if this be the Sense and Meaning of that Law, a
Spaniard can no more be chosen than a Frenchman; but if Charles may be chosen,
because he has Provinces within the Pale of the Empire, the same must hold
also in Francis, who possesses both Lumbardy and the Kingdom of Arles, which
are both Parts of our Republic; of the two then proposed, let us see which is
most eligible. The Truth is, at that Time when France was joined to Germany,
which was in the Age of the Franks, our Empire was in a most flourishing
condition, and I am not a little delighted with the Remembrance of those Times,
as often as I fall upon reading the Histories and Transactions of past Ages.
Now the very same occasion is again offered unto us, which, I think, ought not
to be slighted; Foreign Nations, also, are of the same Opinion, the Pope,
Venetians and all the Princes and States of Italy: For the French Nation
derives its Original from us, uses almost the same Laws and Customs, and is
very loving and kind to our Countrymen, besides its commodiousness for us and
Italy because of vicinity: If any Troubles arise, Armies will presently be in
readiness, and French Money to pay them: And if the Turk invade either Hungary
or Italy, as I am fully persuaded he will, Asia being now in Peace, what can be
more desired than to have so flourishing an Emperor near us, backed by the
Forces of both Nations? Now though the Spaniards be accounted good Soldiers,
yet what great Action did they ever atchieve in Italy, without the Help of the
Germans? Besides, seeing they are at a very great Distance from us, we cannot
expect any timely Assistance from them; and though they might be willing, yet
could they not do us any great good; for since Spain is exhausted by Colonies
and Fleets, they constantly send abroad, it cannot spare any great Armies from
home. To this it may be added, That we shall have the French for fellow
Soldiers, and Companions of all our Labors, whereas, if any thing succeed well
with us, the Spaniards will take to themselves all the Glory, enjoy the Fruits
of our Victories, and have the Government of our Provinces; but no more of this
Comparison, I now come to the Election. If the French King be pitched upon,
there will be no cause of War in Italy, for he has Milan already, and we shall
persuade him not to attack Naples; the same also will he do with the
Netherlands, provided they will be quiet. Now, why we should be so much concerned
for the Netherlands? I see no reason; They have, indeed, been our Neighbors
for a long time, but they have no League nor Alliance with us; and neither
think themselves obliged by the Laws of the Empire, nor contribute any thing to
public Taxes, no more than the English or Scots. Since the French King then is
very powerful, peaceably enjoys Lombardy, and is provided of all things
necessary: He Will undertake far greater and more glorious Actions, I mean a
Turkish War, and will employ all his force in beating off the Enemy from
Hungary and Italy, that so he may secure the state of Germany. But if he prefer
Charles of Spain before him, good God! what Commotions will we raise in Italy?
He will attempt the recovery of Milan, occasion a lasting War; and while a most
lovely Country is thus harassed, the Turks will bend all their force against
Hungary: Who pray, shall resist these? Who can fit out a competent Army? These
are things to be carefully considered, and not slightly passed over. Now it is
uncertain what may be the issue of an Italian War: For if the French King get
the better on it, he will attempt Naples, and it is possible that at his
instigation the Pope may annul our Election; and every one is sensible how
great Troubles that may occasion. On the other hand, if Charles of Spain be
advanced, we are not to expect that Italy will be restored unto us: The
Spaniards once in possession, will retain it for ever: Nor that only; but it
would be no easy matter neither to get this our Empire out of their hands
again. What have they not suffered, that they might preserve Naples, which all
Men know how they came by? By no means then are they to be called into Italy.
Let me now say a little of both Kings. I make no doubt but Charles is a Prince
of a gentle and modest disposition; for so many do commend him: But since he is
but as yet a Youth, what Judgment can be made of those Virtues in him, which
are required to be in an Emperor? The Public stands in need of such a Prince,
who besides other things may settle and reform the state of the Church, as the
Elector of Mentz wisely hinted. Now of all Men, King Francis is most capable of
effecting this; for he is a Prince both of Wit and Judgment, uses to confer
often with Learned Men about Religion, and reads many Books himself. Besides,
the present state of Affairs requires a Prince and General who is an expert
Soldier, diligent and fortunate: And who pray upon this occcasion can outvie
King Francis? His Valor is already known and tried, and he surpasses all his
Ancestors in the greatness of his Actions; for he lately overcame in Battle the
Switzers, a most Warlike People, and since the time of Julius Caesar, almost
invincible. A Youth then is not to be preferred before so great a Commander.
The Elector of Mentz confesses indeed that it would be inconvenient, if Charles
should continue long out of Germany; but bids us set our minds at rest for all
that. However, for my part, I look upon it to be a Matter of the highest
Danger, that an Emperor should remain a long while out of the Borders of the
Empire; For who will withstand the sudden Irruptions of the Turks, who will
restrain unexpected Tumults, Quarrels, and Civil Commotions? Who will, if a
Storm arise, guide the Ship in the Pilot's absence? When he is absent, he will
have no certain intelligence of our Affairs; many things will be falsely
reported unto him; no Germans, but only Spaniards, will be of his Council: He
will now and then make Edicts, and send them to us in a most unseasonable time;
and if being provoked by the Calumnies and Accusations of malicious Men, he
chance afterward to come into Germany with an Army of Strangers at his back,
What think you will be the fortune of the Empire then? Wherefore if it seems
good to you, and if Fate will so have it, that at this time a Foreign King
should put our Crown upon his Head, I am clearly of the Opinion, that the
French should be preferred before the Spaniard: But if the Law be against the
choosing of the French King, it is no less against the King of Spain; nor are we
by any nice Interpretation to take King Charles for a German, but rather to
find out some Prince, who has no Residence but in Germany, and who is a German
by Birth, Manners, Humor and Language. Against this the Archbishop of Mentz
has started many Inconveniences, and thinks, That by reason of Weakness and
low Fortune, such an Emperor will be contemptible; but if we choose a fit
Person, Germany is strong and powerful enough to bear that Burden. Rodolph I,
the eleventh Emperor before Maximilian, brought no great strength with him to
the Throne; but he was a Virtuous and Valient Prince, and raised the Empire,
which was then sunk very low, and harassed by many Wars, to such a state, that
it became formidable to all the Kings about it. Nor do I think you are ignorant
what a high Opinion Foreign Princes, and among these, Lowis XII, of France,
conceived of the Emperor Maximilian, only because of his Parts and Valor:
Great has always been the Fame and Reputation of the German Princes, which is
not extinct as yet, but is still fresh and green; and among others, there are
at this Day three chief Families in Germany, Bavaria, Saxony and Brandenburgh,
and some excellent and deserving Men of them. If then, we can agree, and choose
one of them, and, as we ought, assist him with our Forces, we need not be
afraid of Foreigners; for, provided we be unanimous among our selves, all will
be well enough; wherefore, passing by all Strangers, let us choose one among our
selves, we need not doubt of success; and we can produce many Domestic
Instances of our own Fortitude and Behavior, of which I shall now only mention
one. Matthias King of Hungary, a potent and fortunate Warrior, once declared
War against your Father Duke Frederick; but when he saw a good Army ready to
oppose him, his Heat and Courage was soon cooled. So, also, I think, a way may
be found out now, that an Emperor chosen of our own Country, may retain his
Authority both at Home and abroad.

In the third Place, The Vote of Frederick Elector of Saxony.
spoke Frederick Duke of Saxony; and having represented to the College, That
the French King was excluded by Law, but that Charles was a German Prince, and
had a Residence and Habitation in Germany; he told them, That the Body Politic
stood in need of a very powerful Head, but that he knew none that was to be
compared to Charles; that therefore his Judgment was, That he should be
declared Emperor, but yet on certain Conditions, both that Germany might be
secured of its Liberty, and the Dangers which had been mentioned, avoided. When
the rest, had at length, approved this Opinion: How, said the Elector of
Treves, do I foresee the Fate of Germany, and a Change a coming! But since it
seems good to you, Charles of Austria chosen Emperor.
I will not oppose your Judgment. This was on the twenty eighth Day of June. It
was now late Night, and therefore they broke up, but met again next Day: Then
it began to be debated, What Conditions were to be offered to Charles, the
Emperor Elect; and this Debate continued for some Days; when, at length, the
Conditions were agreed upon, they were drawn up in Writing, and sent to Mentz,
to his Ambassadors: When they had received them, the several Voices were set
down in Writing, and as the Custom is, signed and Sealed. The Day before, the
Empire had been offered to Frederick Elector of Saxony, but he bravely refused
it, and, as has been said, gave his Vote for Charles of Spain; and when, upon
that Account, the Ambassadors of Charles offered him a great sum of Money, he
not only rejected it, but commanded all about him, likewise, not to take a
Farthing.

The Nobility, and all the People, being afterward called together, the
Archbishop of Mentz, in a speech, made to them in S. Bartholomew's Church,
declared, That Charles Archduke of Austria, and King of Spain, was chosen King
of the Romans, in the place of Maximilian deceased; that they ought to give God
thanks, that he had been so unanimously chosen, and exhorted them to be
Faithful and Obedient to him. Then running out in his Praises, he gave them the
Reasons, why they had chosen him of all others; which was received by the
States and People, with Humming and Applause. Afterward, the Ambassadors, who
had drawn nearer, and were now but at a Miles Distance, were sent for. These
were Matthew Cardinal of Saltzburg, Erard Bishop of Liege, Bernard Bishop of
Trent, Frederick Prince Palatine, Casimire, Marquess of Brandenburg, Henry,
Count of Nassaw, Maximilian of Sibenburg, and some other Counselors: These
being come, and having consulted with the rest, about the Administration of the
Government, till the Emperor Charles should come into Germany, Prince
Cassimire was appointed to raise Forces so, and to post them, that the Public
might receive no Damage in the mean while: Afterward the Electors wrote
Letters, and sent Ambassadors to the Emperor into Spain, to acquaint him with
all that had been done. The chief of the Ambassie was Frederick Prince
Palatine; but in the mean time, some Messengers were privately dispatched with
the News, of whom one is said to have posted from Frankford to Barcelona in
nine Days time. The Prince Palatine arrived about the latter end of November,
The Elector's Letter to the Emperor.
and delivered the Elector's Letters; the sum whereof was, That he would be
pleased to accept of the Empire that was offered unto him, and all Delay laid
aside, to come with all speed into Germany.

The Emperor made a Generous Answer, His Answer.
by the Mouth of Mercurine Cattinario, That though great Troubles seemed to be
threatened on the one Hand from the Turks, and on the other from the French, yet
he neither could nor would be wanting to their common Country, especially when
so great Princes made such a Judgment of him, and required that at his Hands;
that therefore he accepted the Honor and Charge that was offered him, and
would put to Sea with the first Opportunity, in order to his coming into
Germany. Much in the same Words, also, he wrote back to the Electors, and so,
having nobly presented Prince Frederick, he dismissed him. Thus, then, was he
made Emperor, the Fifth of that Name, at the Age of nineteen Years.

The French King was the more troubled at this Repulse, The French King vexed
that Charles should be preferred before him.
that he knew his Affairs were thereby exposed to greater Danger; for he had
rather that any Man should have had that Dignity than Charles of Spain, whose
Power being already suspected by him, he saw, now by this means, mightily
increased and confirmed. He had been at vast Charges, and very free of his
Gold, in making Friends to promote his Designs: The same is said to have been
done also by the Flemings; but of this I dare not be positive. But let us trace
back a little the Genealogy of Charles*

Charles V of France, The Genealogy of Charles, the Emperor.
called the Sage, gave to his youngest Brother Philip, the Duchy of Burgundy,
that had fallen unto him; Philip afterward married Margaret, the only Daughter
of Lewis Earl of Flanders, and had by her a Son, John; to him was born Philip,
the Father of Charles the Hardy, who being killed before Nancy, left behind him
a Daughter, Mary, the Heiress of vast Territories: She, at length, was married
to Maximilian, the Son of the Emperor Frederick III, and bore to him Philip,
who married Jane, Daughter to Ferdinand, King of Spain, by whom he had Charles
and Ferdinand; the Infanta Jane, being with Child, went to Ghent, and was there
brought to Bed of Charles, on February 24, 1500. Here we must say somewhat, by
the by, of Ferdinand the Emperor's Grandfather, by the Mother: He was King of
Arragon and Sicily, and had in Marriage Isabel, the Daughter and Heiress of
John II, King of Spain, having afterward obtained the Kingdom of Naples also:
Now the Children he had by her, were John, Isabel, Jane, Mary and Catharine;
John and Isabel dying without Issue, the whole Succession of the Kingdom, by
the Laws of the Country, fell to the next Sister Jane, and by this means all
the Inheritance of the Duke of Burgundy a most powerful Prince, and of
Ferdinand King of Spain, descended to Charles the Son of Jane; for in the
Division of the Inheritance, the Possessions of the House of Austria fell to
Ferdinand. So that for many Ages Germany had not had a more Powerful Emperor.
Charles lost his Father, when he was a Child of six Years of Age, and his
Grandfather Ferdinand, when he was about sixteen; after whose Death, he went
into Spain, and there continued, till being chosen Emperor, he came into
Germany, The way of choosing the Emperor.
as shall be said hereafter. And since we are now come to this Place, it will
not be amiss to say somewhat of the manner of choosing the Emperor. Charles
King of Bohemia, and the fourth Emperor of that Name, in the Year of our Lord
1356, The Heads of the Golden Bull.
made a Law concerning this, which is called Bulla Aurea, the Golden Bull Or
Charter, because it was sealed with a Seal of Gold instead of Wax.
These, among others, are the Heads of that Law; That when the Emperor Dies,
the Archbishop of Ments, so soon as he comes to know of it, shall presently
Summon the rest of the Electors, to meet, within three Months, on a certain
Day, at Frankford, or to send their Deputies with full Power and Commission,
for choosing the Emperor or King of the Romans: That if the Archbishop of Mentz
should be negligent, his Colleagues, nevertheless, should meet within the time
aforesaid, accompanied with not above two hundred Horse a piece, when they
enter the Town, and of them only fifty with Arms. He who neither comes nor
sends his Deputy, or departs before the Business is done, is to lose his right
of Election for that time: That the Magistrates of Frankford be true and
faithful to the Electors, and during their Assembly, suffer none besides the
Electors and their Families, to enter the Town. When they are met, they are to
hear Mass in S. Bartholomew's Church, for imploring the Assistance and Grace of
the Holy Ghost; and then take an Oath to be tendered unto them by the Archbishop
of Mentz, That they shall not act by virtue of any Compact, Bribe, Promise or
Gratuity: afterward they are to fall to the Business, and not depart before an
Emperor be chosen; that if the matter be protracted longer than thirty Days,
they shall have no Victuals but Bread and Water allowed them: He who is chosen
by the greater Part, shall be in the same condition, as if he had been elected
nemine contradicente. The Emperor being in this manner chosen, the first thing
he is to do, is, To confirm to the Electors all their Privileges, and whatever
concerns their Dignity, Honor, Liberty and Immunity. It is, moreover, provided
and enacted, that they mutually allow one another free Passage through their
Territories, what Place they are severally to have in the Dyets and Assemblies
of the Empire, how Votes are to be taken, and what their several Places and
Charges are, when the Emperor Dines, or does any thing else in public.
Moreover, that in the time of an interreign, the Elector Palatine shall have
the administration of the Government in Schwabia, Franconia, and the Circle of
the Rhine; and the Elector of Saxony in the Circle of Saxony; that upon the
death of an Elector, his eldest Son or Brother-german shall succeed to him;
that if an Elector be under the Age of eighteen Years, his nearest Kinsman, by
the Father's side, shall supply his Place, until he be of Age; that the
Electors meet yearly, and consult of the Affairs of the Public; that Frankford
be the Place of Election, but Aix la Chapelle the Place of the first
Instalment; and Sclavonian Languages, that they may be able to discourse with
many Nations.

We spoke before of the Conditions prescribed by the Electors, The Conditions
prescribed to the Emperor Charles V.
which the Emperor's Ambassadors ratified, and, as is customary, gave
Security in his Name, under Hand and Seal, for performing the same. Now they
were these, That he shall protect and defend Christendom, the Pope, and Church
of Rome, whereof he is the Advocate; that he shall equally administer Justice,
and maintain Peace; that he shall not only confirm the Laws of the Empire,
especially that which they call the Golden Bull, but also, when there is
occasion, with their Consent, amplify and enlarge them; that he shall choose
and appoint a Council of Germans, to govern the State; that he shall not alter
nor diminish the Rights, Privileges, Dignities and Immunities of the Princes
and States of the Empire; that it shall be lawful for the Electors, to meet
together upon occasion, and consult about public Affairs; and that he shall in
no ways hinder them to do so, nor take it ill when they do; that he shall
rescind and annul the Leagues and Associations of the People or Nobility made
against the Princes, and make a Law, that no such be made for the future; that
he shall make no League or Compact, relating to the Affairs of the Empire, with
Strangers, but with the Consent of the Electors; that he shall neither sell nor
mortgage the Public Lands and Revenues of the Empire, nor any ways imbezil
them; and that he shall, with the first Occasion, regain those Lands or Goods
that have been invaded and possessed by other Nations, or have been dismembered
from the Empire, but so still, that it be not prejudicial to those who are
supported by Right or Privilege; That if he himself also, or any of his Family
possess any thing belonging to the Empire, not lawfully purchased, he shall,
being demanded by the Electors, restore the same; that he shall live in Peace
with his Neighbors and other Kings, and not make War, either within or without
the Limits of the Empire, for the public concerns thereof, without the Advice
and Consent of all the States, especially of the Electors; that he shall not
bring any Foreign Soldiers into Germany, unless the States be willing; but that
if either he himself, or the Empire, be attacked by War, he may make use of any
Assistance; that he shall not call a Diet of the Empire, nor impose any Taxes,
but with the consent of the Electors; neither shall he hold Dyets without the
Limits of the Empire; that in public Affairs he shall not employ Strangers,
but Germans chosen from among the Nobility, and that all public Writings shall
be made in Latin or the Vulgar Language; that he shall not summon any of the
States to answer in Law, without the Bounds of the Empire; that seeing many
things are acted at Rome, contrary to former Agreements made with the Popes, he
shall negotiate with the Pope, That no encroachment be made upon the
Privileges and Liberty of the Empire; that he shall advise with the Electors,
How the Monopolies of Merchants, that are very pernicious to Germany, may be
restrained, and bring that matter, which has been often stated before them, to
an Issue; that he shall impose no Toll nor Customs, without the consent of the
Electors, nor by Grants and Patents, lessen or prejudice the Customs belonging
to the Electors upon the Rhine; that if he have any Action or Suit against any
of the States, he shall try it by Law, but shall not use Force against those,
who offer to stand a fair Trial; that he shall not put any Man to the Ban of
the Empire, without a hearing, but therein follow the course of Law; that he
shall not bestow upon any Person the vacant Goods and Revenues of the Empire,
but reserve them for the public; that if he acquire any Foreign Province, by
the Help of the States, he shall annex it to the Empire; that if he recover any
thing that belongs to the Public, by his own Forces, he shall restore it to
the Commonwealth; that he shall Confirm and Ratify what the Electors Palatine
and Saxony have acted in Public Affairs, during the interreign; that he shall
entertain no Counsils nor Design of making the Imperial Dignity proper and
Hereditary to his own Family, but shall leave the Electors in full and free
Power of Election, according to the Statute of Charles IV, and the Provision of
the Canon Law; that what is done otherwise, shall be void and null; that with
the first Opportunity he shall come into Germany to be Installed.

When his Ambassadors, had upon Oath confirmed and approved these Conditions,
in his Name, as has been said, they gave every one of the Electors an
Instrument of the same under hand and Seal: And this was done on July 3. What
they said of the Cannon Law, refers to the Decretal Epistle of Pope Innocent
III, which grants, That the Electoral Princes of Germany have the right of
choosing the Emperor, and that the Imperial Dignity does not depend on
Succession, but Election. Now Pope Innocent lived about the Year of our Lord
1200. But let us return again to Luther.

Much about that Time, Erasmus his Judgment of Luther, to the Elector of Saxony.
Erasmus of Roterdam, writing from Antwerp to Frederick Elector of Saxony,
among other things, takes notice also of Luther, whose Books, he said, were
read with great Applause by Good and Learned Men, and that no Man censured his
Life, as being free from all Suspicion either of Covetousness or Ambition; but
that the Divines of Lovain, hearing that he was much born down by the Authority
of Cardinal Cajetane, did now triumph, and rail against him in all their
Sermons, and at their Feasts, as if he were an Heretic, and the Antichrist:
That he was much displeased thereat, especially, seeing he had but proposed
some things for Disputation sake, and had submitted himself to the Judgment of
those, both to whom he ought, and to whom he ought not; but that they had
neither admonished the Man Friendly, nor as yet taught him, nor convinced him
of his Error, but only made a turbulent and seditious Noise and Clamor about
the Matter, which was a way of Proceeding altogether unworthy of Men that made
Profession of the Christian Religion, but especially Divines; for that no Man
was to be rashly accused of Heresy. He writes also to the Archbishop of Mentz,
and Cardinal Campegio; As also to Luther.
To the same effect he wrote also to the Archbishop of Mentz and Cardinal
Campegio, and in his Letter enveighs against those Sophistical Divines and
Monks, who could not endure the Study of Languages and Eloquence, nor of sound
Doctrine. He wrote, in like manner, to Luther at that time, telling him, That
he had received his Letter, which showed both a sharp Wit, and Christian
Disposition; but that his Books had raised a sad Tragedy in those Parts, and
that, for them, he lay under both the Envy and Suspicion of the Divines, who
would admit of no Excuse at his Hands: That there were many Men in England, and
of great note too, who had a great esteem for his Writings; that he himself,
also, had perused his Commentaries upon the Psalms, and hoped they might prove
of great use to others, as well as to himself, who was exceedingly pleased with
them; but that there was one thing, that he would have him admonished of, and
that was, That more might be done by a civil Modesty, than by Transports and
Heat; that he ought rather to thunder against those who abused the Authority of
Popes, than against the Popes themselves; that about inveterate things, which
cannot be suddenly plucked out, it is better to dispute with pithy and close
Arguments, than to assert positively; and that in this Case, the Passions and
Affections must be laid aside: That he gave him this Admonition, not that he
might learn what he was to do, but that he should proceed as he had begun.

Luther's Doctrine, A Disputation at Leipsick betwixt Luther and Eckius.
having in this manner caused much Strife and Contention, and raised him many
Enemies, there was a Disputation appointed to be at Leipsick, a Town in Misnia,
belonging to George Duke of Saxony, Cousin-german to the Elector Frederick;
thither came Luther, and with him, Philip Melanchthon, who the Year before came
to Wittemberg, being sent for by Duke Frederick, to be Professor of the Greek
Language there; thither came also John Eckius, a bold and confident Divine. On
the Day appointed, which was July 4, the Disputation was begun by Eckius, who
having proposed some Positions to be debated, made this his last; That they who
affirmed, that before the time of Pope Silvester, the Church of Rome was not
the first of all Churches, did err; for that he who attained to the Sea and
Faith of S. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, was always acknowledged for the
Successor of S. Peter, and the Vicar of Christ upon Earth. The contrary
Position to this was published by Luther, to wit; That they who attributed
Primacy to the Church of Rome, had no other Ground for it, but the bare and
insipid Decretals of the Popes, made about four hundred Years ago; but that
these Decretals were repugnant, not only to all Histories, written a thousand
Years since, but also to Holy Scripture, and the Council of Nice, the most
Famous of all Councils. Eckius then entering upon the Dispute, laid hold of that
last Position, and would begin the Debate about the Authority and Primacy of
the Pope of Rome; but Luther having made a short Preface, said, That he had
rather that that Argument, as being very Odious, and not at all Necessary,
might have been waved, and that for the sake of the Pope; that he was sorry he
should have been drawn into it by Eckius, and that he wished now his
Adversaries were present, who having grievously accused him, and now shunned
the Light, and a fair Trial of their Cause, did not do well. Eckius also having
made a Preamble, declared, That he had not raised this Bustle and Stir, but
that it was Luther, who in his first Explication of his Theses, had denied,
That before Silvester's time, the Pope of Rome preceded the rest in Order and
Dignity, and had averred before Cajetane, That Pope Pelagius had wrested many
Places of Scripture according to his own Pleasure; which being so, that all the
Fault lay at his Door. The first Debate then was about the Supremacy of the
Pope of Rome, which Eckius said was instituted by Divine Right, and called
Luther, who denied it, a Bohemian, because Huss had been heretofore of the same
Opinion. Luther, to justify himself from this Accusation, proved, That the
Church of Christ had been spread and propagated far and near, twenty Years
before S. Peter constituted a Church at Rome; that this then was not the First
and Chief Church by Divine Right. Afterward Eckius impugned Luther's other
Positions, of Purgatory, Indulgences, Penance, the Pardon of the Guilt, and
Remission of the Punishment of Sin, and of the Power of Priest. At length, on
the fourteenth Day, ended the Dispute, which had been appointed, not upon the
account of Luther, but of Andrew Carolstad, though Luther came to it in company
of Carolstad, only to hear; but being drawn in by Eckius, who had procured a
Safe Conduct for him from Duke George, he entered the Lists of Disputation; for
Eckius was brisk and confident, because of the Nature of the Subject, wherein
he promised himself certain Victory. Luther afterward published the whole
Conference and Debate, and by an ingenious Animadversion, upon the Writings and
Sayings of his Adversaries, gathered several Heads of Doctrine, downright
Heretical, as he said; That so he might make it appear, That whilst they spoke
and wrote any thing in Favor of the Pope, and were transported with the Zeal
of defending their Cause, they interspersed many things, which being narrowly
inspected, contained a great deal of Error and Impiety.

Vlrick Zuinglius taught at that time at Zurich in Suitzerland, Zuinglius
preaches at Zurich.
whither he came, upon a call, in the beginning of this Year, having before
preached at Claris, and in the Desert of our Lady, as they call it. Not long
after Friar Samson, a Franciscean of Milan, came thither also, being sent by
the Pope to preach up Indulgences, and squeeze Money from the People. Zuinglius
stoutly opposed him, and publicly called him an Imposter.

portrait of Emperor Charles V CAROLVS. V. AVSTRIACVS D.G. ROMAN: IMP: SEMPER
AVG: REX HISPAN:
Natus Gandavi Ao. MD. Die. XXIV Febr: Electus Ao. MDXIX. XXVIII Iunij.



Ferdinando Frat: Imp: Commisit VIIo Sept. MDLVI Obijt XXI Sept MDLVIII

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK II.
The CONTENTS.
Luther, by the advice of Charles Miltitz, writes to the Pope, and presents him
with his Book of Christian Liberty. 1520.
The Emperor departs from Spain, and passes through England into the
Low Countries. Luther writes a Book which he calls Tessaradecas, and another
about the Manner of Confession; a third about Vows. His Opinion concerning the
Communion in Both Kinds. To this his Adversaries object a Decree of the Council
of Lateran, under Julius II, of whose Actions you have a large Account. In the
mean time the Divines of Lovain and Cologn condemn Luther's Books. In his
Defense, the Opinions of Picus Mirandula, the Questions of Ockam, and the
Controversy of Reuchlin, with the same Divines, are recited. Seeing himself
attacked by so many Enemies, he writes to the Emperor, soon after to the
Archbishop of Mentz, and Bishop of Mersburg. The Elector Frederick finding that
he had lost his Credit at Rome upon Luther's account, endeavors to clear
himself by Letter. Luther likewise does the same. The Pope Excommunicates him,
and he appeals again from the Decree of the Council of Mantua, and puts out his
Book of the Babylonish Captivity. The Emperor is Crowned at Aix la Chapelle.
The Pope again sollicites Frederick, but not prevailing, causes Luther's Books
to be burnt. Which when Luther understood, he burnt the Popes Bull, and the
Canon Law, and gives his Reasons for it. He Answers Ambrose Catarino, who had
written against him.

IN the former Book an Account has been given of what relates to Charles
Miltitz, Miltitz treat^ with Luther.
and his Negotiation at the Court of the Elector Frederick. He perceiving that
the longer the Controversy lasted, the less inclinable each Party would be to
hearken to any terms of Accommodation, endeavored by all ways and means
possible to put a speedy period to it; and having, with the Elector's leave,
had several private Conferences with Luther, he conceived some hopes that
things were not yet come to that extremity, but that such a temper might be
found as should restore the Peace and Unity of the Church: But because since
the Dispute at Leipsick, in which Eckius had opposed him in so scurrilous a
manner, Luther had published a more full Explanation of his Tenets, Miltitz
convened some of the Chief of the Augustine Friars; where after a long Debate
they all agreed, that it was expedient for the composing the present
difference, that Luther should send a submissive Letter to the Pope. At their
request therefore he wrote on the Sixth of April to this effect.

That although he had appealed from him to a General Council, Luther writes to
the Pope.
yet nevertheless he still continued his most earnest Prayers to God for him.
That he was charged as guilty of casting malicious Scandals, not only upon him,
but even on the Papacy it self: That he was not a little troubled at the
Accusation, which had enforced him now to vindicate himself by Letter: In the
Refutation and Reproof of some Errors and Corruptions, he confessed his style
had been such as the grossness of the things themselves extorted; but he
protested he had never mentioned his Name without an Encomium, as all his Books
can fully testify. If he had taken the freedom to examine and impugn any false
Doctrine; in that he had done no more than what he had the Example of Christ
himself, and of all the Prophets and Apostles for his warrant: But that such
seasonable Discourses and wholesome Admonitions met with no kinder reception in
the World, was to be imputed to the false Insinuations of base and servile
Flattery: That for his part, he had an eye only to the Glory of God; and his
chief design in all that he did, was this, That the Truth of the Gospel might
again shine forth in Christendom: Let him but obtain this, and in other matters
he will be very ready to yield; but to depart from the Profession of the Truth,
in that he desires to be excused that he cannot comply with them. In the next
place he comes to speak of the Court of Rome, A Description of the Court of
Rome.
which he says was grown more corrupt and wicked than either Babylon or Sodom;
and that it had in all things arrived to that height of impiety, that nothing
was now wanting to complete the character of the Kingdom of Antichrist. It
grieved him therefore to think it should be the hard fortune of so good a Man,
to live there as a Lamb among Wolves; for that Rome was unworthy to have a
Person of his Integrity preside in it: He acknowledges he had written several
Treatises to retrieve in some measure, if he could, the ancient Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church; not that he thought it possible to work a Reformation
in Rome it self, but that he might at least deliver some few from the slavery
of those vices which are there practiced. Then he tells him, that it were much
better for him if he could be content with some small mean Preferment, or live
upon his own private Estate, out of the reach of Flatterers, who make use of
his Name and Authority for a Cloak to their own Lusts and Ambitions. Bernard in
his Books of Consideration to Eugenius.
That Bernard had deplored the condition of Pope Eugenius at that time when
Rome retained as yet somewhat of its primitive Purity: Much more then did he
deserve pity, who sits in the Chair now when it is become the sink and
receptacle of all the filth and abominations in the World. That this was the
reason why he had been so severe in his Reflections upon it, which he had not
done with an intent to fix any reproach upon him, but rather for his advantage,
and that it was to be wished that all good and learned Men would assist him
with their utmost strength and skill in his endeavors to subdue that Monster.
That he, when he had published some few small Tracts, and saw 'twas all labor
in vain, would very willingly have retired from so fruitless an Enterprise, and
for the future have applied himself wholly to such Studies from which some
benefit might accrue to those of that College whereof he is a Member: But that
then there started up one John Eckius, who disturbed all those calm pleasing
Speculations, and would not suffer him to enjoy his so much desired Retirement.
That he had managed a Dispute against him, concerning the Primacy of the Bishop
of Rome, with opprobrious Language, and very bitter Invectives; but that all
the advantage he got by it, was, that he rendered the lewdeness and infamy of
that City more notorious. After this he gives a short Relation of what Passed
between Cardinal Cajetane and him, What Eckius gained by his Dispute.
and says, That it was in the Cardinals power then, if he would, to have made
up the Breach; and that therefore he only ought to be accountable for all the
mischief that has ensued since that time. That after him came Charles Miltitz,
who although he had labored hard for a Peace, yet could effect nothing, being
still hindered by the unseasonable Wranglings of Eckius, who, whatever he
pretended, was in truth his Enemy, and he who had been the cause of all this
Disturbance. That he (speaking of himself) as soon as ever he was required by
Miltitz and the Heads of his Order, to write to him in such terms as might
sufficiently express his humility and dutifulness, immediately Obeying, showed
how unwilling he was to omit any thing which might contribute to a
Reconciliation. In order to which, he desires him first, Luther makes some
overtures for a Peace.
to lay his Commands upon his Adversaries, that they cease to rail against him;
in the next place, that he may not be compelled to make a Recantation of his
former Writings, nor obliged to Interpret Scripture according to any
self-determin'd Rule; for that the Doctrine of the Gospel, which by giving true
liberty, ennobles the Minds of Men, cannot it self sure be tied up to the
narrow bounds of any certain fixed Prescript or Decision. Upon these
Conditions, he is willing to do whatsoever they can in reason demand of him.
That for his part, he took no delight in Strife and Contention; but yet if they
still went on to treat him with nothing but Scoffs and Injuries, they should
find, perhaps to their cost, that he would not so tamely give up his Cause. He
shows him that he now had an opportunity of ending the difference, if he would
but take the Cognizance of the Matter wholly upon himself, and in the mean time
enjoin each Party silence: But he warns him to be sure to beware of Flatterers,
The mischief of Flatterers.
and to stop his Ears against all their fawning Speeches, as he would against
the treacherous Songs of Sirens, if he were sailing in the midst of dangerous
Rocks, who attribute to him no less than a sort of Divinity, and cry him up for
the Monarch of the Universe, and make him Superior to all Councils. He assures
him that nothing can be more pernicious to any one, than to hearken to this
sort of Parasites. That therefore he should rather give credit to such Persons
who put him in mind that he is Mortal as well as other Men, and who exhort him
to the faithful discharge of his Duty. That because he was placed in such a
state of Life, in which, as in the middle of a tempestuous Sea, he was
continually exposed to very great dangers, that therefore he had written to him
thus freely, and without any the least admixture of Flattery; and in this he
thought himself to have performed the part of a true Friend. Luther's Book of
Christian Liberty.
In the last place he presents him with his Book, which he had lately composed,
concerning Christian Liberty, giving it only this short Recommendation, That it
was a full and complete Summary of true Doctrine.

In the beginning of Spring, The Emperor's Voyage out of Spain into Germany.
the Emperor sets sail from Spain; and arriving in England, was very
magnificently entertained by King Henry, who married his Aunt Catherine. After
which he passed into the Low Countries, where he was received with the general
Shouts and Acclamations of all the People. Much about this time the Elector
Frederick fell very dangerously sick; upon which Luther, by the advice of some
Friends, compiled a little Book to afford him some comfort at this season, to
which he gave the Title of Tessaradecas; Luther's Book to Frederick, entitled
Tessaradecas.
and in his Letters to him, he tells him, it was the Command of Christ, that
among other mutual charitable Offices which we are to perform one to another,
the administering to the Sick ought never to be forgotten: That for this cause
he, who was in a peculiar manner upon several accounts obliged to his Highness,
had for his sake made this short Collection, not being in a capacity of
evidencing to the World and Him any other way how much he is devoted to his
Service. He tells him that the Constitution of Human Bodies was such, that if
any the least Distemper invaded the Head, all the other Members sympathised
with it, and each particular part felt the pain as sensibly, as if it self were
immediately afflicted therewith. So now this Indisposition of his could not but
affect all his Subjects with a very deep sorrow; for that a considerable part
of Germany looked upon him as their greatest Ornament, as well as strongest
Bulwark.

After this, His Book concerning Confession.
he published a Book treating of Confession; the chief Heads of which are
these; That Men ought not to rely on Confession, as of it self Meritorious of
Pardon, but upon the gracious Promise of God to forgive Sins: That in the first
place they should make their Confession to God; and that he that Confesses,
ought at the same time to have a perfect hatred and abhorrence of his Sin, and
to desire sincerely to amend his Life: That a particular enumeration of every
Sin was not necessary; nay, that by reason of the innumerable slips of a Man's
Life, and the general depravity and almost lethargick security of most Men's
Consciences, it was even impossible to be performed: That a great difference
ought to be made between Sins committed against the Command of God, and such as
are only breaches of some Human Ordinance. In the last place he adds a word or
two about Vows, and bewails that barbarous cruelty which under color of them
is exercised by covetous and illiterate Persons upon the Souls of Men: Another
concerning Vows.
But of this he speaks more at large in a separate Tract afterward published
by it self.

In another Piece of his, His Opinion concerning the Communion in Both kinds.
he had said, That it appeared to him as a thing which would be of great
advantage to the Church, if the Authority of a Council first interposing, all
Persons were admitted to participate of the Lord's Supper in Both Kinds. This
Saying of his, because it was contrary to a Decree of the late Lateran Council,
many resented highly, and among these was John Bishop of Meissen, who commanded
all the Clergy of his Diocese to suppress the Book, and teach all under their
Charge, that the whole complete Sacrament was exhibited under each distinct
Species. Luther being informed of this, presently replies, and lays all the
blame of this Injunction not upon the Bishop, but upon some few unlearned and
turbulent Fellows, and to them he turns his Discourse, and shows that this
which he was thus desirous of having established by a Council, did not deserve
so severe a Censure, no more than if he had said, he could wish a Council would
decree it lawful for Priests to have Wives: That this very thing Pope Pius II.
publicly declared himself for; and that herefore he was not to be blamed who
concurred with him in the same Opinion: He granted there was such a Canon of
the Lateran Council as they spoke of, but he thought it absurd to go about to
Confirm any Doctrine by an Ordinance of a later Council, which was repugnant to
all the more ancient Councils, as well as the constant usage in all the first
Ages of the Church: He minds them that among the Bohemians the Laity were
admitted to partake of the Cup, and that for this reason we brand them with the
name of Heretics, That the Bohemians always receive it so.
who deny it to all those who hold Communion with us. That they in their
defense, urged Christ's own Institution, and the Practice of the Apostles, and
of all Christians down almost to these times; and all that we have to say in
our own Justification, or to convince them of their being in an Error, is only
this Lateran Decree, which is but a trifling Argument, and such as carries no
great weight in it; for that every Body was sensible now what a sort of Council
that was, The Dignity of the Lateran Council.
since the Papists themselves, whose Interest it was to uphold it, were not
grown so expert in the Art of Dissimulation, as at all times to counterfeit an
esteem for it. But supposing this Council to have been Ecumenical, yet it was
not for the Credit of a Church which pretends so much to Antiquity, to be
beholding to an Authority of so late a date, for the Ratification of any of its
Doctrins.

But to lay open the whole Intrigue of this Lateran Council; thus it was;
Julius II. at his coming to the Po^pedom, obliged himself by an Oath to call a
Council within two years: This was in the Year of our Lord 1503. But the
Affairs of Italy being very much emb^oiled, the Pope engaging himself in a
continual War either with the Venetians, or King of France, or Duke of Ferrara,
or else with the Family of the Bentivolio's, Prinas of Bononia, nine Cardinals
withdrew themselves, and when they were come to Milan, The Pisane Council;
they summoned a Council to meet at Pisa: The Chief of these Cardinals were
Bernardine de la Croix, William Bishop of Praeneste, and Francis Bishop of
Bazas; and to these joined themselves the Ambassadors of Maximilian the
Emperor, and of Lewis XII, King of France, who were also embarked in the same
Design. It was called by the Cardinals.
The time when this Council was called, was the Nineteenth of May, in the Year
of our Lord 1511, that so the first Session might begin on the First of
September next ensuing. The Reasons why they did it.
The Cause they alleged to justify this their Proceeding, was, That the Pope
had broken his Oath; for that although so many years of his Pontificate were
already elapsed, yet he had not given them any the least hopes of his having
any Inclination to call a Council; and that because they had very great and
heinous Crimes to lay to his charge, they could not any longer neglect the care
of the Church, which was a Duty imcumbent on them as Members of the sacred
College. Their intent really was to depose him from the Popedom, which he had
obtained by Bribery, and other such honest arts and means as all Persons make
use of who aspire to the Infallible Chair: And because they could no way safely
convey this their Remonstrance to him, they caused it to be publicly affixed
at Regio, Modena and Parma, which were all three Towns belonging to St. Peter's
Patrimony; and they added a Citation to him, to appear Personally at a certain
day therein mentioned. The Pope's Answer to the Cardinals*
Julius having received Information of all this, returned this Answer on the
Eighteenth of July, That before he came to be Pope, he longed for nothing more
than the calling a general Council, as was very well known to several Kings,
and to the whole College of Cardinals; and that purely upon this account he
lost the Favor of Alexander VI. That he continued still of the same mind, but
that the state of Italy had been so unsettled for several years last past, and
was left so by his Predecessor Alexander: That it was altogether impossible to
have formed a Council, while things continued in that distracted condition.
After this, he shows them that their Summons was void in it self, by reason of
the shortness of the time limited in it, and the inconveniency of the place;
for that Pisa had suffered so much in the late Wars, that it was now nothing
almost but an heap of Ruins, and that the Country round about it was all wasted
and desolate; nor could there be any safe passage thither, because of the daily
Hostilities committed between the Florentines and those of Senese. To this he
adds in the last place, That they had no legal Power of issuing out any such
Summons; and that the Reasons given by them for so doing, He prohibits all
Persons to come to the Council called by the Cardinals, and summons another
himself.
were altogether false and groundless: Therefore under pain of the severest
Censures, he forbids all Persons to yield any Obedience to them. At the same
time, he by a Bull, subscribed by One and twenty Cardinals, called a Council to
meet the next year, which should commence on the Nineteenth of April, and be
held in the Lateran Church in Rome. For this, they say, has always been one of
the Papal Artifices, that whenever upon any Pretext they took occasion for
some secret motives, to decline the holding of a Council, An old trick of the
Popes.
though called by never so lawful an Authority; at the same time to Summon
another to meet in such a place, in which they could with the greatest ease
influence all the Proceedings in it. After this, he admonishes the Confederate
Cardinals to desist in time, and return to Rome, and accept of the Pardon now
offered them: But they continuing still refractory, on the Twenty fourth of
October he Excommunicates them all, He Excommunicates the Cardinals.
and those three that we mentioned before, in particular by name, as Heretics,
Schismatics, and Traitors to the Apostolic See, and sends Copies of this Bull
to Maximilian the Emperor, and several other Princes. And because there were
diverse Bishops of France who adhered firmly to the Cardinals interests, he
Excommunicates them also, unless they return to their Duty, and make their
Purgation within a prefixed time. On the other side, the Cardinals having
several times in vain cited the Pope to come and appear before them there in
Council, The Cardinals Proceedings against the Pope.
by a Decree made in the Eighth Session, suspended him from all Civil and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and commanded all Christians for the future to
renounce his Authority, and acknowledge him no longer for St. Peter's
Successor. The Council removed from Pisa to Milan.
This was in the Year of our Lord 1512, on the Twenty first of April. But you
must take notice, that although the Council were removed from Pisa to Milan,
yet it still kept its old Name, and was called the Pisane Council. At this time
there was a very famous Civilian at Pavia, Decius writes in Defense of the
Cardinals.
whose Name was Philip Decius; he having espoused the Cardinals Cause,
published a Book in Defense of their Proceedings against the Pope. A little
after this, Maximilian strikes up a League with Julius, Maximilian leagues with
Julius.
and Ferdinand King of Spain, and so leaves the Cardinals in the Church to
shift for themselves, and sends Matthew Langus, Bishop of Gurk, to Rome, to sit
as his Proxy in the Council that was holden there; and him Julius immediately
promoted to the Dignity of the Purple. Matthew Langus created a Cardinal in the
Lateran Council.
But Lewis II, King of France, who was truer to his Engagements, and had lately
routed the Popes Forces near Ravenna, could not escape the thunders of the
Vatican; his Subjects were absolved from their Allegiance, his Kingdom put
under an Interdict, and an Invasion of it was now no less than meritorious. But
after the end of the Fifth Session, on the Twenty first of February, Pope
Julius dies, and Leo X succeeds him.
in the Year of our Lord 1513, Pope Julius dies, and Leo X is chosen by the
Conclave to succeed him. He, immediately after his Inaguration, proceeds to
complete what his Predecessor had begun; and because the state of Affairs in
Europe was now a little more calm, than at any time during the former
Pontificate, a great many Kings and Princes sent their Ambassadors to Rome, to
assist at this Lateran Council: The Cardinals also whom Julius had
Excommunicated, having since his Death nothing to give any color to their
continuing in their Obstinacy, made their humble Submission and Suit to be
indemnified for what was past; and being received into Favor by Leo, were
restored to their former Dignities and Preferments, as Leo himself declares in
an Epistle wrote by him to Maximilian. The End of the Lateran Council.
The Council broke up on the Twelfth of March, in the Year of our Lord 1516,
there having been seven Sessions since the Death of Julius; for there were but
twelve in all the whole four years that this Council lasted, from its first
Convention, to its Dissolution. The chief Transactions in it were these: The
Praises of Julius and Leo were the Subjects of those luscious Panegyricks with
which the Auditory were almost daily entertained. There were some Motions made
in order to the engaging in a War against the Turks; and concerning the
Reformation of the Church: The Immortality of the Soul called in Question at
Rome.
And also there was a Debate about the Immortality of the Soul, which began to
admit of a Dispute now in Rome; and it was consulted by what means the
Bohemians might be made to renounce those Errors which were lately crept in
among them. And this, I suppose, is what Luther means, when he says there was a
Decree made in this Council relating to the Eucharist: For most of the
Bohemians contended, that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, all the
Communicants ought to partake of Both the Symbols, of the Wine as well as the
Bread. And besides what we have mentioned, there is no Decree extant of this
Council touching that matter: But it received its final Determination at
Constance, in the Thirteenth Session of that Council; of which there will be
occasion to speak more hereafter.

While those things were in Agitation in Saxony, which were hinted upon in the
beginning of this Book, several of Luther's Writings, viz. that which he
dedicated to Sylvester Prierias, and his Discourses concerning Repentance,
Excommunication, Indulgences, Luther's Book condemned at Lovain and Cologn.
and Preparation to Death, were all by a Synodical Decree of the Divines of
Lovain and Cologn condemned, as tending to the encouragement of Impiety and
Irreligion; and which therefore ought to be burnt, and their Author made
publicly to recant. When this came to Luther's Ear, he immediately replies,
His Answer.
and defends all those principal Points of his Doctrine which had fallen under
their Censure, and in the Introduction laments the Misery of that state and
Condition to which those his Adversaries were now reduced. That although some
Years ago they had very fiercely opposed Capnion, yet he was still willing to
put the favourablest Interpretation he could, upon all their Actions; but now,
since they went about to expugn the plain manifest Doctrine of the Gospel, and
were grown even past reclaiming, he could not but think, That they had justly
incurred God's highest Displeasure; that if they went on as they had begun, and
no one had the Courage or Honesty, in the least to control them, he expected
that by degrees they would suppress all the whole Sacred Volumes, and impose on
the World in their stead whatsoever they should please to call Expositions of
them; That whilst he seriously considered all these things with himself, they
appeared to him to be evident Demonstrations, either that the Reign of
Antichrist was already begun, or that the Prophecyes concerning it were very
near their Accomplishment; that he could not without Regret behold their
Behavior at this time, for it was a clear and certain Token of their lying
under the heavy Weight of the Divine Anger; that through the whole Course of
their Proceedings, there was nothing had any firm sound Foundation, but they
were still wavering in their own Minds, and were at one time the Maintainers of
that Opinion, which at another could not escape the Lash of their unbridled
licentious Tongues: He rubs up their Memory, Ockam condemned at Paris.
That it is not long since William Ockam was condemned by the whole University
of Paris, and his Works were rejected by all, as containing things contrary to
the true Catholic Doctrine, whenas now he was become the very Darling of the
Schools; and his Name as much cried up, as it was before loaded with Infamy:
But how low the Credit of that University runs, may be gathered by this, That
its Judgment, is had in very little esteem in France it self, and is of no
Authority at all in any other Country; for it is grown almost into a Proverb
among the English, That the Paris Decrees never cross the Seas; among the
Italians, That they never climb over the Alps; and among the Germans, That
they never pass the Rhine: In the Censures past upon Picus Mirandula, his
Enemies could not hide that rancour and Malice, which had in so great a Measure
biased their Judgments, for his Books were now hightly prized by all Persons,
and no one could read any thing of his, without being insensibly drawn into a
very great Admiration of the most incomparable Parts of the Author: Nor had
Laurentius Valla himself met with the least better Treatment, although Learned
and Judicious Men had always an esteem for him, and thought themselves very
profitably employed, as long as they were conversant in his Writings.

He tells them, That in that Controversy with Capnion, they had managed their
Business in such a manner, that they never at any time more openly betrayed
their gross Ignorance, as well as obstinate Wickedness; That the Counsels of
God are very wonderful; A Comparison between the Jews and Roman Clergy.
That the Jews were of Old his own peculiar People, but when they wilfully shut
their Eyes against the Light of the Gospel, and despised all the Benefits of
Christ, they were then deservedly reprobated, and the Gentiles embraced that
Grace and Favor, of which the first Tenders were made to them; That much after
the same manner it was now, That the Popes and others, who were, and loved to
be called the Dignitaries of the Church, and who assumed to themselves the
Supreme Power, and all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, had, in truth, nothing but
an empty Name, whilst there were others who affected none of all that pompous
Pageantry, who yet had a better Right to all the Honors and Titles, which
these had so unjustly usurped: In short, That it never was otherwise, but that
all Good and learned Men had at all times been thus persecuted by them, and yet
they never could produce one Example of their having made Good their own Ground
or foiled their Adversaries by any solid substantial Argument, but rather by
mere Tricks and Shifts, or else by the dint of Fire and Faggot; that thus it
was in the Case of John Hus and Jerome of Prague, which was such a Piece of
Barbarity, as their Memories would stink to all succeeding Generations; but he
could not but be struck with a very great amazment to see their precipitated
Folly, who notwithstanding all these Warnings, would still proceed in those
unwarrantable Methods, which must of Necessity leave a Blot, not only upon
their own, but upon all the other Universities in Christendom; for granting all
their former Processes were according to the known established Rules, and the
Sentences pronounced by them, upon several famous Men, were well grounded, and
in due Form of Law, yet as to what relates to his Cause, and the present
Controversy, they had done very Injuriously and Spitefully, to deal with him
in such an unexampled manner: if he had offended in any thing, they should not
immediately construe it in the worst Sense, but think with themselves, That all
Men are subject to Infirmities; That in the giving their Judgment upon his
Tenets, they ought to have showed a Christian-like Disposition, Lenity,
Mildness and Gentleness; but thus, without any previous Examination to condemn
all at one Dash, discovered at once the Distemper of their Minds, and the
Virulency of their Malice; The Authority of Aristotle, with the Divines of
Lo^vain and Cologn.
that Aristotle was of great Repute amongst them, and that there was nothing
which he had said, though never so absurd, or even repugnant to Christianity it
self, which they would not defend, or at least excuse and palliate by some far
fetched Gloss or Comment, so as the Credit of the Author might not suffer any
Diminution; but toward him their Carriage had been very different, for they
had not only put a candid Interpretation upon those Parts of his Writings,
which might be wrested to his Disadvantage, but had endeavored to pick a Hole,
even in those very things in which he had been so cautious in his Expression,
as not to dread the Censure of the most Captious and Prejudiced Reader; That
the better and more effectual way had been, to have admonished him either to
explain or correct what he had wrote, or else not to be obstinate in the
maintaining of it; That if, notwithstanding all this, he had continued
disobedient, they might then, after having first showed him his Error, have
acted according to Christ's Precept: But besides all this, the Pope could not
but think his Honor touched in this that they had done, in daring to pass such
a Sentence on a Book which was wrote and Dedicated to him, which was no other
than rashly to upbraid him both with Sloth and Negligence; but no Wonder that
they made so bold with his Holiness, since the Majesty of God himself was daily
affronted by the Contempts which they put upon his Laws.

This William Ockam, of whom Luther speaks, lived in the Time of the Emperor
Lewis IV, about the Year of our Lord 1320, and among other things, wrote a Book
concerning the Pope's Supremacy, in which these eight Questions were handled
very curiously. Whether the same Person, can at one and the same time, be both
Pope and Emperor? Whether the Emperor receive his Power and Authority from
God alone, and not also from the Bishop of Rome? Whether Christ delegated any
such Supreme Jurisdiction, over the whole World, to the Pope and Church of
Rome, which they might at their Pleasure parcel out to the Emperor and other
Kings and Princes? Whether the Emperor being once Chosen, has not thereby the
Government put absolutely into his Hands? Whether other Princes, besides the
Emperor and King of the Romans, because the Ceremony of their Coronation is
performed by Priests, upon that account, derive any Authority from them?
Whether such Princes owe any sort of Subjection to those by whose Hands they
received their Anointing and Investiture? Whether, if they should make use of
any new Ceremonies, or take upon them to Crown themselves, they thereby forfeit
their Regal Power and Dignity? Whether the Suffrages of the seven Princes
Electors, do not give as good a Title to the Elected Emperor, as a lawful
Succession does to the other Kings, where the Government is Hereditary. In the
Examination of these Points, having showed a great deal of Variety and Subtlety
of Argument of both Sides, he for the most part determines in Favor of the
Civil Magistrate: And upon that Occasion he makes mention of Pope John XXII,
who lived at that time, and had made certain Ordinances, which they called
Extravagentes, and inserted them into the Canon Law, All which, he says, were
generally condemned as Heretical and Spurious: Then he recites what Errors had
been observed by other Persons, both in his Books and public Discourses, and
says, That all Orthodox Men did admire, how they came to gain any Credit in the
World; but that this was the Time, of which S. Paul, in his Epistle, foretold
Timothy, That the time would come, when men should not endure sound doctrine,
but after their own lusts should they heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears; and should turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned to
Fables: That this was too sadly verified in these Days, in which most Men never
enquire what was the Doctrine of Christ, or of the Apostles or Primitive
Fathers, but are guided in every thing, only by the Pope's arbitrary Will and
Command.

As to what relates to Capnion Reuchline, Phefercorne's Judgment concerning the
suppressing the Jewish Writings.
the matter stands thus; John Phefercorne, who had forsaken Judaisme and
embraced Christianity, had a long time been a Petitioner to the Emperor
Maximilian, That all the Jewish Books might be suppressed, as those which
trained up Men only in Impiety and Superstition, and very much hindered their
Conversion to the Christian Religion; and that therefore they ought to be
allowed the use of no other Book besides the Bible. Maximilian, at last, sends
his Orders to Vriel Archbishop of Mentz, That he should make choice of some
certain University, to whom, together with the Inquisitor James Hogostrate, and
John Reuchline, he might refer the Examination of this Affair, that they might
consult what was fit to be done in it, and whether it were agreeable to the
generous and open practices of our Religion, to condemn all Books to the
Flames, except those whose Authors were divinely inspired; this was in the Year
of our Lord 1510. Reuchline, The Opinion of Reuchline.
who was a Civilian, and a great Master of the Hebrew Tongue, having received
Letters from Mentz, returned this Answer: That the Jewish Books were of three
sorts, Historical, such as treated of Medicks, and their Talmuds, which last
were of several different kinds; that although there were a great many things
contained in them, which were Ridiculous as well as Superstitious, yet upon one
account they were of great use, in that they served to refute their Errors, and
fond vain Opinions. This his Sentence he sends sealed to the Archbishop; but
when Phefercorne came to hear of this, he presently began to make no small stir
about it, and published a Book in opposition to what Reuchline had wrote,
reproaching him with the most odious Titles of the Champion and Patron of the
Jews. Capnion, that his Silence might not be interpreted as a Confession of the
Charge, writes an answer to it, which drew upon him the Ill Will of several
Universities, but chiefly of that of Cologne: The most Famous Men, there at
that time, were James Hogostrate and Arnold van Tongren. And Hogostrate, he put
out a Book, in which he was not in the least sparing of his Invectives,
following exactly the Copy that Phefercorne had set him, and this he Dedicates
to the Emperor Maximilian. After this they commenced a Suit against him, and
the Trial was before the Archbishop of Mentz, to whose Jurisdiction the
supposed Criminal belonged, and the Prosecutor was James Hogostrate; him
Reuchline excepted against, as one whom he thought not indifferent, and this he
did at first, not in his own proper Person, but by his Advocate: But being
persuaded to it by some Friends, he at last came himself to Mentz, accompanied
with a great many of the First Rank, both for Nobility and Learning, which
Vlrich Duke of Wirtemberg had sent along with him: There, when he saw that
whatsoever Proposals he made, in order to a Reconciliation, they were still all
rejected by his Adversaries, he was forced to appeal to the Pope. He commits
the hearing of the Cause to George Palatine, Bishop of Spire, and at the same
Time issues out an Injunction, That no Person besides, presume to intermeddle
in it. But those of Cologne, taking no notice of this, proceed to Censure
Capnion's Book, with a Salvo, as they pretend, His Book burnt.
to the Credit of the Author, and in February, 1514, they publicly burnt it;
this the Bishop of Spire took as an Affront put upon him, and because the
Prosecutor, Approved of by the Bishop of Spire.
having been legally Cited, had never appeared at the Day, but made Default, he
gave Judgment for Capnion, with an Approbation of his Book, and condemned
Hogostrate to pay the Costs of the Suit. He, that he might avoid this Sentence,
hastens to Rome. In the mean time, the Divines of his Party make their
Applications to the University of Paris, and by the Help of Erand Marchian
Bishop of Liege, who was then in the French Interests, they cajoled Lewis XII,
Condemned at Paris.
so as to make him inclinable to favor their Cause. Therefore, after a long
Consultation, those of Paris also Condemn the Book, as deserving to be Burnt,
and whose Author ought to be compelled to make a Recantation; and their
Judgment was, That the Jewish Talmuds were justly censured by former Popes, and
deservedly burnt by their Predecessors. This was in the same Year, on August 2.
To prevent this, the Duke of Wirtemberg had interceeded with them by his
Letters; and Reuchline also himself, had written very courteously, as having
been formerly a Scholar of that University, and he sent enclosed the Judgment
given by the Bishop of Spire, but all to no purpose. Hogostrate being come to
Rome, managed his Business with very great Address; but there were some
Cardinals, who favored Reuchline upon the account of his eminent Learning;
among these was Adrian, who has a Piece extant concerning the Latin Tongue. Leo
at last appoints certain Delegates to inspect the matter, and they seeming to
lean toward Capnion's side, Hogostrate, having met with nothing but
Disappointments, after above three Years stay in Rome, sneaked away Home into
his own Country. But it is not to be thought what a Scandal the Divines of
Cologn brought upon themselves, by this Imprudent Act of theirs; for there was
not a Man, who pretended to any thing of Ingenuity or Scholarship, in all
Germany, who had not a Fling at them in some smart Lampoon or Satyr, applauding
Reuchline, and ridiculing them, as Blockheads and Dunces, and sworn Enemies to
that Laborious, but useful Study of Languages, and to all other more polite
Learning: And Erasmus of Roterdam was not wanting to use his interest with the
Cardinals in Capnion's behalf, concerning which he has several Epistles yet
extant, which he then sent to Rome.

The Divines of Louvain, The Censure of the Louvain Divines upon Luther's
Writings: His Letter to the Emperor:
before they would declare what was their Opinion in Luther's Case, consulted
first with the Cardinal Adrian Bishop of Tortona, who had been a Member of
their College and Order, and who was at that time in Spain; and being backed
with the Authority of his Judgment, they published their Censure. Luther
finding himself so hard beset on all Sides, addressed himself in an Epistle to
the late elected Emperor, Charles V, and having made his Apology, That a Man
of his mean Quality should presume to write to so great a Potentate, he tells
him, That the Reasons were very weighty which had emboldned him to do this, and
that the Glory of Christ himself was concerned in his Cause: That he had
published some few small Books, which had procured him the Displeasure of a
great many Persons, but that the Fault ought not to lie at his Door, for that
it was with great Reluctance that his Adversaries had drawn him to enter the
Lists: That a Private Retired Life was much more agreeable to his Inclinations,
but that his chief Care and Study was to make known the pure and incorrupt
Doctrine of the Gospel, in opposition to the false Glosses, and even
contradictory Ordinances of Men: That there were a great number of Persons
eminent both for Learning and Piety, who could attest the Truth of what he
said: And that this alone was the Cause of all that Odium and Infamy, of those
Dangers, Contumelies and Losses, to which almost for three Years he had been
continually exposed: That he had omitted nothing which might contribute to an
Accommodation; but that the oftener he made any Proposals, tending that way, the
more resolved his Adversaries seemed to continue the Breach: That he had
frequently and earnestly requested them to convince him of his Errors, and to
give him such Rules, by the which he might the better guide himself for the
Time to come; but that he could never obtain any other Answer from them, but
barbarous Injuries and railing Buffoonery, their Design being to rid the World
both of him and the Gospel together: That by these Means, he was driven to have
recourse to the last Remedy, and forced, according to the Example of
Athanasius, to fly to him, as to the inviolable Sanctuary and Protection of the
Law: And to beseech him to take upon him the Patronage of the Christian
Religion, and vouchsafe to shelter him from all Violence and Injury, until he
should be more fully informed in the Matter: If it should appear that he had
been engaged in the Maintenance of any thing that was Unjustifiable, he then
desired no Favor: His humble Petition was only to have a fair Hearing, and
that every one would t'ill then suspend his Judgment: That this was a part of
his Duty, and that therefore God had entrusted him with this Supreme Power,
that he might maintain and distribute impartial Justice, and defend the Cause
of the Poor and Weak, against all the Insults of their powerful Oppressors.

After this, To the States of the Empire.
he writes much to the same purpose, to all the States of the Empire, telling
them how unwilling he was to have engaged in this Controversy, and with what
bitter Malice he was prosecuted by his Enemies, when his Aim was purely this,
by propagating the true Doctrine of the Gospel, to convince Men how Inconsistent
it was with those false Opinions, of which they had been so long but too
Tenacious: Then he recites, in short, all that had been done by him, in order
to a Reconciliation; how he had several times promised, by a voluntary Silence,
to let the Cause fall, upon condition his Adversaries would cease their
impertinent Babbling, desiring nothing more than to be better informed, if he
was in the wrong, and being willing to submit freely to the Judgment and
Censure of all good Men: But that these Requests of his had not as yet had
their desired Effect, his Adversaries continually loading him with all manner
of Injuries and Reproaches: That since it was so, he desired them not to give
Credit to any disadvantagious Reports, which they might hear of him: If he had
at any time been guilty of any Sharpness or Petulancy in his Writings, it was
no more than what he had been forced to by their paultry saucy Pamphlets, which
they were almost daily spawning against him: In the last place, he makes now
the same Profers, for the composing the Difference, which he had so often
formerly done; and of this he prays them to bear him witness.

Some few Days after, he wrote to the Cardinal Albertus, Archbishop of Mentz,
in a very submissive Style: The Substance of his Letter was this; That his
being impeached before him, To the Archbishop of Mentz.
therefore touched him the more nearly, because he supposed it to be done by
those who had formerly commended his Works, and been the most forward Sticklers
for them; but whether the Accusation were true or false, take it either way,
they had not dealt very handsomely in it; for if it were False, they then put
the grossest Abuse upon him, without any respect to his Character, and that
sublime Station that he has in the Church: He bids him call to mind how David
himself was deceived by the Flattery of Siba, and that there was scarce any
Prince who could at all times stand so well upon his Guard, as not to be in
danger of being imposed upon by such fawning Courtiers: But supposing he was
really guilty of the Crimes laid to his Charge, yet it had been a much fairer
way of proceeding, to have showed him his Error, and to have endeavored to
rectify his Understanding, wheresoever they perceived him to labor under any
Mistakes; that this he had several times begged of his Adversaries, who still
continued Deaf to all his Requests. He tells him there were two sorts of Men,
who generally condemned his Writings; one was those never read them, and the
other such as, indeed, vouchsafed them the reading, but their Minds were
prepossessed with an ill Opinion of him, and then, whatsoever he said, though
never so conformable to the Precepts of Christianity, must of necessity be
misinterpreted by them: But if that his more important Affairs could but afford
him so much Leisure, as to peruse his Books, he did not in the least doubt, but
that he would be of a very different Judgment from his Accusers: He entreats
him, therefore, not to believe Calumnies, or to entertain any suspicious
Thoughts of him, but to take a full and exact Examination of the whole Matter,
since not only his alone, but the eternal welfare of all his Followers, was
nearly concerned in it: For because his Desire was to be heard speak for
himself, and to be instructed by those who were more learned, if he could not
obtain this Favor, the Truth it self would suffer very much by it: Confiding
therefore in his Candor and Humanity, and being also born and bred in that
Country, which is properly under his Episcopal Care and Government, he thought
himself in some measure obliged to give him this short Account of his Case.

The Archbishop answers, The Archbishop's Answer.
That he was very well pleased with his Promise, Not to be obstinate in the
Defense of his Tenets, but to be willing to yield to any who should better
inform him: As for his part, though he had a great regard for the concerns of
Religion, yet he had not hitherto been able to steal so much Time, as would
serve to read over his Treatises: That therefore he could not give any Judgment
upon them, but referred it wholly to those, whose proper Province it was, and
who had already engaged themselves in that Disquisition: That his hearty Wishes
were, That he and all other Divines, would handle Points of Religion
reverently, modestly and conscientiously, without uttering any reproachful
Words, or harboring any secret Malice in their Breasts: That he heard with
great regret, with what Heat and Passion some Men of Note and Fame disputed
about the Supremacy of the Pope and Free Will, and other such trifling
insignificant Questions, which are far from being any of the Essentials of
Religion: That those things began now to be controverted, which had been so
long received, and which were confirmed by the common Consent and Approbation
of the whole Church, as well as by the Authority of General Councils; such is
that which relates to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and the manner of
communicating therein: And because this is done openly, and the Ears of the
common People begin to be tickled with the Novelty, he should not but have very
dreadful Apprehensions of what would be the dangerous Consequences of them:
That he could not see, how he or any other Person could raise any useful pious
Instructions out of these Points: But if Scholars had a mind to debate them
friendly and privately among themselves, he could not be against it: Nor did he
blame him for saying, That what he taught was no other than the true Doctrine of
the Gospel, provided there was nothing of Bitterness or Spite in the Assertion,
and that it was not spoke in contempt of the Authority of the Church: For if
this public Declaration of the Truth flowed purely from the gentle impulse of
the Divine Spirit, it then would baffle all Attempts whatsoever, that should be
made against it; but if that either Haughtiness of Mind, or a private Grudge
against any one, were the Motives in it, it then could have no firm Foundation,
but that and its Author would soon fall together: For whosoever abuses the
Gifts and Favors of God, on him will he assuredly pour out the full Vials of
his Wrath.

To the same effect, on the same day, Luther writes to the Bishop of Mersburgh,
that as to his Doctrine, his Conscience bore him witness that it was the same
that Christ and his Apostles had taught: Luther's Letter to the Bishop of
Mersburgh.
But because his Life and manners were not in all things answerable to the
Purity of his Profession, he could even wish that he were silenced from
Preaching, as being unworthy to exercise that Sacred Function: That he was not
moved either by the hopes of Gain or Vainglory; but that the End to which all
his Endeavors were directed, was to imprint a-fresh in the minds of Men those
eternal Truths, which were now almost utterly defaced, or else obscured by a
gross and wilful stupidity; That those who condemn his Writings, were hurried
on by the violence of their Passions; and promoted their own ambitious designs,
under the specious pretense of upholding the Authority of the Bishop of Rome:
That a great many Foreigners, famous both for Parts and Learning, had by their
Letters approved of his Works, and thanked him for his obliging the Public
with them: That this confirmed him in his Opinion, that his Doctrine was
Orthodox: He beseeches him therefore to show some Fatherly tenderness toward
him; and if he had hitherto erred, to guide him now into the right way: That he
could not as yet get his Cause to be heard, although he had been importunate in
requesting it: That he should think it a great happiness to be convinced of any
of his Errors, and they should find he had been misrepresented by those who
had possessed the World with a belief of his Obstinacy.

The Bishop returns to this, The Bishop's Answer.
That he had been often under a very great concern for him, and that he was
heartily sorry for his having published a Book concerning the Lord's Supper,
which had given offense to many: That those of his Diocese were much startled
at the Doctrine, which could not but trouble him to whose immediate Care they
were committed. Then he reproves the sharpness of his Style, and says, That how
diverting soever it might be to Strangers, he must declare his dislike of it;
and could wish that in the present Controversy he had showed less of the Man,
and more of the Christian. He checks him for having spoken irreverently of the
Bishop of Rome, telling him, such language was certainly unbecoming the Mouth
of a Clergyman, as well as injurious to the Dignity of the Prelate. He
therefore advises him to exercise his Parts in somewhat which might be more
advantageous to the Public, and not to keep up a Dispute any longer purely for
Wrangling sake. As to what he writes, that he is desirous to be informed where
he is in an Error, and promises to be ready to yield to any better Judgments:
As to these Particulars, he says he cannot give a full Answer now by Letter;
but he will find a convenient season to tell him his mind more at large by Word
of Mouth.

The Elector Frederick had at that time a Suit depending at Rome, in which he
had employed as his Agent one Valentine Ditleb, a German; he sends him word,
that in this and in all the other parts of his Commission, he made but very
slow advances at that Court; which he could attribute to nothing but the
rashness and impudence of Luther, who had lately vented his malice in several
Libels against the Pope, the Church of Rome, and the sacred Conclave; and that
the common report was, That he was the only Person who countenanced and
supported that Fellow. Upon the arrival of the Courier with these Letters,
Frederick presently dispatches away an Answer to Rome, That it had always been
far from his thoughts to give any encouragement to the progress of Luther's
Doctrine: That he had not yet altered his mind, nor took the pains thoroughly to
sift any one of the controverted Points: That he heard indeed his Tenets had
the Approbation of Learned and Judicious Men, but for his part he determined on
neither side, but left him to make his own Defense as well as he could: He
confessed he thought he had made two very fair Proposals, which he still stuck
to; the first was, That if he might obtain a safe Conduct, he was ready to
answer for himself before any Person whom the Pope should appoint: And in the
second place, If it should be made out upon trial that any of his Opinions were
Erroneous, he would most cheerfully renounce them; and of this he made an open
and solemn Protestation. And although by this Luther had acquitted himself like
a good Christian in the judgment of all impartial Persons; yet upon his
warning, he had long ago left Saxony, if Charles Milititz had not opposed it;
for he thought it not convenient to drive him into another Country, whereas he
would be under less restraint; so they must expect he would then give his
Passion its full swing, and with his Pen revenge himself on all those who had
any way promoted his Exile: There could therefore be no reasonable ground to
suspect his fidelity to the Catholic Interests, which gave him some hopes that
his Holiness would deal with him according to the Justice of his Cause; for it
would make his very Life uneasy to him, if such a Slander should find credit
in the World, as that any Error which sprung up in his time, had taken root
and spread it self under the shelter of his Protection. After this, in the same
Letter he tells him freely, as his Friend and Countryman, that he heard, the
Contest had never been carried on to this extremity, if Eckius, and a great
many more such fierce Bigots, had not been even restless till they had blown
all into a flame: That they were continually throwing dirt in Luther's face, by
those scurrilous Papers which they scattered among the People; so that he was
forced at last, against his will, to return the Complement: And that this was
the unlucky occasion of his discovery of a great many things, which, if he had
not been thus provoked, had in all probability died with him. He assures him he
had this Account from very good hands, who are fully acquainted with the whole
matter; and that Luther himself confessed as much: That those therefore of
Eckius's Gang ought to suffer as the only Incendiaries, who while they thought
to curry favor with the Pope by some extraordinary piece of Service, had in
truth done him an injury beyond the malice of his most professed Enemies. He
tells him that Germany was much civilized of late years: That it now produced
Men of excellent Parts: That Learning flourished there, and the Inventors of
useful Arts met with all due encouragements; and there were some who by a long
study were become great Proficients in all those Languages which are necessary
to complete an universal Scholar: In short, that we lived in such an Age now,
in which even the Common People were curious to search the Scriptures: That
this made a great many sober and moderate Men to think, that if the Proposals
made by Luther were rejected, and the Church proceeded to any Censures against
him, that they would Conjure up such a Spirit, as would be beyond the power of
all their Charms to lay again; for that his Doctrins had now gotten such
footing, that unless he had a fair and legal Trial, and his Errors were refuted
by solid Arguments and Scripture Proofs, all Germany would be in an Uproar; and
then he questioned whether the Pope or any one else would gain much by the
bargain.

This Letter of the Electors bore Date the First of April, The Pope's Answer to
the Elector.
and the Pope returned an Answer on the Sixth of July, telling him, he was
highly satisfied in his having no Communion with that profligate Fellow Luther:
That he always had an Esteem for him answerable to his eminent Virtues: But
that since grave and serious Men had informed him how prudently he had carried
himself in this particular, he now stood higher in his Favor than ever he did
before: That in this he had acted like himself, and had not degenerated from
his glorious Ancestors, who had always paid a great devotion to the Apostolic
See: It was also an evident demonstration of his singular Wisdom, inasmuch as
he was sensible that it was not the meek Spirit of Christ, but the Devil, that
arch Enemy of Mankind, which actuated and inspired the Author of this Schism;
who was proud and ambitious as Luther himself, who endeavored to infect the
World afresh with the condemned Heresies of Wickliff, Husse and the Bohemians,
who gaped after popular Applause; and who by depraving the true Sense of the
Scriptures, ruined the Souls of his simple and weak Brethren; who exploded all
Vows of Chastity, and laughed at Auricular Confession, and the Penance imposed
thereupon, as mere Tricks of the crafty Priests, who sided with the Disciples
of Mahomet, and who with his profane and poisonous breath thought at once to
blast and overturn the whole Discipline of the Church; who bewails the
Punishments inflicted on Heretics; and in short, who strove to turn all things
topsie-turvie; and is arrived at that degree of pride and madness, as to
despise the Authority both of Popes and Councils, and has the confidence to
prefer before them all, his own single Judgment: That he therefore had showed
himself a true Son of the Church, in that he had nothing to do with that
pernicious Rascal, nor embraced any of his erroneous Opinions, but in all
things imitated the Virtues of his Forefathers: That this made so many grave
and understanding Men outvie each other in his Commendations: And that he could
not but think himself bound to return his most hearty Thanks to God, who had
bestowed on him so many rich endowments of Mind: He says, he had long borne
with Luther's Sauciness and Temerity, hoping he would in time grow ashamed of
his Folly; but now when he saw him deaf to all his Admonitions, and that he was
only hardened by the gentleness which he used toward him, he was forced at
last, as in a desperate Disease, to have recourse to a desperate Remedy, to
prevent, if possible, the farther spreading of the Contagion: That having
summoned therefore the Conclave, and had the Advice of several learned Men in
the matter, after much serious deliberation he had signed the Decree, being
guided by that holy Spirit, whose aids can never be wanting to an Infallible
Church. In it were recited some of his Tenets, which were picked from among a
great many more; part of which were downright Heretical, others directly
contrary to the Precepts of the Gospel; and some were destructive of Morality,
and even common Honesty it self, and were such as by degrees would debauch Men
into all manner of Wickedness: That he had sent him a Copy of this Bull, to let
him see what monstrous Errors that Agent of Hell did maintain: But now his
Request to him, was, That he would admonish him not to persist in his Pride and
Obstinacy, but publicly and solemnly to recant all his former Writings; which
if he refused to do within a prefixed day, then to take care to have him seized
and committed to Prison; by this means he would wipe off the Reproach of his
own House and of Germany too, and get himself immortal Honor, by putting a
timely stop to that flame which would else not have ended but in the ruin of
his Country; and it would be a Service also very acceptable even to God himself.

The Bull it self was very long, The Pope's Bull.
and was published on the Fifteenth of June; the substance of it was this:
After a Quotation of some Texts of Scripture, which were applied to his present
purpose, his Holiness, Pope Leo, having called upon Christ, St. Peter and St.
Paul, and the rest of that glorified Society, to avert those dangers which at
this time threatened the Church, complains that there was now started up a
Doctrine which not only revived all those Opinions which had been formerly
condemned as Heretical, but also contained in it several new Errors never
before broached in the World, and such as would justle out all sense of God and
Religion: That he was troubled that this Heresy should have its rise in
Germany, a Country always very Loyal to the Church of Rome, and which to uphold
the Dignity of that See, had fought even to the last drop of Blood, and never
refused to undertake any the most difficult Enterprises: That it was yet fresh
in memory, with what Heroic Spirits, and with what Zeal they maintained the
Catholic Cause against the Bohemians and the Followers of Husse: That some of
their Universities had lately given Instances of a Virtue and Courage equal to
what inspired the first Planters of Christianity: But because he was Christ's
Vicar here on Earth, and the Care of the Universal Church was committed to him,
he could no longer neglect the discharge of his Duty. After this, he repeats
Luther's Tenets, which he says were repugnant to that Christian Love and
Reverence which all Men owe to the Church of Rome: That he had therefore
summoned together the whole College of Cardinals, The Pope and Cardinals
condemn Luther's Doctrine, and command his Books to be burnt.
and several other learned Men, who after a long Debate, all declared, That
these Points ought to be rejected, as derogating from the Authority of
Councils, Fathers, and even the Church it self: Therefore with their advice and
consent he condemns this whole sum of Doctrins, and by virtue of his
Supremacy, commands all Persons under the severest Penalties, to yield
Obedience to this his Decree, by renouncing those Opinions which are censured
in it; and he enjoins all Magistrates (especially those of Germany) to use
their endeavors to hinder the farther progress and growth of this Heresy: He
orders also Luther's Books to be every where brought forth and burnt. Then he
relates how Lovingly and Fatherly he had dealt with him, in hopes to reclaim
his by those gentle methods; how he had admonished him by his Legates, and
cited him to come and make his Purgation at Rome; not only granting him a safe
Conduct, but promising to furnish him with all Necessaries for his Journey; but
that he slighting this Summons, had appealed from him to a General Council, The
Decrees of Pius and Julius concerning Appeals.
contrary to the Decrees of Pope Pius, and Julius II, by which it is enacted,
That whosoever shall make any such Appeal, shall from that time be adjudged an
Heretic, and be obnoxious to the same Punishments: That therefore it was in
his power to have prosecuted him at first with the utmost rigor of the Law,
but that out of mere pity he had forborne so long, if perhaps, as the Prodigal
Son, his Calamities might bring him to a sense of his Errors, and he would at
last be willing to return into the bosom of the Church: That he had still the
same tender Affections toward him; and that he most passionately entreated him
and all his Followers, that they would cease to disturb the Peace of
Christendom; and if they yield to this his request, he promises to show them
all the kindness imaginable. Luther is Excommunicated.
In the mean time he forbids Luther to Preach, and prefixes Threescore days,
within which time he should amend, burn his own Books, and publicly Recant: If
he did not, he condemns him as an Heretic, and orders him to be punished
according to Law; he Excommunicates him, and commands all Persons to avoid his
Company, under the like Penalty, ordering this Decree to be read in all
Churches upon certain days.

As to what he says of Pius and Julius, the matter stands thus: In the Year of
our Lord 1359, Pius II, on account of the War with the Turks, holds a Council
at Mantua, and there, among others, makes a Decree, That no Person should
Appeal from the Pope to a Council, because he said there could be no Power on
Earth Superior to that of Christ's Vicar. Therefore he condemned all those who
presumed to act contrary to this Decree, and declared their Appeals invalid.
And not long after he Excommunicated Sigismund Duke of Austria, for taking
Cardinal Nicholas Cusanus Prisoner. Sigismund Appeals from him to the Council;
and the Pope Excommunicates George Heinburg, a Lawyer that drew up the Appeal,
as a Traitor and Heretic, and writes to the Senate of Nuremberg to Banish him,
and Confiscate his Estate. This Decree of his Julius II confirmed, that he
might defend himself against those Cardinals who had revolted from him, against
Kings and Princes, and the Divines of Paris, who often made use of such
Appeals. Pope Pius, who was before called Aeneas Silvius, was present at the
Council of Basil, and wrote the History of it, wherein he highly commends the
Decrees that were made there; but at last being advanced to the Papacy, he
changed his Opinion, and declared that the Council ought to be subject to the
Pope.

Luther, Luther opposes the Pope's Bull.
when he found himself condemned at Rome, renews his former Appeal from the
Pope to General Council: And now since the Pope continues in his Tyranny and
Impiety, and proceeds so far as to condemn him, neither called nor heard, nor
convict of Heresy, he says he Appeals again from him to a General Council, for
these four Reasons: Because he condemns him at pleasure without hearing the
Controversy, because he forbids him to hold Faith to be necessary in the
Sacraments, because he prefers his own Opinions and Fancies to the Holy
Scriptures, and for rendering all Councils useless: Therefore he calls him rash
and obstinate, a Tyrant, a proud Despiser of the Church, and Antichrist
himself; and says he will prove all this, whenever it shall please his
Superiors; and for that reason desires the Emperor and other Magistrates, that
for the Glory of God, and in defense of the Liberties of a General Council,
they would admit his Appeal; that they would bridle the Tyranny of the Pope,
take no notice of his Bull, nor do any thing in the business, till the Cause be
fairly heard and decided. Before he appealed after this manner, which was upon
the Eighteenth day of November, he had put out a Book concerning the Babylonish
Captivity; and in the Preface he says, that he advances every day more and more
in the Knowledge of the Scripture; that formerly he had published a small
Treatise concerning the Pope's Indulgences; and that then he writ very
modestly, having a very great Veneration for the Roman Tyranny: But that now he
was of another Opinion; and that being stirred up by the provocation of his
Adversaries, he had discovered that the Sea of Rome was nothing else but the
Kingdom of Babylon, and the Power of Nimrod the mighty Hunter: Afterward he
disputes concerning the Sacraments of the Church, and holds there are but
Three, Baptism, Penance, and the Lord's Supper. And having discoursed
concerning these, he proceeds to consider the others also, Confirmation,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction; but he allows them not the Name or
Title of a Sacrament; and says, that they are properly Sacraments, which are
Promises with Visible Signs annexed to them; the others, which have no Signs,
are bare Promises, and therefore he thinks that Penance ought not to be
reckoned in the number of Sacraments, if we would speak properly, because it
wants a Visible Sign of Divine Institution. Luther, after he had heard of the
Pope's Bull, besides the Appeal we have been speaking of, publishes a Book,
wherein he confirms and maintains all those opinions which Leo had condemned.

In the mean time the Emperor having settled all things in the Low Countries,
appoints the Electors to meet him at Aix la Chapelle, on the Sixth of October,
in order to his Coronation: But at that time the Plague raged there very much;
therefore the Electors when they were arrived at Cologn, about ten Miles from
Aix la Chapelle, and the report of the Plague increased daily, they writ to the
Emperor, being then at Louvain, to desire him to choose some other place for
the Coronation: But the Townsmen, who had laid out a great deal of Money in
trimming up their Houses, and furnishing themselves with Provisions, did by a
proper Messenger assure him, that there was no Danger. The Emperor, therefore
persisted in his Resolution, and declares, That he cannot well alter the Order
of Charles IV, which appoints the Coronation to be there.

Therefore upon the 21 of October, The Electors come to Aix la Chapelle.
the Archbishops of Mentz, Cologn and Triers, with the Ambassadors of the Duke
of Saxony and Marquess of Brandenburg, arrive there; for the Duke of Saxony
himself, by reason of his Ilness, was forced to stay at Cologn. The next Day
they go out to meet the Emperor, and when they came near him, they alighted
off their Horses, and the Archbishop of Mentz made a Speech to him, which he
answered graciously by the Cardinal of Saltzburg: And so joining their Company
together, The Emperor enters the Town i^ great state.
they marched toward the Town. Before the Gate, the Count Palatine meets him:
The Horse that accompanied the Electors were about a thousand six hundred, some
Archers, and some with Lances; those that attended upon the Emperor were about
two thousand, all bravely clothed. John Duke of Cleve, being a Neighbor, had
brought thither four hundred Horse very well armed, who contended so long with
those of Saxony about the Precedence, that Night came on them before the whole
Cavalcade, which was the finest that ever was seen in Germany, could enter the
Town. On each side the Emperor rode the Archbishops of Cologn and Mentz, being
followed by the Ambassador of the King of Bohemia, the Cardinals of Sedune,
Saltzburg and Croye, and the Ambassadors of other Kings and Princes; the
Pope's only, and the King's of England were absent; and that designedly, lest
by giving place to the Princes of Germany they might seem to diminish the
Honor of their Masters. The Emperor was brought into our Lady's Church,
where, after he had made his Prayers, he talked with the Electors apart, The
Ceremonies of the Coronation.
and so went to his Lodging. The next Day they met again at the Church, but
there was such a Crowd of People, that the Guard had much ado to keep them
back: In the middle of the Church there hangs a large Crown, the Floor
underneath was covered with rich Carpets, where the Emperor for some time lay
prostrate, while the Archbishop of Cologn says certain Prayers over him: After
that is done, he Archbishop of Mentz and Triers take him up, and lead him to
the High Altar: Here he falls down again, and having said his Prayers, is lead
to his Throne, that was richly overlaid with Gold; the Archbishop of Cologn
begins Mass, and having proceeded a little way, he demands of him, in Latin,
The Emperor's Oath.
Whether he will keep the Catholic Faith, defend the Church, administer
Justice, and maintain the Dignity of the Empire, protect the Widows and the
Fatherless, and such other distressed Persons, and whether he will give due
Honor to the Bishop of Rome? When he has assented, he is led to the Altar, and
there takes his Oath to perform all this, and so returns again to his Throne.
Then the Elector of Cologn demands of those that were present, Whether they
will yield him due Faith and Allegiance, which being promised, and some other
Prayers recited, he anoints him on the Breast, the Head, the Bendings of the
Arms, and the Palms of the Hands: And being thus anointed, the Archbishops of
Mentz and Triers lead him into the Vestry, and there having clothed him like a
Deacon, place him again in his Throne: After other Prayers, the Archbishop of
Cologn, accompanied by the two other Archbishops, delivers him a Sword drawn,
and commends the Commonwealth to his Care; and when he has sheathed this Sword,
puts a Ring on his Finger, and vests him with the Imperial Robe, gives him a
Scepter and Globe, and the three Archbishops, together, put the Crown on his
Head: From thence he is lead to the Altar, and there swears again, That he will
do the Duty of a good Prince; after which, accompanied by the Archbishops, he
goes up into a part of the Church, which is purposely raised higher than the
rest, and is there placed in a Seat of Stone: Then the Archbishop of Mentz,
making a Speech in the Vulgar Tongue, wishes him great Prosperity, commending
to him himself, his Colleagues, and the States of the Empire: The Prebendaries
of the Church do likewise congratulate him, into whose number he is chosen by
an ancient Custom: And after all, he is entertained by a Consort of Vocal and
Instrumental Music. The Lady Margaret, the Emperor's Aunt, who was Governess
of the Low Countries, was present during the whole Ceremony. When Mass was
over, and the Emperor had received the Sacrament, he Knights as many as
offered themselves, which Honor used to be given anciently, only to those who
had signalized their Courage in War, The manner of making Knights.
and was the Reward of Valor: And now the manner is for Kings to strike gently
with their naked Sword, the Shoulders of those that are to receive the Honor:
And by this Ceremony, only, now a days, many are made Knights, not only of the
Nobility, but Tradesmen and others. From the Church they proceed to the Palace,
which is magnificently adorned; there the Emperor Dines, and the Electors
also, every one by himself, there being Tables placed in the same Hall, on both
Sides the Emperor's, the Archbishop of Triers sitting right against the
Emperor, according to one of the Laws of Charles IV. By an ancient Custom, a
whole Ox is roasted that Day, with several other things in his Belly; part of
it is brought to the Emperor's Table, and the rest is given to the Rabble; and
two Conduits run all the while with Wine: After Dinner, the Emperor returning
to his Lodging, delivers the Seal of the Empire to the Archbishop of Mentz, and
the next Day he treats the Electors: The Day following, repairing to the
Church, when he had heard Mass, he worships the Holy Relics, as they call
them, and among these, a Linen-Cloth, in which, they say, our Blessed Savior
was wrapped, when he lay in his Cradle: After this the Archbishop of Mentz
pronounces, That the Pope confirms the Election, and commands, That Charles V,
A Diet summoned to meet at Worms.
should hereafter be called Emperor. The Electors being departed, for fear of
the Contagion, the Emperor also takes his Journey, and arriving at Cologn,
about the beginning of November, he sends his Letters all over the Empire, to
call a Diet on January 6, at Worms.

As to what the Archbishop of Mentz said concerning the Pope's Confirmation,
The Popes anciently subject to the Emperors.
it is now indeed grown into a Custom, contrary to what it was formerly; for
heretofore the Bishops of Rome used to be approved of by the Emperors; but
increasing in Power, they began not only to rule at Pleasure, but brought it at
last to that pass, after much Strife and Contention, That the Right of Electing
should be in the Electors, but they themselves only should have the Power of
Confirming and Ratifying it. And this Authority they have made use of in almost
all Kingdoms, chiefly in Italy, Germany and France, deposing the lawful
Princes, and putting others in their room. For besides other Places of the Canon
Law, in the Decretal Epistles of Pope Gregory IX, Innocent III affirms, That
the Right of choosing the Emperor, by the Favor of the Bishops, and See of
Rome, was translated from the Greeks to the Germans, in the time of Charles the
Great, and it is their Business to judge of the fitness of the Person; and not
contented with this, they make the chief Magistrate of the World swear
Allegiance to them; which very thing has been the Cause of great Wars and much
mischief. But at length Clement V, who lived in the Year of our Lord 1300,
bound them to it by a Law, which he inserted into the Body of the Canon Law;
for when the Emperor Henry VII, of the Family of Luxemburg, refused the Oath,
as a new thing, not practiced in former Times, The Emperors swear Allegiance
to the Popes.
Pope Clement, to secure all for the future, opens the Matter at large,
declaring what is contained in that Oath; that is to say, That the Emperor
should defend the Roman Church, root out Heretics, and avoid the Company of
Wicked Men; that he should by all means possible maintain the Dignity of the
Popes, defend and keep all privileges granted at any Time to the Church of
Rome, but especially such as were given by Constantine, Charles the Great,
Henry, Otho IV, Frederick II, and Rodolph; that he claimed no Right upon any
account whatsoever over the Lands and Possessions of the Roman Church; and that
he would defend all other Churches in their Rights and Privileges. He declares
that the Emperor is obliged to all this, and that Henry himself promised as
much by his Envoys; however, afterward he refused to own it: But this Decree
of the Popes came not out till after Henry was dead. This is that Clement, who
first of all summoned the Cardinals from Rome to Lions in France, and kept his
Court there; since which time the Authority and Power of the Emperors has
decreased daily in Italy, and the Power and Dignity of the Popes been
augmented, so that Emperors of a later date imagined that they owe them this
Obedience and Allegiance. But the chief of those Popes that have been in this
Matter troublesome to our Emperors, are Gregory VII, Alexander III, Innocent
III, Gregory IX, Innocent IV, Nicholas III, Boniface VIII, and Clement V. But
to return from whence we have digressed.

While the Emperor was at Cologn, the Pope began again to incense Frederick
Duke of Saxony against Luther by Marinus Caracciolus and Jerome Aleander; who
speaking first in praise of him and his Family, and telling the Danger that
hung over Germany by reason of Luther's pernicious Writings, demanded, at
length, two things; First, That he would command all his Books to be burnt:
And, Secondly, That he would either execute him himself, or send him Prisoner
to the Pope. There were then present Peter Bonomus Bishop of Trieste, and
Bernard Bishop of Trent. Alexander declared, That the Emperor and other
Princes were required to see the Bull of the Pope performed; and that the
hearing of the Cause was committed to himself and Eckius.

Duke Frederick, because it was a matter of great importance, desired time to
consider of it, and on November 4, not being at leisure himself, he gave in
this Answer by some of his Council, in the presence of the Bishop of Trent:
That he wondered very much why the Pope should desire this of him, who had
always taken care to do nothing unworthy of the Virtue and Glory of his
Ancestors, and to do his Duty both to the Empire and the Church: That he
understood that Eckius, in his absence, had given trouble, not only to Luther,
but to several other Learned Men of his Dominions, contrary to the Mind and
Tenor of his Holiness's Bull, which, as became him, he declared he very much
resented, That a private Person should take upon him to meddle so much in
another's Jurisdiction: What Luther or others have done in his Absence, since
the bringing of the Pope's Bull thither, he knows not: That it is possible
several Persons may have approved of his Appeal: That as for himself, he never
concerned himself in it: But that he should be very sorry if his Doctrine were
not Orthodox: That two Years ago, he procured a Conference between him and
Cajetane at Ausburg; but they coming to no Agreement, Cajetane writ a Letter to
complain of him: That he then answered it, so as he imagined he had given him
Satisfaction; and for taking away all suspicion, he was then willing to have
dismissed Luther, had not Miltitz opposed it: But Richard Archbishop of Triers,
had been delegated by the Pope for hearing this Cause, and that Luther was
ready to appear in any Place, provided he might have a Safe Conduct: And that
he makes as fair and large Proffers as can be desired: That several Good and
Learned Men, imagine that he has proceeded thus far, not so much of his own
Accord, as by the Instigation of his Adversaries: That it appears not yet to
the Emperor, nor to any other Magistrate, that his Writings are convicted of
Heresy or Impiety; for if they had, he himself should have been ready to have
done the Duty of a good Prince: He desires therefore, That they would not
proceed after this manner, but rather procure that the Matter may be lovingly
and quietly debated by some Godly and Learned Men, that Luther may have a
Safe Conduct, and that his Books may not be burnt, before he has made his
Defense: If he should happen to be convinced by Scripture and solid Arguments,
that then he would by no means countenance him: But though he and his Cause
should be quite baffled, yet he hoped his Holiness would require nothing of him
but what might stand with his Honor: In all other things, he should always
behave himself as became a Prince of the Empire, and an obedient Son of the
Church. When the Elector had given in this Answer, the Legates, after some
Consultation, began to recite how many things the Pope had done and suffered,
in order to reclaim Luther; but that he had not performed any part of his
Promises: That it was not now in the Power of the Bishop of Triers to determine
in this Cause, since the Pope had recalled that Hearing of it before himself,
to whom only it belonged to judge in matters of this Nature. The conclusion of
their Speech was, Luther's Works burnt.
That they could not but act conformable to his Holiness's Decree; and so not
long after they burn all Luther's Works. This Aleander was an Italian, born at
Motola in the Kingdom of Naples, very skilful in the Hebrew Tongue: He was for
some time a Reader in the University of Paris; being come to Rome, he rose by
degrees, till he was at last made Archbishop of Brindin, and after that created
a Cardinal: And Caracciolus was also promoted to the same Dignity.

As soon as Luther heard of this, He burns the Canon Law.
he called together all the Students that were in Wittemberg, and in the
Presence of a great number of Learned Men, he publicly burns the Canon Law,
and the Pope's late published Decree, on the tenth Day of December: And in his
next days Lecture, he earnestly admonishes all Persons, who have any regard to
their own Salvation, to shake off the Dominion of the Bishop of Rome. In a
Treatise, which he soon after published, he declares what it was had moved him
to do this, acknowledging, That it was with his Consent, and by his Advice and
Means that these Books of the Canon Law were burnt, and that for these Reasons:
First, It has been an Ancient Custom, observed in all Ages, in this manner to
suppress all pernicious Books, of which there is an Example in the Acts of the
Apostles; moreover, it was his Duty, who is baptized into the Faith of Christ,
and who is a Professor, and public Preacher of the Gospel, to oppose whatever
contradicts the Precepts therein contained; and to instruct Men in all Sound
and Wholesome Doctrins, and to purge their Minds from all false and erroneous
Opinions: That a great many others lay under the same Obligations, but if they,
out of Ignorance, or by Cowardice, neglected to do as they ought, yet that he
was not thereby excused, unless he endeavored faithfully to discharge what he
thought in Conscience was his Duty: That the Pope, and those whose Interest it
is to uphold his Power, were become so desperately Wicked and Obstinate, that
they not only stopped their Ears against all good admonitions, but also condemned
the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and forced Men to the commission of the
grossest Impieties: Besides this, he supposed those Book-Burners had no Command
to act after that manner. As for the Divines of Cologn and Louvain, who
pretended to be authorized by the Emperor to burn his Books, he was now very
certain, that that was a mere sham: In the last place, because this burning of
his Works, and the Report of it, which would be spread all over the Country,
might perhaps stagger some, and cause great Doubts in the Minds of many more,
who would judge, that such a thing would not be done rashly, and without some
very weighty Cause: Therefore seeing his Adversaries were now grown past cure,
he had been forced to burn their Books, thereby to raise up, and confirm, and
strengthen, the Minds of his Followers. And he entreats all Men, not to suffer
themselves to be dazzled by the lofty and proud Titles of his Adversaries, but
to take a nearer View of the Matter, by which they would perceive, what Impious
and Pernicious Tenets are contained in the Canons and Decretals of the Popes,
And that he might make this the more plain to every Man's Understanding, he
recites some Passages out of the Canon Law, which tend manifestly to the
Reproach of God, the Injury of the Civil Magistrate, and serve only to uphold
and establish their own Tyranny: He quoted about thirty of these places, by
which he showed, That he had just and sufficient Reasons to burn their Books.
Then he challenges them to produce but one good Reason to justify their
burning his Works. But that so few, or none, had for some Ages past, opposed
the Power of Antichrist; he says, Therefore came to pass, because the Scripture
had foretold, That he should vanquish all his Adversaries, and be strengthened
by the Alliance of Kings: Since then the Prophets and Apostles have predicted
such dreadful things, one cannot but form to himself a very frightful Idea of
his Cruelty: That the Constitution of Sublunary things was such, that out of
the best Beginnings sometimes did arise the greatest Corruptions, when he had
proved this by some Examples, he applies it to the City of Rome, which being
loaded with all the greatest Blessings of Heaven, had wholly degenerated from
what it was formerly, and with its Poisonous Contagion infected a great part of
the World: That this Ordinance of the Popes was contrary to Law, and all
received Customs, nor were the Usurpations of that Bishop any longer to be
endured, since he declined a fair Trial, and would not be bound up by any
Decree or Judgment whatsoever.

In the former Book we told you, how Silvester Prierias had wrote against
Luther: When this had been answered by him very sharply, Ambrose Catarine, an
Italian, took up the Cudgels, and published a Book in Defense of the Pope's
Supremacy: To this Luther answers very fully, and having expounded some places
in Daniel, he teaches, That the Papal Tyranny was there painted out; and that
what he has foretold of the Kingdom of Antichrist, was only truly applicable to
the Sea of Rome. This Catarine was afterward made Archbishop of Cosenza.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK III.
The CONTENTS.
The Emperor is prevailed with by Duke Frederick to write to Luther; who
relying upon his Majesty's Letter, as upon a safe Conduct, comes to Worms;
there he undauntedly justified what he had written or taught, in presence of
the Emperor, and a great Assembly of the Princes, and constantly persevered
therein, though he was Cursed and Excommunicated by the Pope in his Bull de
Coena Domini, threatened with Banishment by the Emperor, and tampered with by
the Princes severally, to make him recant his Opinions. The Council of
Constance is proposed unto him; from whence taking occasion, he speaks of
Wickliff, John Huss, and John Zischa a Bohemian. The Divines of Paris condemn
Luther's Books. While a League is making betwixt the French King and the
Swisse, Zuinglius dissuades them from taking Pay or Pensions from any Prince,
to serve them in their Wars. Luther being Outlawed by the Emperor's
Proclamation, retreats into a more private place. The King of England also
writes against him. Pope Leo X dies, and Adrian succeeds him. Solomon the
Magnificent is prosperous in Hungary. The Emperor endeavors to suppress
Seditions in Spain, and makes a League with the King of England. The Bishop of
Constance Presecutes Zuinglius. Troubles at Wittemberg. The Anabaptists rise,
which gave occasion to the Diet of Norimberg. Thither Pope Adrian sent his
Brief and Legate. Solomon takes Rhodes. Zuinglius having set forth the Heads of
his Doctrine, is attacked by the Papists; but at length the Reformed Religion is
received at Zurich.

WHile Duke Frederick waited upon the Emperor to the Diet of Worms, 1521.
he procured a Promise of him that he would send for Luther, and give him a
public Hearing. Duke Frederick obtains from the Emperor, that Luther should
have a public Hearing in the Diet of Worms.
Luther being informed of this by Letters from Duke Frederick, toward the
latter end of January wrote back an Answer, expressing the great Satisfaction
he had, that the Emperor would be pleased to take the Cognizance of that
Cause, which was indeed a public concern, to himself; and that for his part he
would do all that he could with a safe Conscience, and without prejudice to the
Reformed Religion: Wherefore he entreated the Prince, that he would endeavor
to obtain a safe Conduct for him, that his Person might not be in danger: That
good and learned Men might be chosen, Luther's Letter to Duke Frederick.
with whom he should Dispute: That he might not be condemned, before he were
convicted of Error and Impiety: That in the mean time, his Adversaries might
desist from that rage of theirs, and not burn his Writings: And that if for the
future he should attempt any thing else for the glory of God, and the discovery
of Truth, he might have the Emperor's leave to do it: That so soon as the
Emperor gave him a safe Conduct, he would nt fail to come to Worms; and there
so maintain his Cause before impartial Judges, that all Men should be convinced
that he had done nothing frowardly, but all for the good of Christendom; and
chiefly, that for the welfare of Germany he had been at this labor and pains,
in endeavoring to reclaim his Countrymen from many and most gross Errors, to
the purity of the Gospel and true Religion. He moreover prayed, that the
Emperor and he would seriously reflect upon that dreadful bondage and
miserable condition wherewith Christendom was oppressed by the Roman Papacy.
Wherefore the Emperor being solicited by Duke Frederick, wrote to Luther, The
Emperor's safe Conduct to Martin Luther.
March the Sixth: That since some Books had been published by him, he had
consulted with the Princes, and was resolved to hear from himself Personally
what he had to say: That therefore he granted him free liberty to come and
appear before him, and afterward to return home; which that he might safely
do, he had engaged the Public Faith, as more fully appeared in the safe
Conduct sent with his Letter: He therefore commanded him forthwith to set out
upon his Journey, and not fail to be present in the space of One and twenty
days: That he should not fear any violence or injury; for that he would take
care that he should not suffer the least prejudice.

It has been an old Custom with the Popes of Rome, The Bull De coena Domini.
solemnly to Curse and Excommunicate some sorts of Men, on Thursday in the
Passion Week: As first Heretics, next Pirates, then those who impose new Toll
and Customs, or exact such as are prohibited; those who Falsify or Counterfeit
the Bulls and public Instruments of the Court of Rome; who supply the Turks
and Saracens with Arms and other Counterband Goods; who hinder the Importation
of Corn to Rome; who offer violence to any that follow and attend the Court of
Rome, who invade or damnifie the Possessions of the Church of Rome, or Places
thereunto adjoining, as namely, the City of Rome, Sicily, Naples, Sardinia,
Corsica, Tuscany, Spoleto, Sabina, Aucona, Flaminia, Campania, Bolonia,
Ferrara, Benevento, Perugia and Avignon: Some former Popes among Heretics
named the Garasians, The Pope Excommunicates the Lutherans.
Pateronians, the Poor Men of Lions, the Arnoldists, Speronists, Wicliffites,
Hussites and Fratricelli. But Leo X, this year, clapped Luther and his Followers
in with the rest, and solemnly Cursed them on Holy-Thursday. This Bull is
commonly called Bulla coenae Domini, the Bull of the Lord's Supper. Which
formulary of Excommunication came afterward into Luther's hands, and he
rendered it into High Dutch, besprinkling it with some very Witty and Satirical
Animadversions.

So soon as Luther received the Letter, Luther goes to Worms.
he parted from Wittemberg, and took his Journey toward Worms, accompanied by
the same Herald that brought the Letter: But when he was come within a few
Miles of the place, many dissuaded him from proceeding, because his Books had
been lately burnt; which they looked upon as a Pre-judging of his Cause, and a
Condemning of him before a Hearing; they therefore advised him to look to
himself, as being in great danger, and to take warning from what happened to
John Huss in the former Age. However, with great resolution he slighted all
danger, affirming that that terror and fear was suggested to him by the Devil,
who saw his Kingdom would be shaken by an open Confession of the Truth, and in
so illustrious a Place. So then continuing his Journey, he arived at Worms on
the Sixteenth of April. Next day being sent for, he appeared before the
Emperor, and a great Assembly of the Princes; where Eckius a Lawyer, by Orders
from the Emperor, spoke to him to this purpose. For two Reasons, said he,
Martin Luther, the Emperor, with consent of all the Princes and States,
commanded you to be sent for; and has charged me to put the Question to you;
first, Whether or not you will confess that you wrote these Books, and
acknowledge them for your own? And then, Whether or not you will retract any
thing in them, or stand to the defense of what you have written? Luther pleads
his own Cause before the Emperor and whole Empire; But asked time to deliberate
first.
Luther had brought along with him a Lawyer of Wittemberg, one Jerome Schurff,
and he craved that the Titles of the Books might be read and produced: Which
being done, Luther resumed in short what had been said unto him: And then as to
the Books, says he, I confess and own them to be mine: But whether I will
defend what I have written, that is a Matter of great consequence; and therefore
that I may make a pertinent Answer, and do nothing rashly, I desire time to
consider on it. The Matter being debated; Although, said he, you might easily
have understood by the Emperor's Letters, the cause you were sent for, and
ought therefore to answer peremptorily without any delay; yet the Emperor is
graciously pleased to allow you one day for Deliberation, commanding you to
appear again at the same hour to morrow, and give your positive Answer by Word
of Mouth, and not in Writing. Most People began to think, by his asking time to
consider, that he did relent, and would not prove constant.

When next day he appeared at the hour appointed; Eckius Interrogates Luther.
You did not, said Eckius to him, answer the second Question that was put to
you yesterday, having desired time to deliberate in, which could have been
lawfully denied you; for every one ought to be so well persuaded in his Faith,
as to be ready at all times to give a reason of it to those who demand the
same; much more ought not you, who are so learned and experienced a Divine, to
have doubted, or have needed time to premeditate an Answer: But to let that
pass, What do you now say? Will you defend those Writings of yours? Then Luther
addressing himself to the Emperor, Luther's Harangne to the Emperor and States
of the Empire.
and the Council of the Princes, and having earnestly besought them to hear him
patiently; If I offend, said he, most Mighty Emperor, and most Illustrious
Princes, either in the impropriety of Expressions unworthy of such an Auditory,
or in the clownishness and indecency of Carriage and Behavior, I humbly beg
Pardon for it, and desire it may be imputed to the course of life that now for
some part of my age I have followed. For the truth is, I have nothing to say
for my self, but that with uprightness and simplicty I have hitherto taught
those things which I believe do tend to the Glory of God, and Salvation of Men:
Yesterday I answered as to my Books, and owned them to have been written and
published by me; though if any thing should happen to be added unto them by
others, I would by no means acknowledge that for mine. Now as to the second
Question that was put to me, thus stands the case: All the Books that I have
written are not of the same kind, nor do they treat of the same subject; for
some of them relate only to the Doctrine of Faith and Piety, which even my
Adversaries do commend; and should I abjure these, I might justly be accused of
neglecting the duty of an honest Man: There are others, wherein I censure the
Roman Papacy, and the Doctrine of Papists, which have plagued Christendom with
the greatest of Evils: For who does not see how miserably the Consciences of
Men are racked by the Laws and Decrees of Popes? Who can deny but that they
have by Craft and Artifice robbed all Countries, and especially Germany; and
that even to this day they set up no bounds nor period to their Pillage and
Rapine? Now if I should retract those Books, I must confirm that Tyranny; which
would be of far worse consequence, when it came to be known that I did it by
the Authority of the Emperor and Princes. There is a third sort of Books,
which I have written against some private Persons, who have undertaken to
defend that Knavery of Rome, and to ensure me with Cavils and Calumnies; and in
these I confess I have been more vehement than became me; but I arrogate no
Sanctity to my self, nor is it of Life and Manners, but of the true Doctrine
that I make Profession; and yet I would not willingly retract any thing in
these neither; for by so doing, I should but open a door to the Insolence of
many: Nevertheless I would not be so understood, as if I vainly pretended that
I could not Err: But seeing it is the property of Man to Err and be Deceived, I
cannot defend my Self and Cause better, than by that saying of our Savior's,
who being smitten by a certain Servant, as he was speaking of his Doctrine, If
(said he) I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil. Now if Christ, who is
all Perfection, refused not to hear the Evidence of a wretched Servant against
him, how much more ought not I, a vile Sinner by nature, and liable to many
Errors, make my apperaance when I am called, and hear every Man that would
object and witness any thing against my Doctrine? Wherefore I beg for God's
sake, and all that is Sacred, that if any Man have any thing to object against
the Doctrine which I profess, he would not dissemble it, but come forth and
convince me of Error by Testimonies of Scripture; which if he do, I will not
be obstinate, but shall be the first to throw my Books with my own hands into
the Fire: And this may be an Argument, that I have not been led by rashness or
any headstrong passion, but have sufficiently weiged the greatness of the
Matter, and the troubles that this Doctrine has occasioned. Nay, truly I am
exceedingly rejoiced to see that the Doctrine I profess has given occasion to
these Troubles and Offenses; for Christ himself tells us, That it is the
property of the Gospel, to raise grievous Strife and Contentions wherever it
is taught; and that among those very Persons too, who are most closely linked
together by the Bonds of Nature and Blood. It ought seriously then to be
considered, and maturely thought on (most Noble Patriots) what is fit to be
decreed; and care had, lest by condemning the Doctrine which by the Blessing of
God is now offered unto you, you yourselves be the cause of the greatest
Calamities to Germany. Regard should likewise be had, that the Government which
the young Emperor, who here presides, has lately taken upon him, be not
reckoned inauspicious and fatal by Posterity, through any bad Act or Precedent,
that may entail its Inconveniences upon them: For it may be proved by many
places of Scripture, that Governments have then been in greatest danger, when
the Affairs of the Public were managed only by Human Prudence, and mere
Secular Councils. Nevertheless, I design not by what I say (most Illustrious
and Prudent Princes) to prescribe or point out to you, what you are to do; but
only to declare the Duty, which I shall always be ready to perform to Germany,
our native Country, which ought to be dearer unto us than our very Lives: After
all, I most earnestly beseech you, to take me into your Protection, and to
defend me against the Violence of mine Enemies. Eckius to Luther.
When he had made an end of Speaking, Eckius looking upon him with a stern
Countenance; You answer not to the Purpose, said he, nor is it your part to
call again into question, or doubt of what has been heretofore determined by
the Authority of Councils: It is a plain and easy Answer that is demanded of
you, Do you approve, and will you defend your Writings? To which Luther made
answer, Luther's answer to his Demands.
Since it is your Command, said he, most mighty Emperor, and most Illustrious
Princes, that I should give a plain Answer, I Will obey, and this therefore is my
Answer; That unless I be convinced by Testimonies of Holy Scripture and evident
Reason, I cannot retract any thing of what I have written or taught; for I will
never do that which may wound my own Conscience; neither do I believe the Pope
of Rome and Councils alone, nor admit of their Authority, for they have often
erred, and contradicted one another, and may still err and be deceived. The
Princes having considered this Answer; Eckius again told him, Eckius's ^eply to
Luther.
You answer, said he, Luther, somewhat more irreverently than becomes you, and
not sufficiently to the purpose neither, when you make a distinction among your
Books: But if you would retract those which contain a great part of your
Errors, the Emperor would not suffer any Injury to be done to such others as
are Orthodox and right. You despise the Decrees of the Council of Constance,
where many Germans famous both for Learning and Virtue, were present, and
revive Errors that were condemned therein, requiring to be convinced by Holy
Scripture; you do not well, and are very far out of the way; for what the
Church has once condemned, is not to be brought under Dispute again; nor must
every private Person be allowed to demand a Reason for every thing; for should
that once be granted, that he who opposes and contradicts the Church and
Councils, must be convinced by Texts of Scripture, there would never be any end
of Controversies. For that Reason, therefore, the Emperor expects to hear from
you in plain Terms, Luther's Answer.
What you will do with your Books? I beseech you, said Luther, that by your
leave, I may preserve a Sound and upright Conscience; I have answered plainly,
and have nothing else to say; for unless my Adversaries convince me of my
Error, by true Arguments taken from Scripture, it is impossible I can be quiet
in mind: Nay, I can demonstrate, that they have erred very often and grossly
too; and for me to recede from the Scripture, which is both clear, and cannot
err, would be an Act of greatest Impiety. Eckius muttered something to the
contrary, That it could not be proved, that ever a General Council had erred:
But Luther declared, That he could and would prove it; and so the matter
concluded at that time.

Next Day the Emperor wrote to the Princes, The Emperor's Letter to the
Princes.
assembled in Council, That his Predecessors had professed the Christian
Religion, and always obeyed the Church of Rome: So that since Luther opposed
the same, and persisted obstinately in his Opinion, his Duty required, that
following the Steps of his Ancestors, he should both defend the Christian
Religion, and also succor the Church of Rome: That therefore, he would put
Luther and his Adherents to the Ban of the Empire, and make use of other proper
Remedies for the extinguishing that Fire: However, that he would make good the
Safe Conduct he had granted him, And the Princes Disagreement about it.
and that he might return Home with Safety. This Letter of the Emperors was
long and much debated in the Assembly of the Princes; and some there were, as
it was reported, who following the Decree and Pattern of the Council of
Constance, thought that the Public Faith was not to be observed to him: But
Lewis the Elector Palatine, and others also, were said to have vigourously
withstood that Resolution, affirming, That such a thing would lie as an eternal
Stain and Disgrace upon Germany. Wherefore most were of Opinion, that not only
the Public Faith and Promise should be kept to him; but also that he should
not be rashly condemned, because it was a Matter of great moment, whatever
should be decreed by the Emperor, whom at that Age they perceived to be
incited and exasperated against Luther by the Agents and Ministers of Rome. A
Committee of the States for treating with Luther.


Some Days after, the Bishop of Treves appointed Luther to come to him the 24
of April: There were present at that Congress Joachim Elector of Brandenburg,
George Duke of Saxony, the Bishop of Ausburg, and some other great Men: And
when Luther came, conducted by the Emperor's Herald, and was introduced by the
Bishop's Chaplain; Vey, a Lawer of Baden, spoke to him to this Purpose; These
noble Princes have sent for you, Vey's Speech to Luther, before the Committee.
Martin Luther, said he, not to enter into any Dispute, but to treat friendly
with you, and to admonish you privately of those Things, which seem chiefly to
concern your self; for they have obtained leave from the Emperor to do so: And
in the first place, as to Councils, it is possible, that at some Times they
have decreed things different, but never contrary; and granting they had erred,
yet their Authority is not therefore so fallen, that it should be lawful for
every Private Man to trample upon it: Your Books, if Care be not taken, will be
the cause of great Troubles; and many interpret that which you have published
of Christian Liberty, according to their own Inclinations and Affections, that
with greater licentiousness they may do what they please: This Age is far more
Corrupt than former Ages have been; and therefore requires that Men should act
more circumspectly also. There are some of your Works, that cannot be
condemned; but it is to be feared, That the Devil has set you upon it; in the
mean time, to publish others inconsistent with Religion and Piety, that so all
your Books might be promiscuously condemned together: For those which you have
published last, are a sufficient Proof, that the Tree is to be known by the
Fruit, and not by the Blossom. You are not ignorant, how carefully the
Scripture warns us to beware of the Devil by Day, and of the Arrow that flies
by Night; that Enemy of Mankind cease not to lay Snares for us, and under a
fair Pretext, many times, entraps us and misleads us into Error: You ought to
think, therefore, both of your own Salvation, and other Men's too, and consider
if it be fitting that those, whom Christ by his own Death has redeemed from
everlasting Death, should by your Fault, Books and Sermons, be seduced from the
Church, and so perish again; from the Church, I say, whose Dignity all Men
ought reverently to acknowledge: For in Human Affairs there is nothing better
than the Observation of the Laws; and as no State nor Government can subsist
without Laws, so also, unless we religiously maintain the most Holy Decrees of
our Forefathers, nothing will be more troublesome than the State of the
Church, which of all others ought to be the most calm and settled. These Noble
and Virtuous Princes, here present, out of the singular Love and Affection,
they bear to the Public, and particularly also for your own welfare, have
thought fit to admonish you of these things; for without doubt, if you
obstinately persist in your Opinions, and yield in nothing, the Emperor, as he
has plainly enough already intimated his Resolution, will banish you the
Empire, and not suffer you to have any footing within the Bounds of Germany; so
that it concerns you seriously to reflect upon your own Condition.

To these things Luther made Answer; Luther's Answer to the Commissioners.
For the Care and Concern ye have for me (most Noble Princes) I give you most
hearty Thanks: And indeed, for such Illustrious Persons, to vouchsafe to take
this Pains and Trouble for so mean a Man as I, is an Act of extraordinary
Condescension. But now, as to Councils, I am far from finding Fault with all;
yet cannot but blame that of Constance, and have very just Cause so to do. Huss
defined the Church to be the Congregation of God's Elect; and both this
Doctrine, and that saying of his, That he believed the Holy Church, were
condemned by the Prelates of that Council, who themselves deserved rather to
have been condemned: For what he said was Orthodox and Christian; I will
therefore suffer any thing; yea, sooner lose my Life, than forsake the clear
Rule of the Word of God, for we must obey God rather than Men: And as to the
Scandal, which is objected unto me, I neither can, nor ought to be, accountable
for it; for there is a great Difference betwixt the Scandals of Charity, and
those of Faith, the first consisting in Life and Manners, which by all means
are to be avoided; whilst the other arising from the Word of God, are not at
all to be regarded; for Truth, and the Will of our Heavenly Father, ought not
to be dissembled, though the whole World should be offended thereat. The
Scripture calls Christ himself, a Work of Offense, and that equally belongs
to all who preach the Gospel. I know we ought to obey the Laws and Magistrates;
I have always taught the People so, and my Writings bear witness, how much I
ascribe to the Dignity of the Laws. But again, as to Ecclesiastical Decrees,
the Reason is quite different; for if the Word of God were purely taught, if
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, discharged their Duty, as Christ and his
Apostles have enjoined them, there would be no need of laying that hard and
intolerable Yoke of Human Laws, upon the Minds and Consciences of Men: I am not
ignorant neither, that the Scripture admonishes us, not to trust our own
Judgment; which is a true saying, and I shall be willing to comply with it, and
not to do any thing obstinately, provided only I may have Leave to profess the
Doctrine of the Gospel. Having so said, he was ordered to withdraw; and after
some Consultation, Vey, among other things, began to exhort him, to submit his
Books to the Sentence of the Emperor and Princes. Why not? said he, I will
never seem to decline the Judgment of the Emperor and States of the Empire,
nor of no man's else, provided they take for their Guide, the Scripture and Word
of God, which speaks so plainly for me; that unless I be thereby convicted of
Error, I cannot change my Opinion: For S. Paul commands us, Not to believe,
even an Angel, coming from Heaven, if he should preach another Doctrine.
Wherefore I humbly beg of you, That you would intercede for me with the
Emperor, that I may be suffered to live with a good Conscience; and if I can
but obtain that, I shall be ready to do any thing. Then said the Elector of
Brandenburg to him, Is this your meaning then, That you will not submit, unless
you be convinced by Holy Scripture? It is Sir, answered Luther, or else by most
evident Reasons. Wherefore, when the Council was broke up, the Archbishop of
Treves called him to him, and in presence of some of his Domestics, made
Eckius the Lawyer again admonish him; but he having pleaded much for the Roman
Papacy, could gain no ground upon him; and so no more was done at that Time.
The next day after, the Elector of Treves plied him again, urging him to
submit, without Condition, to the Judgment of the Emperor and Princes; but
that was in vain. In the Afternoon, again, some who were sent for to the
Lodgings of the Elector of Treves, put it to him, That he would submit, at
least, to the next General Council. Luther submits his Works to a General
Council.
To this he agreed, provided the Controversy should be managed according to
the Rule of Holy Scripture. Afterward the Eelctor of Treves, had a Conference
with him in private, all the Company being removed, and asked his Judgment, How
that grievous and dangerous Evil could be remedied? The best Counsel that could
be given, said he, was that which Gamaliel gave the Scribes and Pharisees, Not
to fight against God. In fine, when the Bishop could not prevail, he
courteously dismissed him, promising to take care, That he should have a
Safe Conduct for returning Home. Not long after, Eckius the Lawyer came to him,
by Order of the Bishop, and told him; Since, said he, you have rejected the
Admonitions of the Emperor and Princes, the Emperor will henceforth, do what
he ought in Duty: And now he commands you immediately to depart, allowing you
one and twenty Days to return home in: He will also inviolably observe the
Safe Conduct he gave you; but charges you not to teach the People by Word nor
Writing, Luther returns Home, accompanied by a Herald.
as you are upon your Way homeward. Being thus dismissed, he gave Glory to God,
and April 26 departed, being conducted by the same Herald who brought him
before.

He wrote to the Emperor upon the Road; Luther's Letters to the Emperor and
States.
and after he had in few words resumed all that had past, he begged of His
Imperial Majesty, That since he had been always hitherto, and still was
willing to submit to Conditions of Peace and Agreement, and desired no more but
that the Controversy might be determined by any impartial Judge, according to
the Authority of holy Scripture, he would be pleased to Protect him against the
violence and fury of his adversaries: That 'twas not his private Cause, but the
public Concern of the whole World, and especially of Germany, whose safety and
welfare he preferred before his own life. To the same purpose also he wrote to
the rest of the Princes and States; and that whenever it should seem good to
the Emperor and them, he would come upon safe conduct, whithersoever they
pleased, and debate his cause before impartial and unsuspected Judges.

Whereas in this work, The History of the Council of Constanc^e.
there is frequent mention made of Huss, the Council of Constance, and the
Bohemians, I Will give the Reader a short account of the whole matter. In the
year of our Lord 1393, there was one John Wickliff in England, who wrote many
things against the Roman Papacy, which were afterward carried into Bohemia. At
that time there was a famous University in Prague; and therein slourished John
Huss, a Divine by profession: This man Preached up Wickliffs Doctrine, as holy
and saving, and dispersed it far and near. But being accused of this, he was
cited to appear before Pope Alexander V. he by his Proctors alleged causes why
he could not come: And King Wenceslaus also interceded for him, desiring the
Pope to send Legates into Bohemia to try the matter there; but that could not be
obtained. Huss condemned for an H^retick, first by the Pope.
Huss being therefore condemned for an Heretic, published a Book, wherein he
appealed from the Pope to Christ as Judge. The Church of Rome at that time was
in a very troublesome State. For the Cardinals being divided into factions, had
chosen three Anti-Popes, Gregory XII, Benet XIII, and John XXIII, which highly
displeased other Kings as well as the Emperor Sigismund; who having solicited
Pope John, he at length, called the Council of Constance: Now Sigismund who was
the Brother of King Wenceslaus, called John Huss thither, and in October 1414,
sent him a safe conduct in due form. Whereupon Huss being accompanied by some
persons of quality, came to Constance, on the third of November; but three
weeks after, being called to a private Conference with the Pope and Cardinals,
he was detained prisoner. The Emperor Sigismund was absent then, and being
informed of the matter, was highly displeased, and came thither: But the
Papists urging, that Faith was not to be kept with Heretics, he not only
remitted the offense, though the Bohemians importuned him to the contrary, and
demanded performance of the safe conduct, but was also the first that spoke
bitterly against him. In fine, on the sixth of July following, And then by the
Council:
the Council condemned him as an Heretic and Seditious Person, and ordered the
Books he had written, to be burnt. Being thus condemned, he was delivered over
to the Emperor, He and Jerome of Prague burnt.
and burnt; his ashes being afterward cast into the Rhine, that no relick of
him might remain. After him Jerome of Prague, his Disciple and Hearer, was put
to Death in the same manner. In this Council, besides the Emperor, were the
Ambassadors of many Kings, three Electoral Princes of the Empire, Lewis Prince
Palatine, Rodulph Duke of Saxony, and Frederick Marquess of Brandenburg, and a
vast number of the other Princes, three Patriarchs, of Aquileia, Antioch and
Constantinople; eight and twenty Cardinals, an hundred and fifty five Bishops,
very many Divines and Lawyers, Italians, Germans, French, English, Hungarians
and Polonians. Wickliff's Doctrine condemned, and his Body taken up and burnt.
The Doctrine of Wickliff was here also condemned, and a Decree made that his
Body should be taken up and burnt in England. It was besides Decreed that none
but Priests should receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds; and
that all others should be content with one kind; which had been impugned by
Huss. A Law was also made, that Faith should not be kept with Heretics or
persons suspected of Heresy, though they should come under the Emperors
Safe Conduct, to be tried in Council. Lastly, the three Popes were degraded,
and by common Consent Martin V chosen. When the News of the Execution of Huss
and Jerome was brought into Bohemia, it occasioned a terrible Commotion, and
afterward a very cruel and bloody War, under the Conduct of John Zischa, so
that Sigismond was forced to beg the Assistanc of the Empire; but the greatest
Cruelty was exercised against the Priests, in hatred to the Pope; whom they
Cursed, whose Dominion they shook off, and embraced the Doctrine of Huss,
adoring his Memory.

Much about this Time, The Parisian Divines condemn Luther's Books.
the Divines of Paris condemned Luther's Books, and out of that which is
entitled, Of the Captivity of Babylon, and some others also, they gathered
certain Heads; as of the Sacraments, the Canons of the Church, the Equality of
Works, Vows, Contrition, Absolution, Satisfaction, Purgatory, Free Will, the
immunity of the Clergy, Councils, the Punishments of Heretics, Philosophy,
School Divinity, and many more of the like sort; admonishing the Reader, and
all who professed the Name of Christ, to beware of such pernicious Doctrins:
For that it was the Custom of Heretics, to propose specious Matters at first,
which sinking once down into the Mind, could hardly ever be got out again; but
that under those alluring Words, present Poison lay hid: Then they reckoned up
in Order the Heretics of the several Ages; and among these Wickliff, John
Huss, and last of all Luther, whom they mightily blamed, as an arrogant and
rash Man, that he should imagine himself alone, to know more than all others,
contemn the Judgments of all the Holy Fathers and Interpreters of all Councils
and Schools; and that he should reject the Custom and Consent of the Church,
observed for so many Ages; as if it were credible, That Christ would have left
all that while, his only Spouse, to wander in so great Darkness of Error; but
that it was the usual way with Heretics to wrest Scripture to their own Sense.
Having then reckoned up some Books written by him, they show what Heretics
Luther imitated in such and such Opinions; and, that seeing it properly
belonged to their Office and Profession to stifle springing Heresies, as much
as lay in their Power; they had therefore diligently perused his Books, that
they might direct all Men how to have a Care of them; and that after much
Reading of his Writings, they found that his Doctrine was pernicious, deserving
to be burnt, and that he himself ought to be compelled to renounce and retract
the same.

Melanchton afterward answered this Decree of their, Melanchton and Luther
answer the S^rbonists.
and so did Luther too, but in a jocose drolling way. Now the Divines of Paris
reckon themselves to be the chief in that kind, of all Europe: They have two
Colleges, the Sorbonne, and College of Navarre, and thither flock Students
almost from all Countries. The Bachelours of Divinity are exercised in frequent
Disputations all the Summer time; and must for the space of twelve Hours answer
the Arguments of all Opponents. Here are strange Bickerings, and for the most
part about matters, which are either Frivolous, or above the Reach of Human
Understanding; loud Bawlings and fierce Contentions often happen, about such
Trifles, and are commonly ended by the hissing or stamping of the Auditors,
when one of the Disputants grows either Silly or Tedious. The Doctors of
Divinity stand without, and hear through a Grate, and are called Magistri
nostri, our Masters: These are the Censurers of all sorts of Doctrine, and are,
in a manner absolute, without Appeal; for no Man dares to publish any thing in
Divinity, without their License: But most of them follow their Ease, and seem
to aspire to that Degree, that they may lead a quiet Life, and bear Rule over
others. There are, indeed, some excellent Wits amongst them, but others again,
that deserve to be sent to School again, and whipped into better Breeding.

Pope Leo had already made a League with the Switzers, The Switzers make
Leagues with the Pope and French King;
that if at any time he had occasion for them, he should have their Aid: The
French King also, who had concluded a Peace with them, as has been said in the
first Book, was soliciting them for a League, and to assist him with Soldiers;
but Zuinglius did all he could to dissuade them from this in his Sermons; he
told them, That it was not only sordid, but an impious thing also, to serve any
Foreign Power for Money; and having showed them the many Inconveniences
thereof, he exhorted them to tread in the Steps, and follow the Frugality of
their Ancestors, who minded their Cattle and Husbandry, and had done many
famous Exploits; but all this was in vain, for the Nobility being prevailed
with by Importunity, Gifts and Promises, persuaded the Common People; so that
all the Cantons of Switzerland made a League with him this Year, But the Canton
of Zurick refused the League.
and promised to assist him with Men; except those of Zurich, who being wrought
upon by Zuinglius, refused it, and bound themselves by Oath, not to accept
Present or Pension from any Prince, to serve him in his Wars. The King had
afterward a Son born, who was christened by the Name of Charles, the Suitzers
by their Ambassadors, standing as Godfathers. Now the whole State of
Suitzerland, consists at present of thirteen Cantons; which are Zurich, Berne,
Lucerne, Vri, Switz, Vnderwalt, Zug, Claris, Basil, Solothurne, Friburg,
Schafhausen and Appenzil. These are joined together by Oath, in a most strict
League, have equal Rights and Privileges, and govern the State as a
Commonwealth. The first that entered into this League, were the Cantons of Vri,
Switz and Vnderwalt, when having expelled the Nobles, who oppressed them, they
stood up for their Liberty; and this was in the Year 1315. To these afterward
joined Lucerne, next Zug; in the sixth place, Zurich, and then Berne: Basil was
almost the last that entered into the Union. There were associated to them
afterward, but not under the same Laws, nor in so strict a conjunction of
Friendship, the Grisons, Sionese, Rhinwalders, the Haut Valais, those of
Sangall, the Mulhausians, and other neighboring People.

The Emperor being now past the one and twentieth Year of his Age, The
Emperor by a public Decree Proscribes Luther.
on May 8, by a Public Decree put Luther in the Ban of the Empire. He begins
his Edict with Considerations taken from his own Person; That it was his Office
not only to settle and enlarge the Empire, but to provide also, that no Sect
nor Heresy spring up within the Bounds of the same: That his Ancestors had
carefully bestirred themselves in that; and that therefore it was much more
reasonable, that he, whom God had blessed with so large and ample Dominions,
should imitate their Example; for that if he should not restrain the Heresies
lately broken forth in Germany, he would both wound his own Conscience, and in
the beginning now of his Reign, bring a great Dishonor upon his Name and
Dignity: That all Men, without doubt, knew what impious Doctrins Luther for
some Years had divulged: That Pope Leo X, to whom the recognizance of those
things properly belonged, being moved therewith, had essayed all ways of
reclaiming him, and had at first used most gentle Remedies; but that when such
Courses could not prevail, he had proceeded to these Methods, which are
prescribed by the Ancient Canons and Decrees, and had assigned him a certain
time to abjure his Error in, under a severe Penalty, if he obeyed not; but
that he was so far from obeying, that he published more pernicious Books still:
That the Pope having seriously pressed him, the Emperor, to perform his Duty
to the Church, and put a stop to the Proceedings of a hurtful Man, had
published that Bull of the Popes against him: But that he grew no better, for
all that; nay, on the contrary, that he began to rage, and publish Books full
of spiteful Reproaches concerning nothing almost, but Seditions, Wars,
Discords, fire and Sword, Murder and Rapin: That he contemned the Authority of
the Fathers and Councils, and chiefly of the Council of Constance; casting such
Reproaches upon it, as not only reflected upon the holy Men of that Age, but
also upon the Emperor Sigismund, and the Senate of the Princes: That his
outrageous malice could not be sufficiently expressed: That it seemed not to be
a Man who acted so, but rather a Devil in Man's likeness: That it heartily
grieved and troubled him to think on these things, for the love he bore to the
Public, and the Papal Dignity: That therefore lest he might seem to suffer any
thing unworthy the Virtue of his Ancestors, or inconsistent with his own
Dignity and Charge, he had called a Diet of all the Princes and States of the
Empire, and had with joint Councils seriously weighed and examined the whole
Matter: And that though the Laws provide that an open Heretic so often
condemned and cast out of the Communion of the Church, should not be heard; yet
that there might be no place left for cavilling, he had sent his Letters and a
Herald with a safe Conduct for him, that he might personally give Account of
his actings. (Then he reckons up in order, all that past at Worms, both
publicly and privately, as it has been mentioned before.) And because he
obstinately defended his Errors, he cited the Popes Bull, which, he said, he
would see put in Execution. Wherefore he condemned and banished him, as an
Author of Schism, and an obstinate and notorious Heretic. He also charged all
Men, under severe Penalties, to look upon him as such; and that the One and
twenty days which he had allowed him to return in, being expired, every one
should endeavor to apprehend him, and bring him into lawful Custody; Banishing
in the same manner, all that should any ways aid or assist him. He ordered all
his Books also to be destroyed, appointing a severe Penalty for Stationers that
should meddle with them for the future: And this Decree, which he said was made
with the common Consent and Advice of the Princes and States, he commanded to
be inviolably observed by all. It was said that there were but a few who had a
hand in framing this Decree: For some of the Electors acknowledged that they
were not privy to it, as shall be said of the Elector of Cologn in its proper
place. The Elector of Mentz, who is Chancellor of the Empire, had a great
stroke in Matters of that nature. However it be, the Emperor by this Sentence
procured to himself much Favor; so that the Pope fell quite off from the
Frienship of France, and made a League with him, as you shall hear by and by.

After the Publication of this Sentence, Luther conveyed out of the way.
Duke Frederick appointed some Gentlemen, in whom he could most confide, to
convey Luther into some more private place, remote from the concourse of
People, that so he might be out of danger; and this was performed with great
secrecy and diligence. In this his Retirement, he wrote several Letters to his
Friends, and some Books also, as one for abolishing private Mass, which he
dedicated to his Brethren the Augustine Friars: Another concerning Monastic
Vows, dedicated to his Father John Luther; and one against James Latome, a
Divine of Lovain: He exhorted the Augustines to Courage and Constancy, telling
them that they had a strong support in Duke Frederick, who was a wise Prince, a
lover of Truth, and most averse from rash Judging. They of all others were the
first that began to leave off saying of Mass, The Augustines of Wittemberg
forbear saying of Mass,
and therefore it was that Luther composed for them the Book we now mentioned,
that he might both encourage the weak, and confirm the strong, earnestly
exhorting them to persevere in that purpose. Duke Frederick hearing of this,
and fearing that some great disturbance might thereupon ensue, commanded that
the Opinion of the whole University should be taken about the matter, and
brought to him. For that purpose the University chose four of their Members,
Justus Jonas, Philip Melancthon, Nicholas Amstorff, and John Dulce: These
having had a Conference with the Augustines, made a report of what their
resolution was; and at the same time declared how great injury was done to the
Lord's Supper: And give Duke Frederick their Reasons for so doing.
Wherefore they prayed the Duke that he would abolish that great Impiety, not
in one Church only, but in all places also; and restore the true use of the
Lord's Supper, according to the Institution of Christ, and the Practice of his
Apostles, without regard to the Reproaches and Calumnies of Gainsayers: For
that it was the course of this World, that he who would undertake the defense
of the true Doctrine of the Gospel, must suffer many things: That he ought to
make it his chief study reverently to acknowledge that singular Mercy wherewith
God had now blessed him, Duke Frederick's Answer about abolishing the Mass.
in making the Light of the Gospel to shine among the People. To these things
Duke Frederick made Answer, That he would omit nothing that might conduce to
the propagating of Piety; but that since the matter was very difficult, he did
not think it fit to make too much haste; and that hardly any thing could be
effected by them, who were so few in number: But that if the Matter were
grounded on Scripture, many would certainly come over to them; and then such a
change as might seem to be pious and necessary, would more conveniently be
brought about: That for his own part, who was ignorant of the Scripture, he
could not tell when that accustomed Rite of the Mass, which they condemned, was
first introduced into the Church; and when that which the Apostles are said to
have followed, was left off: That all Churches generally, and Colleges, were
founded for the Mass, being endowed for that end with great Revenues; so that
should Mass be now abolished, the Goods and Lands heretofore given for that
use, would be taken from the right Possessors: That any Man might see what
disturbance and confusion that would breed: And that since they had referred
the whole Affair to him, it was his advice to them, That having consulted the
rest of the good and learned Men of the University, they would proceed in the
matter moderately, and devise with themselves such means as might be proper for
keeping Peace and Piety among them. The Commissioners having consulted
together, made their Reply, and again advise him to abrogate the Mass,
alleging that it might be done without Tumult; and that though it could not,
yet that which was just and good, ought not therefore to be omitted: That their
being fewer in number, was no new thing; since that from the beginning of the
World, the greatest part of Mankind had always opposed the true Religion: That
none would accept and approve the right way of administering and receiving the
Lord's Supper, but they to whom it should be given from above: That Colleges
were founded of old not for Mass, but for the pious Education of Youth; and
these Possessions given for the Maintenance of the Masters and Scholars, and
for the Use of the Poor; which Custom had lasted almost to the time of St.
Bernard; but that about Four hundred years since, this trafficking about Masses
came in play, which now ought to be utterly abolished: That though it were of
ancient date, yet such a Profanation was not to be tolerated: And that if Stirs
and Commotions should arise from thence, it was not to be imputed to the
Religion, but to the Wickedness of the Adversaries, who for Gain sake,
withstand the Truth against their own Conscience: That however, Men ought not
to regard such inconveniences, but to proceed absolutely, The Marriage of the
Archduke Frederick.
whatever Tumults the World might raise; for that all these things had been
long ago foretold by Christ. This year the Emperor's Brother Ferdinand,
Archduke of Austria, married the Lady Ann, Sister to Lewis King of Hungary.

Among so many Adversaries as Luther had, King Henry of England writes against
Luther.
Henry VIII, King of England, opposed him also in Writing; and in the first
place refuted his Opinion about Indulgences, and defended the Papacy:
Afterward he censured all his Disputations concerning the Sacraments of the
Church, taking occasion of writing from the Book of the Captivity of Babylon.
When this came to Luther's knowledge, he wrote a most bitter Answer, declaring,
That in defense of this Cause, he valued no Man's Honor nor Greatness. However
Pope Leo gave the King an honorable Title for this, calling him Defender of
the Faith.

How Charles of Austria came to be chosen Emperor, The Emperor's War with the
French King.
has be shown before: But some private Quarrels happening afterward betwixt
Him and the French King, it came to a War at last, though first on the
Frontiers of Spain, and in Flanders. The French held at that time Parma and
Piacenza in Italy; which Pope Leo was much troubled at: But when more lately
they had attempted Regio, he fell quite off from them, and made a League with
the Emperor; whereof the chief Conditions were, That the Dignity of the Church
of Rome should be defended: That what the French had lately taken from it,
should be recovered: That Francis Sforza, who was then a banished Man, should
be restored to his Inheritance, and the Dukedom of Milan. Having therefore
joined their Forces, under the Command of Prospero Colonna, and Ferdinand
d'Aval Marquess of Pesoara, they recovered Parma and Piacenza from the French,
took the City of Milan, and beat the Enemy quite out of Lombardy, after they
had been six whole years Masters of it. Not long after Pope Leo had the News of
this Overthrough, Pope Leo dies.
he Died, not without the Suspicion of Poison. He was the Son of Laurence de
Medices, and had to his Great-Grandfather Cosmo, who raised that Family to its
Splendor. At Thirteen years of age Leo was made Cardinal by Innocent VIII.
Adrian succeeds Leo.
He lived not above Seven and forty years; and had for Successor Adrian VI, a
Hollander, who had been the Emperor's Tutor.

Much about the same time, Solomon lately made Emperor of the Turks, undertook
a War against Lewis King of Bohemia and Hungary, who had married the Lady
portrait of Pope Leo X LEO X. PAPA. ANTEA IOANNES MEDICES FLORENTINVS
Natus Ao. 1474.

XIII* An Adolescens Alectus fuit in Ordinem Cardinalium

Electus XIo. Martij Ano. 1513.

Obijt 1o. December, 1521.

Sedit An. 8 Men. 8. D. 21

Mary, the Emperor's Sister; and having gained many Towns and Castles, he took
Belgrade, the Bulwark of Hungary, situated at the Confluent of the Danube and
Save, The Turk takes Belgrade.
which he fortified, and put a strong Garrison into.

While the Emperor spent his time in Germany and the Netherlands, there
happened great Seditions in Spain: The Emperor returns to Spain, to appease
Seditions there.
Therefore to prevent the growing evil in time, having first settled a Council
and Supreme Court of Judicature, to administer Justice, and in his absence, to
order the Affairs of the Empire, he returned into Spain by Sea: But before his
departure, the States of the Empire had met at Norimberg; among other things,
to consult about the Turkish War; and the Emperor having emitted a Proclamation
toward the end of March, enjoined chiefly the Churchmen to pray to God, say
Masses, 1522.
and make Processions for the Public Safety, and for atoning the Sins of Men.
A Diet at Norimberg.
Now the grand result of this Diet was, that on the First of May after, A
League betwixt the Emperor and King of England.
they granted Aid to King Lewis against the Turk. The Emperor upon his return
home, visited once more the King of England; and to secure him for a firm
Friend against the French King, he promised to pay him yearly an Hundred and
Thirty three Thousand Ducats. For the French King, by Agreement, paid so much
yearly to the King of England, and his Sister Mary Queen Dowager of France; so
that unless he might be saved harmless, the King of England would attempt
nothing against him. This Treaty was concluded betwixt them June the
Thirteenth, at Windsor. For a greater Confirmation of their Friendship also,
Mary the King of England's Daughter, betrothed to the Emperor.
it was agreed, that the Emperor should Marry his own Cousin-german, Mary the
King of England's Daughter, a young Lady then of Seven years of age, when she
should come to Maturity: And that he who failed in performance of this, should
pay the other Four hundred thousand Crowns. In the mean time the French King
bends all his Force to the recovery of what he had lost in Italy.

Of Zuinglius you have heard before. Now Hugh Bishop of Constance, to whose
Spiritual Jurisdiction Zurich belonged, addressed himself to the Senate,
acquainting them with what Complaints he heard of Zuinglius, who had started a
new kind of Religion: But Zuinglius being called before the Senate, defended
his own Cause, and satisfied them. The Letter of the Bishop of Constance to the
Canons of Zurich.
Afterward the Bishop wrote to the College of Canons, of whom Zuinglius was
one; and having said many things of new Teachers who disturbed the Peace of the
Church, he entreats them to take heed and beware of such: And because Pope Leo,
and then the Emperor, had by most severe Bulls and Decrees condemned that
Doctrine, he admonishes them to obey the same, and not to make any Changes or
Innovations, till they whom it concerned should by common advice and consent
determine what was to be done: This was in the Month of May. After this Letter
had been read in the Convocation, Zuinglius, against whom it was written, wrote
an Answer to the Bishop, Zuinglius writes to the Bishop of Constance,
That he knew very well who they were that put him upon these things, and
advised him not to follow their Counsels; for that Truth was invincible, and
could not be resisted: But he wrote a longer Letter afterward to those whom he
supposed to be the Authors of that Epistle. After this, Zuinglius, and some
others there joined with him, wrote a Letter to the Bishop, wherein they prayed
him not to act any thing against the Doctrine of the Gospel; nor to suffer any
longer that filthy and scandalous life of the Priests, but allow them Marriage.
And to the Switzers.
To the same purpose Zuinglius wrote to all the Switzers, and counseled them
not to obstruct the course of the Reformed Religion, nor any ways molest the
Married Priests; for that the Devil was the Author of that single Life of
theirs: That it was a Custom in some of their own Cantons, The Custom of some
Cantons about Priests Concubines.
when they received any new Curate, to enjoin him to keep a Concubine, lest he
should attempt upon the Chastity of other Men's Wives: That the Custom was
laughed at by many, but that it was prudently established at that time, and in
that darkness and depravation of Religion: And that what they did then as to
Concubines, ought now to be put in practice as to lawful Wives.

Luther in the mean time having absconded, Luther returns to Wittemberg,
as we said, for some Months, returned to Wittemberg; and because he had not
been recalled by Duke Frederick, fearing that he might take it ill at his
hands, he wrote to him in the Month of March, assuring him that it was out of
no Ill Will or Contempt of his Authority, And by Letters aquaints Duke
Frederick with the Reasons of it.
that he was returned without his Command: That he was sensible enough, some
would not fail to represent it as a dangerous thing to his Highness, in regard
that he stood Outlawed and Condemned both by the Pope and Emperor, whose Power
was not to be slighted: That he had indeed seriously reflected on these things
before hand; but that for three chief Reasons he had been moved to do what he
did. First, That he had been earnestly solicited by several Letters from the
Church of Wittemberg, to turn; and that they were a People whom God had
committed to his Charge, and therefore could not be neglected: That many,
without doubt, spoke bitterly and reproachfully against this Reformation of
Religion; but that he was certainly convinced that this his Profession was most
acceptable unto God: That, in the next place, through the craft and subtilty of
the Devil, who could not endure this Light of the Gospel, many troubles, in his
absence, had been raised in his Church; which unless he were there to teach
them in Person, could not be composed: And that that was to him so weighty a
Cause, that it out weighed all other Reasons whatsoever; so that so soon as he
came to know it, he had returned without farther Deliberation; for that nothing
was so dear unto him, as the Salvation of his People. But that if the thing
could have been done by Letters, he could easily have dispensed with his
absence from Wittemberg. That, lastly, he was very apprehensive of, and did in
a manner foresee a dreadful Tempest like to fall upon Germany, which so
securely slighted the present Mercy of God: That many indeed did very zealously
embrace the true Religion, but exceedingly disgraced it by their Lives and
Manners; turning that liberty which ought to be of the Spirit, into a
licentiousness of doing whatever they pleased: That others again made it their
whole study and endeavors, by any means to suppress the sound Doctrine; and
these together tended directly to the stirring up of Seditions: That the
Tyranny of the Churchmen was now weakened; which was all that he proposed to
himself at first; but that since the Magistrate despised so great a gift of
God, his Divine Majesty would punish that ingratitude and contempt of his Word;
and by sending one Judgment upon the heels of another, utterly destroy all, as
he had done Jerusalem of old: That now it was his duty, and the duty of all
others whom God had any ways enabled, to use their utmost diligence in Teaching
and Exhorting; and that though perhaps they might take all that pains in vain,
nay and be laughed at too by many, yet they ought not therefore to desist,
because their labor was pleasing to God. That, in short, whatever the Decree
of the Diet of Norimberg might prove to be, they would set no limits to the
Counsel and Will of God: That he had besides, other causes for his return,
which were of less moment: But that as to this which he had alleged, the
asserting and vindicating of the Gospel, it was of so great weight and
consequence, as to make him contemn all human counsel, and to look up only to
God: That therefore he prayed his Highness not to be offended, that he was come
back again without his Call or Command: That he, as their Prince, had Power
over the Bodies and Fortunes of his People; but that Christ bore Rule over
their Souls; and that since the Care of these was committed to him from above,
and that it was Christ's work wholly, he supposed his Highness could incur no
danger, upon the account of his return.

Now as to the Troubles which he said were raised in his Church in his absence,
the matter was this. Carolostadius casts Images out of the Churches of
Wittemberg.
While Luther was out of the way, Andrew Carolostadius, who has been mentioned
before, preached a different Doctrine, and stirred up the People in a tumultuary
manner to cast the Images out of the Churches: This being the chief cause why
Luther was recalled by his Friends: So soon as he came back, he condemned that
Action of Carolostadius, showing that that was not the way they ought to have
proceeded in, but that Images were first to have been removed out of the mind,
and the People taught, that by Faith alone we pleased God, and that Images
availed nothing: That if they had been in this manner removed, and the Minds of
People rightly informed, there would have been no more danger of any hurt from
them, and they would have fallen of themselves: That he was not indeed against
the removing of Images, but that it ought to have been done by the Authority of
the Magistrate, and not by the Rabble and promiscuous Multitude.

At this time there sprang up a secret Sect of some People that talked of
Conferences they had with God, who had commanded them to destroy all the
Wicked, and to begin a new World, wherein the Godly and Innocent only should
live and have Dominion. These clandestinly spread their Doctrins, in that part
of Saxony chiefly which lies upon the River Saal; and, as Luther affirms,
Carolostadius also favored their Opinion; but when borne down by the Authority
of Luther, he could not bring to pass what he intended at Wittemberg, The Sect
of Muncer, and other Enthusiasts.
he forsook his Station, and went over to them. Thomas Muncer was one of this
Herd, who afterward raised a Popular Insurrection against the Magistrate in
Thuringe and Franconia; of which in its proper place.

Luther being now informed, that in the public Assemblies of the Bohemians,
there were some who urged the Re-establishment of the Authority of the Pope and
Church of Rome, without which there could be no end of Controversies and
Debates; wrote unto them, in the latter end of July to this Effect. That the
Name of Bohemians had been some time very odious unto him, Luther's Letter to
the Bohemians.
so long as he had been ignorant that the Pope was Antichrist: But that now,
since God had restored the Light of the Gospel to the World, he was of a far
different Opinion, and had declared as much in his Books; so that at present
the Pope and his Party were more incensed against him than against them: That
his Adversaries had many times given it out, That he had removed into Bohemia,
which he oftentimes wishes to have done; but that lest they should have
aspersed his Progress, and called it a Flight, he had altered his Resolution:
That, as matters stood now, there was great Hopes, That the Germans and
Bohemians might Profess the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the same Religion: That
it was not without Reason that many were grieved to see them so divided into
Sects among themselves: But that if they should again make Defection to Popery,
Sects would not only not be removed, but even be increased and more diffused;
for that Sects abounded no where more than among the Romanists; and that the
Franciscans alone were an Instance of this, who in many things differed among
themselves; and yet all lived under the Patronage and Protection of the Church
of Rome: That his Kingdom was, in some manner, maintained and supported by the
Dissentions of Men; which was the Reason also that made him set Princes
together by the Ears, and afford continual Matter of Quarrelling and
contention: That therefore they should have special Care, lest whilst they
endeavor to crush those smaller Sects, they fall not into far greater, such as
the Popish, which were altogether incurable, and from which, Germany had been
lately delivered; That there was no better way of removing Inconveniences, than
for the Pastors of the Church to preach the pure Word of God in Sincerity: That
if they could not retain the weak and giddy People in their Duty, and hinder
their desertion, they should at least endeavor to make them steadfast in
receiving the Lord's Supper in both kinds, and in preserving a Veneration for
the Memory of John Huss and Jerome of Prague; for that the Pope would labor
chiefly to deprive them of these two Things; wherefore if any of them should
relent, and give up both to the Tyrant, it would be ill done of them: But that
though all Bohemia should Apostatize, yet he would celebrate and commend the
Doctrine of Huss to all Posterity: That therefore he prayed and exhorted them to
persevere in that way which they had hitherto defended with the loss of much
Blood, and with highest Resolution, and not cast a Reproach upon the
flourishing Gospel, by their Defection: That although all things were not
established among them, as they ought to be, yet God would not be wanting, in
time, to raise up some Faithful Servant of his, who would reform what was
amiss, provided they continued constant, and utterly rejected the Uncleanness
and Impiety of the Romish Papacy.

Now as to the Bohemians, Three Sects in Bohemia.
the case stands thus; after the death of John Huss, whom we mentioned
before, the people were divided into three Sects; the first of those who own
the Pope of Rome to be Head of the Church and the Vicar of Christ: The second,
those who receive the Sacrament in both kinds, and in celebrating Mass, read
some things in the vulgar tongue, but in all other matters differ not from the
Papists. The third are those who are called Picards or Beghardi; these call the
Pope of Rome and all his Party Antichrist, and that Whore that is described in
the Revelations: They admit of nothing but the Bible; they choose their own
Priests and Bishops; deny no man marriage; perform no Offices for the Dead, and
have but very few Holy Days and Ceremonies.

Luther afterward published a Book against the Order of Bishops falsely so
called; Luther's Book against false Bishops.
and in the Preface, taking to himself the name of Minister or Preacher, at
Wittemberg, he says, That it was no wonder to him, nor indeed contrary to
expectation, if for that title he should be scoffed and laughed at by them,
from whom he had met with violence in far more weighty concerns: That they had
nothing but Tyranny and Oppression to stop his mouth with, and that when he was
ready to justify his Doctrine by Argument and Reason, they did but slight and
reject him: But that on the other hand, when they themselves were put to it, to
prove the truth of their Doctrine, they stopped their ears: That it was a great
shame and reproach, that so many of them, who besides many other splendid and
magnificent Titles they bore, professed themselves Masters of the whole
Scripture, being so often challenged by him alone, durst not join issue, and
come to a fair trial with him about the matter; that therefore, since they
behaved themselves haughtily toward him, he was resolved to yield to them in
nothing, and had taken to himself that name of Minister or Preacher, as not
doubting, but that he might with far better conscience arrogate to himself that
Title, than they could the Name of Bishops: That the Doctrine which he
professed, was not his, but Christ's; so that they needed not to put any trust
in violence or oppression, thinking thereby to daunt him, for that the more
hatred and rage they vented against him, the more resolutely was he resolved to
proceed, in spite of all their fury and madness: That though they should even
cut his Throat, yet his Doctrine would prove immortal: That Christ lived and
reigned for ever, who would in his own due time, put a stop to their outragios
and bloody Desings: That by the Emperors Edict, and the Bull of the Pope, his
name was lately taken from him, and that charactar of the Great Beast wholly
blotted out: Which he was so far from taking ill, that he heartily thanked God,
for delivering him out of the dark dungeon of so many filthy Errors, and false
Doctrins, and enlightening him with the true Knowledge of his Word: That since
it was so then, and that God had committed to him the Office of Preaching the
Gospel, it was but reasonable that he should take to himself a Title, when
false Teachers gloried so much in such gaudy Names: That therefore, he would
not for the future, submit his Writings to their Censure; that he had
condescended too much at Worms: But that now he was so certain of his Doctrine,
that he would not submit it to the Judgment, no not of an Angel; but by the
Evidence thereof, would judge, not only himself, and them all, but even Angels
also: That they who rejected this Doctrine, could not attain to Salvation, nor
Life Eternal, because it proceeded not from Man, but from the Eternal God: That
if it pleased God to bless him with longer Life, he would use his utmost
Diligence, that the Gospel should be preached to all people: That they, indeed,
sought after their own Ease and Quietness, and to lead an Idle and Voluptuous
Life, being mightily troubled at the Disturbance of the State; but that he
would make it his Business, that they should not enjoy that Peace, which they
so earnestly coveted; and that though he might be killed by them, yet that
would not ease them of Troubles and Disquiet; and that what way soever they
might deal with him, yet God would never cease to prosecute them, 'till he
either utterly destroyed them, or made them humbly to confess their Fault, and
beg pardon of the invincible Lord of Hosts: That he heartily wished they might
repent, and submit to sound Counsel in time; but if that could not be obtained,
he bad them everlasting Defiance, and was resolved never to be reconciled with
them: That whereas some also made his freedom of Speech a Crime, as if by
libelling and scribbling, he designed to raise Stirs and Commotions, they did
him a great deal of Wrong; since that he could make it out by several Texts of
Scripture, and many Instances, that it was necessary to take this Course, when
the Governors of the Church were unlearned, impious and obstinate, and would
neither do their Duty themselves, nor suffer others to do it for them, who were
both able and willing to set about it.

Mention has been made before of the Diet of Norimberg: Hither Lewis King of
Hungary, and the Peers of that Kingdom sent also Ambassadors, who made sad
Complaint of the Cruelty of the Turk, and begged strong and lasting Aids
against him. Pope Adrian sent thither a Legate also; but before he came into
Germany, October 5, Pope Adrian's Brief to the Elector of Saxony.
one of the Popes Bed-Chamber-Men, delivered a Brief from his Holiness to Duke
Frederick, wherein he tells him; That it had been acceptable News to him, to
hear of the Diet of Norimberg; but that he had been overjoyed, to understand,
that he was resolved to be there in Person, for that there was great Hopes,
that some things might be enacted there, that would tend to the Honor and
Welfare, both of Church and State: That for that Reason also, he had, with the
Advice and Consent of the College of Cardinals, resolved to send a Legate into
Germany; but that whilst his Legate was preparing for his Journey, he had
thought fit, to send before the Bearer, whom he had charged to wait upon his
Highness, for whom he had always had a very great esteem, and acquaint him with
the Care and sincere Intentions he had for the Concerns of the Public, as he
might more amply be informed by the Legate, who was to come after: That, in the
mean time, he prayed and exhorted him, who was a Prince of the Empire, under
the Protection whereof the Church of Rome subsisted, that he would in his
Actions and Consultations use all Endeavors, That such things might be
promoted, as should conduce to the Honor of the Apostolic Church, and the
Peace and Quiet of the Public, and therein follow the Footsteps of his
Ancestors; from whom, as in no other Virtue, he did degenerate, so it was his
Hopes, he would not be unlike to them in this Particular neither: That he had
ordered the Bearer, to discourse him about these Affairs, and desired that he
would give Credit to what he said. Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, was very
strict in executing the Sentence pronounced against Luther the Year before; and
in the Duchy of Wittemberg, which then he had in Possession, he emitted a
Proclamation, November 26, promising Rewards to Informers; and throughout his
own Dominions, he severely punished all that did not obey the Laws and Canons
of the Church. This Year died John Reuchline, being a Man of great Age; whom
Erasm^^ of Roterdam celebrated in a most excellent Dialogue, attributing unto
him Immortality and supreme Knowledge in three Languages.

About the latter end of November Pope Adrian wrote to the rest of the States
assembled at Noremberg, Pope Adrian's Letter to the States of Germany.
to this Effect. That from the time he had been chosen to the Office of
Apostleship, he had desired nothing more, than that he might in all things
discharge the Duty of a good Pastor, and suffer none of his Flock to go astray,
if by his Vigilance and Care it could in any wise be prevented; and that of his
sincerity herein, he called God to witness, who had raised him to that Charge,
when he did not at all deserve, and as little expected any such Promotion. That
for the more easy accomplishment of what he proposed to himself, he had
earnestly exhorted all Kings and Princes to abstain from Civil Wars; and that
if they must needs make War, that they would turn all their Force against the
Enemies of the Christian Faith, he having himself performed, what he had
persuaded others to do; and given a great Sum of Money to the Knights of
Rhodes, who were at present mightily straightened by the Grand Seignior. That his
Thoughts being called home again from Foreign Dangers, he began to look about
him nearer hand, and perceived domestic Evils to threaten the Public; for
that to his great Grief he heard, That Martin Luther, who after many gentle and
fatherly Admonitions, when no Remedy could prevail with him, had been Condemned
and Proscribed by several Universities, by Pope Leo, and by the Emperor also,
with their unanimous Consent and Advice was not only not restrained, but raged
more furiously than ever, publishing daily new Books, to the great decay not
only of the Christian Regligion, but also of Morality and all good Living: That
it was a great addition to his Grief, to understand, that many of the Nobility
favored him, and that the Mischief was spread so far, that not only the
Dignity of the Clergy in Germany was lessened, but that they were in danger
also of being deprived of their Lands and Livings, and that a Civil War was
broken forth among some. That is was truly, indeed, said by S. Paul, That
heresies must needs be; but that as Affairs now stood, it was most unseasonably
fulfilled; That the Devil was busy at work to involve us in many Calamities:
That he had stirred up the Turk to vent his Fury against us far and near,
whilst at the same time he plagued the most Valiant Nation of Germany with the
Heresy of Luther. That no Man was ignorant how powerful an Enemy the Turk was,
and that, though he might be overcome, yet the Affairs of Christendom would be
in no better condition, so long as that Domestic Enemy remained unconquered:
That during his abode in Spain, he had heard many things of Luther's false
Doctrins; and that though it grieved him, that this Evil seemed to arise in
that Country, to which he himself owed his Birth, yet he had been comforted by
two things: First, Because he hoped that so frivolous and impious a Doctrine
would be despised by all Men: And then, because he thought that that poisonous
Weed, being brought from abroad, could not take rooting in that Country, which
had always produced Champions against Heresies: But that since it had happened
far otherwise, either through the just Judgment of God, or the Carelessness and
Neglect of those, who ought to have applied the proper Remedies in time; it was
their part to look to it carefully, lest that whilst they acted more slowly and
remisly, they might seem to have forgot their ancient Virtue, and to approve so
great a Villainy: That it would be a very disgraceful thing, for so Valiant and
constant a People, to make desertion from that Religion, which was decreed by
Christ and his Apostles, embraced by so many Martyrs and Famous Men, and
professed also by our own Progenitors, at the Instigation of a sorry Friar, who
had himself, for many Years followed and professed the same; as if, forsooth,
the Church had erred for so many Ages; as if Christ, who promised to be with us
for ever, had suffered his Church to continue in so great Ignorance and
Darkness, and as if he were the only Wiseman raised up by God, to disclose the
Errors of all Mankind; that doubtless these things seemed very Ridiculous to
all wise Men: But that nevertheless they were Popular and Specious, and to
those that delighted in Novelties, gave great Occasions of Undertaking, was it
not easy to be seen what they drove at? it was only their Intention, That
under a pretext of Christian Liberty, they might trample upon all Law and
Justice; for how was it possible that they should Reverence and Honor the
Civil Magistrate, who made no scruple to use disgracefully; nay, and to burn
the Laws and Constitutions of most holy Popes and Councils? It was not
certainly to be believed, That they who boggled not at Sacrilege, but with
Impure and Bloody Hands seized and robbed the things that were consecrated to
God, would at length forbear to invade the Rights and Possessions of their
Neighbors: That they who stood not in awe, not only to Strike, but also to
Kill Priests, were, doubtless, ready and had it in their Thoughts, to violate
and abuse any other State of Men whatsoever: So that this so great
Licentiousness and Impunity, in committing Wickedness, would at length rest
upon Princes themselves, their Children, Wives, Families and Possessions: That
therefore he prayed and exhorted them, and by virtue of the Power and Authority
he had, as the Successor of S. Peter, and Vicar of Christ, also required and
charged them, That laying aside all Quarrels and Animosities, with united
Hearts and Hands, they would endeavor to quench that Common and Domestic
Fire, and reclaim Luther by moderate and fair ways: Or if that could not be
done, that then they would punish him according to the Laws, and the late
Decree of the Emperor and Empire: That by so doing, they would not only wash
away that Stain which now stuck to Germany; but also contribute to the
Salvation of many, who were much damnified by his Contagion: That for his own
part, his Natural Disposition and Profession inclined him to Mercy, rather than
any kind of Severity: But because this was a Distemper, not to be cured by
gentle Medicines, there was a Necessity of applying more Violent Remedies: That
Testimonies and Instances of this, more than one, might be had in Holy
Scripture; and that their own Predecessors, in the Council of Constance, after
this manner punished John Huss and Jerome of Prague, according to their
Deserts: That if they would imitate them in this Virtuous Course, God would not
be wanting; and that then there might be greater Hopes, that the Cruelty of the
Turk, would be restrained: And that, in fine, he was ready to bestow all he
had; nay, and to lay down his Life, for the Welfare of the Flock committed to
his Charge; referring what else he had to say, concerning Luther, to his Legate
Francis Cheregate Bishop of Teramo, to whom he prayed them to give Credit.

What he said of a Civil War raised among some, A War betwixt the Archbishop of
Treves, and Francis Sicking.
related to Richard Archbishop of Treves, who was then in a War with Francis
Sicking, a Valiant Man, and great favourer of Luther: However Religion was not
the Cause of that War; but it was, because the Bishop would not suffer two Men
within his Jurisdiction, for whom he had been Bail, to answer the Law; for so
it is specified in the Letter of Defiance, which Sicking sent him, Adrian
writes to the Senate of Strasburg.
toward the latter end of August. Pope Adrian at that time wrote Private
Letters to some others, to the same effect; and having much inveighed against
the Doctrine of Luther, he required the Senate of Strasburg, Not to suffer any
of his, or his Adherent's Books to be printed; and not only to Suppress, but
also to burn those which were already published; for that he heard, That such
kind of Books were printed by their Printers, who refused to meddle with any
thing written against them; threatening the Senate with the Wrath and Vengeance
of God, if they did not obey him; for that, although they persevered in the
Ancient Established Religion; yet unless they took from others the Liberty of
Offending, and Occasion of Error, they were not to promise to themselves
impunity. Now for the better understanding of what he said, that he had heard
of Luther, when he was in Spain, we are to look back a little into the History
of his Life.

Adrian was a Poor Man's Son of Vtricht, A short History of Pope Adrian.
a Town upon the Borders of Holland; he followed his Studies in the University
of Louvain, and for his Learning and Probitie, was recommended to Maximilian
the Emperor, to be Tutor to his Grandson Charles; with him he continued, till
he was grown up, and became fit to learn more Manly Exercises, and then was
sent Ambassador into Spain, to King Ferdinand, who made him Bishop of Tortosa;
but after the Death of the King, when the Government fell to his Grandson
Charles, of Ambassador that he was before, he was made Privy Counselor. There
was a Difference at that time betwixt Pope Leo and the Cardinals, who had
conspired his Death, so that having dispatched a great many of them, some by
Exile, and some by loathsome Imprisonment; he created one and thirty new
Cardinals at the same time, partly for his own Defense, and partly to raise
Money; among whom also was Adrian: and this was in the Year 1517. Charles came
afterward into Spain, upon the Death of his Grandfather Ferdinand, whose Heir
and Successor he was. In the mean time, Maximilian the Emperor dying, Charles
was chosen Emperor, and upon that account, being obliged to go to Germany, he
left the chief Care of the Government of Spain to Adrian, during his Absence,
and not long after there happened a great Insurrection in that Kingdom. Now
upon the Death of Pope Leo, when Julius of Medices, and Alexander Fernese,
Adrian being declared Pope, writes to the College of Cardinals.
canvassed for the Papacy, and were making all the several Interests they could
to be chosen Pope; Adrian, who was both absent and unknown, was elected January
9, this Year, to the great Displeasure of the Romans, who took it extremely
ill, That so high an Office should be conferred upon a Stranger, whom they had
never seen. He having received the News of his Promotion, and being therewith
acquainted, that three Cardinals were designed to come as Ambassadors to him
into Spain, who nevertheless were not as yet come, he thought fit March 8, to
write to the College of Cardinals, from the Town Victoria, and gave them his
hearty Thanks, that they had conceived such an Opinion of him; telling them,
That though at first he had been terrified at the greatness of the Charge
imposed upon him; yet that looking upon it as a Call to him from Heaven, in
those Distracted and Divided Times, he had taken Heart, and hoped the best:
That moreover, since he heard that the Cardinals, who were to come to him, had
not as yet parted from Rome, and could not so soon perform the Journey, and
that, in the mean time, unless he himself approved the Election, he could not
be invested with Authority for Governing the Church: Besides it being a Long
and Dangerous Journey for the Ambassadors to undertake; therefore to ease them
of that Trouble, and at the same time to declare his Mind, he had before some
honest and proper Persons, whom he had called together for that purpose,
signified his Resolution, and approved the Election: Wherefore he required them
to make the same known to all Men, especially in Italy; and in the mean time,
to take care that Justice should be administered; he being now wholly taken up
in preparing a Fleet, and other things necessary for his Passage to Rome, with
the first Opportunity. He wrote also to the Senate and People of Rome, bidding
them to expect all Good Will and Favor at his Hands. Adrian goes to Rome.
And so some Months after, the Season offering fair, he put out to Sea, on his
Voyage: And though the Emperor, at the same time was returning to Spain, from
the Netherlands, to appease an Insurrection that had happened in his Absence,
yet he departed without saluting him, but wrote to him a most kind Letter,
wherein he gave him the Reasons, why he made so much have. Thus about the
latter end of August, The Turk takes Rhodes.
he arrived at Rome; it being then the third Month, that Solomon, Emperor of
the Turks, had besieged Rhodes, which, at length, after a seven Month's Siege,
wherein the Knights had most valiently defended themselves, though destitute of
all Succors, 1523.
he took by Composition, December 25, not only to the great Prejudice, but
Disgrace also of Christendom. Much about the same time Cheregate the Pope's
Legate, we mentioned, came to Norimberg; and January 1, sent from thence the
Pope's Letters we spoke of, to the Senate of Strasburg, offering his Service,
if they pleased to write him an Answer.

Zuinglius began now to give great Offense, and whilst many both within and
without the City preached against his Doctrine, as Impious and Erroneous, but
especially the Dominican Friars, and that he justified the same, offering to
prove it to be consonant to the Holy Scriptures; the Senate of Zurich called a
Convocation of all the Clergy within their Jurisdiction to meet at Zurich,
January 29, about the Difference in Religion, where all men should be heard, as
much as was Requisite. They invited also the Bishop of Constance, by Letters,
either to come himself, or send one in his Place. The Assembly of Zurich.
So then, a numerous Assembly met at the Day appointed, and among others John
Faber, whom the Bishop sent to represent him, to whom the Burgomaster of the
Town made a Speech to this Effect: That because there was a great Dissension
arisen about Religion, the present Assembly had been called; That if any man
had ought to say against the Doctrine of Zuinlius, he might freely propound the
same. Now Zuinlius had before comprised his Doctrine into certain Heads and
common places, to the number of sixty seven Articles, and had published them,
to the end that all might come prepared to Argue and Dispute the Matter openly
in the Assembly: Wherefore, when now the Burgomaster had done speaking, he
again propounded them, and invited them to fall to the Dispute. With that,
Faber having declared the Cause of his being sent, endeavored to persuade
them, That that was a Debate not proper for such a Place, and that it belonged
to a General Council, which was shortly to be called: But Zuinglius urging him
to Dispute, and if he had any thing to say, not to dissemble it: He made
answer, That he would refute his Doctrine in Writing. The Reformation received
at Zurich.
Thus they two having exchanged many Words, and no Body else appearing to take
up the Cudgels, the Senate dissolved the Assembly; and proclaimed throughout
their Territories, That the Traditions of Men being laid aside, the Gospel
should be purely taught from the Books of the Old and New Testament.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK IV.
The CONTENTS.
Pope Adrian by his Legate propounded several things, confessing that now for
many Years there had been various and grievous Corruptions in the Court of
Rome. The Princes of Germany, answer him; and declare upon what Conditions they
would have a Council. An alteration of Affairs in Denmark: King Christiern
flies. The Imposts of Germany, First Fruits and Vacances are treated of.
Mention is made of the Pall of Archbishops. Two Augustine Friars are burnt at
Brussels. Luther interprets the Decree made at Norimberg: He publishes some
Books. The King of England makes a heavy complaint of Luther. Pope Adrian dies;
to whom Clement succeeds. Troubles arise in Switzerland about the Doctrine of
Zuinglius; and at Strasburg about the Marriage of Priests. Campegius is sent by
Pope Clement, Legate to the Diet of Norimberg; where he writes to Duke
Frederick; and then exhorts the Princes, in a Speech he made to them: To which
they answer, and he again replies thereunto. The Switzers expostulate with
those of Zurich, who answer the Ambassadors of the other Cantons, The Bishop
of Constance's Book in defense of Images: Which nevertheless are thrown down
and burnt throughout all the Canton of Zurich. The Emperor sends an
Ambassador to the Diet of Norimberg. The Senate and Bishop of Strasburg bring
their Controversy before Cardinal Campegius. After the Diet is over, Ferdinand
and others make a League against the Reformation.

BEsides the Letters, Pope Adrian's Instructions about the restraining of
Luther.
we mentioned, Pope Adrian gave his Legates Instructions in Writing, that he
should signify to the Princes, How much he was grieved at the Troubles and
Seditions which were occasioned by Luther: not only because of the Damage that
thereby accrued to men's Souls, and the Ruin and Dissipation of the Flock which
Christ had committed to his keeping; but also because such a mischievous thing
should have happened among that Nation and People, from whom he derived his
Birth and Being, and who had always been a People free from the very least
Suspicion of Heresy: That therefore it was his most earnest Desire, That some
speedy Remedy might forthwith be applied to the Evil, lest by longer Delay, the
same thing might happen to the Germans, which heretofore befell the Bohemians:
That for his own part he would spare neither Pains nor Charges in that Affair:
That therefore he besought them, that according to their several Abilities,
they would do the same, there being many and weighty Reasons for their so
doing; as the Glory and Honor of God, which was chiefly violated by that
Heresy, all the Ceremonies and Rites of the Church, being thereby not only
impaired, but in a manner quite abolished: Charity and Brotherly Love; since he
that directed not him into the right way, who was gone astray; must be
accountable to God for his Omission: The Shame and Disgrace of the Nation;
since Germany, which was wont to be chiefly praised for Religion, was now by
reason of that Defection, fallen into Contempt and Ignominy: Their own Fame and
Reputation; for since they might easily make an End both of Luther and of his
Heresies, if they did it not, they would seem to be very sickle and inconstant,
and to degenerate from their Ancestors, who left behind them at Constance a
noble Instance of their Virtue; and was it not a most heinous Injury that he
did both to themselves and their Forefathers? for since these followed the
Religion of the Roman Catholic Church, they were, in his Judgment, who
condemned that Religion, all debarred from Salvation: That they should consider
and weigh with themselves, what the Purpose of these Men was; and what their
Doctrine drove at: Which was nothing else, than under a Color of Christian
Liberty, to endeavor the Subversion of all Laws, and all Respect and Obedience
to Magistrates; and that though Luther seemed at first only to impugn the
Ecclesiastical Power, as Impious and Tyrannical, yet it was his Drift, that
having once persuaded People, That Christians were by no Laws obliged to obey
the Magistrate, he might open a way for all Men, to break out into what
extravagant Courses they pleased: And that therefore they themselves lay
thereby exposed to great Dangers: That as yet, indeed, they cunningly and
craftily disguised their Purpose, flattering the Magistrate, That with impunity
they might be suffered to wreak their Spleen and Malice upon the Churchmen:
But that these being once oppressed, without doubt they would try their Fortune
also with the rest: That they themselves now plainly saw, and felt by
Experience, the Animosities, Hatred, Quarrels and Troubles which that Heresy
had already occasioned in the State; and it was to be feared, That if these
Evils were not timely repressed, God who had given them the Power of the Sword,
might severely punish so great a Negligence both by public and private
Calamities: That Luther's way was not unlike to the Sect of Mahomet, which
allows Men to marry several Wives, and afterward to put them away; by which
Law that villainous Juggler bewitched Men, and drew the greatest part of the
World over to his Religion: That Luther did not indeed expressly allow that, but
that he absolved all those who had made to God Vows of Chastity, from the
obligation of the Law, exhorted them to Marriage, and let loose the Reins to
Men's Lusts; that so he might allure more People into that Association and
Confederacy, which he was hatching to the Ruin of Christendom, and
particularly of Germany: That therefore it was their Parts punctually to put
into execution the Sentences of the Pope and Emperor, that they might avenge
the Glory of God, wipe off the Reproach that stuck to their Country, and remove
from themselves an infectious Pestilence: That nevertheless, such of them as
should retract, and return into the right way, might be pardoned, and received
again into Favor; but that they who obstinately maintained their Errors, ought
to be punished with the utmost severity, that the rest being terrified by such
an Example, might learn to persevere in the true Faith and Religion: That if it
should be objected by some, That Luther was condemned before he had been heard,
and that it was Reasonable that he should be tried, before he suffered, such
men reasoned amiss; for that Christ himself had laid down a Rule of Faith and
Religion; whose Authority we ought to submit unto, and not dispute about
Articles of Faith, nor enquire into the Reasons of this or that Precept: That
he was to be heard, indeed, when he was examined, Whether in his Sermons he had
said so or so, or whether he had published this or that Book; but that he ought
not to be admitted to defend those things which he had broached concerning the
Faith and Sacraments; for here the Custom and Doctrine of the Church was to be
observed, and not to be deviated from: And since most of his Opinions were
already condemned by the Authority of Councils, no regard ought to be had unto
them: That there could not be a greater Injury done to Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, than to cavil at or reject their Decrees; nor could there be any
End of Controversies, if what Learned and Wise Men had, after long and serious
Deliberation, determined, should by every Private Person, be questioned and
examined: That all Societies of Men had certain and fixed Laws, which they were
bound to observe; how much more then, ought not that to be done, when any thing
is established by Public Authority in the Church? That seeing, then, these Men
did not only reject, but even burn the Decrees of the Councils and Fathers,
they ought certainly to be punished as Disturbers of the Public Peace: That,
in the mean time, it was not to be dissembled, nor past over in Silence; that
God who is the Revenger of all Iniquity, did in this manner afflict his Church
for the Sins of the People, but chiefly of the Rulers and Ministers of the
Church; since the Scripture says, That the iniquity of the people proceeded
from the priests: For that, in Truth, for these many Years past, the Sins of
Rome had been manifold and grievous, and that even from the Head, down to the
inferior Clergy, that Evil and Contagion had been propagated; that no Man did
his Duty, all had gone astray, and that none were free from Guilt, no not one:
So that all Glory was to be given unto God alone, from whom Pardon and
Remission was humbly to be implored: That since things were then in such a
State, he would take care, That the Court of Rome, which, perhaps, had given
occasion to so great Evils, should first of all be strictly reformed, that so
the Cure might begin at the Root, and Cause of the Distemper; which he thought
himself the more obliged to do, in that it was most earnestly desired by most
Men: That for his own part, he was against his Will, and with Reluctance
promoted to the Chair, and would have been far better pleased with a Private
Life: But that being moved by the Fear of God, and present State of Affairs, he
could not at length decline that burdensome Care: That, indeed, no desire of
Dominion and Rule had been a Motive to him to accept of that Charge, but only
that he might have an Opportunity of consulting and doing what he could for the
Public Good and Welfare of Christendom: Now that he did not instantly reform
the Vices and Abuses, which he plainly saw, the Reason was, because the Disease
which he designed to cure, was very inveterate and Complicate also; so that he
must proceed gently and by degrees, lest by attempting too sudden and speedy a
Cure, he should increase the Distemper: For that all sudden Changes were
dangerous, and it was an old Proverb, That he who blowed his Nose too hard,
would squeeze out Blood.

This Writing Luther translated afterward into High Dutch, Luther's
Interpretation of the Pope's Instructions.
and illustrated with Marginal Notes; wherein he observes, That what the Pope
said of Proceeding in the Reformation gradually, and by little and little,
ought so to be understood, as that for the space of every Step, an interval of
some Ages ought to be allowed: However, it was said, That his Holiness had but
little Thanks from the Cardinals, for that he so plainly acknowledged the
Corruptions of the Court of Rome: Although this be reported to be a common
Fetch of the Popes, when they would delay or break the Measures of calling a
Council, or bringing Matters to a Hearing, to make fair and large Promises;
that they may have time to ingratiate themselves with Kings and Princes, till
an Opportunity offer of Deciding the matter by the Sword; for by Promises they
raise Hopes and Expectations in Men's Minds, and in the mean time take Measures
for retaining their Power and Dignity, which they know to be endangered by
General Councils. In the mean time, whilst the Legate proceeded in this manner,
the Princes complained, That the Compacts and Agreements which they had
heretofore made with the Popes, were many ways violated at Rome. The Pope being
acquainted with this, by Letters from his Legate, ordered him to tell them,
That he could not help what had been done by his Predecessors: But that he had
ever been, even whilst he was a Private Man, much displeased with that usual
way of Proceeding of the Court of Rome; and that he had already resolved of
himself, though no Application had been made to him about it, to reform all
these things, and not to suffer any Man to be wronged; far less them, whom for
Countries sakehe desired chiefly to gratfie: That, as to what they demanded,
That all Lawsuits commenced at Rome, might be remitted to Germany; he told
them, That most of the Judges and Advocates had left the City, because of the
Plague; but that so soon as they were returned, upon Enquiry into the Case, he
would do what should be thought Just and Reasonable: He had given his Legate in
Charge also, to require an Answer from the Princes; since he had written to
them with Design, first, That he might know of them, what they thought might be
the fittest Course for quelling that pestiferous Sect; and then, that he might
understand in time, what was to be done therein, on his part.

These things being brought into Deliberation, The Princes Answer to Pope
Adrian's Legate.
the Princes and States return an Answer; and having begun with a short
Repetition of all his Demands, they profess the great Satisfaction they had, to
know that God had been pleased to set him over the Church, which in so dismal a
Time stood much in need of such a Governor, who had so great a Zeal for the
Welfare of Christendom, took so much Pains to compose the Differences of Kings
and Princes, and was at such Charges for putting a stop to the Progress of the
Turk, as much rejoiced them to hear of from him, and for which they gave his
Holiness their most hearty Thanks: For that certainly, by these Civil Wars, the
Empire was exceedingly weakened, and the Power of their most cruel Enemy, the
Turk, increased, whilst there were no Forces on Foot, to make Head against him:
That there were Ambassadors come to the Diet from the King and Nobles of
Hungary, who had given a sad and lamentable Relation of the Cruelties they had
suffered, and of the great Dangers they were at present exposed unto: That
therefore they most earnestly prayed him, who was their Common Father and
Pastor, That he would persist in that most holy Resolution, and use his best
Endeavors, that either a firm Peace or long Truce might be made, that so, at
length, measures might be taken, both for Resisting the Violence of the Turks,
and recovering the lost Provinces of the Empire; for effecting whereof no Aid
nor Assistance should be wanting on their Parts: That as for Luther, they were
heartily sorry, as, indeed, it became them, for the Troubles that his Doctrine
had raised in Germany, and were very desirous to apply a Remedy to the Evil;
acknowledging it to be their Duty, to obey both him and the Emperor, wherein
they resolved not to degenerate from their Ancestors; but that as to the
punishing of him, according to the Emperor's Decree, which his Holiness
complained was not done, it had been omitted upon no slight Considerations: For
that all Ranks and Degrees of People heavily complained of the Court of Rome,
and most Men were now so well instructed by Luther's Sermons and Books; that
should that Decree be put in execution against him, it would, without doubt,
occasion grievous Commotions, and be so construed by many, as if it were done
with intent to suppress the true Light of the Gospel, and to countenance and
maintain such open Crimes, as could no longer be suffered nor dissembled; which
Persuasion would unavoidably stir up the People to a Rebellion against their
Magistrates: And, indeed, it could not be denied, as he himself frankly
confessed, but that there were many things scandalously and irregularly done at
Rome, to the great Prejudice of other Nations and Provinces, and no less Decay
of Religion: That therefore his Holiness was highly to be commended. That he
did not palliate nor excuse the Disorders of the Court of Rome, but promised to
reform those Abuses, and render Justice to all Men, without respect; but that
he would deserve far greater Applause, if he really performed, what in Words he
promised, which they earnestly begged of him he would; since otherwise no firm
nor lasting Peace could be expected: That Germany was much impoverished by Wars
and other extraordinary Imposts and Charges; so that hardly were they able to
support the necessary Expenses of the Public, and give Assistance to the
Hungarians and other neighboring People, against the Turk: That now it was
well known to his Holiness, how in former Years the Germans had suffered their
Bishops and other Churchmen, to become Tributaries to the Pope for a certain
time; how that then it was conditioned, That all that Money should, when
occasion served, be employed in the War against the Turk; but that now the Time
limited was expired, and the Popes his Predecessors had not laid out the Money
to the Use it was designed for; so that when Taxes were imposed on the
Provinces of Germany for the Turkish War, Men fretted and grumbled, thinking
that those vast Sums of Money, which for many Years had been publicly
collected, and kept for those Uses, ought to be employed this way, and that
there was no Reason why they should be charged any further: That they
therefore, desired he would not for the future exact that Tribute, but suffer
it to be brought into the Public Treasury of the Empire; that by that means
many Grievances in Germany might be quieted, and a Public Stock be always in
readiness for assisting Foreign Nations against the Hostilities and Invasions
of the Turks: That furthermore, as to their Counsil and Advice, which he craved
in this Change of Religion, and which they were both willing, and obliged in
Duty to give; it was their Opinion, That since not only the Opinions of Luther
were now to be enquired into, but also many other gross Errors and
Corruptions, which had prevailed by long Custom and Continuance, and through
the Depravation of Men's Lives and Judgments, were now excused, as he himself
confessed; There could be no better way thought on for remedying all these
Disorders, than by a free and General Council, which he and the Emperor, the
chief Magistrate of Christendom, might easily call in some City of Germany, as
Mentz, Strasburg, Metz or Cologn, the sooner to begin, the better, and within a
Year at farthest; but with this Condition, That all who should be present
thereat, whatever their Degree and Quality might be, should take a solemn Oath
to speak freely, and not dissemble, whatever they should think expedient for
the Glory of God, and the Peace and Well-being of Church and State; for that
otherwise the Council would be looked upon as partial, and would do more Hurt
than Good: That in order thereunto, it should be their Care, to hinder Luther
and others from publishing, in the mean time, any more Books; and that therein
they made no doubt, but the most Noble and worthy Frederick Duke of Saxony,
would gratify them: That they also take Care, That the Preachers should meddle
with nothing in their Sermons, but only Modestly and Sincerely teach the Gospel
according to the Interpretations approved and received by the Church: In like
manner, That they should utter nothing in the Pulpit, that might either stir up
the People against their Magistrates, or lead them into any Error: Besides,
That they should not insist upon deep Controversies, which were not necessary
to the People, but reserve them to the Determination of the Council: But that
for judging in that Matter, the Bishops ought to appoint able and fit men, who,
when need should require, might rebuke them mildly, and so correct them, as not
to give Ground to the least Suspicion, that they endeavored to stop the Course
of the Gospel: That such as did not take Admonition, should not go un punished:
That, in the last place, they would make it their Business, That Printers
should print no new things for the future; and that some Holy and Learned Men,
appointed for the Purpose, by the Magistrates, within their several
Jurisdictions, should peruse and examine what came from the Press, and that
what they disapproved should not be sold. That these things seemed to them
proper for uniting People's Minds, and settling a Reformation: For that though
all things were not out of hand reformed, yet some Progress might, in the mean
time, be made therein, till the rest should be determined by the Authority of a
Council: That whereas among other things, his Legate had spoken of Priests, who
married Wives, because there was no Punishment appointed for them by the Civil
Law; it seemed not amiss to them, That such as had offended that way, should
suffer according to the Prescript of the Canon Law. To conclude, they pray his
Holiness to take in good part their Judgment as to those several things, for
that it proceeded from a true and sincere Mind, which tendered the Public
Welfare, and concerned the Dignity of the Holy See.

About this Time there happened a great Alteration of Affairs in Denmark,
Troubles in Denmark.
which was briefly thus: Christiern, the first of that Name, King of Denmark,
Norway and Sweden, had two Sons, John and Frederick; upon the Death of the
Father, John succeeded, who had Wars with the Swedes that had rebelled; however
the Quarrel was taken up and ended: John had a Son named Christiern, who at six
Years of Age was proclaimed King, and upon the Death of his Father, six and
twenty Years after, succeeded to the Crown, in the Year of our Lord 1514.
During his Reign the Swedes again rebelled, and set upon one Steno Stura to be
their Governor: King Christiern, in the mean time, employed all his Force
against them, and after many Battles and Sieges, at lenth, obtained the
Victory, causing the Body of Steno, who had been killed in Battle, to be raised
out of the Grave and Burnt: And this happened in the Year 1520. The Swedes
being thus subdued, one Gustavus Erixon, a Nobleman of the Kingdom, incited, as
it is believed, and aided by the Lutbeckers, again stirred them up to
Rebellion, and that successfully too: At first he pretended to act for the
Children of Steno; but growing stronger, he invaded the Throne, and to confirm
his Title, married the Daughter of Steno. Christiern having lost this Province,
was ill beloved at home also; for he governed tyrannically, and by his Cruelty
offended all his Subjects: Wherefore fearing that these Clouds which were a
gathering, might at length break out into a Storm, to his ruin and
destruction, and the rather, because the Lubeckers and his Uncle Frederick were
arming against him; Christiern King of Denmark banished.
this Year, which was the ninth of his Reign, he fled with his Children and
Queen Isabel, the Sister of Charles the Emperor, and arrived first in Zealand,
a Province belonging to his Imperial Majesty. Immediately after, the States of
the Kingdom assembling, Frederick Duke of Holstein made King of Denmark.
and, and being assisted by the Lubeckers, created Frederick his Uncle, Duke of
Holstein, an aged Man, their King; and then having published a Declaration to
the Emperor, the Pope, and to the rest of the Princes of the Empire, they give
Reasons for what they had done, accusing him of most grievous Crimes; for
which, they said, he was justly Banished. Frederick did the same, which was
imitated by the City of Lubeck, a Commonwealth of the greatest Power and
Authority in all those Parts. King Christiern in a public Declaration answers
the Accusations of the Danes and Swedes.
But Christiern finding an able Penmen, Cornelius Skepper a Flemming, a very
learned Man, answered the Accusations that were brought against him, and begged
Assistance from the States of the Empire assembled at Norimberg. He had one
Son, whom the Emperor afterward took, and two Daughters, Dorothy and
Christian. The same Year his Friends and Relations undertook a War for his
Restoration, but in vain, the Emperor being then engaged in a War with France.

The Popes Legate had accused the Ministers of the Church of Norimberg of
Preaching impious and unsound Doctrine, The Ministers of Norimberg accused by
the Pope's Legate.
and demanded that they might be committed to Prison: But the Princes told him,
that they believed, he had been misinformed: That the Preachers also were
highly honored and esteemed by the people; so that if any thing were attempted
against them, the Mobile would look upon it as done purposely to suppress the
Truth, which might cause some insurrection: That nevertheless they would
appoint a Committee, to enquire into all matters for the future, and do
whatever should be thought just and reasonable. When they had in this manner
answered all demands, The Grievances of Germany presented to the Legate.
they on their parts, proposed what they would have had done by the Pope, and
the Bishops in Germany, and drew up their grievances into certain Heads and
Articles, which they delivered to the Legate; praying the Pope that since the
things they complained of were altogether unjust, and could no longer be
suffered, that his Holiness would with all speed abolish them, for that
otherwise they themselves must needs take some course, to shake off from them
that burden, and recover their ancient Liberty. They had made the same
complaint in the Diet at Worms, and having presented the same Articles to the
Emperor, they prayed him to interpose his Authority. Neither did they at that
time conceal those things from the Bishops, who having hitherto made no
reformation therein, they made their application to the Pope, because as we
said before, he had given them ample and generous Promises by his Legate. Now
the things which they desired might be redressed, were all such as encroached
upon the rights and liberties of the Princes, drained Germany of Money, and
kept men under most heavy Bondage. As to the Tribute paid by the Clergy, the
case in short is this, The power of the Pope daily increasing, and growing to a
head, among other ways of raising Money, this also was found out, That the
Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Persons, should according to the Rate of their
Benefice, pay such a Sum of Money yearly to the Pope, which was commonly
called First Fruits and Tenths: Some do ascribe this Device to Pope John XXII,
and others to Boniface IX; the pretext was Specious and Popular, to wit, That
there might always be a Treasure in readiness to be employed in the Wars
against the Saracens and Turks: And because at that time the Authority of the
Popes was a Sacred thing, they easily persuaded all People, the English only
excepted, who for small Benefices refused to pay: Now this Law continued in
Force until the Council of Basil; where, because of the many Complaints brought
from several Places, concerning that, a Decree past, That no more Money should
upon that account be exacted for the future; but Eugenius IV, evacuated the
Decrees of that Council, as has been said before, and the Popes who came after
him, that would not part with any thing, have kept up the Custom, and would not
confirm Bishops and other Clergymen in their Livings, but upon condition that
they duly paid their First Fruits and Tenths; so that the Custom is continued
to this very Time, though not without much repining and many Quarrels: For in
the Year of our Lord 1500, when the Emperor Maximilian held an Imperial Diet
at Ausburg, among other Matters, concerning a Turkish War; it was decreed that
Ambassadors should be sent to Pope Alexander VI, to solicit his Aid, and that
he would employ those Revenues to this Use, for which chiefly they were in
times past granted: Furthermore, the Pope bestows upon the Archbishops and
Metropolitans, a certain Badge of Honor and Dignity, made of Flax and Wool,
which is called a Pall; but the Purchase of it costs a round Sum of Money, to
be paid within three Months too, according to the Constitutions of the Court of
Rome: Nor is it lawful for Archbishops to Consecrate any Bishop, till first
they have got their Pall, which is chiefly used in saying of Mass; neither is
that delivered before he who receives it, has sworn Fidelity and Obedience to
the Pope. Now the First Fruits, we mentioned, are so called, because every new
Bishop or Abbot is obliged to pay one Years Rent of his Living to the Pope.
When all Debates were concluded, the Princes framed a Decree, relating in
short, what had past, and what Methods had been proposed by them for Concord
and Reconciliation, which were those we mentioned before, charging all Men,
under severe Penalties to observe the same. The Acts of the Diet of Norimberg
published.
This Decree was on the sixth of March, published in the Emperor's Name; for
upon his Return into Spain, he had appointed a Council and Judicature to govern
in his Absence, as has been said above. In this Diet Frederick Prine Palatine
represented the Emperor's Person.

About this Time two Augustine Friars, John and Henry were apprehended at
Brussels: Hogostrate a Dominican, among others, had the Examination of them:
The first Question put to them was, What they believed? They made answer, That
they believed the Books of the Old and New Testament, and the Apostles Creed,
which contained the Articles of our Faith. Again, Whether or not the Decrees of
the Councils and Fathers? Such of them as agreed with the Holy Scriptures.
Whether they did not think it a Mortal Sin, to transgress the Decrees of the
Fathers and Pope of Rome? That God's Commands alone had the Prerogative of
Condemning or Absolving? Seeing they persevered herein, they were condemned to
die: But they gave Thanks to God, That they were accounted worthy to suffer any
thing for the Glory of his Name. Being brought to the Place of Execution, they
moved all the Spectators by their Constancy; and were burnt the first Day of
July: But before they suffered, Two Augustine Friars burnt at Brussels.
they were degraded, as in the like Case Priests commonly are, and that is
performed in this manner; He that is condemned of Heresy by the Ecclesiastical
Judge, is clothed in the sacred Vestments of a Priest, and has a Chalice with
Wine and Water, and also a gilt Pattin, with a Wafer, put into his hands; so
being made to kneel down, the Bishop's Vicar takes from him the things
abovenamed one after another, commanding him at the same time never to say
Mass more for the Living and the Dead. Then with a piece of Glass he scrapes
his Fingers, enjoining him never to consecrate any thing for the future; and
afterward strips him of all his Vestments, using certain Curses and
Imprecations at every several action. Being thus degraded from the Order of
Priesthood, he is likewise deprived of all the inferior Orders that are
antecedent to it. When he is thus stripped of all his Sacerdotal Ornaments, he
is clothed in Secular Apparel, and delivered over to the Civil Magistrate; the
Bishop's Vicar in the mean time interceding with him, that he would not use any
severity against his Persons, nor put him to Death: For this Ceremony is used,
lest they who deal in holy things, should seeem to have a hand in taking away
the life, or shedding the Blood of any Man.

The Decree of Norimberg being variously interpreted by many, and slighted by
some; Luther wrote to the Princes, acquainting them that he had reverently and
with great pleasure read it, Luther's Interpretation of the Decree of Norimberg.
and also proposed it to the Church of Wittemberg; but that through the craft
and snares of the Devil, it had not the authority which it ought to have; for
that there were some of the highest Quality, who both refused to obey it, and
put various Constructions upon the same: Wherefore he thought fit to declare in
Writing how he understood it, trusting that his Opinion was consonant to their
meaning and intentions. That whereas they command the Gospel to be taught
according to the Interpretations received by the Church, most Men thus
understood it, That Ministers were to Preach according to the manner hitherto
in use, and the Rules prescribed by Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, and Others, who
have been approved by the Popes of Rome; but that he took it to be meant of the
more ancient Authors, as St. Hilary, St. Cyprian, St. Austin, and the like; and
that neither were those so much to be depended upon, but that the holy
Scriptures ought to be preferred far before them: That he made no doubt but
this was their sense; and it was to him an argument to make him believe so,
that some who could not endure to hear of a true Reformation of the Church,
refused to subscribe to this Edict, and suffered it not as yet to be proposed
to their People. In the next place, That Bishops should appoint fit Men to be
present at Sermons, and mildly admonish, if there were occasion for it: It was
well decreed on their parts, but that they to whom the Charge was given, though
they were willing, could not fulfill the Decree, because they wanted learned
Men, and made use of those who had never learned any thing but Sophistry: That
whereas also they decreed, That no more Books should be published, unless they
were first approved and licensed by learned Men chosen for that purpose: He was
not indeed against it; but however that he understood it so, as not at all to
be extended to the Books of the Holy Scripture; for that the publishing of
those could not be prohibited: That what, in the last place, they had enacted
concerning Priests that married Wives, or forsook their Order, That they should
be punished according to the Canon Law, it was too hard; for if the Gospel was
to be taught in purity (as they themselves confessed) then ought that
Pontifical Law to be qualified. Then he goes on, and bewails the misery and
obstinacy of our times, that when the Light of the Gospel shon out so clear,
that Law of Single-Life was not abrogated, which gave occasion to so many
grievous and scandalous Crimes: That they nevertheless who were satisfied with
the Punishment enjoined by the Canon Law, were much to be recommended for that
Moderation; but that they who clapped up in Prison and in Chains, Racked,
Tormented, and put Priests to Death for contracting Marriage, or forsaking
their Order, were greatly to be detested. Wherefore he besought the Princes,
that seeing their Adversaries did not obey the Decree they had made, but boldly
and licentiously opposed it; they would also pardon those, who through frailty
of Nature, that they might not wound their own Consciences, or run into
manifest Sin, should not exactly observe that last Clause of the same; for that
it was very unreasonable that their potent Adversaries should have liberty to
violate those things which they ought and might most easily observe; and that
other poor Men should be punished, for transgressing a Law, which it was not in
their power to observe, since all had not the Gift of Continence; and that Vows
of Chastity were not only foolish, but contrary also to good Manners, and
honest living. Afterward he published a Book, at the desire of some, about the
Ordaining of Ministers, and dedicated it to the Magistrates of Prague; to which
he annexed a Treatise, wherein he proved, that the Church had the Right and
Power of judging all Doctrins, and of appointing Ministers. In the first place
he defined the Church to be, wherever the purity of the Gospel was taught; but
that Bishops, and such other Prelates, were Images, and Heads without Brains;
that none of them did their duty in any Nation, or among any People, and
especially in Germany. Not long after, he wrote about avoiding the Doctrins of
Men; affirming nevertheless in the Preface to his Book, that he did not at all
justify those who boldly despised all Human Laws and Traditions, and in the
mean time did nothing that belonged to the duty of a true Christian. Afterward
he prescribed a Form, how Mass and the Communion should be celebrated in the
Church of Wittemberg, saying, That hitherto he had proceeded leisurely, because
of the infirmity of many; and being satisfied only with Doctrine, had made it
his aim to root out Errors and pernicious Opinions of Men's minds: But that now
when many were confirmed, it was time not to suffer ungodly Rites and
Ceremonies any longer in the Church; but that the purity of Doctrine should be
accompanied with sincerity of Worship, without Hypocrisy or Superstition. To
this Piece he subjoyned another Treatise, concerning decent and pious
Ceremonies to be observed in the Church; and another of the Abomination of
Private Mass, which they call the Canon; in the Preface to which, he mentions
how that in his Books and Sermons having often exhorted Men to the Abrogation
of the Popish Mass, he had been therefore called Seditious; but that it was an
injury done unto him; for that he had never taught the People publicly to
abolish false Worship by their own authority; nor had he indeed allowed that to
the Magistrate, unless the Rulers of the Church should obstinately maintain
Errors; and because that was a horrid Profanation of the Lord's Supper, as the
more learned now acknowledged, he had therefore been at the pains to write that
Piece; that the People might also understand, and that they might avoid those
usual Sacrifices of the Mass, as they would the Devil himself; and to confirm
what he said, he set down the whole Canon of the Mass, and showed it to be full
of Blasphemies against God.

Among the other learmed Men of Germany that favored Luther, Vlrick Hutton
dies.
Vlrick Hutton, a Nobleman of Franconia, was one; who about the latter end of
August this year, died in the Territory of Zurich. There are some Pieces of his
extant, which show him to have been a Man of an excellent and sharp Wit.

In the former Book we mentioned, how Luther answered Henry King of England;
which when the King had read, Henry King of England's Letters of Admonition to
the Dukes of Saxony.
he wrote to the Princes of the House of Saxony, Duke Frederick, his Brother
John, and to his Cousin George; and having made a heavy complaint of Luther, he
represented to them the great dangers that his Doctrine was like to bring upon
them and all Germany; and that they were not to be slighted and neglected; for
that the prodigious success of the Turks, whose Cruelty spread now so far, owed
its Rise to one or two profligate Wretches; and that the neighboring Bohemia
was a warning unto them, how much it concerned them to prevent an Evil in the
beginning. He also admonished them not to suffer Luther to publish the New
Testament in the Vulgar Tongue; for that his Artifices were now so well known,
that there was no doubt to be made, but that by a bad Translation he would
corrupt and pervert the purest Orignals. George Duke Saxony Answers the King of
England.
To that Letter Duke George wrote a very kind Answer, bitterly inveighing
against Luther also, whose Books he said, as the most pernicious of Enemies, he
had prohibited in all his Territories; for that ever since he had allowed him
to Dispute at Leipsick, he well perceived what he would come to at last: That
it heartily grieved him also that he had writ so bitterly against his Majesty;
which Libel he had prohibited to be Sold or Read within his Dominion, having
punished the Bookseller who first brought the Copy of it into his Country.

In the former Diet of Norimberg, besides Matters of Religion, the Princes took
also into deliberation, how they might settle Peace and establish Judicatures;
what Punishments were to be inflicted on those who obeyed not the Laws of the
Empire; and how they might raise present and constant Aids against the Turk.
But as to these two last Points nothing could be concluded; wherefore they were
put off to another time and Diet: And because some things were enacted in that
Diet, which the Cities of the Empire perceived would redound to their
prejudice, they all sent Ambassadors upon that account to the Emperor in Spain.
These arriving at Valladolid, August the Sixth, and having Audience three days
after, the Emperor gave them a very Gracious and Princely Answer within a few
days, but withal told them, That the Pope had complained to him by Letters, of
Strasburg, Norimber and Ausburg, as if they favored the Doctrine of Luther:
That he expected better things of them; but that however he could not pass it
by in silence; that they might have a care to obey his and the Pope's Edicts,
which he was consident they would do. They justified themselves, assuring his
Majesty that their Cities were no ways wanting in readiness to fulfill his Will
and Pleasure. In the mean time, Pope Adrian dies.
September the Thirteenth, Pope Adrian dies; to whom succeeded Clement. VII, of
the Family of Medices. Of all the Switzers, none but the People of Zurich
followed the Doctrine of Zuinglius; most of the other Cantons vexed and murmured
at it: And therefore in a Convention of States, held for that purpose at Berne,
there were some who grievously accused Zuinglius; and to raise the greater
hatred against him, affirmed, that he had been often heard to say in the
Pulpit, That they who entered into a League with Foreigners, sold Blood, and fed
on Men's Flesh. When upon the return of the Deputies of Zurich, Zuinglius came
to know of this, he justified himself by Letter, declaring that he had not
spoken so; but that in general he had said, That there were some who abhorred,
as a wicked thing, the eating of Flesh, because forbidden by the Pope's Law;
but thought it no Crime to sell Men's Flesh for Money, and to destroy it with the
Sword: That he had named no Nation in particular, nor was it his custom so to
inveigh against his Brethren the Switzers, whom, for Country sake, he tenderly
loved: That it behoved him necessarily to reprove Vice, which now exceedingly
abounded, but that good and harmless People were no ways concerned therein.
Among other things, Zuinglius preached that Images were to be removed out of
Churches, and that the Mass was to be abrogated as a wicked thing. For which
the Senate called another Assembly in their City; whither in the Month of
October many repaired, and for three days the Disputes lasted. However the
Senate, that they might do nothing rashly, wrote to the Bishop of Constance,
who had sent none to the Assembly, praying him that he would also give them his
Judgment in the Matter.

Much about this time, Priests Marry at Strasburg.
several Priests married Wives, both in Strasburg, and in other places also;
which occasioned much Strife and Contention: For when they were accused for it,
they made answer, That they had done nothing contrary to the Commands of God;
and that all Men indifferently were permitted by the Law of God to Marry. The
Senate of Strasburg had a long Debate about this matter with the Bishop of that
City; who at length, on the Twentieth of January, cited the Priests to appear
before him by a certain day, at Saverne, there to hear Sentence pronounced
against them, 1524.
for having contracted Matrimony; whereby he said they had transgressed the Law
of the Church and holy Fathers, of the Popes, Emperor and Empire, done the
highest injury to their Order, and were guilty of Treason against the King of
Heaven. The Priests having received this Citation, petitioned the Senate that
they might make their defense, and plead their Cause before them; protesting
that they were willing to suffer Death, if they were found to have done any
thing against the Commandment of God. The Senate therefore again interceded
with the Bishop; and that seeing they declined not a lawful Trial, and that
nothing could be attempted against them, without some dangerous Commotions,
especially since others of their Order, who publicly kept their Concubines,
were not punished for it: They prayed him that he would at least delay the
matter till the Conclusion of the Diet which then was held at Noremberg; for
that there was no doubt but there were actions of the like nature in other
places also, which they had reason to expect would all be Tried and Adjudged in
that Assembly. This is the same Diet, which being prorogued to another time, as
was said before, happened to meet again this year. Hither also Pope Clement
sent his Legate Cardinal Campegio, and with him a very loving Brief to
Frederick Duke of Saxony, dated the Thirteenth of January: Therein he tells
him, that he was very glad to hear of this Diet, and that he particularly was
to be present in it; for that he conceived great hopes that some things might
be done there, which would tend to the welfare of Christendom; and that
therefore he had sent Cardinal Campegio, a Man of great Virtue, who would
inform the Princes how solicitously he was concerned for the Public good, and
discourse privately with him about the measures of settling Peace, which he
earnestly exhorted him to endeavor, and to be Assistant to his Legate therein;
since at that time nothing could be more Necessary and Laudable, nor more for
the Dignity and Prosperity of all who were in Magistracy: That he bore singular
Love and Affection toward Germany, which he hoped would not deviate from its
Ancient Virtue, but forgetting present Discontents and Animosities, contribute
to the quieting the Disorders of Christendom: Wherefore he prayed him kindly to
receive his Legate, from whom he would have a further Account of all things.

January 26 the Switzers held an Assembly at Lucern: An Assembly of the
Switzers at Lucern.
There a Decree was made, That no Man should presume to scoff at, or despise
the Word of God, which had been taught for above these fourteen hundred Years,
nor the Mass, wherein the Body of Christ is consecrated to his own Honor, and
the Comfort of the Quick and the Dead: That all who being of Age, received the
Lord's Supper, should in Lent time Confess their Sins to Priests, and perform
all other things in the accustomed manner: That all the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church should be observed: That every one should obey their own Pastors,
receive the Sacraments from their Hands, and pay them yearly the Money which
they ought, and used to pay: That Priests should be reverenced and honored:
That no Flesh should be eaten on Days prohibited; nor Eggs and Cheese in Lent:
That nothing of Luther's Doctrine against the received Practice and Custom of
the Church should be publicly or privately taught: That in Taverns and
Publick-houses, at Feasts and Entertainments, no mention should be made of
Luther's, or any other New Doctrine: That no Indignity should any where be
offered to the Images of Saints: That the Ministers of Churches should not be
obliged to give an Account of their Doctrine to any but to the Magistrates: That
in case of any Troubles or Insurrections, they should be protected and
defended: That such as carried about the Relics of the Holy Ghost, the Virgin
Mary, or S. Anthony, should not be jeered nor laughed at by any: That the Laws
concerning Religion, made by the Bishop of Constance, should be observed: And
that they who transgressed this Decree, should be presented to the Magistrate
and punished.

Before Campegius arived at Norimberg, Cardinal Campegius's Letter to Frederick
Duke of Saxony.
Duke Frederick was gone from thence; wherefore on the last of February he
wrote him a Letter, and therewith sent the Brief which he had received from the
Pope: In his Letter he tells him, That it fell out very unluckily, that he
could not have the Opportunity to Discourse with him; for that he had many
things to impart to him in the Pope's name, which could not so conveniently be
done by Letters or Messengers; and that the Affair was such, as could hardly
admit of any Delay: But that since it could not be helped; after kind
Salutations both from the Pope and himself, he comes to tell him, at length,
That though it was a common Report, that he was a Favourer of the new Heresies
that now were broaching, yet neither his Holiness nor he, could as yet be
persuaded of it; for that from the very first time he had known him, he had
observed many Noble and Excellent Virtues in him, and especially that he was
Devout in his Religion, and a most obedient Son of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church: So that he would not trust the Judgments of others, nor have the former
good Opinion he had of him, before he understood the Matter from himself: That
within these few Years, Germany, indeed, was in a manner transformed, and had
taken to it self new Rites; but that he very well knew what difference to put
betwixt the Mobile and the Nobility and Princes, the Dispencers of Laws, among
whom he had the Pre-eminence both for his own Virtue atd Desert, and the Merits
of his Ancestors, who had always much honored the Church of Rome: That
therefore it was the Desire and Wish of his Holiness, That in these troublesome
Times, he would imitate the Examples of his Forefathers, and by his Carriage
and Conduct, make that Virtue more Illustrious and Conspicuous: For that since
Seditions and dangerous Commotions followed the Heels of one another, there was
a Necessity of Fortitude and Resolution in the Magistrate; not only in
disliking the Licentiousness of the People, but also in severely punishing the
same: That this Severity of Discipline, was the rather and the more exactly to
be practiced in his Country; that a greater Combustion might arise there, if
not timely prevented: For it was obvious enough to be understood, what they
themselves were to expect, if the Reformation of the Laws and Ceremonies of the
Church, were left to the Discretion of the People; and that Bohemia and Hungary
were sad Instances of that, in which Places the Troubles and Seditions that
were heretofore raised for the like Causes, were not to this very present
quieted, as they ought to be: That the States of Germany would be much the
same, if the Rashness and Boldness, rather than Liberty of the People, were not
repressed: That they who wantonly contemned the Laws and Constitutions of the
Church and Church Men, would without doubt, at length, attempt upon the Civil
Magistrates also, whom otherwise they had no great Kindness for: That some took
delight to see the Prelates of the Church, and the Court of Rome so tossed and
despised; But in the mean time considered not, in how great Danger they were
themselves: But that the Pope, who as the Pilot of a Ship, sat aloft to watch
and look carefully out, foresaw this approaching Storm, and had therefore sent
him as his Legate, to forewarn all the Princes, and himself in particular, of
their Danger, and to stir them up to the suppressing of those Disorders, which
threatened not so much the City of Rome, as Germany it self, with Ruin: That
for the same Cause he had received Letters from him and Injunctions, to treat
with his Highness about all these things, that so Peace and Tranquillity might
be restored to Germany: For that he was sent for this Purpose, that he might
raise up those that were fallen, and receive Penitents again into Favor; and
that though he was not altogether so fit for these things, yet trusting to his
Highnesses Favor, he resolved to set about them with all Diligence: That since
then, he had undertaken so painful and tedious a Journey, wholly upon that
Design, he prayed his Highness, That he would be pleased to favor and assist
him, and send him a speedy Answer, what he thought best to be done; and that
for his own part, he would be ready to do any thing for his Highnesses sake.

He made afterward a Speech in the College of the Princes, Campegius's Speech
to the Princes of the Empire.
and having premised some Apologies for himself; told them, That no Man could
be found at Rome, who was willing to undertake that Legation; but that, at
length, he had been charged therewith, who owed all his Fortune and Promotion
to the Germans: That he had Instructions to treat of two things chiefly, to
wit, of Religion, and the Turkish War: And that in the first place, he did,
indeed, very much wonder, That so many great and honorable Princes, should
bear with this Change of Doctrine, and suffer the Religion, Rites and
Ceremonies, wherein they were born and bred, and their Fathers and Progenitors
died, to be thus abolished and trampled upon at the Humor and Persuasion of a
few Men; without considering with themselves, What would be the End and Event
of such an Innovation; which certainly, if it were not timely prevented, could
not but produce most dreadful Troubles, and the Rebellion of Subjects against
their Magistrates: That his Holiness having ground to fear these things, had
sent him as his Legate, to join with them in devising of Means to Remedy this
Evil; not that he would prescribe to them, or demand any thing of them; but
only assist with his Counsel, and apply some healing Medicine to the public
Sore: That if they refused the good Offices of the Pope, who as a kind Father
and dutiful Pastor, wished well to his Children and Flock, the Blame could not
be hereafter laid at his Door. That as to the Turk, he did not deny, but that
all the Money which had been raised and carried to Rome for these Wars, had not
been employed that way; but that therefore the Public ought not to be
neglected in these Calamitous Times: That no Man was ignorant of the Mischiefs
that most cruel Enemy had done; that the thing it self spoke, and it was plain
to be seen by all Men; how that through the Security and Slothfulness of the
Christians, he had lately taken Rhodes, and the chief Strength of Hungary, and
had now opened to himself a Way to advance whithersoever he pleased: That the
Knights of Rhodes had, indeed, endured a long Siege, till being destitute of
all things necessary, and no Relief sent them, they had been fored to
surrender: That the like was the Fortune of Hungary, which if wholly subdued,
and brought under Subjection to him, it was to be feared, would become a more
terrible Enemy to Christendom, than the Turks themselves were: But that after
all, it was his Opinion, That unless the Differences about Religion were once
removed, the Affairs of State could never prosper.

To these things the Princes made Answer; The Princes Answer to the Pope's
Legate.
That they thanked him for the Good Will he bore toward Germany, and were very
glad that the Pope had employed him in that Legation: That they would choose
some of their Number, with whom he might treat, and communicate his Thoughts
to: That however, they supposed, he had Instructions and Orders of Proceeding,
prescribed to him by his Holiness, and the College of Cardinals, who were
acquainted with the whole State of Affairs; wherefore it was their Desire to
hear what Counsel he had to give them: That they very well understood, and saw
the Danger, which that Change of Religion threatened them with; and that
therefore, when the Year before, there was another Legate from the Pope there,
they had proposed a Way and Method for Accommodating the Affair: That they had
also given to the same Legate their Demands to the Pope, in Writing, to be by
him delivered unto his Holiness; which he promised to do accordingly: That,
therefore, if he had any Instructions in relation thereunto, they prayed him to
declare them, that so they might have surer Grounds to proceed on: That the
Turkish Affairs were, indeed, such as he had described them to be, which was no
small Grief unto them: But that that Difficult and most Important War concerned
not the Empire alone, but also all the Kings and Princes of Christendom; for
that unless they would be at Peace among themselves, and contribute their Aid
and Assistances, no lasting Measures could be taken: That nevertheless, since
the Turk was making vast Preparations both by Sea and Land, they desired also
to know his Judgment as to that matter.

Hereunto, the Legate replied, The Legates Reply.
That whether or not any Method, for composing the Differences of Religion, had
been proposed by them, or delivered to the Pope and College of Cardinals, he
knew nothing at all of it: That his Holiness was in a Disposition of doing any
thing that was convenient, and had given him full Power and Commission to act;
but that it belonged to them who knew the Men, and the Customs and Condition of
the Country, to find out a Way, that might lead to the desired End. That in the
Diet of Worms, the Emperor, with their unanimous Consent, had made and
published a Decree, which was renewed again last Year; and that then it was
judged convenient, that it should take place all over Germany; but that
nevertheless, some had obeyed it, and some not: That now he was ignorant of the
Reason of that, and why there should be so great a Diversity and Incongruity in
the Empire: That therefore it was his Opinion, That before any thing should be
decreed, they would consider how it was to be executed: That he was not come
thither to blow the Coals of Strife and Dissension, (as some said) but that all
the Popes Thoughts and his tended to Unity, Peace and Concord, that those who
had erred and gone astray, might be reduced into the right way, and that the
Decrees of Councils, and the Edicts of the Emperor and States might be
observed: That as to their Demands, whether they were made to be sent to Rome
or not, he could not tell: That there had been only three Copies of them
brought privately to Rome, whereof one had fallen into his Hands; but that the
Pope and College of Cardinals could not be persuaded that they had been framed
by the Princes; but thought that some private Persons rather had published them
in hatred to the Court of Rome; And that he had no Instructions, as to that
Particular: That however, he was not to be so understood, as if he had not full
Power and Commission to act in that Affair; but that there were many things in
these Demands, which did both derogate from the Pope's Authority, and savoured
also of Heresy, which he could not meddle in: But that for those other
Matters, which did not entrench upon the Pope, and were grounded on Justice, he
did not refuse to treat of them: That nevertheless, he thought, That what they
had to say to the Pope, might have been more modestly propounded: That the
Spaniards had lately done so, who having sent Ambassadors to Rome,
respectfully represented their Grievances: But that to Print and disperse them
among the People, seemed to him to be a little too much; though there was no
Doubt to be made, but that the Pope would do any thing for the sake of Germany:
That his Holiness was not ignorant neither of the great Power of the Turk, and
of his Preparations in this time of War, and thought that Peace and Concord
among Christian Princes was at present absolutely necessary; for effecting
whereof he would use his utmost Endeavors: That he had also great Sums of
Money in Readiness, and made it his Business to raise more, which he designed
wholly for this War; but that it was their Part, because of the Neighborhood
of Hungary, to assist the young Prince, who was related to them, both in Blood
and Affinity: That the Pope would also supply him with Money, and had labored
from his first Entry into the Pontificate, that having made Peace betwixt the
Emperor, the Kings of England and France, the Turkish War might be prosecuted
with united Forces: That as the chief Pastor, he made Peace his chief Care and
Study; but that if the Sheep would not follow the Voice of the Shepherd, he
could do no more: That for the same Cause, he had been sent Legate into
Germany; and that if all the Pains he had taken, must be in vain, his Holiness
and he both, must bear it patiently, and commit the whole matter to God's
Providence. The Cantons of Switzerland expostulate with those of Zurich about
Religion.


In Switzerland, the Animosities and Clashings about Religion increased daily,
and the rest of the Cantons, by their Ambassadors, made their Lamentation to
those of Zurich; That in times past, all things were Quiet, and no Contention
about Religion; but that now some rash, hot-headeded Men, had troubled that
lovely Peace and Tranquillity both of Church and State, and sowed among them the
Seeds of Discord: That it had been well done, to have remedied this growing
Evil in the beginning, and in imitation of their Ancestors, vindicated the
Glory and Honor of Almighty God, the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, and
therein have spent their Lives and Fortunes; and that now also the State of the
Times required the same chiefly at their Hands; for that otherwise the Disorder
would bring upon them all, unavoidable Ruin, besides the Loss of their own
Souls: That the Fruits of Luther's new Doctrine, began now sufficiently to
appear: That the Rabble and Mobile would hardly now be restrained: That they
behaved themselves Insolently and Sawcily, grew Stubborn and Unruly, and seemed
ripe for Rebellion, as they had plainly enough intimated of late: That the
Contagion of this Evil had been conveyed to them by means of Zuinglius and
Leo Jude, who so taught the Word of God, which ought to bring Peace and Concord
with it, and interpreted it according to their own Fancy, that they opened all
ways to Broils and Dissentions: And that though they were not certain what
their Doctrine was, yet they had daily Experience of the Abuses which attended
it: That on Days prohibited by the Church, Men did eat Flesh and Eggs without
any distinction: That Priests, and the Religious of both Sexes, breaking their
Vows, forsook their Profession and Orders, and married: That the Service and
Worship of God was wholly laid aside: That there was no more Singing nor
Prayers now in Churches; Priests were Dishonored, Monasteries Dissolved,
Confession and Penance neglected; so that some, without any regard to these,
stood not in awe to come and receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: That
Mass was railed at, the Virgin Mary and other Saints reviled, Pictures and
Images pulled down, torn and broken, no Reverence nor Honor shown to the
Sacraments of the Church; and that Licentiousness and Impurity was now grown to
such a height, That the most Holy Host, that Unleavened Bread which represents
the Body of Christ, was scarcely safe in the Priest's Hands. That these were
matters of such moment, as justly deserved to be bewailed: That, for their
parts, they could no longer endure them, especially, seeing lately in their
last Convention, some of the Clergy, their Confederates, had by a common and
public Deputation, implored their Aid. That these things being so, they prayed
them, To leave their new Doctrine, and continue in the ancient Religion of
their Forefathers: But that if they thought themselves in any thing agrieved
and oppressed by the Pope, and those that depended on him, as Cardinals,
Bishops, Prelates, and the like, for that they invaded, sold or exchanged
Church Livings, or that they usurped to themselves too great a Jurisdiction,
and applied that Power, which ought only to be exercised in Spiritual, to Civil
and Temporal Affairs; That if these and many other things of that kind, were
burden some and uneasy unto them, they were not against the having of them
reformed; for that they themselves were extremely displeased thereat, and would
willingly consult with them, how they might cast off that Burden.

On the one and twentieth day of March, The Answer of the Senate of Zurich.
the Senate of Zurich gave their Answer; That for these five Years now past,
their Ministers had preached the Gospel among them; which in the beginning
seemed to them to be a new kind of Doctrine indeed, because they had not heard
the like before; but that when they came to understand that the scope and end
of it, was only to show, That the only Author and Finisher of Man's Salvation,
was Jesus Christ, who shed his precious Blood, and laid down his Life for the
Sins of the World, and alone delivered wretched Men from Eternal Death, being
the only Mediator betwixt God and Man; they could not but with servent Desires
embrace such glad Tidings: That great had been the Harmony and Consent which
was in ancient Times among the Apostles, and those, who in the Ages after them
embraced the Doctrine of Christ; which they hoped would be new also among all,
who applied their Minds to it, rejecting Human Traditions, that had no Ground
in the Word of God: That if Luther, or any Man else taught so, it was well
done; and yet his Name ought not to be objected to any, as if they believed the
Doctrine only because he taught it; for that that was a malicious Aspersion,
and reproachful to the Word of God: That, moreover, though they adored Christ
alone, and had their recourse to him, yet did they not therefore offer any
Injury either to the Virgin Mary or the other Saints; for that all these when
they were upon Earth, expected Salvation only through the Name of Christ: That
there was now such a Light revealed, that most People within their City
diligently searched and read the Scriptures; nor could the Ministers of the
Church wrest the Scripture, which all Men had in their Hands; so that Schism
and Heresy ought not to be objected to them, but might be justly imputed to
those, who for worldly Gain, Pomp and Honor, turned the Word of God to what
Sense they pleased: That they were charged with Error, indeed, but that it
could not be made out; that the Bishops of Constance, Basil and Coyre, and some
Universities also, had been several times desired to do it, but nothing of that
kind had been hitherto performed: That besides, to their last Assembly, none
came from the Bishops, nor from them neither, except some from Schafheusen and
San Gall; that they, who were then present, having diligently considered the
matter, agreed in Opinion with them: That as to what the Bishops said, That it
was not lawful for them to make the Scriptures so common, it was unreasonable;
for it being their Duty to take heed that the Sheep should not go astray, it
was but just that they should bring into the Way such as were out of it; but
that seeing they did not do it, and referred all things to the Fathers and
Councils, they were resolved to hearken not to what Men decreed, but to what
Christ commanded: That their Teachers and Ministers gave no Cause to Divisions
in the State; but that that Fault lay at their Doors, who for their own Profit
and Advantage taught Doctrins contrary to the Word of God, for that they were
those who led Men into Error, and grievously offended God, who was therefore
provoked to punish that Boldness with various Calamities: That all that
Difference and Dissension proceeded from their Covetousness, who were afraid to
lose any of their Profits: But that if these Men followed the true Doctrine, and
made it their Task, to enquire what God's Will was, and not what Men willed;
there was no doubt, but that they would cast off all Lust, Pride and Avarice,
and apply themselves to the Study of Peace and Concord: That many Vices,
unknown in former Ages, had now overspread the World, which the Ministers of
their City freely reproved, exhorting Men to the Fear of God; but that if most
People were not reformed by their Sermons, and did not bring forth Fruit worthy
of that Doctrine, it was not the Fault of the Seed sown, but of the Ground that
received it: That it was plainly to be seen, That the People within their
Territories, did not live in that Rioting and Intemperance, which reigned every
where else; and that particularly the Men of their Country followed not, as
heretofore, Foreign and Mercenary Wars, which doubtless cherished and fomented
many Vices: That as to the eating of Flesh and Eggs, though it might be lawfully
done, and was not prohibited by Christ, yet they had made a Law to restrain the
rashness of the People, who might thereby give Offense: That God was the Author
of Marriage, who allowed it to all: That S. Paul also enjoined, That a Minister
of the Church should be the Husband of one Wife; and that seeng Bishops for a
little Money, gave Priests leave to keep Concubines, a thing of foul Example,
and that they neither could nor would be without Women; they thought it not
good to resist God, who instituted Matrimony: That the Case was the same with
the Women, who are said to have vowed Chastity; for they looked upon that kind
of Obligation and Vow not to be pleasing to God; and that since all People had
not the Gift of Continence, it was, in their Judgment, far better for them to
marry, than to live in impure Celibacy: That Convents and Colleges of
Regulars, were heretofore instituted for the Poor and Needy; but that now these
Revenues were for the most part enjoyed by those, who had enough of their own
besides to live on: Nor was it reasonable that one Man should possess alone
what was sufficient for the Subsistence of many: That therefore it seemed just
to them, that these Goods should be again converted to the use of the Poor;
wherein, nevertheless, they used that Moderation, that the present Possessors
should enjoy them during Life, that no Man might have cause to complain: That
the Ornaments of Churches belonged not to the true Worship of God, but that God
was exceeding well pleased, when the Necessities of the Poor were relieved:
That Christ commanded the Rich Young Man, in the Gospel, Not to hang up his
Wealth in Churches for a show, but to sell all his Goods, and give unto the
Poor: That they did not despise, but highly esteemed the Order of Priesthood,
when Priests did their Duty, and taught the People aright; but for the rest of
the Rabble, that did no public Good, but rather Harm, if by little and little
they were diminished without giving Scandal, and their Possessions converted to
pious Uses, they made no doubt but that it would be very acceptable Service to
God: That it was to be questioned, Whether their Singing and Prayers were
pleasing to God or not; for that most of them understood not what they said,
and besides were hired to do it: That what tacit and Auricular Confession,
which muttered over Sins, was good for, they would not undertake to determine;
but that they reckoned the other, whereby true Penitents confessed their Sins
to Christ, their Mediator, to be not only profitable, but necessary also to
Consciences troubled, and born down under the Pressure of Sin: That that usual
way of Satisfaction, which was very gainful to the Priests, was both Erroneous
and Impious; that this was truly to Repent and make Satisfaction, when men
reformed their Lives: That the Orders of Monks was a Human Invention, and no
Ordinance of Gods: That they highly Reverenced and Honored the Sacraments,
which had God for their Author, and would not suffer any Man to despise them;
but that they were to be used according to the Word of God, and Divine
Institution, and the Lord's Supper not so to be applied, as if it were an
Oblation or Sacrifice: That if the Clergy, who lately sent Deputies to
complain, could prove that they had molested them, or that they were guilty of
any Error; they did not refuse to make them Satisfaction: But if otherwise,
that it seemed reasonable to them, that they should be enjoined to do their
Duty; that is to say, Teach the Truth, and to abstain from standering of others;
that they had been extremely glad to hear from them, that they were desirous to
be delivered from the Rapine, Extortions and immoderate Power of the Pope and
his Dependents; but that there was no better way of accomplishing that, than to
follow in all things the Word of God; for that so long as their Laws and
Decrees should be in force, there was no Deliverance to be expected; but that
the preaching of the Word of God was the only means to shake all their Power
and Dignity: That they were sensible enough of the great Force and Efficacy of
the Gospel, and of the Truth; and because they distrusted their own Strength,
therefore they had recourse to Kings and Princes for Aid: That if in this
Particular the Assistance of Scripture was to be made use of, the thing it self
required, That the same should be also done in other matters, and that all
things whereby God was offended should be abolished; that for the Reformation
of all these Abuses, they would freely bestow not only their Labor and
Counsils, but their Estates and Fortunes also; for that it was a thing, which
ought to have been done long since: That therefore they prayed them to take in
good part what they had said, and seriously reflect upon the same; that for
their parts, they desired nothing more earnestly, than that all might live in
Peace: That, in like manmer, they would do nothing contrary to the Articles and
Conditions of the League; but that in this Cause, which concerned their Eternal
Salvation, they could not do otherwise than they did, unless they were
convinced of their Error: That therefore, as they had lately, so again they
earnestly desired them, if they thought their Doctrine to be repugnant to Holy
Scripture, that they would make it so appear to them, within a certain time, to
wit, before the End of May; for till then they would expect an Answer from
them, and from the Bishops, and from the University of Basil.

In the mean time the Bishop of Constance having held a Synod, The Bishop of
Constance's Book to those of Zurich.
made Answer to those of Zurick, in a little Book composed for that purpose;
wherein he treats of Idols and graven Images, what they were of old; how the
Jews and Gentiles worshipped them; why the Church received Images and Pictures,
what time they were first introduced, wherein the Idols of the Jews and
Gentiles differed from the Images of Christians, and concludes; that when the
Scripture speaks of putting away graven Images, it was only to be understood of
the Idols of the Jews and Genttiles, and that therefore, the Images received by
the Christian Church, were still to be retained. In the next place, he handled
the Mass, and alleging many testimonies of Popes and Councils, endeavors to
prove it to be an Oblation and Sacrifice. This Book which was pretty long, he
sent to the Senate about the beginning of June, and seriously exhorted them not
to suffer Images to be removed, the Mass abolished, nor the people to be any
otherwise taught. He caused the Book to be afterward Printed, and sent it
about, and among others, to the Canons of Zurick; giving for his Reasons, that
though it had been written for the private use of the Senate, who craved it of
him, yet because he had heard that questions and animosities did arise in other
places also upon the same account, he was willing to make but one business of
it, and to consult the interest of the rest also; that therefore he advised
them to follow the received custom of the Church, and not to be persuaded by
any man's Reasons to the contrary. Their Answer to it.
The Senate replied to this, August the eighteenth, that they had carefully
read the Book over and over again, and were extremely glad that he had
published it; for that so it would appear which of the two maintained the
better Cause: Then they tell what was the opinion of their Doctors and Learned
men, and confute his Arguments by Scripture: But before they wrote back unto
him, Images abolished at Zurich.
the Senate had already commanded that all Images both within the City, and in
all other places also within their Jurisdiction, should be pulled down and
burnt, but all without tumult: This was done on the fifteenth of June, and some
months after, the Canons treated and came to a composition with the Senate, who
both together agreed upon a way how the goods and revenues of the College
should be disposed of.

The Emperor sent John Haunart to the Diet of Norimberg, before mentioned, to
complain that the Decree of Worms, which was made with their unanimous advice
and consent, had been to the great prejudice of Germany, infringed, and to
command that it should be carefully observed for the future: To which the
Princes Answered, That they would observe it, as far as they could. At length,
April the eighteenth, it was Decreed, That with the Emperors consent, the Pope
should, with all convenient speed, The Recess or Decree of the Diet of
Norimberg.
call a free Council in some proper place in Germany; that November the
eleventh, the States should assemble again at Spire, to consult what was to be
followed, until the Council should commence; and that the Princes in their
several Provinces, should appoint some pious and learned men, to collect out of
the Books of Luther and others, all disputable points, to be presented to the
Princes in the next Diet, that they might proceed more orderly, when they
should come to be examined in Council: Furthermore, that the Magistrates should
take special care that the Gospel should be purely and soberly taught,
according to the sense and interpretation of Expositors approved by the Church;
that no infamous Libels and Pictures should any more be published; and lastly,
that those things wherewith the Princes had lately charged the Court of Rome
and the Clergy, should be treated of and discussed in the next Diet of Spire.
As concerning the Council Campegius promised to make a Report to the Pope, as
the Princes at this Diet had desired him; who were Lewis Prince Palatine,
William and Lewis Dukes of Bavaria, Frederick Prince Palatine, Casimire
Marquess of Brandenburg, the Bishops of Treves, Bamberg, Wurtzburg, Trent and
Brixen, and Albert of Brandenburg, Master of Prusia.

You have heard before what the Senate of Strasburg offered to their Bishop,
The Bishop Strasburg's Complaint to Cardinal Campegius.
concerning the Priests, whom he had cited to appear before him at Savern: But
they not appearing at the Day, he wrote to the Legate Campegius, complaining,
That he was hindered by the Senate, in the execution of his Jurisdiction; so
that he could not punish those who contrary to the Sacred Canons, had married
Wives: And besides that, contrary to the Pontifical Constitutions, the Senate
made Priests Freemen of the City. Thomas Murner, a Franciscan Friar, went at
that time from Strasburg to Norimberg, and made a grievous Complaint of the
Senate to the Cardinal: The Senate's Justification.
But the Deputies of the Republic that were sent to the Diet, hearing of the
Bishop's Complaint, went to the Legate to purge themselves, and justify the
Senate, who, they said, had not hitherto, nor were they yet purposed to be any
Let or Hindrance to the Bishop; but on the contrary, that they had expressly
signified to him by Letters, That if he had any Action against married Priests,
grounded on the Law of God, he might freely put it into Execution; and that he
would be assistant to him therein: That however, the Senate took it ill, that
the Bishop should flinch from his Agreement; for that it had been stipulated,
That when he had any Action against a Clergyman, he should try it before his
City-Official: but that without any regard to this Agreement, he had cited the
Defendants to appear out of the City; and that when in their own Defense, they
pleaded the Articles of the Compact, and did not appear, they had been
condemned without a Hearing: That if the Senate should now suffer any Sentence
to be executed against them, whilst they appealed to Law and Equity, there was
no doubt, but that it would occasion a Tumult and Uproar among the People: That
as to their making Priests Freemen of the City, it had been an ancient Custom
so to do; that the Senate also had not long since been desired by the Bishop,
to take the Clergy into their Protection, Campegius's Plea with the Deputies of
Strasburg.
and that that was the usual way of doing it. To these things the Legate made
answer, That having read the Bishop's Letter, and the state of the Case which
he had sent him, he found that their being cited to appear without the City,
was not contrary to the Order and Course of Law, and that the Bishop had the
same Power that his Vicar had; that therefore he prayed, That the Senate would
assist the Bishop in punishing them. After a great deal of Discourse, wherein
the Deputies maintained that Justice was to be administered in the Capital City;
they furthermore told the Legate, That the greatest part of the Clergy of
Strasburg gave very bad Example by their lewd and scandalous Lives, keeping
Concubines in their Houses, to the great offense of the People, which was
altogether connived at, and no Man as yet punished by the Bishop for the same:
That if now, the Senate should suffer him to punish those who observed not the
Pope's Law, whilst they who broke the Law of God, had liberty to Whore, and
give all the bad Examples of a most filthy and vicious Life; who would doubt
but that they would thereby expose themselves to a great deal of Danger? To
this he replied, That he knew not what Agreements there were betwixt them; but
that the Crime of those Men was notorious, and needed not any great Trial at
Law; since they were, ipso facto, excommunicated: That therefore, the Bishop
was to be assisted: That the Whoredom and dishonest Lives of other Men, did not
excuse their Crime: That they who lived so did very ill, and that the Bishop
neglected his Duty in conniving at them: That he knew it to be a received
Custom in Germany, That the Bishops for Money allowed Fornication to the
Priests; for which they were to render an account some time or other; but that
it was not Lawful therefore, for those to marry: And that it was a far greater
Sin for Priests to have Wives, than to keep several Concubines; for that the
one were persuaded that they did right, and the other knew and confessed that
what they did was sinful: That all Men had not the Continence of S. John
Baptist; and that no Instance could be given, That it was lawful for them to
forsake Single Life; no not among the Greeks, who in Rites differed from the
Church of Rome: That therefore, he again entreated them to aid and assist the
Bishop. To these things the Deputies said, That if the Bishop would begin, and
punish the Whoring Priests first, then the Senate could much more conveniently
assist him afterward in any lawful Proceeding against the others. But he again
urged, That they should first assist their Bishop, and if he punished not the
Fornicators, that he would come in Person, and see it done, as they severally
deserved.

After the Diet of Norimberg, The Resolution of some Catholics at Ratisbone.
and Archduke Ferdinand, Campegio Archbishop of Salisburg, the Dukes of
Bavaria, the Bishops of Trent and Ratisbone, with the Deputies of the Bishops
of Bamberg, Spire, Strasburg, Ausburg, Constance, Basil, Freisingen, Passaw and
Brixen, met at Ratisbone, and on the Sixth of July, came to this Resolution:
That whereas the Emperor, in compliance with the Opinion and Desire of Pope Leo
X, had by a public Decree, at Worms, condemned the Doctrine of Luther as
impious and erroneous; and that whereas it had been decreed both in the former
and last Diets of Norimberg, That all should obey it, as much as lay in their
power. They therefore, at the Suit of Cardinal Campegio, who had full Power and
Commission from the Pope in that Affair, did will and command, that that Edict,
and the Decrees lately made in the Diet, should be observed throughout all
their Dominions and Jurisdictions: That the Gospel and all other Scriptures
should be taught in Churches, according to the Interpretation of Ancients, who
were conspicuous for purity of Life, and confirmed their Doctrine by Sufferings
and Martyrdom: That all who taught old Heresies, or any thing else that was
reproachful to Christ, his Mother, or the Saints, or which tended to Sedition,
should be punished according to the Tenor of the Edict: That no Man should be
admitted to Preach, without a License from the Bishop: That they who Preached
already, should be Examined, and that no Place should be given to private and
clandestine Sermons: That the Ecclesiastical Regulations made by Campegio, with
common consent, against Vice, and for reforming of Manners, when once they were
published, should be observed: That (...) Alterations should be made in the
Sacraments, Mass, and other Rites of Worship, but all things done as formerly,
in the times of their Ancestors: That they who without Confession and
Absolution, received the Lord's Supper; they who on days prohibited, did eat
Flesh and other forbidden Meats; all Monks and Nuns who forsook their Order;
and all Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons that Married, should be severely
punished: That nothing should be Printed without the Magistrates leave; but
especially, that none of the Books of Luther and his Adherents should be
Published or Sold: That those within their Dominions who studied at Wittemberg,
should within three Months after they had notice of this Decree, return home,
or go some where else, where Luther's poisonous Doctrine had not reached: That
they who were disobedient herein, should be deprived of all their Benefices,
and lose their Inheritance: That they who continued in that University, should
be incapable of any Church-Living, or of the Privileges of Teaching Youth. And
that for the more effectual putting these things in execution, some fit Men
should be commissioned, to make diligent enquiry into all Matters, and therein
assist the Governors of Places: That the guilty should be committed to Prison,
and punished according to their Deservings: That they who should be proscribed
and banished, should have no place of refuge within their Territories: And that
if any Stirs or Insurrections happened within any of their Limits, by reason of
this Decree, that they should mutually help and assist one another; but so,
that it should be no derogation to any League that they might have with others.
The Regulations for Reformation of the Clergy.
Moreover, because, as they said, the vicious Lives of the Priests had given
cause to Luther's Heresy, by the Advice of the Legate Campegio, they made
these following Laws, for Reformation of the Clergy: That they should live
Virtuously, be clothed Decently, not Traffic, avoid Taverns and
Publick-Houses, not be Covetous, nor extort Money for administration of holy
Things: That such as kept Concubines should be turned out of Place: And that
the number of Holydays should be moderated. Campegio had a great mind to have
had these things enacted in the Diet of the Empire; but seeing he could not
accomplish that, by reason of the aversion that some had to Popery he held this
separate Convention.

When Luther understood that the Emperor and most part of the Princes urged the
execution of the Decree of Worms, Luther's Admonition to the Princes of
Germany.
he bewailed the state of Germany, which being so often admonished, neglected
its own Interest: He expostulated also with the Princes themselves, that being
so palpably and grossly cheated by the Popes of Rome, they should so zealously
maintain their Dignity, and attempt the Destruction of him a single Man, who
wished their Welfare and Prosperity: Wherefore in regard of their high
Ingratitude, and inexcusable Obstinacy, he said there was a dreadful Tempest
hanging over Germany: He admonished them also not to be rash in engaging in a
War, or contributing Money against the Turk, who in Counsel and Moderation far
exceeded our Princes: That while our Lives and Manners were such, there was no
Victory to be expected: That it was a very ridiculous and absurd thing, for the
Emperor, who could not add a minutes time to his own Life, to call himself
Defender of the Faith and Church: That the King of England was guilty of the
like boldness, in taking to himself the same Title: But that he prayed God to
set such Magistrates over his People, as might prove zealous in promoting the
Glory of his Divine Majesty.

The Pope sent the Golden Rose, The Pope sends a Golden Rose to the King of
England. Erasmus his Book of Free Will.
which he had lately consecrated; as the Custom is, three Weeks before Easter,
to Henry King of England, as a certain Pledge, in token of his singular
Good Will and favor toward him.

At this very time came forth a Treatise, written by Erasmus, concerning
Free Will; which Luther afterward answered in a Book, entitled, de Servo
Arbitrio, or Bond-will. The King of England and Cardinal of York put Erasmus
upon the handling of that Subject, as he himself acknowledges, in a Letter to
the Cardinal, which is printed. Now also, Anthony Duke of Lorrain, ordered by
Proclamation, That since Luther's Doctrine was condemned by the Pope and
Emperor, and by the most famous Universities, none of his Subjects should in
their Sermons teach any such Doctrine; that they also who had any of Luther's
Books, should bring them in by a Day prefixed, or otherwise incur a Penalty by
him appointed.

This Year Henry of Zutphen, Henry of Zutphen suffers.
was for preaching the Gospel, put to a sad and painful Death at Dietmarsh,
upon the Borders of Germany; he had gone thither upon a Call, after he had
preached two Yers at Bremen.

We told you before of a Diet that in November was to be held at Spire; but
that Design was altered, and when the Emperor knew of the Decree which
appointed it, he wrote from Spain to the States of the Empire on the thirteenth
of July, and blamed them very much for so doing: For that since some Years
before, he had with the Advice and Consent of all the States, in the Diet of
Worms, solemnly condemned the Doctrine of Luther as pestilent and Heretical,
and had commanded his Books, which upon due examination, had been condemned by
the Pope, to be burnt; he could not, he said, but think it very strange, and be
troubled, that they should only prohibit Scandalous Books and Pictures to be
sold; as if the Edict of Worms had been illegally made: That he was also
somewhat more troubled, that they should both desire to have a Council in
Germany, and also make address to the Legate Campegius, to write to the Pope
about it, as if that did not concern the Pope or him, more than them; for if
they thought it so much for the Interest of Germany to have a Council, why did
they not make their Application to him, that he might obtain it from the Pope?
That now, though he was sensible, how much that Decree of theirs entrenched
both upon the Pope's Authority and his own; yet considering with himself, That
the Course proposed might be profitable and advantageous to the Public, he
therefore, approved of a Council also, but conditionally, That it were called
by the Pope's Authority, and held in Time and Place convenient, so that he
himself might be present thereat, as he was fully resolved to be: But, that
they had appointed another Diet to begin the eleventh of November, wherein they
resolved to adjust matters of Religion, until the sitting of the Council: That
they had also appointed some learned Divines to collect and judge of the chief
Points of Doctrine, he could by no means, nor would he consent to it; but as by
Duty he was obliged, being Protector and Defender of the Roman Church, he
utterly disapproved that Decree, left he should offend both God and the Pope:
For what could be more Reproachful to the Church of Christ, than to see the
Reverence which was done to the Supreme Power thus prostituted? to see Germany,
which had been ever celebrated above all other Nations for Piety and Obedience,
alone to attempt so weighty an Affair, as no Princes, no not the Pope himself
durst undertake; which was to renounce and abolish that Religion, which had so
long flourished in the Christian World; from which Religion no Man ever made
defection, but he felt the heavy Hand of God punishing him for his Crime? That
Luther, indeed, now opposed it, and by alluring Words and crafty Insinuations,
seduced Men into Snares, and made himself Popular; just so as Mahomet formerly
had done; who by his Doctrine wrought more Mischief to Christendom, than any
armed Force could ever have done; but that when Errors of that Nature, under a
Color of Truth, once made an Impression upon the Minds of Men, it was not
easy to efface it again: That he prayed God, to look favorably upon Germany,
and not to suffer so great a Calamity to overspread it during his Life. That
therefore they should obey the Edict of Worms, unless they would smart for it,
and not to meddle in Controversies about Religion, till the Pope and he, who
were their chief Magistrates, should think fit to call a Council. To the same
purpose also, he wrote privately to some of the States, and among others to the
Senate of Strasburg, so that that Decree for a future Diet, was vacated; for
the Emperor being engaged in a War with France, endeavored by all means to
gain the Pope.

This Summer Charles Duke of Bourbonne, The Duke of Bourbonne Besieges
Marseilles.
Constable of France, who the Year before, partly of himself, and partly at the
Emperor's Solicitation, had revolted, besieged Marseilles; but in vain: Upon
his Retreat from thence into Italy, the King pursued him in great haste, and
having seized most of the Places in Lumbardy, and taken the City of Milan it
self, toward Winter he laid Siege to Pavia, a Town upon the River Tesino.

In the Month of November the Boors of Schwabenland began to rise against their
Lord, An Insurrection of the Boors.
the Count of Lupsie, pretending to be overcharged by him. The same did
afterward some of their Neighbors also, against their several Magistrates; so
that the Council of the Empire, which, as we said, managed the Government in
the Emperor's absence, and sat then at Esling, were obliged to send
Commissioners to compose some Controversies: However, this Tumult ceased not,
for all that, as we shall show hereafter, but was the beginning of an
extraordinary and dangerous Commotion, which in process of time imbroiled a
great part of Germany.

As Luther's Doctrine began more and more to spread, Complaints of the Popish
Clergy against the Senate of Strasburg.
so the Clergy bestirred themselves more vigorously to oppose it, finding that
their Goods and Fortunes lay at stake: And some of the Churchmen of Strasburg,
made a heavy Complaint to the Council of the Empire, That the Senate did many
ways invade and infringe their Liberties and Privileges, that they promoted
married Priests and Monks, as Capito, Bucer, and others, to Churches: That they
received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in both Kinds, 1525.
and that they had in a tumultary manner cast the Images out of their Churches.
Wherefore Frederick Prince Palatine, and Philip Marquess of Baden, two of the
chief of the Council of the Empire, which then was at Esling, wrote to the
Senate of Strasburg, in the Month of January, admonishing them to desist, and
to restore all things as they were before.

Some of the Switzers, as particularly they of Schafhausen and Basil,
Oecolampadius preaches at Basil.
where John Oecolampadius preached, began by little and little to relent in
their spite against the Zurichers; but the rest, especially Lucerne, Vri,
Switz, Vnderwaldt, Zug and Friburg could by no means be appeased. And when the
Governor of Turegie, to which Country Zurich adjoyns, A Tumult at Zurich.
was carrying off a Priest whom he had apprehended in the Nightime, he called
out for help, and presently raised a Tumult of the People, as is usual in such
cases; so that the Allarm flying into the Country, all were presently in Arms.
The Zurichers alleged that this was an injury done unto them, because the Man
had been taken within their Jurisdiction: And having received many other
Affronts besides, on the Fourth of January they wrote to all their Confederates
and Allies to this effect; Christ, say they, commands, That if one smite us on
one Cheek, we should turn up to him the other. In obedience to this Doctrine, we
have indeed suffered many things, and that patiently too: But now that there is
no end nor measure of Wrongs and Injuries, we are forced to betake our selves
to that which Christ himself made use of; and if we have done any evil, The
Zurichers expostulate with the rest of the Cantons.
we desire to be convicted of it. Since then we lie obnoxious to so much envy,
and are every where evil spoken of, the thing it self certainly requires and
extorts an Answer from us. And therefore we will show the Causes of this
hatred, refute the Accusations brought against us, and make it appear how we
stand affected toward the common Country. And in the first place, when Francis
King of France had long and earnestly solicited a League, and had therein
obtained your consents; though you had often dealt with us to engage therein,
yet we absolutely refused it; and that for diverse reasons, but chiefly this,
That we did not like that course, of letting out our Men to others for Money,
that they may fight against those who never did them any injury; for that it
was a thing of bad Example, and accustomed them to idleness; and if they should
chance to die in the Wars, they must leave their Wives and Children in extreme
poverty: Nay we looked upon it also as base and unworthy with our own loss to
sneak so to any King, as in a manner to enslave our Countrymen to his Will and
Pleasure: Wherefore we judged it our Duty to retain the liberty of Bodies and
Estates which our Ancestors with great Valor and bloody Hands purchased for
us, and to defend it with the like Courage and Constancy. Now this seems to
be the source and cause of all the grudge and prejudice that is entertained
against us; for we verily believe, that if we had approved the League with the
rest, we should not have heard of any Quarrels nor Animosities: For when ye
often dealt with us, that we would not separate from the rest, we always told
you what our Thoughts were, That we would live quietly, and entertain
friendship with the King, according to the Treaty of Peace long ago concluded,
and would observe the Conditions of our ancient League contracted for the
defense and welfare of our common Country: And because we stuck to that, we
have drawn upon our selves hatred from abroad. After that the Light of the
Gospel began to shine among us, we have shaken off that Burden which the Pope
and his Party had laid upon us ignorant Men, and abolished manifest Errors.
Some of you have laid hold on this occasion, and by your Deputies required us
to reform: But we made answer then, as we had done many times before, That we
acted according to the Prescript of God's Holy Word: That if any Man could
convince us of Error, we would change our Purpose; but if not, that it was but
reasonable that we should obey God rather than Man. With that, Egly the
Governor of Lucern stood up and told us, That unless we did renounce the Sect
of Luther and Zuinglius, those of Lucern, Vri, Switz, Vnderwaldt, Zug and
Friburg would sit no more in Assembly with us. And not long after they had made
a Law among themselves to that purpose, the Governor of Turegie apprehended
John Oxline, a Minister of the Word, in his own House, in the Nightime, and
carried him away Prisoner; whereby we have received a double injury: First' in
that it was a Trespass not only upon a Man of ours, but also upon our Limits:
And then, in that, when upon his crying out for help, many armed Men flocked
together, and, as it is usual in such cases, committed many Insolences; our
Men, who crowded out promiscuously with the rest, and we who were innocent,
bear all the blame of the Fact. Now the second thing wherewith you charge us,
proceeds from that Convention which last year Ferdinand Archduke of Austria
held at Ratisbone with the Governors of his Country, the Bishops and others,
who cannot endure the pure Doctrine of the Gospel. But it is plain enough that
for a long while it has been their design to raise Dissenssions among us, and,
to divides us one from another: And it grieves us the more, that ye should
trust such; for there are some among them, whom you have sometimes accounted
lewd and wicked Men, and whom we, understanding their snares and treachery,
banished out of our Territories. These very Men now, finding that we would not
give ear to their tricks and artifices, are fled to you, and now accuse us, as
if we had broken that League, which was once made with the House of Austria.
They say that we gave aid to our Neighbors of Waldhust against Ferdinand their
Prince, but it is false. For when they of Waldhust were in danger for the
profession of the Reformed Religion, and were not admitted to plead their own
Cause; some of our Men of their own accord, unknown to us, ran thither to
defend harmless People from violence and force; but so soon as we were informed
of it, we recalled them: So then that head of Accusation falls of it self. But
if Ferdinand have any thing else to object unto us, as to the violation of the
League, let him allege it, and he shall have an Answer; so that all Men shall
plainly see, which side has kept to their Articles. But that you should have
treated privately with Archduke Ferdinand's Ambassadors, our Deputies being
excluded from the Conference, is a thing that we have good reason to wonder at;
for if the Treaty had been about the old League, it was but just that we should
have been admitted; but if it was about Religion, why do ye not proceed with us
upon the conditions that we have many times offered unto you? There was a
strong report, that you have combined together for the Subversion of the
Lutheran Religion; which if true, yet seeing we are joined in League, as well
with him as with you; and that we follow not the steps of Luther, but the
dictates of holy Scripture, we ought not to be reckoned of that number: But
since we are ignorant of what was done betwixt you, and yet are maliciously
accused, as if without your knowledge we had solicited some Cities for Aid; we
protest it is a mere Calumny. Of the same nature is that other report also,
That we resolved, by a Signal given, to Muster Men together of a sudden, and to
surprise Baden and some other places; for these are Lies devised by them to
incite you to seize those places, and to put Garrisons in them against us: And
if that were once done, they make no doubt, but that it would raise such Stirs
and Commotions, as may kindle a Domestic and Civil War among us. There are
besides many other Calumnies forged against us; as, among others, That we
teach, that Mary the Mother of Christ, had several Sons; and that it was James
the Younger, and not Christ himself that died for us. These and such other
Slanders we would have refuted at Lucern, but our Men were hindered by you from
speaking to the People. When Eckius also gave it out, that he would convince
Zuinglius of his Errors, we were very glad of it, and gave him and others also
a safe Conduct, earnestly exhorting him to come, and promising to receive him
with all Good Will and Affection. We are told also, that our pulling down of
Images and Pictures has given very great offense; but we have already given
Reasons for our so doing. Since therefore we have done nothing against the
Articles and Conditions of the League; since we refuse no danger for the safety
and welfare of our common Country, and that we have the same Love and Affection
for you, that we have always had, as far as you give us leave, why do we suffer
this Division among us? It is well known, what the state and condition of some
of our Ancestors was, who being content with their own Limits, and by hard
labor getting a Livelihood for themselves and Families, were oppressed by the
Nobility with heavy Bondage: But God looked favorably upon them; for having
driven out the Tyrants, they recovered their liberty; and being enriched by the
Goods of those whom they ejected, they strengthened themselves by a League,
under the Protection whereof they valiantly defended themselves against all
Foreign Force, and have many times triumphed over their Enemies: Many have also
labored to infringe and dissolve that Society, but in vain: Now what Aid and
Assistance our Ancestors contributed in those difficult times, we doubt not but
you will remember. And this, in short may suffice to be said of the Original
and Beginning of our League: Nor do we think it needful to relate what
Diligence, Fidelity and Zeal we have ever since shown in promoting the Honor
and Dignity of our common Country; for we still retain the same good Intentions
that hitherto we have had: Which being so, it exceedingly grieves us, that at
the instigation of others, who seek their own Ends, you should be so
exasperated against us. Consider rather with your selves what Friendship has
always been among us, when in several places, as well at home as abroad, we ran
the same Fortune of War, and did many brave Actions. Certainly the thoughts of
these things ought to unite not only us, but our Posterity also, in the
strictest Bonds of Amity. If the cause of Religion, or any thing else that we
have done, give you offense, why do we not amicably debate the matter among our
selves, as it becomes Allies and Confederates, linked together in a kind of
Brotherly Fellowship? We shall not be morose, obstinate or perverse; but
willingly submit to better Information, as we have often declared. Now
therefore, since the Profession of the Reformed Religion, the Refusal of the
French League, besides many other Calumnies forged against us, have alienated
your Minds from us, and changed your former Good Will; we were necessarily
obliged to write these things, to clear our Honor and Reputation: For unless,
as it has been often said already, it be proved by Scripture that we have
erred, we cannot part from those Decrees which we have made about Religion,
what Force soever be bent against us for the same.

The Senate of Strasburg, The Senate of Strasburg gives an Answer to the
Council of the Empire.
by Letters which on the Thirteenth of February they wrote to the Imperial
Council, refuted all that had been laid to their charge, affirming that three
Informers had falsely taken to themselves the Name of the Representatives of a
Party; when indeed no Man moved in the matter, but they only who were restless
busy Men that had left the City, to raise Disturbances: That for their own
parts, they had done nothing but what they might do by Law; and that for
avoiding of greater Commotions, they could not but allow the People the
exercise of the Reformed Religion, which grew now daily more and more public:
That they begged therefore that they would not give credit to those Informers,
but judge so of them, as of those who in imitation of their Forefathers,
directed all their Thoughts to the Peace and Welfare of the Empire. The
Preachers also and Ministers of the Churches, whom these had informed against,
as was said before, The Apology of the Ministers of Strasburg.
wrote at the same time a long Apology for themselves, giving the same
Counselors the Reasons of their Doctrins and Practices: And seeing they had
acted nothing contrary to the Law of God, they earnestly pray them not to give
credit to malicious Informers, nor to come to any Determination, before the
Matter were fully examined.

The War was hot at this time in Italy, betwixt the Emperor and Francis King of
France, who marching thither, as I said, and having in the Wintertime laid
Seige to Pavia, about the latter end of February they came to a Battle; where
he was made Prisoner, The French King made Prisoner.
and carried to the Emperor in Spain. In this War, Pope Clement secretly sided
with the French, but upon the change of Fortune, he gave the Officers of the
Imperial Army a great sum of Money to pay off their Soldiers. Pavia was kept
out by Antonia di Leyva, and a Garrison of Spaniards and Germans. The King had a
vast Army before it, insomuch that the Imperialists, almost in despair of
preserving Lombardy, were thinking of drawing off their Forces, and marching to
Naples for the defense of that Kingdom; but being encouraged by the Speech of
Ferdinand d'Avalos Marquess of Pescara, they engaged in Battle; and having
routed the Enemy, and taken Prisoner a most powerful King, obtained a most
glorious Victory, and rich Booty. Charles de Lanoy, a Dutchman, Commanded in
Chief; who pretending at first to carry the King to Naples, when he was out at
Sea, changed his course, and sailed straight to Spain, that so the Treaty of
Peace might be the more expeditious. This Battle was fought on the Twenty
fourth of February, the Emperor's Birthday.

A little before we took notice of the Insurrection of the Boors, which was
quieted; but this Year, in the beginning of the Spring, there happened in
Schwabia, and the neighboring Parts of Germany that lie upon the Danube,
another Rising of the Common People against some of the Prelates of the Church;
and these had sworn a League and Covenant, for the defense, as they pretended,
of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the delivering of themselves from Bondage.
The Magistrates offered to examine their grievances, and to reform what was
amiss; but they continued, and daily increased: However they did not as yet
take the Field, but met now and then on certain days, upon occasion of
Weddings, and such like public Feasts. And at the same time some of their
Demands, to the number of twelve, were published; wherein they desired
Satisfaction from the Magistrates, as you shall learn in the following Book:
These being forthwith communicated to others, occasioned new Stirs in many
places.

While these things were a brewing, Vlrick Duke of Wertemberg in vain attempts
to recover his Country.
Vlrick Duke of Wertemberg, whom some years before the Confederates of the
Schwabian League had driven out of his Country, as shall be mentioned hereafter
in its proper place, got together an Army of some thousand Swisses, for the
recovery of his own; and besides other places, took the Suburbs of Sutgart, and
there possessed himself, that he might also make himself Master of the Town:
But the States of the Schwabian League, and Ferdinand's Officers also, who were
in Possession of that Country, raising Soldiers; the Officers and Soldiers in
like manner being tampered with to desert him, and he wanting Money, he was
forsaken, and forced to desist. In the mean time, the Army of the Boors much
increased; and the Schwabian Confederates, whom we named, having repulsed the
Duke of Wirtemberg, and regained the Towns which he had taken, marched to Vlm,
with their Forces against them, who then also had taken the Field, The Boors
take the Field.
and divide their Army into three Bodies, posting them, one near to Bibrach,
another in Algow, and the third by the Lake of Constance: But upon the
Mediation of the Citizens of Ravensburg and Kempen, some of the Commanders of
the Boors Army coming with Safe Conduct to Vlm, a Cessation of Arms was agreeed
upon for some Days, but not observed, for which they mutually blamed one
another, and so fell to Hostilities; wherefore the Council of the Empire
fearing the Danger of this popular Tumult, sent Deputies to Vlm, to the
Commissioners of the Schwabian League, to treat of a Peace, and these were
Simon Pistorius, in the Name of George Duke of Saxony, and James Stu^^ey, a
Nobleman and Senator of Strasburg, in the Name of his own City; and sent
Letters in the Emperor's Name, commanding both Parties, under the highest
Penalties, to lay down their Arms. The Deputies at first proposed a Truce, but
that was in vain, because the Confederates alleged, That the Boors, breaking
the Cessation, had given cause to the War: Nevertheless, at the interposition
of some of the Cities of Schwabia, of which number were Constance, Memminghen,
Kempen, and Bibrach, the chief Commanders of the Boors, came again to Vlm, on
the second of April; to them the Deputies of the Empire showed their
Commission, and told them, That they were come to treat of a Peace; but they
alleging, That no Treaty of Peace could be set on Foot, unless a Truce were
first agreed upon; said that they were therefore come, that they might know
what their Enemy's Intentions were as to that; but when a Truce could not be
obtained, and all things tending to Action, next Day they returned to the Camp:
And the same Day some Troops of Horse and Foot, marching from Vlm to Elching, a
Town upon the Danube below Vlm, killed a great many of the Boors, The Boors
worsted.
and brought several Prisoners also to the Town. Afterward George Truchses of
Walpurg, General of the Schwabian League, marching with his Forces to Lippen, a
small Town near the Danube, two Miles below Vlm, where a great number of the
Boors lay, without staying for the Foot or great Guns, charged them with a
Brigade of Horse, and cut off a great part of them; the rest threw themselves
into the River, and there were drowned; the Town was surrendered and plundered,
and many of the Enemy beheaded. After that Victory, when Truchses would have
marched against the rest, the Foot, who were commanded by William of
Fustemberg, refused to march, and as if they had fought a Battle, demanded
their pay: This Matter having been debated for some Days, and it being
alleged, That it was no Battle, and that the Enemy was fled before they came,
was at length taken up.

The Mediators of the Cites of Schwabia, which we named before, again moved for
a Truce; but the Confederates would not hear of any new Agreement with them,
who had lately broken it, though they did not refuse a Truce with those who
were in Algow and the neighboring Places, and were Levellers; all Proposals of
a Truce being then laid aside, the Confederates told the Mediators and Deputies
of the Council of the Empire, and of the Cities, That if they had any thing to
offer concerning a Peace, The Boors Army in Algow dispersed*
they should propose it. The matter being long and much debated, when the
Confederates persisted in their Resolution, and advanced with their Army in
order to an Engagement, the Boors in Algow dispersed themselves, some flying
for it, and others yielding upon Discretion, and delivering up their Colors,
which happened April 13.

In the mean time, The Cruelty of some Boors at Winsperg.
in another part of Schwabia, about Hall, and in Franconia, the Boors were got
together again in vast Numbers; and on the sixteenth Day of April, which then
was Easter Day, they surprised Winsperg, where they took some, and killed other
Gentlemen, who were in Garrison in it; of the Prisoners, they put William Count
Helfenstein and others to Death, in a Military but most cruel manner, running
them through on all Hands with their Spears; and this they did with the greater
Cruelty and Inhumanity, in that they would not be moved to Pity by his Lady,
the Natural Daughter of the Emperor Maximilian, who carrying a young Infant, a
Son of his in her Arms, fell at their Feet, in a most forlorn Dress, and with
Floods of Tears begged them to save the Life of her Husband, and of the Father
of the poor Babe. Afterward they divided their Forces; whereof one Body
marched into the Country of Wirtemberg, and having possessed themselves of many
Places there, advanced straight to Esling, where the Deputies of the Council of
the Empire, James Sturne, and Mangolt a Lawyer, in vain treated with them about
a Peace; and from thence they removed to Vlm; but Truchses the General of the
Schwabian League, whom I mentioned before, having forced those that were in the
Territory of Vlm, Algow, and at the Lake of Constance, to yield themselves, as
we said before, marched straight against these, and put them to flight also,
having slain some thousands of them: He severely punished the Prisoners,
especially those who murdered Count Helfenstein; and one of them he fastened to
a Stake by a Chain, that was long enough to let him run about, and he himself,
with some other Persons of Quality, fetching Wood, made a Fire about him, and
burnt him: Afterward he burnt the Town of Winsperg to the Ground, commanding
that it should never be built again. The other Body marched into Franconia, and
having there burnt above two hundred Castles, besides Noblemen's Houses and
Monasteries, they took the Town of Wirtzburg, and besieged the Castle: But
Truchses coming upon them, out of the Country of Wirtemberg, at the Village of
Englestadt, charged, discomfited, and put them to flight. Afterward he retook
Wirtzburg, raised the Siege of the Castle, and put a great many to Death, being
assisted by Ludovick Prince Palatine, who was there in Person.

This Combustion spread it self as far as Lorrain also; An Insurrection of the
Boors also in Lorrain.
so that Anthony the Duke thereof, attended amongst others, by his Brother
Claude, Duke of Guise, who had gathered together the remains of the French
Army, after the Battle of Pavia, advanced as far as Saverne; at which Place the
Lorrainers as well as Alsatians, were in great numbers assembled; and some
thousands of Boors coming in to their Assistance, he detached some Troops of
Horse and Foot, which near the Village Lupfstein killed fifteen hundred of
them, putting the rest to flight: Next Day he made a great Slaughter of those
who were gathered together about Saverne; wherein, nevertheless, he kept not
his Word; for having promised them Pardon, if they would lay down their Arms;
whilst they were marching homewards unarmed, and passed through the Lines of
the Horse and Foot, upon some slight Occasion of a Quarrel, most part of them
were killed: Afterward the furious Soldiers plundered the Town and the
Bishop's Palace, killing Citizens and all pell-mell, without any distinction,
When the Duke was returning home, after this Slaughter, another Army of Boors
had posted themselves in the Streights of the Valley of Wilet, with design to
intercept his Passage; but having joined Battle, above four thousand of them
were killed. In that Fight he lost the Count Isenburg; but returned home with
much Spoil and many Prisoners. And 18000 of them are slain.
In those three Places we named, eighteen thousand were reckoned to have been
slain, and this was in the Month of May. The like Success they met with every
where else; and at Petersheim, a Town of the Territory of Worms, Another
Slaughter of the Boors at Worms.
a great number of them were killed by the Soldiers, after they had yielded,
and thrown down their Arms: At this Slaughter the Prince Palatine, and Richard
Archbishop of Treves were present, and the Prince did what he could to restrain
the Rage of the Soldiers, but the Archbishop is reported, not only to have
approved what they did, but also to have killed many with his own Hands.
However, in some Places, through the dextrous management of the Magistrates and
Mediators, matters were peaceably accommodated: And when, upon an Insurrection
in Brisgow, they had surprised Friburg, the chief Town in those Places, Ernest
Marquess of Baden, who had great Possessions there, fled to Strasburg, and
prayed the Senate to intercede for him; whereupon James Sturney and Conrad
Joham were sent as Deputies from the Senate, who with the Deputies that came
from Basil, and some other Places, dealt fairly with them, and persuaded them
to return home; so that after the Difference had been debated and concluded at
Basil, on the twenty fifth Day of July, they broke up from Lava, four Miles
from Strasburg and dispersed; but Promises were not punctually observed to them
neither, for many of them were executed after they came home. The Switzers also
zealously bestirred themselves in quieting an Insurrection in Sontgow, a
neighboring Province, belonging to Archduke Ferdinand, and the Dominion of
Austria, making it appear to the Seditious what the Magistrates Duty was, and
what the Peoples. Now their Demands were almost the same in all Places, which
beginning first in Schwabia, ran immediately all about like Wildfire, as we
told you before; so that from Thuringe, and the Borders of Saxony, as you shall
hear hereafter, it reached as far as the Alps; there having been a Rising also
in the Country of Saltzburg. But all things being settled in Franconia and
Schwabia, the Army of the Schwabian League marched thither also, Geismeier the
General of the Boors assassinated.
and destroyed and banished many; among whom was their General Geismeier, who
with part of his Forces, by difficult and inaccessible Paths, crossed the
Alps, and fled to the Venetians; who having bestowed a yearly Pension upon
him, he went to live in Padoua, where he was at length treacherously
assassinated in his own House. And this was the end of the Boors War, which
from a small beginning grew to such a height, and spread so far; for the
Contagion was diffused over most parts of Germany, and not only in the Country,
but also in Cities and Towns, A Sedition in Cologn.
many Tumults and Riots happened, as particularly in Cologn; where for the
space of a whole Month, almost, the City Companies daily met in Arms,
continuing so, even in the Nightime also, and were designing the Destruction
not only of the Clergy, but of the Senate likewise; but the Tumult was quieted
without any Blood, save of one or two Seditious, who many Months after were
executed for it. The number of those that were killed.
All do not agree upon the Number of those that were slain in this War, which
lasted but one summer; they who speak the least say, That in all places there
died fifty thousand. The Princes and Cities engaged in the Schwabian League.
That Schwabian League, so often mentioned, was made long before, first for
eight Years, then for three, afterward for twelve, and then again for ten; but
in the year of our Lord 1522, it was renewed for eleven Years, a little before
the Emperor returned to Spain. Those who engaged in this League, were, first,
the Emperor as Archduke of Austria, and his Brother Ferdinand, who had been
lately possessed of the Duchy of Wirtemberg, the Archbishop of Mentz, the
Prince Palatine, the Bishops of Saltzburg, Bamberg, Wurtzburg, Aichstadt and
Ausburg, the Brother William and Lewis Dukes of Bavaria, Otho, Henry and
Philip, the Prince Palatines, Brothers, George Marquess of Brandenburg, and
Albert his Nephew, Philip Landgrave of Hesse, besides many others of the
Nobility and Clergy, to whom were joined most of the Cities of Schwabia, and
among these all Norimberg.

April 13, Mass abolished at Zurich.
Mass was abolished in Zurich, by Command of the Magistrates; and that not only
in the City, but over all their Territory also, in place whereof the Lord's
Supper was appointed, all Ceremonies being laid aside; the Reading of the
Scriptures, Prayers and Preaching succeeded; and a Law was published against
Fornication and Adultery, and Judges were appointed to determine Matrimonial
Causes.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK V.
The CONTENTS.
Thomas Muncer broaching a new kind of Doctrine, That all Goods should be had in
Common, drew a vast number of Country People after him, one Phifer being his
Companion and chief Counselor. After the Death of Duke Frederick, the
neighboring Princes raise an Army against the Muncerians, nor did his
Seditious Preaching, nor vain Promises hinder, but that many of his Companions
were killed, and he himself lost his Head. Luther had already written against
him to the Senate of Mulhausen. Here are recited the Demands of the Boors; to
which Luther answers, shows the Nature of the Disorder, and exhorts the
Magistrates to punish such Villains. The Emperor knowing of these Troubles and
Disorders, calls a Diet at Ausburg. Caralostadius leaving Wittemberg,
endeavors to purge himself, in a Book that he published. Luther marries a Nun,
and comes to Marpurg, that he might confer with Zuinglius about the Lord's
Supper. Whilst the French King was Prisoner, Pope Clement having received
Letters from his Mother, incites the Parliament of Paris against the Lutherans.
Le Fevre was forced to fly out of France; the King being informed of that, sent
Orders, That they should not molest Men of Learning. The Master of Prusia is
made Duke, and receives the Reformed Religion.

THIS great and terrible War, Muncer a great Sectarian.
was in a great measure occasioned by busy and pragmatical Preachers, of whom
Thomas Muncer, mentioned before, was the Ringleader; who at length leaving off
the Preaching of the Gospel, broached an odd and new kind of Doctrine, at
Alstet, a Town belonging to the Elector of Saxony upon the Borders of Thuringe:
There he began to teach, first of all, not only against the Pope, but against
Luther also; condemning both their Doctrins, as Corrupt and Erroneous: That the
Pope bound Men's Consciences with strict Bonds and hard Laws; which Luther did,
indeed, loose, but then run to the other Extreme, allowing too much Liberty,
and not Teaching those things which were of the Spirit: That it was lawful to
neglect the Decrees of the Pope, as not conducing to Salvation; for obtaining
whereof, Men must, said he, first of all avoid manifest Sins, as Murder,
Adultery, Blasphemy, Incest, and Mortify the Body by Fasting and simple
Clothing; look gravely, speak little, and wear a long Beard: These and such
like things he called the Cross, the Mortification, and Discipline of the
Flesh. Those, he said, who were in this manner prepared, must retire from
Company, and the Speech of Men, and fix their Thoughts upon God, that they may
know what he is, if he takes any Care of us, if Christ suffered Death for our
sake, and if our Religion be to be preferred before that of the Turks: That we
were to crave of God a Sign also, to assure us that he takes care of us, and
that we are in the true Religion; that if he did not presently give us a Sign,
we must nevertheless persevere in instant Prayers, nay, and expostulate
seriously with God, that he dealt not well with us: For that since the
Scripture promises, That he will grant such things as are asked of him, it was
not just to deny a Sign to Man that sought after the true Knowledge of him;
This Expostulation and Anger, said he, was very acceptable unto God, who
thereby perceived the fervent Zeal and Inclination of our Minds, and that there
was no doubt, but that being importuned in this manner, he would discover
himself by some manifest Sign, quench the Thirst of our Souls, and deal with us
as he did with the Patriarchs of old: He also taught, That God revealed his
Will in Dreams, laying in them the Foundation of his Designs; and if a Man
dreamt a Dream, that he could make any thing of, he would run out upon his
Praises in his Sermons. When, by this means, he had drawn many over to his
Party, he proceeded by degrees to what he had long before intended, and in the
Town we mentioned before, he began to make a List of the Names of those who
entered into an Association by Oath, and promised their Assistance to destroy
all wicked Princes and Magistrates, and set up new ones in their Places; for he
pretended to have a Command from God to do so. So long as he talked only of
Dreams, and the like, Frederick Duke of Saxony bore with him, especially seeing
Luther wrote in his behalf; but when he began to preach Seditiously, he was
banished, and after he had absconded for some Months, came to Norimberg; and
being shortly after sent packing thence, he came to Mulhausen, a Town of
Thuringe; for whilst he lived at Alstet, he had perverted some Citizens of
Mulhausen, Muncer preaching at Mulhausen, got new Magistrates created, and the
Monks ejected; whose Monasteries he and others took possession of.
by whose means afterward he obtained the Liberty of Preaching there; and
because he was disliked of by the Senate, he got the Rabble in a Tumultuary
manner to make new Magistrates, which was the beginning of great Troubles.
After that the Towns-people cast out the Monks, and seized their Houses; of
which the chief and richest Monastery fell to Muncer's share; who now acted the
part, not only of a Preacher, but Magistrate also; for all things he said were
to be determined by the Bible and Divine Revelation, and he arbitrarily decided
all Cases; so that what he said, was looked upon as Sacred and Holy. He taught
also, That it was most consonant to Human Nature, that all Goods should be
common, and that without any distinction of Dignity and Quality, they should be
indifferently enjoyed by all Men. This Doctrine took mightily with the common
People, who leaving off their Work, made bold with the Rich, taking from them
what they wanted, without asking their Leave. Thus he went on for some Months:
And when now the Boors of Schwabia and Franconia had got together, to the
Number of forty thousand, and had driven out a great part of the Nobility and
Gentry, taken, plundered and burnt, several Forts and Castles, as has been
said; he himself began to set Hand to the Work, thinking the time now come of
doing his Business; and having cast some great Guns in the Monastry of the Gray
Friars, he allured to him many Country People, Phifer, Muncer's Companion, and
his enthusiastic Pretenses.
in hopes of bettering their Fortunes. He was assisted in all his Counsels by
one Phifer, a bold and desperate Fellow, who bragged much of Dreams and
nocturnal Visions; and among others, they gave it out, That he had in his Sleep
seen a prodigious number of Mice in a certain Stable, and chased them all away,
which he interpreted to be a Command from God, to take up Arms, and march into
the Field, for the extirpation of all the Nobility and Gentry. But though
Muncer preached seditiously to the People, yet he was somewhat more reserved,
and was not willing to hazard all, before the whole Country was up in Arms: And
that he might the more easily accomplish this, he wrote to all the Laborers,
who wrought in the Mines in the Country of Mansfield, advising them by all
means to fall upon their Princes, without any respect, for that those who were
up in Franconia, would draw nearer to Thuringe. In the mean time Phifer, who
was impatient of all Delay, marching out with his Men, wasted the neighboring
Country of Isefield, spoiled Castles and Churches, drove away many of the
Nobility and Gentry, and put some of them into Irons; after which he returned
home, loaded with Booty. This happy Success encouraged the Rabble exceedingly,
especially seeng their Neighbors were also in Arms, and invaded the Country of
Mansfield: Wherefore Muncer thinking that the Insurrection was now Universal,
set out from Mulhausen with three hundred Men, and joined those of Franckhausen.

At the same time dyed Frederick Duke of Saxony, Frederick Elector of Saxony
dies.
without Issue, having never been married, to whom succeeded his Brother John.
In the mean time Albert Count Mansfield, having speedily raised some Troops of
Horse, fell upon the Boors, and killed two hundred of them: The Princes Forces
against the Boors.
This so terrified them, that they proceeded no further, but went to
Franckhausen, and there waited for more Forces; so that being thus stopped in
their Carere, by this small ruffle, the neighboring Princes raised fifteen
hundred Horse, and a few Foot-Soldiers: These were John Elector of Saxony, and
his Cousin Duke George, Philip Landgrave of H^sse, and Henry Duke of Brunswick:
The Boors had posted themselves on a Hill, not far from Franckhausen, and so
fenced themselves with Wagons and Carts, that it was hard to attack them; but
they wanted great Guns; were, besides, ill armed, and for most part unskilful
in Fighting; so that the Princes moved with Compassion, sent Messengers unto
them, and advised them to deliver up the Authors of the Sedition, lay down
their Arms, and go home, promising them Pardon, if they would do so.

portrait of Frederick III FRIDERICUS III. DICTUS. SAPIENS. SAXONIAE DUX etc
S.R. IMP: ARCHIM. et ELECTOR.
Successit Ernesto Patri. Ao. 1486.

Witteburgensem Academiam Instituit Ao. 1502.

Imperium R: oblatum contemsit. Ao. 1529.

Obijt Coelebs* 5. Maij. 1525.



Muncer being now apprehensive of his own Danger, came forth, and with a grave
and demure Countenance, spoke to them as follows: Ye see, said he, my Brethren
and fellow Soldiers, Muncer's seditious Speech.
Tyrants not far from you; who, though they have conspired our Destruction, yet
are so faint-hearted, that they dare not attempt any thing against us; but
offer idle and ridiculous Conditions, that they may persuade you to lay down
your Arms. Now it is well known to all of you, That I undertook not this
Enterprise by my own private Authority (for I never applied my self that way)
but at the Command of God: Which being so, it is the Duty of you and me to
obey, and not to forsake this Station, where God himself has placed us: He
commanded Abraham of old to Sacrifice his own Son; and he, though ignorant what
might be the Event, disposed himself to Obedience, without gainsaying,
wherefore God both preserved his Son, and conferred great Blessings also upon
himself: So we in like manner, who are exactly in the same Condition, ought to
perservere and commit the Event to God, and there is no Doubt to be made but
all things will succeed according to our own Hearts Desires: Ye your selves
shall plainly see God's helping Hand with you, for we shall put all our Enemies
to flight. In several places of Scripture God has promised to assist the poor
and wretched, and to bear down the Ungodly: Now this Promise belongs properly
to us; for we are poor and afflicted; and because we desire to maintain and set
forth the Knowledge of God, we cannot doubt of Success and Victory: Let us on
the other hand, consider the Condition of our Enemies; They are called Princes,
indeed, but in reality are Tyrants; they take no Care of you, but deprive you
of your Goods, which they squander away in most wicked and unlawful Courses.
Among God's peculiar People, which he chose of old, Kings were not to spend
their Wealth unprofitably; but were commanded rather to be diligent in turning
over the Book of the Laws, which God himself made: But what do our Tyrants, or
how do they spend their Time? they think not themselves at all concerned with
the Public, they hear not the Causes of poor afflicted Men, they neglect
Justice, suffer the Highways to be infested by Robbers, punish not such, nor
other Offenders neither, defend not the Fatherless and Widow, and take no care
of the Education of Youth: They not only neglect God's Worship themselves, but
also hinder others, and mind nothing but the getting of all other Men's Estates
to themselves; and therefore they daily devise new ways of raising Money, not
directing their Counsels to the maintaing of Peace; but that having enriched
themselves, they may live in Pride and all sorts of Voluptuousness; for it is
but too well known, what great Stirs and Wars they have raised for very idle
and slight Causes, whereby, at length, all that poor Men had left is utterly
consumed and destroyed. These, these are the noble Arts and Virtues of your
Princes, wherein they exercise themselves; it is not therefore to be imagined
that God will bear any longer with those things, but that as of old he
destroyed the Canaanites, so will he now root out these. For granting that what
we have now mentioned, might be born with, do you think that they will go
unpunished, for defending and maintaining that most abominable Impiety of the
Clergy? for who knows not how great Wickedness is committed in that
Trafficking and Bartering with Masses? not to mention other things. Surely as
Christ of old cast the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, so now also will
he drive out these Mass-Priests and their Defenders: Be therefore strong and
valiant, and do God good Service, in destroying this unprofitable Rout; for we
see not how we can lawfully and with Safety make Peace with them; since they
will not leave off their old Courses, neither restore to us our Liberty, nor
suffer the true Worship of God: Now it is far better to die, than that we
should approve their Wickedness, and suffer the Doctrine of the Gospel to be
taken from us: Be then assured that God will be with us, and that the Victory
will be ours; for he himself has so promised to me; he, I say, who cannot lie
nor be deceived, commanded me to proceed in this manner, and to punish all
Magistrates; for in this the Power of God is chiefly magnified, when a vast
multitude of Enemies are destroyed by a small handful of Men: It is known to
you what Exploits Gideon did with a few, Jonathan accompanied only with one
Servant, and David all alone, when he fought against the Giant Goliath, who was
so terrible in his Looks and Stature: Now it is not to be doubted, but this Day
will be made Famous by a like instance, and be spoken of to all Posterity; for
though we seem not to be so well provided of Arms and other things necessary,
yet shall we overcome the Enemy; and this Frame of Heaven and Earth will sooner
change, than God will forsake us: So was the Nature of the Sea changed of old,
that the Israelites might escape from Pharaoh, who pursued them. Be not now
moved at the suggestions of your own Reason, neither be troubled at a certain
Shadow and Appearance of Danger that stands in your way; but fight valiantly
against poor wicked and accursed Enemies, and be not afraid of their great
Guns, for in my Coat will I catch all the Bullets that they shall shoot at you.
See ye not how gracious God is unto us? behold a manifest Sign and Token of his
perpetual Good Will toward us; lift up your Eyes, and see that Rainbow in the
Clouds; for seeing we have the same painted in our Banner, God plainly declares
by that Representation, which he shows us from on high, That he will stand by
us in the Battle, and that he will utterly destroy our Enemies; fall on then
courageously, and with certain Hope of Divine Aid, for God will have us to have
no Peace with the Wicked.

For all this Speech, A Consternation in Muncer's Camp.
his Men were generally in horror and consternation, because of the greatness
of the present danger; but all things were carried on in a tumultuary manner,
without Order or certain Command: Besides, there were some bold and profligate
Rogues among them fitted for any villainy: These being naturally inclined to all
sorts of mischief, were the more inflamed by that Sermon: But nothing excited
them more than the Rainbow, which, as has been said, appeared in the Clouds,
and which they looked upon as a certain Sign of Victory. Besides, they were
about Eight thousand strong, and the place commodious for making a Defense.
Wherefore these Blades I now mentioned, gave a shout, calling to all to Arm and
bravely advance against the Enemy; and withal singing a Hymn, wherein they
implored the assistance of the Holy Ghost. There had been sent to them before,
a young Gentleman of Quality, whom Muncer, contrary to the Law of Arms and of
Nations, caused to be put to Death. The Princes being the more exasperated by
this, gave the Signal of Battle, The Speech of the Langrave of Hesse to his
Soldiers*
and drew up their Men in order. Then Philip Langrave of Hesse, though the
Youngest, rode about the Army, exhorting the Soldiers to behave themselves
valiantly; for that though all they laid to their Charge were true, yet it was
not lawful for private Men to rise in Arms against their Magistrates, as might
be proved by many places of Scripture: That however he would not excuse neither
his own Faults, nor those of other Princes: That he confessed there were
failings, and many things that ought to be reformed; but that nevertheless Men
ought to abstain from Rebellion; for that God has strictly commanded, that the
Magistrate should be honored: That whereas they complained that they were
overcharged with Burdens; that could be no lawful ground for them to renounce
their Duty and Allegiance; though yet if things were rightly examined, it would
be found that they had no cause of Complaining: That they paid indeed Subsidies
and Customs; but for that, they enjoyed on the other had many Advantages: That
they had Houses, Wives and Children, labored the Land, bred up Cattle, and
many ways got Estates by the favor of the Magistrate, under whose Protection
they were: That what they alleged moreover, that they were not allowed to have
the Doctrine of the Gospel preached among them; that was no just cause neither
of Rising in Rebellion: That when Peter smote with the Sword, Christ sharply
rebuked him for it: That if any Princes did persecute the true Religion, yet
ought they rather to submit and suffer Punishments, than resist by force of
Arms: That they pretended Religion and the Gospel, but in reality intended
nothing but Robbery, Rapine, and such like villainous Crimes: And that they were
the greater Villiains, in that they impudently cloaked their wicked and bloody
Designs under so specious a Title; for that they aimed at nothing less, than to
seize other Men's Goods and Estates, destroy all Magistrates, force others Men's
Wives and Children, and to have free liberty to commit all sorts of Crimes: And
that seeing they committed such horrid Abominations under a veil of Purity and
Sanctity, it was not to be doubted but God would revenge that Blasphemy: That
therefore they ought to fight valiantly against them, as against notorious
Robbers, in defense of the public Peace, their own private Fortunes and
Estates, Wives and Children: That the cause of the War was most just; and that
they would never have taken up Arms, if they had not known it to be acceptable
Service to God, who put the Sword into the hands of Magistrates; not that they
should Rob others, but defend their Subjects from unjust Force, The Princes
Army overcome the Muncerian^.
Robbery and Oppression. This Speech being made, they charged the Enemy, and
first played upon them with their great Guns; but the poor Wretches stood like
Men amazed and out of their senses, neither defending themselves, nor flying
for it, but singing that Dutch Song wherein the Assistance of the Holy Ghost is
implored; for most of them trusting to Muncer's Promises, expected Aid from
Heaven. After the great Guns were discharged, when they began to break into
their Camp, and put all they met to the Sword; then at length they fled toward
Franckhausen; but some of them betook themselves to the other side of the Hill,
and for a short time made Head against a few Horse, and skirmished with them in
an adjoining Valley, killing one or two of them: For when the Enemy was every
where put to flight, the Horse dispersed themselves to follow the pursuit
wherever they saw any running for it; But having lost some of their Men, as
has been said, Anger and Revenge made them more eager in pursuing, so that they
killed about five thousand of the Fugitives. Presently after the Battle,
Franckhausen was taken, and therein about Three hundred seized and put to
death. Muncer had fled into the Town, and hid himself in a House not far from
the Gate; whither a Gentleman accidentally came, and his Servant going up to
view the House, found a Man lying abed in a Garret: Having asked who he was, if
he had fled from the Fight, and if he was one of the Rebels; he denied, and
said he had been a long while sick of a Fever and Ague. His Purse by chance lay
by the Bed; which the other snatched up, that he might take what was in it; and
having opened it, he found therein a Letter written by Albert Count Mansfield
to Muncer, wherein he admonished him to desist from his Enterprise, and not
inflame the Common People into a Rebellion. After he had read it, he asked him
if the Letter were directed to him; but he denying, the other offered him
violence; whereupon he begged quarter, and confessed himself to be Muncer.
Being therefore taken, Muncer taken; His Discourse to the Princes;
he was carried Prisoner to George Duke of Saxony, and the Langrave; who asked
him, why he had so seduced poor miserable Men? To which he answered, That he
had done nothing but his Duty; and that the Magistrates, who could not endure
the Preaching of the Gospel, were in that manner to be curbed. The Langrave
replied, and prove^ by Texts of Scripture, that Magistrates were to be
honored; That all Sedition and Rebellion was prohibited by God, and that it
was not lawful for Christians to revenge Wrongs by their own private Authority.
To that he was silent, and crying out for pain upon the Rack, George Duke of
Saxony told him, Thou art now (said he) in pain Muncer, but consider on the
other hand the slaughter of those poor Wretches, who being basely abused by
thee, have perished to day. At which, bursting out in laughter, His
unseasonable laughing upon the Rack.
he said, They would have it so. Being afterward carried to Heldrunghen, a
Town in the Dominion of Mansfield, and there severely tortured, he confessed
his Design, and discovered many of his Accomplices in the Conspiracy. The
Princes going from Heldrunghen to Mulhausen, put a great many of the Rebels to
death, and among the rest, Phifer, whom we named before. Hither also Muncer was
shortly after brought into the Camp; who in those streights was mightily
dejected and troubled in mind, and could not rehearse the Articles of his
Creed, as is usually done on such occasions, but as Henry Duke of Brunswick
said it before him. However, when he was about to die, he openly acknowledged
his Error and Crime; and being environed with Soldiers, exhorted the Princes to
show more Mercy to poor Men, which would be a means to prevent the like danger
for the future; advising them likewise diligently to peruse the Chronicles and
Books of Kings that are contained in the Scriptures. Having made an end of his
Speech, his Head was struck off, and for an Example set upon a Pole in the open
Fields. When Muncer, as we said before, being banished Saxony, wandered up and
down, and that there was a report that he intended to go to Mulhausen; Luther
being informed of this, wrote to the Senate, seriously admonishing them not to
receive him: Luther advises to have a care of Muncer.
That he was a seditious Person, and designed nothing but Robbery and Violence:
That it was known what he had attempted at Alstet and Zwikaw: That he had Spies
and Emissaries, who every where crept into the Congregations of Men: That they
could not be prevailed with so much as to come to a fair Trial: That their
Doctrine was not only Seditious, but Frivolous also, Silly, and full of
Nonsense; which they should therefore carefully avoid, for that the cheat of it
would shortly be discovered: That if they thought it not fit to do so, they
would at last delay for some time, until they might learn what they were to
think of them: That he gave them that Advice, as one who was their Friend, and
concerned for their Welfare; but that if they slighted it, and fell afterward
into any calamity, he would not be blamed for it, who had given them such fair
and timely warning: That the Senate would do well to ask him who had given him
Commission and Power to Preach, and from whence he had his Call: And that if he
named God for his Author, that then they should bid him show some evident Sign
of his Call; but that if he could not produce any such thing, he should be
rejected; for that it was God's usual method, when he would alter the
accustomed and received way, to declare his Will by some Sign.

When the Divisions and Dissensions of Germany seemed to tend to Troubles and
Commotions, He published a Book, dehorting the Boors from Sedition.
and the Boors had not as yet risen in Arms; Luther published a Book, wherein
he advised all Men to abstain from Sedition; for that although some terrible
Judgment seemed to threaten the Clergy, yet he did not think that any at all,
or at least such a Calamity would overspread all their Jurisdiction, or
overturn their Power; for that it was a far different Judgment which hung over
their Heads, and as the Prophet Daniel, and after him St. Paul foretold, no
human force, but the coming of our Savior Christ, and the Spirit of God, must
crush their tyranny: That his Opinion was grounded on this; which was the cause
also that he never greatly withstood them who attempted the matter by force of
Arms, being assured that they labored in vain: That also though some perhaps
of the Clergy might be killed, yet that havoc was not to reach all: That they
did indeed now quake and run to and fro, and he heartily wished that they might
quake more and more, if so they might repent of their Sins; but that the Wrath
of God was kindled, and they were troubled at the danger their Lives and
Fortunes were in, but never thought how they might make their Peace with God;
nay rather, did securely slight such plain Admonitions, and in a manner laugh
at the denunciation of the Wrath of the Almighty: And although they had no
great cause to be afraid of Arms, yet since the present state of Affairs
required Counsel, he would freely declare his Judgment.

And in the first place, That it was the Magistrates Duty to endeavor that the
People should not suffer any Prejudice through the fault of others, and to take
care that Religion should not be corrupted by false Doctrins: That that was
their Duty, and that all the Power wherewith God had endowed them, should be
employed for the Glory of God, and the Welfare of the People; but that since
they acted far otherwise, letting and hindering one another, and some of them
also maintaining erroneous Doctrine, they would not escape unpunished: That it
was not his purpose that the Papists should be suppressed by force of Arms, but
that the Magistrates should oblige them to their Duty, and therein exercise
their Power and Prerogative; so as neither by lenity nor connivance to confirm
their boldness and perverseness: That as to the Mobile and ignorant Common
People, they were to be seriously admonished not to stir, unless commanded by
the Magistrate; for all that labor would be in vain, and God himself would be
the Avenger, seeing so great Wickedness was not to be expiated by so slight a
Punishment; for that Princes acted so slowly and remisly, that they suffered so
great Indignities, and were not moved by those manifest Injuries and Shams of
the Clergy; God permitted it should be so, that he alone might avenge his own
Quarrel, and pour out all his Wrath upon them: That though a Tumult or
Insurrection might also break forth, and that God should rest satisfied with so
easy a punishment; yet all that way of acting was not only discommendable, but
unprofitable also; for that in Seditions and Tumults all Reason was banished,
and most commonly the Innocent were the greatest Sufferers: That no Man neither
who raised Stirs and Tumults could be excused, how just a Cause soever he might
have; for a Popular Sedition once growing to a Head, good and honest Men must
necessarily perish with the wicked and bad: Men ought then to fix their eyes
upon the Magistrate, and so long as he stir not, nothing was to be attempted
privately; for that all Sedition was repugnant to the Command of God, who has
ordered all the Controversies of private Men to be legally determined. But that
when Sedition was nothing else but a private Revenge, no Man could doubt, but
that God disapproved and abhorred it: That the Sedition and Rebellion which
seemed now impendent, was raised by the Devil, the Enemy of Mankind, who not
being able to endure the Light of the Truth, raised up Stirs by Men that
professed the Gospel, that so he might bring into hatred and contempt the true
Doctrine, which for some years had been by the blessing of God restored, as if
that proceeded not from God, which seemed to have given occasion to so many
Evils: That the very same thing was already confidently objected by the
Adversaries, but that their Judgments were not to be valued; and for his part,
he utterly despised them: That he had never spoken or written any thing which
might blow the coals of Sedition: That by those who now asked what was to be
done then, and how long were those Indignities to be suffered, while the
Magistrate connived at the same? This method was to be observed; first, That
they should acknowledge their Sins; whereat God being offended, had suffered
that Tyranny of the Clergy to continue so long, and spread so far: That this
cruel and impious Dominion, was the reward of our Wickedness and Crimes; from
which if we would be delivered, we must by reforming our Lives, make our Peace
with God: That, in the next place, with hearty and sincere Prayers, Divine Aid
was to be implored against the Popish Kingdom, after the Example of David, who
often prayed God to break the Pride and Power of the wicked: That lastly, the
Doctrine of the Gospel should be preached, and the Juggles and Impostures of the
Popes made manifest to Christians, that their Errors being detected, and the
Truth known, Men might slight and wholly contemn whatever should proceed from
them: That this was the readiest way to lessen their Power: That nothing was to
be done by force of Arms, for commonly they got strength by Wars; but that by
comparing the Pope with Christ, and his Doctrine with the Gospel, it would, at
length, appear, how great a Difference there was betwixt the Light of the Sun
and Darkness, and how great a Blessing God had bestowed upon us, in opening to
us a way to the Knowledge of him, and in removing all Letts and Impediments out
of it; that then would all their Might and Reputation fall and come to naught;
as might appear by his own Example, who had given a greater Blow to the Popish
Monarchy, than any armed Force could ever have done: That therefore there was
no other Sedition or Rebellion to be wished for; Since that the preaching of
the Gospel now revived by Christ himself, was powerful and smart enough to
overturn all Popery: That they were to fix their Eyes and Thoughts on this:
That it was not his own Work he was about (for no Human Strength nor Wit was
sufficient for that), and that the progress it had already made, was quite
contrary to his Expectation; so that he made no doubt, but he who had laid the
Foundation of the Work, and given increase to the same, would also bring it to
a happy end and conclusion, in spite of all the Enemies that should withstand
it: That long before, the Devil foresaw this glorious Change a coming, and had
therefore endeavored to prevent it, and had raised some Men in their public
Writings to prophecy of these Times, that he might render this saving Doctrine
odious; but that when he perceived his Endeavors frustrated, he betook himself
to another Stratagem, and tempted Men to Rebellion, thereby to hinder all
revolting from his and the Pope's Dominion; but that he should not be able to
accomplish his Designs, for that by the Preaching of the Gospel, their Kingdom
should be more and more confounded: That Men should make it their Care and
Study to persevere in that Doctrine, and make it appear that Human Decrees
availed nothing to Salvation: That Men were likewise to be admonished, Not to
put themselves under the Yoke of Monastic Vows; and that such as were already
so engaged, should shake off the Obligation; as also that they should give no
Money to those frivolous and idle uses of the Church, as for Tapers, Bells,
Pictures, Vessels, Images, Works, Ornaments, and the like; since the Christian
Life consisted not in these things, but in Faith and Charity: That if the
People were taught in this manner, there was no doubt, but that in a few Years
all the Authority and Dominion of the Pope and his Adherents, would fall to the
Ground; but that if this Doctrine should be neglected, and these Errors and
false Opinions not rooted out of Men's Minds, Popery would continue, though
never so many Conspiracies might be made against it. That they should weigh and
consider with themselves, How much he himself in so small a time had done,
merely by his Doctrine, which his very Adversaries acknowledged, when they
complained that their Profits and Advantages were much impaired; whence it
might easily be perceived, What might be done, if but for two Years longer,
this Doctrine should have its course: That therefore the Devil did now bestir
himself, and endeavored by Tumults and Seditions to hinder that design; but
that we were to act prudently, and magnify and extol this Blessing of God, who
had thus enlightened us with the Knowledge of his Truth: That the Cheats,
Ignorance, Rapacity, Tyranny and all that Sink of Impostures, wherewith the
Papists had so long deluded the World, were now detected: That they who had
heretofore been so formidable, were now reduced to this, That they had no
safety, but in Arms: That therefore, since they now appeared naked, and their
Uncleanness being seen of all Men, were forced to fly to the Sword, it was
impossible that their Kingdom could long stand; and if any of their Power
remained, which the Preaching of the Gospel had not crushed, it would be
totally abolished by the coming of Christ: That so we were to proceed
courageously in that Course, but still with Order and Moderation; for that some
went on preposterously, who being destitute of all Learning, so soon as they
had heard a Sermon or two, pretended presently to great matters, called
themselves Lutherans, and sharply censured others, who as yet understood
nothing; which was a great Fault, and ought not to be done: Wherefore he
prayed, That no Man would make use of his Name, but labor rather, that since
we professed the Name of Christ, we might justly deserve to be called
Christians: That he who took upon him to teach, should consider whom he had to
deal with; for that there were some stubborn Tempers, who not only contemned
sound Doctrine, but led others also into Error; that such, were not at all to
be meddled with, according to Christ's Command, Pearls were not to be cast
before Swine: But that when these Men, not content with their own Ignorance or
frowardness, labored to seduce others, and pervert them from the true Doctrine,
then were they to be briskly withstood, not indeed, for their own sakes, but
that some of the People, at least, might be saved: That again, there were
others, who were not, indeed, obstinate, but simple and ignorant, and these
were tenderly to be dealt with, not rashly and in hurry, showing them calmly
and in order, wherein the Salvation of Mankind consisted, and accommodating the
Discourse to their Capacities, till by little and little they increased in
knowledge and were confirmed.

In the former Book we spoke of the Boors, who in Schwabia were in Arms before
Muncer took the Field: These were somewhat more moderate at first, and
published a Declaration of their Grievances, and what they demanded from the
Princes and Magistrates, as we hinted at before, protesting that if they were
mistaken and abused, they would not be obstinate, but submit to sounder
Counsils.

The first of their Demands was, The Boors Demands.
That they might have Liberty to choose such Ministers as should sincerely
preach the Word of God, without the mixture of Human Traditions. In the next
place, That hereafter they would pay no Tithes, but of Corn, and that these
should be employed at the Discretion of good Men, partly for the Stipends of
the Ministers, partly for relieving the Poor, and partly for Public Uses.
Again, That it had been unworthily done, to have used them hitherto, as if they
had been Bondslaves, since by the Blood of Christ all Men were made free: That
they did not, indeed, disown the Magistrate, whom they knew to be appointed of
God, and whom in all honest and lawful things they were willing to obey; but
that they would not for the future suffer that Bondage, unless it were proved
by Texts of Scripture, that they ought in reason to do so. Moreover, That it
consisted not with Equity, that they should be prohibited to take Wild Beasts,
Fowls and Fish; and much less that in some Places they durst not hunt Wild
Beasts out of their own Pastures: That from the Creation of the World God had
given man Right and Dominion over all kind of Animals; not that they desired to
take any thing by Force from those who had bought the whole or part of a River;
but they craved that some Equality might be observed, and that regard should be
rather had to the Profit of a Multitude, than of a few Persons. That besides,
Woods and Forests were in the Hands of a small number, not without great
Prejudice to the People: That therefore it was their Intention, That such Woods
as had not been bought by Private Persons, should be common, that every Man
might freely take of them for daily use, and building also, when there should
be occasion; yet so still, that they should not do it, but by the Authority of
Overseers, who should be appointed for that effect: But that if there were no
Woods, but what belonged to private Men, then they should agree amicably with
the Owners: That furthermore, they lay under several sorts of Burdens, which
grew greater and greater daily; wherefore they desired that the Princes would
regulate that according to Equity and the Rule of the Gospel, and lay no more
Burdens upon them than what had been accustomed of old: That it was their
Desire also, That they who helds Lands, Goods and Possessions, by the Favor
and Grant of the Prince and Magistrate, should not be charged higher for them
than had been covenanted at first: That in like manner, since some of them paid
yearly Taxes and Impositions more than their Estates could bear; it was but
reasonable that the Princes should therein remit somewhat, that they who
labored the Land, might have some Profit at least for their Pains, and not be
reduced to Poverty: That in Money-Fines they designed also greater Equity: That
new Laws were daily made, and Money often extorted from them, not for reforming
them, but for Favor, Hatred, or some other by-End: That they therefore
demanded, That Penalties might be inflicted according to the Form and Manner
anciently prescribed, and not according to the particular Affections of Men:
That some also took in Lands and Meadows which were Common; that they would
have all things of that Nature laid open again, unless any private Man should
purchase the same. Lastly, That whereas, upon the Death of a Tenant, it was a
Custom, That his Wife and Childred should pay somewhat for a Heriot, that that
was a most unreasonable thing; and therefore they would have the Magistrate
wholly to abolish it.

To this their Public Declaration, Luther's Answer to the Grievances of the
Boors.
Luther, to whom they had appealed, made Answer, and turning his Discourse to
them: It is true, said he, and I confess, That Princes who admit not of the
Preaching of the Gospel, who many ways burden and oppress the People, justly
deserve that God should cast them down from the Throne; for they have no excuse
to make for themselves: And though this be true, yet must you take heed, that
you bring with you a pure and unblameable Conscience; otherwise you will cast
away both Body and Soul: Nor ought you to consider, how great your own Strength
is, and how much your Adversaries are to be blamed; but how Just and Lawful the
Cause is which you defend: Consider therefore diligently, and believe not what
all Men preach; for Satan has under Pretense of the Gospel, at this time
raised up many Seditions and Bloody Preachers. For my part, I will give you
true and sincere Counsel, and it is your Duty to listen to good Advice, when it
is given you. Neither am I moved at the Calumnies and Reproaches of Men, if I
can save but some from the Wrath and Vengeance of God: I mind not the rest of
the Rabble, but as they despise me, I fear not them. But to the purpose; You
take to your selves, indeed, the name of God, and call your selves a
Congregation of Christian People, giving it out, That you will in all things
follow the Law which God has set before you. But without doubt, you know that
the Name of God is not to be taken rashly and in vain, for God threatens a
Punishment, which is due to you also, if you go not about this Business in the
right way: He that drowned the whole World by the Flood, and destroyed Sodom
with Fire and Brimstone, can easily sweep you away also; what Power soever you
may have now, it, may easily be proved, that in your Actions you take the Name
of God in vain: So that it is not hard to conjecture what the end will be; for
he deceives not that says, They who take the Sword, shall perish by the
Sword: That is, They who boldly take to themselves the power of Correction,
whereas, nevertheless, S. Paul commands all Men in general to obey the
Magistrate with fear and reverence. What will you answer to this, who pretend
to follow the Rule of God's Word, and notwithstanding take the Sword, and
resist the Magistrate, whom God has appointed? Is not that to take the Name of
God in vain? But you will say, The Magistrate behaves himself so, that he is
altogether Intolerable; for he deprives us both of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and in all things else oppresses us to the highest degree: Grant it be so, yet
you are not therefore to raise Stirs and Commotions, for it is not every Man's
part to curb Malefactors, but that belongs to him who has the Right and
Power of the Sword, as the Scripture plainly teaches. Again, it is evident, not
only from positive Laws, but even from the Law of Nature, That no Man ought to
be Judge in his own Cause; for we are all corrupt, and blinded with Self-love.
Nor can it be denied, but that this Tumult and Sedition of yours is a Private
Revenge, for you take upon you to be Judge in your own Cause, and also to
revenge the Injuries that you fancy to be done to you, by your own Authority,
which is a thing repugnant to the Laws of God, of Nature and common Equity. And
seeing it is so, you have no Color of Reason or Justice, whereby you can
defend your Fact; or if you have any Command from God, to do as you do, the
same must be proved by you, by some signal Miracle: But it is verified in you,
what Christ says, you clearly see the faults of other men, but perceive not
the wickedness and injustice of your own cause. The Magistrate acts unjustly,
but more unjustly you, who in Contempt of God's Command, invade the
Jurisdiction of another, who leave nothing for the Magistrate to do; for what
remains, when you have taken from him his Power and Authority? I appeal to
your selves: He that takes from any Man a considerable part of his Goods, but
leaves him some; and he that takes away both Goods and Life, what think you,
which of the two is the more Cruel? The Magistrate takes from you your
Possessions, it is unjust: But you take from him his Jurisdiction, wherein
consists all his Fortune, both as to Body and Estate; you are therefore more
Criminal than the Magistrate. But, say you, we attempt not their Lives nor
Fortunes; believe that who will, I do not. He that takes from a Man the chief
thing he has, will not stand in aw to take the rest also, which depends
thereon. But be it as you say; Let them enjoy their Estates and Lives in
Safety, yet what you have already done, exceeds all Bounds, when depriving
them of all Power and Authority, you your selves will be Lords and Masters.
Consider with your selves, I pray, in case your Enterprise should succeed,
there would be no Judicature, no Magistrate at all, and every private Man might
use his Neighbor after his own Will and Pleasure, and what is there then to be
expected, but mutual Murders and Robberies? for no sooner will one Man think
himself wronged by another, but presently he will essay to revenge himself as he
thinks best: Now if this be in it self unjust, and not to be suffered in any
person, how much less ought it to be allowed to any multitude of Men? Or if it
be granted to them, is it to be born with also, in Private Persons? Now, if in
your own Assembly matters should come to that Licentiousness, that every
private Man did revenge his own Quarrel; pray, what would you do? certainly
they would be made to answer for it before a Public Judicature, appointed by
you: What Excuse have you then, who contemn Judicatures, and reject the
Magistrates, whom God has set over you? This Law we now speak of, is imprinted
on the Minds of all Men, and observed by the most Barbarous: For else all
things would be in the greatest Confusion imaginable; which, though you
carefully observed, yet in that you would be no better than very Turks, or any
such other People that know not our Religion: For to submit to the Public
Judicatures, and to obey the Magistrate, makes not a Man a Christian, since
Necessity obliges Men to that even against their Wills. Wherefore when you root
out that very Law, which is grafted in the Minds, and common to all Men, ye are
a great deal worse than Heathens, so little do ye deserve the Name of
Christians; which Title because you arrogate to your selves, and do injury to
the Name of God, not deserving to be called Turks, for your Violation of the
Law of Nature; how will you stand before the Face of Christ, when he shall come
to Judge us all for our Actions? Take heed therefore again and again, what sort
of Men your Preachers are; for I am afraid that bloody minded Men have crept in
among you, who by their Sermons inflame you; that relying on your Assistance,
they may invade Dominion and Rule, and never mind your Welfare neither here nor
hereafter. God reserves all Revenge to himself, and the Scripture commands us
to obey the Magistrate, though he be wicked: You ought therefore to he
obedient; for otherwise you will raise a Storm that will break upon your own
Heads: Think not that God will suffer your licentiousness to go unpunished; and
while you seek after Liberty, you will procure to your selves the loss of Body,
Goods, and Soul also. The Wrath of God is waxed hot against you, and the Devil,
the Enemy of Man's Salvation, has sent false Teachers into your Assemblies.
Follow therefore my Council, beware and amend in time.

Now will I speak of the Christian or Evangelical Law; for since ye take to
your selves that Name, it is but reasonable that we should examine what your
Right is. And in the first place, Christ commands us not to resist evil; but
when Men smite us on one Cheek, to turn to them the other also; if one take our
Coat from us, he bids us also give him our Cloak: He enjoins us to do good to
our Enemies, and pray for thems To which purpose there are many places in Holy
Scripture. Now look you to it, how that Enterprise of yours agrees with the
Command of Christ: Consider whither your Teachers have led you. It is indeed
the duty of Christians to suffer and bear the cross, not to resist, revenge,
nor smite with the Sword; But does there any such thing appear among you? The
Profession of a Christian is a very hard task, and but very few perform what
they really ought: For the better understanding whereof, I will give you an
Instance of this Law we are speaking of. St. Peter, to defend his Lord and
Master, smote a Servant of the High-Priest's; Had he not a just Cause? since
they not only sought after the Life of Christ, but took also from his Disciples
the Doctrine of the Gospel, wherein their Salvation consisted, by putting to
death their Master Christ. Now you have not as yet suffered such a heinous
Injury: But what did Christ in the mean time? He commanded Peter to desist,
pronouncing a severe Sentence against those who smote with the Sword; that is,
who, in contempt of the Magistrate, practiced private Revenge. What did he do
himself, when nailed to the Cross, when he was forbidden to discharge the
Office of Teaching, committed to him by God the Father? He even bore all
patiently, committed his Cause to God the Father, and prayed and made
Intercession for his Persecutors. This Example you must imitate, or lay aside
so specious a Name. Now if you followed the steps of Christ, God would make
known his Power; and as after the ignominious Death of his only Son, he
propagated the Gospel far and near, in spite of all Opposition; so also
without doubt would he look down upon you, and abundantly supply you with his
saving Doctrine: But now that you will carry on the work by force of Arms, you
shall never obtain what you would have, and your Arms shall be beat out of your
Hands. Now will I say somewhat of my self also. The whole World conspired and
bent their utmost force against me; and nevertheless the more violently they
proceeded, the greater progress did my Doctrine make. Why so? I used no Force,
raised no Commotion, neither was I desirous of Revenge; but reverently
submitted to the Civil Magistrate, and, as far as I was able, wrote in his
Behalf; and what was the chief thing of all, committing the Cause to God, I
wholly rested on his Protection: So that I am preserved alive to this very day,
though the Pope and my Adversaries vex and fret thereat, and my Doctrine at the
same time has been preached to many People. But ye rush on headlong, and
while you think you further the work, perceive not how great a hindrance you
are unto it. What I hereby drive at, is, that in this cause you would lay aside
that Title and Name of Christians; for though it were never so just, yet, as I
said before, it is not lawful for a Christian to fight, nor resist evil; and
therefore I cannot allow you that Denomination. Not that I would by this
justify the Magistrates, for they do many unjust things I acknowledge; but
nevertheless this your proceeding is altogether inconsistent with the Character
of Christians, insomuch that if you obstinately retain that Name, and gild your
bad Cause with that specious color, I declare my self your Enemy; because
under the pretext of the Gospel, ye act quite contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ. Therefore will I make it my Prayer to God, that he would look upon you
from a far, and disappoint your Designs; for I perceive clearly enough, that
the Devil, who has not been hitherto able to oppress me by means of the Pope
of Rome, now goes about to undo me by those blood-thirsty Preachers. Therefore
I will pray, as I have said, though I had rather you would so behave your
selves, that I might not have cause to make my Prayers against you: For though
I be a Sinner, yet the Cause of my Prayer is just, and I make no doubt but it
will be heard; for God will have his Name to be sanctified, and has taught us
so to pray. Wherefore I exhort and beseech you, that you would not make slight
of mine and other Men's Prayers; for you will feel, to your great hurt and sorrow,
what they will avail. Now you cannot come to Prayer with any such confidence;
for both the Scripture and a guilty Conscience declare that your Actions are
profane and ungodly. How many of you, I pray, have betaken themselves to God in
this case? Not one I doubt; for you place all your safety in your numerous
Forces and your Arms. However true Christians do nothing violently, but suffer;
and apply themselves to God by instant and servent Prayer, as the Practice of
godly Men in all Ages makes it appear; for this only is the right course, which
also affords great peace and tranquillity of Mind. Now therefore since ye
neglect this way, and neither pour out your Prayers to God, nor suffer with
Patience, but trust in your own Strength, and expect all from your selves, you
are not to hope for any Blessing from God. It is possible indeed, that by God's
permission you may have some small Success, but that will turn at lenghth to
your own Destruction.

By what has hitherto been said, it will be easy to Answer your Demands;
which though they were grounded on Equity, and were consonant to the Law of
Nature, yet in the main they cannot subsist; because you would by Force wrest
them from the Magistrate, which is contrary both to Equity and common Right;
and he that penned them for you, is no good Man; for the Texts of Scripture
whereby he incenses you, and exposes you to danger, are neither entirely nor
faithfully cited by him; and being narrowly examined, they are so far from
making for you, that indeed they strongly militate against you. The chief thing
you complain of, is, that you are deprived of the Preaching of the Gospel: But
that cannot be, since the Doctrine of the Gospel is not restrained to any one
place, but freely moves all over the World; like to that Star which guided the
Wise Men of the East to the place where Christ was born and lay. It is indeed
in the Power of the Magistrate to hinder one from coming to the place where the
Gospel is preached; but it is in our Power also to leave the Country, and
follow this Doctrine into those places where it is taught. The Place it self is
not to be taken violently, and forcibly detained by you; but to be left to the
Magistrate or Lord of it, and you to remove elsewhere, as Christ himself
teaches. The first of your Demands, about Choosing your Ministers, is not
amiss, if it proceed orderly: For if the Revenues wherewith the Ministers of
the Church are maintained, have been given by the Magistrates, it is not now
lawful for the People to give them to whom they please; but the Magistrate is
to be first petitioned to appoint a Pastor; and if he refuse, the People may
choose one, and maintain him at their own Charges: If the Magistrate will not
suffer this neither, then let him who is chosen by the People fly, and
whosoever please with him; for if any other course be taken, it must needs be
criminal and injurious. What you pretend to concerning Tithes, is most
unreasonable; for what is it else, but to abolish all Magistracy? Be liberal,
but let it be of your own, and not of other Men's Goods, yea, act altogether, as
if you were absolute Masters, and had the disposal of all things, whereby it
may be easily known what your intent and purpose is. You would also take away
all Servitude. What? did not Abraham and many other holy Men possess Bondmen?
Read St. Paul's Epistles, and he will instruct you concerning Bondmen. That
Demand therefore favors of Rapine and Violence, and is repugnant to the
Gospel; for he that is a Servant, may nevertheless be Pious, and enjoy
Christian Liberty, as well as he who is in Prison, or on a sick Bed: But you
aim at this, that all Men should be Equal, and of one and the same Condition;
which is foolish and absurd; for Civil Society and Government cannot subsist,
unless there be a distinction of Persons, some Masters, and some Servants; some
to Command, and some to Obey. As for the rest, concerning Wild Beasts,
Pastures, Woods, Rivers, Taxes, and the like, I leave them to be discussed by
Lawyers; for they belong not to my Office, which is to instruct Men in Religion
and Spiritual Matters. And this, Brethren, is my Judgment and Advice, which you
desired to know. Now it will be your parts, who say that you will conform to
the Testimonies of Scripture, to hearken to the same; and not cry out when
these shall come to your hands, that I am become a Flatterer of the Civil
Magistrate, as if I taught you not what is just and right; but first weigh
seriously the whole matter, and the arguments which I use; for certainly it is
your Interest that lies at stake. But above all things, beware of those
Teachers who spur you forwards: I know what sort of Men they are; they lead you
to a Precipice, that they my get Honor and Riches by your Dangers.

The reason why Luther upbraided them so much with the false Title they took to
themselves, was this, That in all their Declarations for inviting and alluring
others to enter into Confederacy with them, they gave it out, That they had
taken up Arms by the Command of God, and out of Love to the Public, that the
Doctrine of the Gospel might prosper, that Truth, Justice and Honesty of Life
might flourish, and that they might for the future secure them and theirs from
Violence and Oppression. And when they had thus declared the reason of their
Proceedings, in a few words they charged and commanded their Neighbors, that
they should forthwith Arm and come to their Assistance; wherein if they failed,
that they would with all speed come upon them with their whole Forces.

When Luther had thus answered them, he addressed likewise a Monitory to the
Princes and Nobility: Luther's Monitory to the Princes and Nobility.
Wherein he tells them; For all the Troubles and Commotions that are now on
foot, says he, ye only are to be thanked; ye especially, who have the Name of
Churchmen, and leave not off to this present to persecute the Doctrine of the
Gospel, even against your Conscience. In the next place, ye who are
Magistrates, and bear Rule in Civil Affairs, mind nothing else, but how, right
or wrong, you may get Money to support your Luxury and Pride; so that the poor
People are no longer able to bear the Burden. Great Dangers certainly threaten
you, and hang over your Heads like a Sword hanging by a twined Thread: And
nevertheless you are secure, as if you could not be moved; but this Security
will doubtless be your Ruin. God sometimes poured out his Indignation upon
Princes, as you read in the Psalms: I have oftener than once admonished you to
beware of that Evil; but you run headlong to destruction, and no warning will
serve; wherefore the Wrath of God will fall upon your Heads, if ye amend not
your Lives. The Prodigies which happen and are seen in many places, portend no
good. We may easily know that God's Anger is waxed hot against us, in that he
suffers false Teachers to have so much Power over us, as to mislead us into
error and darkness, that so we may be deservedly punished: And we have an
Instance of this before our Eyes; the present popular Insurrection, which will
utterly destroy Germany, unless God, moved by our Prayers, be pleased to send
some Remedy. For this is now the present state of Affairs, that Men neither
can, nor will, nor indeed ought to suffer our Arbitrary Rule any longer. You
must be wholly transformed, and give place to the Word of God; for if the
People bring it not to pass at this time, others shall succeed; and though you
kill and destroy most of them, yet God will raise up others in their place; for
the Work is his, it is he that warreth against you, and calls you to an account
for your Impieties. Some of you have bragged, That you would spend your Lives
and Fortunes in the utter Extirpation of Luther's Doctrine: And does that not
seem to be in a fair way now to be done? But these are Matters not to be Jested
with. The Jews of old, said that they had no King; but at last they have been
reduced to this condition, to want a King for ever. Some of you also, as if
your former Crimes had not been enough, cast a new Reproach upon the Gospel,
and say that all these Stirs are the fruits of my Doctrine. Well, go on in your
Railing; but that ye will not know what my Doctrine is, nor hear the voice of
the Gospel, it is a sign of an obstinate and malicious Mind. For my part, I
have from the very first, always taught modestly, abhorred all Seditions, and
earnestly exhorted the People to Obedience to their Magistrates; nay, and
advised them too, to bear with your wicked and tyrannical Domination: And in
this I appeal to your selves. This Insurrection then proceeded not from me; but
those blood-thirsty Prophets, who are my Enemies no less than yours, have
raised the Plague by seducing the People, and have been carrying on the work
these three years past and more, while no Man withstood them, as I have done.
If God now, for your Sins permit the Devil, by means of those Prophets, to stir
up the Rage of the People against you,; and if matters come to that pass, that
it is out of my power to prevent this Storm; wherein pray, am I or the Gospel
to be blamed for that, when the very Doctrine which I profess, has not only
hitherto suffered your Cruelty, but also pours out Prayers to God for you, and
has always maintained and highly commended your Dignity to the People? Now if
I delighted to be revenged for the Injuries you have done unto me; I might
laugh in my Sleeve, and be an idle Spectator of the Tragedy, or else join with
the raging Multitude, and as it is commonly said, Pour your Oil into the Flame,
and scratch the Sore. Wherefore most noble Princes, I earnestly beseech you,
That you would not despise my Admonition, nor set light by this Insurrection:
Not that I fear they will be too hard for you (for I would not have you be
afraid of that) but that you would stand in awe of the Wrath of God; for if he
intend to punish you, as you deserve, you will not avoid the Danger, though the
Power of the Enemy be never so small. And therefore, if there be any Place left
for Counsel, I pray you give way to rage, and wisely prevent the eminent Storm:
And since the Event is uncertain, and the Will of God unknown; you ought to try
well all ways first, and take heed, that such a Fire be not kindled, as may
consume all Germany. For certainly our Sins, whereby we have stirred up God's
Wrath against us, are manifest, so that we ought to be afraid of the least
Noise; much more when so great a number of Enemies are got together, with
violent Designs: Lenity and Clemency can do you no hurt; and though it should,
it will afterward make Satisfaction with great Advantage: But if you oppose
Force to Force, you may be in Danger, perhaps, of losing all. And when you may
obtain more by other Means, why will ye run so great a Risk? They have proposed
twelve Demands, whereof some are so consonant to Equity and Reason, that you
have just Cause to be ashamed: However, they refer all to their own Profit, and
prove not sufficiently what they allege: And besides there are many other
things of greater concern to the State of Germany, which may be objected unto
you, as we have made it appear in a Book, written for that purpose; but because
you, to whom they were particularly addressed, have rejected them, you are now
deservedly urged with far harder Conditions. Their first Demand is, That such
Ministers may be lawfully appointed, as may sincerely preach the Word of God.
And although they have in this, an Eye to their own Profit, when they would
have their Stipends paid out of other Men's Tiths; yet what they demand, cannot
in Reason be denied; for it is lawful for no Magistrate, to debarr their People
from the Doctrine of the Gospel. The other things they crave, concerning
Serving-men, and the like, are also grounded on Reason; for it is not the part
of the Magistrate, to afflict and harass the People; but rather to defend and
preserve their Fortunes and Estates. But now there is no end of Exactions, and
how can that continue? for if the Country People reap more plentiful Crops of
their Lands and Farms, than perhaps they expected; and their Magistrates and
Landlords therefore raise their Taxes and Rents, all which they profusely spend
in Luxury and Riot; Pray, what Profit have the poor Wretches, and wherein is
their Condition bettered thereby? This Luxury and Profusion ought, certainly to
be restrained, that something may be also left for them to live on. The rest of
their Demands, I suppose you have learnt from their Public Declaration.

Having severally admonished both Parties, Luther's common Epistle to the
Nobles and Boors.
he wrote to them a common Epistle, advising them, That since they both
maintained a bad Cause, that they would desist from Arms, and amicably
accommodate the Difference. To the Magistrates he represents, That the Ends of
Tyrants have been always most sad and fatal; and to the People, That the
Success of those who have Rebelled, and risen in Arms against their
Magistrates, has ever been Calamitous and Unfortunate. One thing he chiefly
bewailed, That when on both Sides they fought with a bad Conscience, the
Princes in maintaining their Oppression, and the People in rebelliously
attempting to accomplish their Desires, all who perished in the Wars, must
needs make Shipwreck of their Souls. In the next place he laments the Condition
of Germany, which was like to be utterly ruined by this Civil War: That it was
an easy thing to take up Arms; but not so easy to lay them down again, when
we would. He advised them therefore to forbear, and not leave to Posterity
Germany in so troubled and bloody a State: That no permanent Good could be
obtained by Arms; but much by the Reformation of Life. He exhorts them to refer
the whole Matter to the Arbitration of Good Men, to be chosen on both Sides:
That the Magistrates would remit somewhat of their Right; and that the Boors
yield to good Admonition, and recede from some of their Demands: That this was
his Counsel, and if they followed it not, he should he the Spectator of the
Ruin of both; for that it would be unlawful to be on either Side; seeing the
Boors fought against the Princes, as against the Oppressors of their Estates
and Liberties; and the Princes, on the other hand, against the Boors, as
against Robbers, and such as cast a Reproach upon the Name of Christ. That in
this their obstinate Fierceness, he would pray to God, either to show some way
of Concord, or to confound and repress the Counsels and Attempts of both.
Though by reason of the many Prodigies which appeared, he was very anxious and
much afraid, he said, that the Wrath of God might no more be mitigated and
appeased now, than at that Time, when by the Prophet Jeremiah he declared, That
the Jews had so highly provoked him to wrath and indignation, as that the
Intercession of most holy men, should not prevail with him to spare them, but
that he would certainly afflict and plague them for their wickedness; that
therefore he wished for nothing more, than that they would repent, and trun to
the Lord, that the Calamity hanging over their Heads, might at least be
mitigated and delayed.

Whilst Luther in this manner, Luther sends an Allarm against the Boors.
endeavored to compose the Tumult, the Boors in Franconia, and other Places,
suddenly advancing, made War not only against the Papists, but the Nobility
also, and did much Mischief far and near, as has been said: Then published
Luther another Book; wherein he exhorted and incited all Men to hasten to the
Destruction of those villainous Traitors, Robbers and Parricides, as they would
run to the quenching of a public Fire; for that they were such, as had
shamefully violated their Allegiance to the Magistrate, invaded other Men's
Possessions by Force, and cloaked this horrid Villainy and Impiety with the
color and pretext of Christianity; than which nothing could be imagined more
abominable and vile. He also in few Words refuted the Arguments they used, as
has been mentioned at large before: In the next place, he tells the
Magistrates, That they should not scruple nor fear to set upon and suppress
that Seditious Rabble: That it was properly their Duty to do so: Nor was it
lawful only for them, but also for every Private Man, by any way whatsoever to
kill a Rebel, because Rebellion was the greatest of Evils that could happen in
a State; and that the more they drew and halled in against their Wills into
their Confederacy, or rather Madness and Fury, the greater was the Guilt, and
the more severely to be punished: That at first they protested, They were
willing to submit to Arbitration, and to hearken to better Counsel if any
should convince them: And that therefore he durst not then condemn them, so
long as they kept themselves within those Bounds; but that now, since it
plainly appeared, That all was but Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, he was obliged
to alter his Style. That therefore he gave the Allarm, and advised all Men to
fall upon them, in the same manner, as they would upon Wild Beasts. This little
Book of his was every where censured as too Sharp and Bloody: But he made a
large Answer for himself, and justifies his Opinion, declaring, That no Mercy
ought to be shown to any of them, no not to those who being compelled by the
rest of the Multitude, had acted any thing rebelliously: And that none should
be pardoned, as he had always said before; but they who being admonished, came
in and surrendered themselves.

I told you before, That the Emperor, by Letters from Spain, prohibited the
sitting of the Imperial Diet, which should have met it November the Year before
at Spire: But now that the State of Germany was much disturbed at Home, and
threatened also with great Danger from the Turk abroad, The Emperor's Letters
for calling the Diet of Au^burg.
he wrote again from Toledo, May 24, and having resumed the Reasons why he
would not have the former Diet to be kept, he tells the Princes, That he would
not have that so to be taken, as if, in the mean time no Consultation should be
had about the other Affairs of the Empire; for that he acknowledged it to be
his Duty, to defend the Christian Religion, and the Holy Rites and Customs
received from their Ancestors; and to prohibit all pernicious Doctrine and
Innovations in Religion: That therefore he proposed, That with the Advice and
Consent of the Pope, a General Council should be called. But seeing that might,
perhaps, be too late, and that in the mean time, many things were done in
Germany, contrary to the Decree of Worms; and that he was informed also of
Stirs and Seditions on foot aginst the Magistrates: That, moreover, because
there were many and great Controversies among the Princes and States
themselves; and that the Turk also, the perpetual enemy of Christendom, lay
hovering upon their Borders: Besides, that there were several things in the
Judicatures and Council of the Empire, which needed Reformation: That for these
Reasons he called a Diet of the whole Empire to meet at Ausburg the first of
October, there to treat of the Affairs of the Public, and particularly of
continuing the Aids against the Turks: That if he could not be present at it
himself, he would give Commission to others to supply his place. These Letters
were not delivered in Germany till the thirtenth of August, which was somewhat
too late: Wherefore by the Advice and Consent of Archduke Ferdinand, whom the
Emperor had made his Representative, and others, the Day was prorogued to S.
Martin's Day, the eleventh of November, that they who lived more remote might
have time to come.

Carolostadius, whom we named before, disagreeing with Luther, left Wittemberg,
and became very familiar with those clandestine Doctors, who pretended to
Visions and Conferences, with God, as has been said before; for this Reason
chiefly the Elector of Saxony had banished him his Country; but he, in the mean
time, published several Pamphlets, wherein he enveighed against Luther and his
Followers, and new Flatterers of the Pope; and as if they taught amiss
concerning the Mass, Confession of Sins, Images and the like. These Words of
Christ, This is my Body, he interpreted also thus, Carolostadius his Exposition
of This is my Body.
here sits my Body. Nor did he spare the Elector neither, whom he shortly
took up for his Banishment, and laid the Blame of it on Luther. To these things
Luther made a long Answer, wherein he defended his own Doctrine, and affirmed,
That the Elector had very good Reason, not to suffer him to abide within his
Territories: But after the suppression of that popular Insurrection, when in
all Places many were dragged to Execution; Carolostadius being in great
Straits, wrote a Book, wherein he took a great deal of Pains, to justify
himself against those, who reckoned him among the Authors of the Rebellion,
affirming it to be an Injury done unto him; and writing to Luther, he earnestly
prayed him, That he would both publish that Book, and also defend his Cause,
lest an innocent Man, as he was, might be in danger of losing Life and Goods,
without being heard. Luther published a Letter to this purpose: That though
Carolostadius differed very much in Opinion from him, yet because in his
straits he betook himself to him, rather than to others, who had stirred him up
against him, he would not disappoint his Hope and Confidence, especially since
that was properly the Duty of a Christian. He therefore, desired the
Magistrates, and all in General, That seeing he both denied the Crime, that was
laid to his charge, and refused not to come to a fair Trial, and submit to
Judgment, the same might be granted him; as being most consonant to Equity and
Justice. Afterward Carolostadius sent another little Book to Luther, wherein
he protested, That what he had written concerning the Lord's Supper, was not to
define or determine any thing, but rather by way of Argument and Disputation to
sift out the Truth. Luther admits of the Excuse; yet admonishes Men, That
seeing he himself confessed he doubted, and defined nothing positively, to
beware of his Opinion: Or if they themselves, perhaps, doubted; to suspend
their Judgment so long, till it should appear what they might safely follow:
For that in matters of Faith we ought not to waver and doubt, but to acquire
such a certain and steady Knowledge, as rather to suffer a thousand Deaths,
than to forsake our Opinion. Much about this time Luther married a Nun, whereby
his Adversaries were excited to load him with more Reproaches; Luther marries a
Nun.
for now he was downright mad, they cried, and had sold himself a Slave to the
Devil.

At the very same time Vlrich Zuinglius Minister of the Church at Zurich,
Zuinglius differs from Luther about the Lord's Supper.
who almost in all other things agreed with Luther, dissented from him also
about the Lord's Supper. For Luther understood these Words of Christ, This is
my Body, literally and properly, admitting no Figurative Interpretation, and
affirming the Body and Blood of Christ, to be really in the Bread and Wine, and
to be so received and eaten by Believers. But Zuinglius maintained it was a
Figure, that many such were to be found in Scripture, and the former Words he
so expounded; This signifies my Body. With him agreed John Oecolampadius
Minister of the Church at Basil, and he so interprets them: This is the Sign of
my Body. The matter was contentiously debated on both sides, and much was
written upon the Subject. The Saxons embraced the Opinion of Luther, and the
Switzers that of Zuinglius; others come after, who explained the Words in
another manner; but all agree in this Opinion, That the Body and Blood of
Christ are taken Spiritually, not Corporally; with the Heart, not with the
Mouth. This debate lasted three Years and more; but at length a Conference was
procured at Marpurg, chiefly by means of the Landgrave, as shall be said in its
proper place.

The Diet also, which at this time was held at Ausburg; because very few
resorted to it, by reason of the Popular Insurrection, beforementioned, was
dissolved, and all matters put off till the first of May, the Year following;
against which time, Ferdinand gave Hopes, That the Emperor, his Brother, would
be there in person from Spain, and Spire was appointed to be the place of the
Diet. It was decreed, though among other things, That the Magistrates should
take special care, That the Preachers did interpret and expound God's Word to
the People, according to the Sense of Doctors, approved by the Christian
Church, and that they should not preach Seditious Doctrine, but so that God's
Name might be glorified, and the People live in Peace and Quietness.

Whilst Francis King of France was Prisoner in Spain, his Mother Aloisia, had
the Administration of the Government, who to keep in with the Pope, acquainted
him, among other things, How zealously she stood affected toward the Church of
Rome. Whereupon Pope Clement VII, Pope Clement's Letters to the Parliament of
Paris.
writing to the Parliament of Paris, told them, How he understood from her,
That the Contagion of Wicked Heresies began also to infect France, and they had
wisely and providently chosen some persons to enquire into, and punish those
who labored to oppose the Faith, and Ancient Religion: That he also, by his
Authority, approved the Commissioners, whom they had chosen; for that in so
great and grievous a Disorder of Affairs, raised by the Malice of Satan, and
the Rage and Impiety of his Ministers, every one ought to bestir themselves, to
preserve and maintain the common Safety of all Men, since that Rage and Madness
tended not only to the Subversion of Religion, but also to the confounding of
all Principality, Nobility, Law and Order: That for his part, he spared no
Care, Labor nor Pains, that he might remedy the Evil: And that they also,
whose Virtue and Prudence was every where celebrated, should make it their
chief Business, that not only the true Faith, but also the Welfare of the
Kingdom, and their own Dignity should be secured against Domestic Dangers and
Calamities, which that pernicious and pestilent Heresy carried with it into
all places: That they needed not, indeed, to be exhorted, having already given
Proofs of their own Wisdom: But that nevertheless, in discharge of his own
Duty, and as a token of his Favor and Good Will, he had been willing to make
this Address unto them, for that he was exceeding well pleased with what they
had already done, and exhorted them, That for the future, they would with the
like Zeal and Virtue bestir themselves for the Glory of God, and the Welfare of
the whole Kingdom; that by so doing, they would render most acceptable Service
to God, and merit the Praises and Applause of Men; and that therein they might
expect all sort of Assistance from him. This Brief dated at Rome, May the
twentieth, was delivered to the Parliament at Paris, on the seventeenth Day of
June.

During the absence also of the Captive King, The Sorbonists persecute James
Fevre.
the Divines of Paris so persecuted James le Fevre d'Estaples, who has
published many Books both in Philosophy and Divinity, that he was fain to leave
France, and fly into another Country. The King being informed of this, The
French King writes in his behalf.
by the means chiefly of his Sister Margaret, who had a kindness for Le Fevre,
because of his Probity and Virtue, wrote to the Parliament of Paris, That he
heard that there was a Process brought before them against James le Fevre, and
some other Learned Men, at the Instigation of the Divines, who particularly
hated le Fevre; for that before his Expedition out of France, he had been
grievously informed against him by some of that Faculty, though unjustly, and
without a Cause: That then he had appointed some great Men, eminent for
Learning, to inspect his Books and Writings, for which he stood accused: But
that they having carefully perused and examined them all, had given him a very
ample and honorable Testimony: That seeing it was so, and that he was had in
gread Reputation by the Italians and Spaniards, for the opinion they conceived
of his Learning and Virtue, as he has since learnt; he would therefore take it
ill, if that innocent Man should be molested, or exposed to any Danger. And
seeing, that if at any other time, so now especially, he would have Justice
strictly administered throughout all his Kingdoms: And again, because for the
future, he intended by all ways to favor Men of Learning, therefore he
commanded them, That if any Process had been commenced against them since his
Departure, they should make report of the fame to his Mother, who managed the
Government, that he might be certified thereof by her, and that they might
expect his Will and Pleasure therein, and not to proceed any farther, but to
supersede all Action, until either he should return, which he hoped, by the
Blessing of God, would shortly be, or else some Order should be taken in the
matter by himself, or his Mother. These Letters, dated at Madrid in Spain,
November the twelfth, were delivered to the Parliament of Paris, the eight and
twentieth day of the same Month. It was a thing almost natural to the Divines
of the past Age, to teaze and molest learned Men; and the reason was, because
they saw themselves despised for their Ignorance.

This Year there happened a change in the State and Government of Prusia, A
Change in Prusia.
a Province in the utmost parts of Germany, upon the Baltick-Sea. Let us trace
the matter a little farther back: The Original of the Teutonick Order.
During the Empire of Henry VI, the Son of Frederick Barbarossa, when the
Christians were in War for the Recovery of Jerusalem, the Knights of the German
or Teutonick Order were instituted, who because they fought for Religion, wore
a white Cross upon their Clothes, as a Badge and cognizance of their
Profession. This happened in the Year of our Lord, eleven hundred and ninety.
The first Master of that Order was chosen, as is reported, in the Camp before
Ptolemais. Afterward these Knights subdued Prusia, in the time of the Emperor
Frederick II: And after that, being grown strong, they had for some time waged
War with the Kings of Poland, they were overcome in Battle, and swore
Allegiance to Casimire king of Poland, the Father of King Sigismund. From the
first Master to Marquess Albert of Brandenburg, there had been three and thirty
Masters: Now Albert was chosen in the Year of our Lord, one thousand five
hundred and eleven. For the space of two Years, he had a bloody War with
Sigismund King of Poland, and in the Year one thousand five hundred and twenty
one, a Truce was made for four Years. In the mean time Marquess Albert, often
solicited the Emperor, and States of the Empire for Aid, and came himself in
Person to the Diet of Norimberg: We mentioned before, where he took his Place
as a Prince of the Empire; for the cause of the War was, because he refused to
swear Allegiance to the King of Poland. But now, when the Emperor was engaged
in a War with France, The Master of Prusia deserts the Empire: Is made Duke,
and embraces the Reformed Religion.
the Turk invaded Hungary, and Germany was so embroiled by the Rebellion of the
Boors, that no help was to be expected from thence; the Truce being likewise
expired, he made Peace with the King of Poland, swore Allegiance to him, as to
his chief Magistrate, and embraced the Reformed Religion. Hereupon he changed
his Order, challenged Prusia, as his own, and being before but Master, was now
by the King's consent inaugurated Duke of Prusia, and some time after married
the Lady Dorothy, Daughter to the King of Denmark, founding also the University
of Coningsberg. By this means he got the whole Order upon his Top: For although
he was in Possession of Prusia, and under the Protection of the King of Poland;
yet by common consent Walter Cronberg was chosen in his place, who retained the
Name, and represented the old Dignity of the Order, and in all Dyets grievously
accused Albert, as you shall hear in the proper place. But he having published
a Manifesto, gave his Reasons for what he had done, and declared, That being
forsaken of the Empire, he was driven by extreme Necessity, to submit himself
to the King of Poland. The Letters of Pope Leo X, to Sigismund and Albert are
extant; wherein he exhorts them to Concord, and either refer the Difference
they had to his Legate, whom he would send, or submit it to the Determination
of the Council of Lateran; because it was most convenient that the Debates of
Kings should be decided by a Council.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK VI.
THE CONTENTS.
Luther-writes to the King of England, and George Duke of Saxony, to regain
their favor: But both reject him. Now he had been put on to do so by
Christiern King of Denmark, The sickness of the French King, who was Prisoner,
hastened the Treaty at Madrid. The King having obtained his Liberty, two of his
Sons are left Hostages. While the Princes of Germany meet in the Diet at Spire,
the Emperor of the Turks marches straight into Hungary. A Disputation begun at
Baden. The Pope and Venetians make a League with the French King. The Emperor
and King make bitter Complaints of one another. Rome being taken by the Duke of
Bourbon, the King sends Lautreck into Italy. The Errors of the Anabaptists
begin to spread. A Disputation appointed at Berne, about Reformation of
Religion. A Context between King Ferdinand and the Vayvode of Transylvania.
Berken suffers Death at Antwerp. The Emperor sends a Herald with a Challenge to
the French King. Lautreck Besieges Naples, but the Plague rages in his Camp.
Mass is abolished at Strasburg. A Dissension arises at Basil about Religion.
The Catholic Switzers make a League with Ferdinand. A Diet held at Spire, and
from thence the Name of Protestant had its Original. A Civil War among the
Switzers. A Treaty at Cambray. Solomon Besieges Vienna. A new Disease breaks
out in Germany. The Protestants frame a League. Erasmus his Book against
Protestants. Sforza is again received into favor with the Emperor.

WE gave an Account before, Luther writes to the King of England.
of the King of England and Luther's clashing by Letters: But Luther, in the
mean time, having heard of some things that sounded to the King's Praise and
Commendation, was mightily rejoiced at the News, and wrote very submissively
unto him, That he doubted not but that he had highly offended him by the Book
he published; but that he had not done it so much of his own accord, as at the
instigation of others, which made him in confidence of his Royal Grace and
Condescension, so much applauded by many, take the boldness to write to him at
present; and the rather, that he was informed his Highness was not the Author
of the Book written against him, but that it was the work of some busy and
crafty Sophisters. And here taking occasion to speak of the Cardinal of York,
he calls him, The Plague of England. He heard also, he said, to his great
satisfaction, that His Highness disliked that sort of naughty Men, and applied
his mind to the knowledge of the Truth: Wherefore he prayed him to pardon what
he had done, and consider, that he himself being a Mortal Man, ought not to
entertain Immortal Enmity: That if he pleased to lay his Commands upon him, he
would make a public acknowledgment of his fault, and wrote another Book in
Praise of his Princely Virtues. Then he entreats his Highness not to listen to
the Suggestions of Slanders, who called him a Heretic; since the sum of his
Doctrine was this, That we must be saved by Faith in Christ, who bore the
punishment of our Sins in his own Body; who having died and risen again for us,
reigns for ever with his Father; which was the Doctrine of all the Prophets and
Apostles: That having laid this for a Foundation, he taught the Duties of
Charity, what we ought to do for one another, how we ought to obey the
Magistrate, and suit our whole Life to the Profession of the Gospel: That if
there was any Error or Impiety in that Doctrine, why did not the Adversaries
make it out? Why did they condemn and excommunicate him before he was heard and
convicted? That therefore he wrote against the Pope of Rome and his Adherents,
because they taught contrary to Christ and his Apostles, for their own Gain and
Profit, that they might rule and domineer over all others, and wallow in Luxury
and Pleasures; for that all their Thoughts and Actions tended only to this
scope; which was so notoriously known also, that they themselves could not deny
it: But would they mend their Manners, and not lead such a lazy and sensual
life, to the prejudice and loss of other Men, the difference might easily be
brought to an end: That since a great many Princes and free Cities of Germany
approved his Doctrine, and thankfully acknowledged God's Blessing in it, he
earnestly wished His Highness might he reckoned one of that number: But, that
the Emperor and some others made themselves his Enemies, it was no new thing:
That David had prophesied many Ages since, That Kings and People should
conspire against the Lord and his anointed, and cast off his Laws; That for his
own part, when he considered such places of Scripture, he wondered to see that
any Prince favored the Doctrine of the Gospel. Last of all, he humbly desired
that His Highness would be pleased to give him a gracious Answer.

Not long after, Luther writes also to George Duke of Saxony.
he wrote also to George Duke of Saxony, That it was God's usual way at first,
to correct Men sharply and severely; but afterward, tenderly to embrace and
cherish them: That he struck the Jews with fear and terror, when he delivered
the Law by Moses; but afterward sent them glad Tidings, by the Preaching of
the Gospel: That he himself also having followed that method, had dealt a
little too roughly with some, and with him among the rest; but that in the mean
while he had written some things full of Fruit and Consolation, whence it might
be easily perceived, that he took all that pains out of no ill will to any, but
that he might do good to all: That he was informed however, that his Grace did
not at all relent in the anger and offense which he had conceived against him,
but was more and more exasperated daily, which was the reason why now he wrote
unto him: That he earnestly begged of him, he would desist from opposing his
Doctrine; not truly for his own sake, who had nothing to lose but his Life, but
chiefly for his sake, whose Salvation lay at stake; for seeing he was certainly
persuaded that his Doctrine agreed with the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, he was therefore very much concerned for his Grace, who so bitterly
hated and persecuted him. He admonished him also not to regard the meanness of
his Person; for that the business was not his, but the work of the Almighty
God; and though all Men should storm and rage, yet that Doctrine would abide for
ever; and that therefore he was the more grieved, when he saw him so incensed
and offended thereat: That he could not forsake this his Station, but seeing he
was willing to gratify him in any thing else, he humbly begged his Pardon, for
that he had said some things too sharply against him: That he, on other hand,
would pray God to forgive his Grace, for his Contempt and Persecution of the
Gospel; and made no doubt but that his Prayers would be heard, provided he
would leave off in time, and not endeavor to put out that Light which by God's
Blessing now shone in the World; for that if he went on in that way of Cruelty,
he would implore the assistance of God against him; and then he would
understand too late, what it was to withstand the Majesty of Heaven: That he
had a firm and undoubted confidence in God's Promises, and knew that his Prayer
was more powerful than all the Arts and Snares of the Devil; and that he always
had his Refuge to it, as to a most strong Castle and Rock of Defense.

The King of England having received Luther's Letter we mentioned before, The
King of England's sharp Answer to Luther.
returned him a sharp Answer, upbraiding him with Levity and Inconstancy. He
also owned his Book, which he said had been very well liked of by many good and
learned Men: That it was no strange thing to him, that he should revile the
Reverend Father the Cardinal of York, since he stood not in awe to reproach
both Saints and Men: That the Cardinal's Services were very useful both to him
and the whole Kingdom also: And that as he had loved him very well before, he
would now entertain a far greater Kindness for him, since he was calumniated
and accused by him: That among other useful Services, his Eminence did also
this good office, that he was zealous and diligent in preventing the Leprosy
and Contagion of his Heresy from infecting any part of his Dominions.
Afterward he reproaches him for his Incestuous Marriage, than which no fouler
Crime could be committed. This Cardinal was one Thomas Woolsey, a Man of mean
Birth, but in high Favor with the King of England. Duke George of Saxony also
made such an Answer to Luther, as it might easily appear how much he hated him.

When the French Ambassadors that were sent to Spain to treat of Peace, among
whom was Margaret the King's own Sister, a Widow, could effect nothing: Aloisia
the Queen Mother, A League betwixt France and England.
who had the Regency of the Kingdom for her own Security, prevailed with King
Henry to enter into Alliance and Amity with her; and this was concluded about
the latter end of August. The chief Article of that League, was, That they
should resist the Invasions of the Turk, and the Sect of Luther, which was as
dangerous as the violence of the Turk. The Cardinal of England, who could do
any thing with the King, was thought to have persuaded his Majesty to this
Alliance; for he bore no good will to the Emperor, because he looked upon him
as the cause, why after the Death of Adrian, he was not chosen Pope, as the
Imperialists have given it out in their Writings.

When Luther had read the King of England's Answer, Luther's Complaint of the
King of England.
which was Printed, and therein found Inconstancy objected unto him, as if he
had changed his Opinion in Matters of Religion; which he looked upon not only
as a private Injury done to himself, but also to the Reformed Religion: It much
troubled him, he said, that to gratify his Friends, he had written so
submissively unto him: That Christiern King of Denmark had not left off to
entreat and advise him, both Personally and by Letters, that he would write
obligingly; and had told him so much of his courteous Disposition, that he had
put him in hopes, that being gently dealt with, he would receive the Reformed
Religion; but that now he was sensible of his Error: That he had been just so
served by Cardinal Cajetane, George Duke of Saxony, and Erasmus of Rotterdam,
to whom, at the desire of others, he had written affectionately; and all that
he got by it, was to render them more fierce and untractable: That it was a
foolish thing for him to imagine to find godliness in the Courts of Princes, to
look for Christ where Satan bore rule, and to enquire after St. John Baptist
among Courtiers who were clad in Purple: That therefore since he could do no
good by that gentle and loving way of Writing, he would take another course for
the future.

The French King being anxious, The French King sick in Prison.
and troubled in thoughts that the Treaty of Peace did not go forward, fell
into a fit of Sickness; but being encouraged by the Emperor's discourse, who
bid him be of good cheer, and hope the best, he began at length to be somewhat
better. The Emperor also considering with himself what a great loss it would be
unto him, if he should chance to die, inclined daily more and more to Peace:
1526.
So that January the Fourteenth, all things were at length concluded at Madrid;
and in the Treaty of Peace it is stipulated among other things, that the
Emperor and King shall endeavor to extirpate the Enemies of the Christian
Religion, The Treaty of Peace at Madrid betwixt the Emperor and French King.
and the Heresies of the Sect of the Lutherans: In like manner, That Peace
being made betwixt them they should settle the Affairs of the Public, and make
War against the Turk, and Heretics excommunicated by the Church; for that it
was above all things necessary, and that the Pope had often solicited and
advised them to bestir themselves therein: That therefore in compliance with
his desires, they resolved to entreat him that he would appoint a certain day,
when the Ambassadors and Deputies of all Kings and Princes might meet in a
convenient place, with full Power and Commission to treat of such measures as
might seem proper for undertaking a War against the Turk, and also for rooting
out Heretics, the Enemies of the Church. Again, that he would give leave to
those Princes who labored in so holy and pious a Work, to collect and raise
the Money which was usual and customary in such cases; and also that he would
impose a Tax upon the Clergy for the same purpose. In this Pacification,
Eleanor the Emperor's Sister, who had been married to Emanuel King of Portugal,
was affianced to the French King. The Emperor promised in Dowry with her Two
hundred thousand Ducats, and some Places in Upper Burgundy, which were in
Controversy betwixt them. The King, on the other hand, promised within two
Months after his return into France, to deliver up to the Emperor the Duchy of
Burgundy, which the Kings of France had held ever since the Death of Charles
Duke of Burgundy, almost now fifty Years: Besides he renounced all Right and
Title to Naples, Milan, Asta, Genoua and Flanders: That he should not aid nor
assist Henry King of Navarre, Charles Duke of Gueldres, Vlrick Duke of
Wirtemberg, nor Robert Count of Mark: That he should carry on no secret Designs
in Italy: That when the Emperor had a mind to go into Italy, he should assist
him with a Navy of sixteen Galleys, fitted out and equipped with all things
necessary except Soldiers, and also Two hundred thousand Crowns to Arm and Man
them: That the King should pay the yearly Pension, which the Emperor was bound
by Agreement to pay to the King of England: That he should restore Charles Duke
of Bourbonne, and his Associates, to all their Rights, Lands, and Possessions,
suffering them to enjoy their Estates, and live where they pleased: And that
the King should at any time stand a Trial at Law with the Duke of Bourbonne for
the Province of Marseillies, to which he claims a Title. The King having sworn
to the Emperor to observe these Conditions, The French King leaving his two
Sons Hostages, is set at liberty.
was set at liberty, and returned home; but upon his passing the Borders of
Spain, he left behind him his two Sons Francis and Henry, little Boys, as
Hostages, according as it had been agreed upon; and in case he should fail in
performance of Articles, he promised to deliver himself up Prisoner again.

After this, The Diet of Spire.
the Princes of Germany, in great Numbers, met at Spire, according to
appointment, as we told you in the former Book; among whom also was John
Elector of Saxony, and Philip Landgrave of Hesse. The Emperor's Deputies were,
Ferdinand his Brother, Bernard Bishop of Trent, Casimire Marquess of
Brandenburg, Philip Marquess of Baden, William Duke of Bavaria, and Erick Duke
of Brunswick. When these had opened the Diet, June 25, and had told the
Reasons, why the Emperor had called it, they farther added, That above all
things it was the Emperors Will and Command, That the States of the Empire
would with unanimous Consent, take some course, how the Christian Religion, and
the ancient Rites and Customs of the Church, might be entirely and universally
retained: Again, How they were to be punished and curbed that acted to the
contrary, if peradventure they should make use of Force: And how also mutual
Aid and Assistance was to be given, that the Emperor's Edict of Worms,
published five Years before, and the Decree of the present Diet, might be
observed and put in execution. When a Committee of all the Princes and States
had been chosen to treat of these things, among whom were the Landgrave, James
Sturmey of Strasburg, and Cress of Norimberg; the Emperor's Deputies again
assemble all the States, The Emperor's Letter to the States of the Empire
about observing the Decree of Worms.
August 3, and tell them, That they understood there was a Committee of the
whole appointed to confer among themselves about the matters proposed, who, as
they supposed, would first consult about Religion; but that the Emperor's Will
and Pleasure might be obeyed, and that they might not treat of such things, as
they had no Power to determine, nor lose Time to the Prejudice and Hinderance
of other Deliberations; they would therefore impart to them, what Instructions
they had from the Emperor, as to that matter; and thereupon caused the
Emperor's Letter, dated at Seville March 23, to be read: The Substance whereof
was; That he intended to go to Rome, to be crowned; and also to treat with the
Pope about a Council: But that in the mean time, he willed and commanded, That
the States should not decree any thing in this Diet, that might any ways be
contrary to the ancient Customs, Canons and Ceremonies of the Church; but that
all things should be ordered within his Dominions, according to the Form and
Tenor of the Edict of Worms, which was made with their unanimous Advice and
Consent: That they should patiently bear with this Delay, until he had treated
with the Pope about a Council, which should be shortly called; for that by such
private Regulations there was not only no good to be done, but the Errors and
Licentiousness of the Common People, were thereby the more confirmed.

About this time the Emperor of the Turks marching from Belgrade, The Turks
invade Hungary.
and having passed the Danube and Save, advanced straight toward Hungary:
Wherefore King Lewis sending again Ambassadors to Spire, demanded Assistance.
Certain Intelligence came then also from Italy, That Pope Clement and the
Venetians had made a League with the King of France lately returned home from
Spain, against the Emperor, as shall be said hereafter.

The Emperor's Letters, The Judgment of some Cities in the Diet of Worraes.
I mentioned before, being read, most of the Free Cities, especially of Upper
Germany, delivered in their Minds in Writing, as it is usual: That they desired
by all means to obey and gratify the Emperor, but that the Controversy about
Religion increased daily, especially concerning Ceremonies and Corruptions:
That hitherto the Decree of Worms could not be observed, for fear of a
Sedition and Insurrection; but that now the Danger and Difficulty was much
greater; as had been plainly made appear to the Pope's Legate; in the former
Diet: And that if the Emperor himself were present, and informed of the state
of Affairs, he would be of the same Opinion: That the Emperor, indeed, in his
Letter promised a Council, but when he wrote that Letter, the Pope and he were
on very good Terms together; but that it was far otherwise now, when the Pope
having changed his Mind, brought his Forces into the Field against the
Emperor; and that as Affairs stood it did not appear, how a Council could be
called: That therefore it seemed most expedient to them, either to send
Ambassadors to the Emperor, or by Letters to inform his Majesty of the whole
matter, and of the state of Germany, and how dangerous a thing it would be to
delay the business of Religion any longer, or to urge the Edict of Worms: That
in regard hereof, his Imperial Majesty was to be entreated: That for avoiding
of greater Troubles, he would suffer a National Council of Germany to be
assembled, wherein all matters might be tried and examined: That this Course
had been approved in the Diet of Norimberg, when another Diet was therefore
appointed to be held in this City, and many of the States made preparation for
the same: But its being countermanded by the Emperor, made way for Stirs,
Seditions, and a bloody Civil War; which might have been prevented, if the
Affair of Religion had at that time been lawfully decided. Now if the Emperor
approved not a National Council, that he might be entreated to suspend the
Execution of the Edict of Worms until the meeting of a General Council; for
that else the Wound lately healed, would fester again and grow worse:
Furthermore, That in this Discord and Dissension, so long as every Man was
forced to be solicitous about their own private concerns, it would be very
difficult and uneasy to contribute Money for the Aid and Assistance of others.

Besides this Paper, A Complaint of some Cities of Germany against Mendicant
Friars.
which was presented to the Princes August 4, they preferred also another:
Therein they complain, That poor Men every where were over burdened by
Mendicant Friars, who wheadled them, and eat the Bread out of their Mouths: Nor
was that all neither, but many times also they hooked in Inheritances and most
ample Legacies, to the great Prejudice of many: That it was therefore their
Opinion, That they should not be suffered to propagate those Fraternities any
more: That when any of the Friars dyed, there should be none put into their
place; and that such of them as were willing to follow another course of Life,
might have some yearly Pension; and that the rest of their Revenues should be
brought into the public Treasury: Against the Immunities of the Clergy.
That, besides, it was not reasonable that the Clergy should be exempted from
all public Burdens: That that Privilege had been granted to them of old by
the Bounty of Kings; but at such a time, when they were both few in Number, and
low in Fortune: But that now, when they were mightily increased both in Number
and Wealth, the case was far different; for the Cause of the Privilege being
removed, the Effect also ought to cease; and the rather, that they did as much
as other People, nay more too, enjoy all these Advantages, for which Money,
Taxes and Customs, Against Holydays.
used to be raised and paid. Again, That the great number of Holydays was
prejudicial to the People, who were bound under great Penalties to keep them,
neglecting their necessary Work and Business, and many ways offending God on
those idle Days. That the Law also for distinction of Meats, ought, in their
Opinion, to be abrogated, and all Men left to their Liberty as to Ceremonies,
until the meeting of a General Council; and that, in the mean time the course
of the Gospel should in no ways be obstructed.

After that Letter of the Emperor's was read, A Dissension among the States at
Spire about Religion.
the Bishops refused to proceed in the matter of Religion, and whilst the Pope
and Emperor were at so great Variance, they thought it best to delay, till a
fairer occasion of acting offered. Thus there happened so great Animosity and
Dissension betwixt the Commissioners; who were of different Religion, that all
deliberation being on a sudden at a stand, the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave,
thought of returning home, and ordered their Servants to prepare for the
Journey. This being known, Ferdinand, and Richard Archbishop of Treves, and
others, perceiving that it would be a very dangerous Matter, if in so
distracted a time, and when all Men's Eyes and Expectations were fixed upon
this Diet, they should depart, not only without making any Decree; but also
with Minds full of Rancour; took a course to make up this Breach; for seeing
many were of Opinion, That the Insurrection the Year before, and the Troubles
at present, sprang altogether from the Divisions about Religion, they thought
it convenient to apply a Remedy in Time; Having therefore appeased the Minds of
some, a Decree was made, The decree of Spire concerning Religion.
at length, to this purpose: That for establishing Religion, and maintaining
Peace and Quietness, it was necessary there should be a lawful General, or
Provincial Council of Germany, held within a Year: And that no Delay nor
Impediment might intervene, That Ambassadors should be sent to the Emperor,
to pray him, That he would look upon the Miserable and Tumultuous State of the
Empire, and come into Germany as soon as he could, and procure a Council. As to
Religion, and the Edict of Worms, it was concluded, That in the mean while,
until either a General or National Council might be had, all should so behave
themselves in their several Provinces, as that they might be able to render an
Account of their Doings both to God and the Emperor.

Before the passing of that Decree, the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave sent
for the Deputies of Strasburg, The beginning of a League among those of the
reformed Religion.
Norimberg and Ausburg, and told them; That because they perceived their
Religion was dear unto them, and that it plainly appeared what the Bishops and
Papists drove at, they were thinking, Whether a League and Association might
not be made for mutual Assistance, in case any of them should be in Danger for
their Religion; and because they conceived good Hopes of those of Frankford and
Vlm, they did not refuse to communicate also with them. To this the Deputies
made answer; That they had no Instructions from their Principals as to that,
but that they would carefully acquaint them therewith. The Duke of Saxony had
two Divines with him, George Spalatine and John Islebe, and the Landgrave had
also brought his Preachers with him; the rest of the Princes requested, That
they might not preach, to prevent Disturbances; but that was in vain.
Ferdinand, also, before the Decree was made, having sent for the Deputies of
all the Cities, and represented to them the Kindness that he and his
Predecessors of the House of Austria, had always had for them; exhorted them to
be obedient to the Emperor, and not to listen to the Counsels and Persuasions
of some that would pervert them. It was also decreed, That Aid should be sent
to the King of Hungary: But by that time the Diet was dissolved, which was
about the latter end of August, Lewis King of Hungary slain.
the Turk having already entered Hungary, overcame King Lewis in Battle, who was
also slain, as he fled, in the Pursuit. All the Princes Electors, except
Brandenburg, were present at the Diet of Spire. This Summer the Emperor
married the Infanta Isabel, The Marriage of Charles V.
Daughter to King Emanuel of Portugal, and Sister to King John, who succeeded
to his Father.

At the same time the Diet was held at Spire, A Disputation at Baden.
the twelve Cantons of the Switzers, kept a Conference and Disputation at
Baden; thither came the chief Catholic Divines, as Faber, Eckius, Munner, and
the Bishops of Constance, Basil, Coyre and Lausanne, under whose Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction these Cantons were, sent their Deputies. Theses were published
there, The Points disputed.
which Eckius very confidently defended: As, that the real Body and Blood of
Christ is present in the Eucharist: That it is really offered for the Quick and
the Dead: That the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints, are to be prayed
to, as Intercessours: That the Images of Saints were not to be removed: That
there is a Fire of Purgatory after this Life. Oecolampadius, and some others
impugned them. Zuinglius was absent, and wrote to the Switzers the Reasons why
he did not come, but confuted Eckius his Theses in Writing. John Faber, who was
highly esteemed by the Bishop of Constance, bearing great hatred to Zuinglius,
is reported to have put the Switzers upon this Match of Disputation, and
persuaded seven Cantons at first, to which all the rest assented afterward,
except Zurich, to whom the rest sent both Letters and Messengers, praying them,
That against the day appointed they would send thither their Deputies; and
especially Zuinglius, who was one of the chief Men they wanted, and to whom
they gave a Safe Conduct: But he, having some Reasons to move him; and chiefly,
That he would not trust his Life with those of Lucerne, Vri, Switz, Vnderwald
and Zug; besides his being forbidden by the Senate to go thither, excepted
against the Place appointed for the Dispute; but was satisfied with Zurich,
Berne or San-Gall. The Issue of the whole Debate was, That all should continue
in the Religion, The Issue of the Disputation.
which hitherto they had observed, and admit of no new Doctrins within their
Territories; but submit to the Authority of a Council. This was done about the
latter end of June: John Huglie a Priest, burnt for Religion.
But before this, the Bishop of Constance had caused one John Huglie, a Priest,
to be burnt at Merspurg, because he disliked some things in the Popish Doctrine.

King Lewis, being thus unfortunately killed, Ferdinand contended, That the
Kingdom was his by Agreement; but he had a Competitour John Sepsy, Vaivode of
Transylvania. This competition bred a division among the Nobility and States,
that broke out into a War, which proved fatal to Germany, and the neighboring
People: For the Emperor of the Turks afterward took the Vaivode into his
Protection; and Buda being delivered up, made him a King, on condition, That he
should be Feudatary, and hold of him.

The French King being returned home out of Spain, where he left his two young
Sons, Francis and Henry Hostages, gave it out, That the Conditions of Peace,
which he had agreed unto, The League of the Pope, French and Veretians against
the Emperor.
were Unjust, and that he would not stand to them. After Ambassadors had been
therefore sent to and fro, the Pope and Venetians made a League with him;
whereof the chief Articles were; That for the Defense and Security of Italy,
they should maintain an Army of thirty thousand Foot, and about six thousand
Horse. That they should provide a Fleet of eight and twenty Galleys, with
Tenders. That the Enemy being defeated in Lumbardy and Italy, they should
attack the Kingdom of Naples by Sea and Land: That being conquered, it should
be annexed to the Patrimony of S. Peter, and belong to the Church; yet so as
the King of France, who pretended a Title thereunto, should have seventy five
thousand Crowns yearly paid out of it: That the Honor and Dignity of the
Family of Medices, should be maintained in the State of Florence. That the
French King should give up the Duchy of Milan to Francis Sforza, whom the
Imperialists had besieged in the Castle of Milan, and forced to surrender,; and
whom also he promised to assist with his own Aid, and Switz-Forces, and to give
him a Wife of the Blood Royal of France; but upon this Condition, That he
should pay him fifty thousand Crowns yearly, and maintain his Brother
Maximilian, who was Prisoner in France.

A little after Pope Clement wrote to the Emperor, The Pope's expostulatory
Letter to the Emperor.
reckoning up the good Offices that he had done him: That for his sake, he had
refused Advantageous Conditions offered him by the French King; That when the
King was taken, he had upon a certain Condition advanced an hundred thousand
Crowns to the Commanders of his Army: That he had several times discovered unto
him the Counsels and Designs of his Enemies: That when Francis Sforza, was by
his Generals besieged in the Castle of Milan, and some great Men invited him to
enter into a League, he had not listened to them: But that he was now very ill
requited for all these good Offices; for that his Soldiers had done great
Injuries, and given great Affronts both to him and the Church of Rome. Again,
That he had neither performed Conditions, nor repaid the Money that was
advanced upon that account: That the Aversion he had also to him sufficiently
appeared, in that he concealed from him the Conditions, upon which he had made
Peace with the King of France: That he had obstinately rejected all the
Intercessions made by him for Sforza: That in Spain and Naples, he had made
Laws derogatory to the Liberty of the Roman Church, and his own Dignity; and
that having sent the Duke of Bourbonne to the Siege of Marseilles, he had
raised a new War in Italy. That for these Reasons, therefore, he had been
obliged to enter into a League with some, who loved the Peace and Welfare of
Italy. That if he also was desirous of Peace, and would embrace it, well and
good; but if not, That he wanted neither Force nor Power to defend Italy, and
the Interest of Rome. The King of England was comprehended in this League, and
with great Promises invited to be Protector of it.

To this Letter of his, The Emperor's Answer to the Pope.
the Emperor wrote an answer from Granada, dated September 18, wherein he
represented unto him, How much he had deserved at his Hands; as that by his
Intercession and Assistance he had been made Pope: That when he was chosen
Emperor, he would not accept it, till Leo X had approved the Election, and
also owned his Right to the Kingdom of Naples, but that he afterward, and
Albert Prince of Carpi, had by Leo's Orders, attempted several things against
him, and entering into a League with the French, had used all their Endeavors
to get Naples and Sicily out of his hands: That afterward, when the Times
changed, and the French, in vain attempted Regio in Modena, a Town depending on
the Pope; he, with the Assistance of Pope Leo's Troops, had made War against
the King of France; in which War his Holiness himself was Legate from Pope Leo,
and at that time had from him for a Reward, a yearly Pension of ten thousand
Ducats, out of the Revenues of the Archbishop of Toledo: That the French being
beat out of Italy, by the Conduct of the Duke of Bourbonne, he could not deny
him the Liberty of making War in France, that he might recover what the French
King had taken from him, because of his Revolting: But that after the Siege of
Marseilles was raised, the French King had, at the Instigation of his Holiness
himself; as most Men affirmed, renewed the War in Lumbardy: That Naples,
indeed, held of the Sea of Rome; nevertheless, said he, should you make War in
those places, you would thereby lose all your Right and Title; for that the
same Reasons which make a Vassal and Feudatary lose his Fief, make the
Sovereign Lord lose also his Dominion. Before the French King was taken, you
did, indeed, mediate for a Peace; but your design was, That under a Color of
Sequestration, you might get into the Possession of the Duchy of Milan, and
therefore the Venetians and Florentines, influenced by you, withdrew their
Auxiliary Forces, which they were bound by League to furnish. For the French
King, both openly confesses, That being solicited by you, he had made a new
League before he returned home out of Spain; and I have certain Intelligence
also, That you have absolved him from the Oath, whereby he stands obliged to
me. Besides, you have attacked me in a Hostile manner, before the Letter,
wherein you denounce War, came to my Hands: And you have laid a Design, not
only to drive me out of Italy, but also to degrade me from the Imperial
Dignity: This I can prove by the Letters of Ferdinand D' Avalos Marquess of
Pescara, whom you enticed into that League, with a Promise of the Kingdom of
Naples. I have Right to challenge the Duchy of Milan, for more Reasons than
one; and nevertheless for the sake of the Peace of Italy, I suffered Sforza to
enjoy it; and when he was dangerously sick, would have put the Duke of
Bourbonne in his Place, perceiving that it would be acceptable to you and the
rest of Italy: Now, that he was blockt up in the Castle of Milan, the Reason
was, Because he had incurred the Crime of High Treason, by making a League with
you; and that the Conspiracy being detected, he would neither deliver up the
Castles of Cromona nor Milan, to my Officers, nor yet purge himself of the
Crimes objected to him, and stand a fair Trial. Your Demand was, That I should
freely pardon him all; but that I neither could nor ought to do, lest I might
thereby give a bad Example for Vassals to rebel against their Sovereigns and
Lords. If my Soldiers took Provisions and other Necessaries from the People of
Parma and Piacenza, it is not to be thought strange; because these Cities
belong to the Dominion of Milan, and not at all to the Church of Rome. As to
the Peace made with France, I concealed nothing of it from your Ministers; for
the Conditions are such, as I would not have them to be-kept secret; for they
tend both to the maintaining the Peace of the Public, and to the restraining
of the Enemy of Christendom. Those few Laws made in Spain, aim only at this,
That the Rights of Patronage, which were granted to me by Pope Adrian, may be
suppressed at Rome. But see the baseness of the thing: Rome receives more Money
and Profits out of my Kingdoms and Provinces, than from all Christendom beside.
That may be proved by the Demands of the Princes of Germany, when complaining
heavily of the Court of Rome, they desired a Remedy to their Grievances: But
out of the Respect I bore to the Church of Rome, at that time I slighted their
Complaints; which being so, and seeing I have given you no cause of Offense, I
earnestly desire you to desist from Hostility; I shall do the like: And seeing
God has set us up as two great Luminaries, let us endeavor that the World may
be enlightened by us, and that no Eclipse may happen by our Dissentions: Let us
consider the whole state of Christendom, and think of resisting Infidels, and
of suppressing the Sect and Errors of the Lutherans: In this the Glory of God
is concerned, and here we should begin: Afterward, let other Affairs and
Controversies be heard; you shall always find me ready to assist you. But if I
cannot prevail, and you will needs go on like a Warrior, I Protest and Appeal
to a Council, that all Quarrels may be therein decided; and demand that it may
speedily be called. What he says of Luminaries, he borrows it from the Words of
Pope Innocent III, who said, That God created two great Lights, the one to rule
by Day and the other by night, which he applied to the Papal and Royal
Dignities; But that that Power which ruled in Divine and Spiritual Matters, far
excelled the other, which meddled only in Civil and Temporal Affairs: And that
there was as great a difference betwixt the Offices of a Pope and a King, as
betwixt the Sun and Moon. This Decree is extant under the Title de Majoritate
and Obedientia.

When the Emperor had thus answered the Pope, The Emperor's Letter to the
College of Cardinals.
he wrote also to the College of Cardinals, October 6; That he had conceived
great Grief of Mind, to hear that Pope Clement was confederated with the French
King, who was making War against him a fresh: That he had written very Hostile
Letters unto him; which he supposed was done by their unanimous Advice and
Consent; and that he was very far from expecting any such thing; since there
was no King to be found more zealous for the Interest of the Church of Rome
than he was; that Parma and Piacenza were instances of that, which being
Imperial Cities, and lately dismembered from the Empire, he had restored them to
the Church, though in Law he was not obliged to do so: That all the Princes and
States of Germany had at Worms made heavy Complaints to him of many Injuries
of the Court of Rome, and then desired that they might be redressed; but
because he had been born and bred with a singular love to the Church of Rome,
he had not given car to their Demands: And when greater Troubles arising
thereupon afterward, and many Tumults and Riots happening through Germany, the
Princes had for that Reason appointed another Diet; he had, under severe
Penalties, prohibited them to assemble, because their Deliberations would have
been prejudicial to the Pope and Church of Rome: And that to sweeten and
appease them at that time, he had given them Hopes of a future General Council.
That the Pope therefore did him great Injury; who had done so much for his
Holiness, as that thereby he had much alienated from himself the Hearts of the
Nobility of Germany. That he had written seriously unto him about all these
matters, and advised him to call a General Council: That therefore it was his
desire to them, That they would admonish him of his Duty, and exhort him to
Peace rather than War: But that if he refused, or delayed the calling of a
Council longer, than it was fit and reasonable, that then they should forthwith
call it. For that if Christendom should sustain Prejudice either for want of a
Council, or for not having it called in due time, it ought not to be laid to
his charge.

We told you, How it had been lately decreed at Spire, That Ambassadors should
be sent to the Emperor in Spain; but the News of the Overthrwo in Hungary
coming soon after, the Princes thought themselves obliged to use Expedition;
and that they might have a nearer way to pass to the Emperor, they desired of
the French King, The French King's Letters to the Princes of Germany.
That he would allow their Ambassadors a free Passage through his Kingdom. He
condescended, prefixing a certain time for that, as shall be said hereafter;
and withal took occasion to write unto them, October 6; That he was extremely
troubled at the Turks late Invasion of Hungary, the Fatal Death of King Lewis,
and the great Danger of Germany: That he was no less sorry for the Civil War,
that had broke out to the Ruin of the Public: That it was not his Fault that
Christendon was not at quiet; but that the Emperor was to be blamed for it,
who rejected Honest and most equitable Conditions of Peace. And that seeing he
was not moved, neither by the public Calamities, nor by the unfortunate Death
of his own Brother-in-law, King Lewis, and the sad condition of his
Widow-sister; nor yet considered in how great Danger Austria was; it would be
their Duty, and well done in them, if they could incline and persuade him to
Peace, to live in Amity with neighboring Kings and Princes, and to set Bounds
to his Ambition; for that that would make more for his Glory, than by
overturning the States of others, to aspire to an universal Monarchy: That his
Ancestors, Kings of France, had often maintained Wars against the Enemies of
the Christian Religion; and that, if the Emperor pleased, the same might now
be done with united Strength: That if they could prevail then, and obtain that
of him, he would be ready to employ all his Force; nay, his own person also
against the Turk: But if not, that he was not to be blamed, if he endeavored
to recover by Arms, what he could not do by fair means; for that it was the
Emperor's part, rather to sue for Peace, who lay much nearer the Danger of the
Turks than he did.

When the Emperor came to know of this Letter, The Emperor's Letter to the
Princes of Germany.
he wrote to the Princes, November 29; and in the first place acquaints them,
How kind and gracious he had been to the French King, when he was his Prisoner;
how he had given him both his Liberty, and in Marriage also his eldest Sister,
and second in degree of Succession to him: But that when all things were
quieted, (as he supposed) and that he was preparing to go into Italy, that he
might bend all his Forces against the perpetual Enemy of Christendom; the
French King (breaking his Faith, and entering into a League with Pope Clement
and some others, who had already in their Hopes anticipated the Kingdom of
Naples, and divided it betwixt them) had renewed a most formidable War: And
that therefore he could not protect Hungary against the Fury of the Turks, as
being necessitated to defend his own Borders. That what the French King
pretended, of his Sorrow for the Death of King Lewis, and the Calamity of
Hungary, was downright Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; which he used, to the
intent he might stop the Mouths of those, who constantly affirmed, from
intercepted Letters, that, at his Solicitation, the Turk had undertaken this
War: That during his Captivity, and afterward, when he was set at Liberty, and
returned home; he had by Letters obliged himself, to observe the Articles of
the Treaty: That he had promised to him the same by Word of Mouth, when he
departed out of Spain: But that because he had a Kingdom lying in the Heart of
Christendom, he wantonly disturbed the Public Peace; and among his Triumphs,
reckoned the Turkish Victories in Hungary: And that he alone was to be blamed,
That he did not in Person come into Germany; that nevertheless he would
endeavor that Aid should be sent against the Turk with all expedition: That in
the last place, he made no doubt, but that they were well enough acquainted
with the Tricks of the French; for that it was their common and usual way to
sow the Seeds of Discord in all places; and make their Profit of the Quarrels
and Dissentions of others.

Besides the Letter before mentioned, there was also published an Apology, in
defense of the French King, giving the Reasons why he did not observe the
Pacification of Madrid. To this Apology a long and copious Answer was made in
behalf of the Emperor. Now, that Buda was taken with a great part of Hungary,
and that the People were in a most distressed Condition there; some Princes,
chosen by the rest, met at Esling, The Princes Letter to the Emperor.
where the Council of the Empire then sat. There, upon deliberation, it was
resolved, That the Embassy, lately agreed upon, should be omitted, and Letters
sent to the Emperor, to beseech him, That by reason of the greatness of the
Danger, he would hasten his return into Germany. In this Letter, which bore
date December 19, they inform his Imperial Majesty, That they had resolved to
send Ambassadors unto him; who being to pass through France, they had
addressed themselves to the French King for a Safe Conduct; which he had
granted but for four Months only: That one Month was already expired, and that
before the Ambassadors could meet, there would not be much time remaining:
That therefore to save them from Danger, they had changed their Purpose, and
put off that Embassy till the next Diet of the Empire; for that, perhaps, they
might, in the mean time, have either a more convenient Occasion of sending, or
his Majesty be informed of their Business by other means. Having so ordered
these Affairs, they appoint a Diet to meet at Ratisbonne, April 1, in the Year
following, to take the Turkish War into consideration.

Though the Emperor wrote to the Pope, The Demands of the Pope, Venetians and
French; who were Confederates.
and College of Cardinals, in the manner before expressed; yet his Letters
wrought no effect: And the Confederates having sent Ambassadors unto him; as
it had been agreed upon, demanded; That he would lay down Arms, that they might
take Measures for settling a Public Peace: That he would restore Francis Sforza
Duke of Milan; take the French King's Ransom, and dismiss his Sons, who were
Hostages; and pay the Money which he had borrowed of the King of England. 1527.
To these Demands the Emperor made answer at Valladolid, February 12: The
Emperor's Answer unto them.
That he could not for some short time lay down Arms; but that he did not
refuse to make a Truce for three Years or more: That all their Forces in
conjunction might be sent against the common Enemy of Christendom, and that, in
the mean time, a Treaty of Peace might go on: That Sforza was a Vassal of the
Empire, and stood accused of High Treason, and therefore could not be restored,
unless he were first tried; wherefore he should give an Appearance at Law, and
answer the Accusation brought against him, before unsuspected Judges whom he
should appoint. That he could not take Money and restore the King's Children;
for that it was contrary to the King's Faith and Oath. That it seemed strange
to him, that they should put it to him, To pay the Money due to the King of
England, since they had no Warrant from him to do so: For that he had so great
Friendship with the King of England, as could not be broken for a Money
business. That therefore, since their Demands were out of the way, he desired
them to propose others: That he was not resolved to be obstinate, and would
pass by many things for the Public Good. So then the Ambassadors departed
without Success; great Preparations for War were made on both sides.

Much about this time, The Elector John Frederick marries the Daughter of the
Duke of Cleve.
John Frederick, Son to the Elector of Saxony, married the Lady Sibylla,
Daughter to John Duke of Cleve. The Infanta Catharine, the Emperor's eldest
Sister, had been betrothed unto him, and the Contract of Marriage thereupon
signed and sealed; but upon the Change of Religion that happened in Saxony, the
Match was broken off; and Hawnart, who was then the Emperor's Ambassador in
Germany, stuck not to say publicly, That Faith was not to be kept with
Heretics; herein, I suppose, treading in the Steps of the Council of
Constance, as the Duke of Saxony himself took notice afterward, in a public
Paper.

Charles Duke of Bourbonne was one of the Emperors Generals, Rome taken and
plundered by the Duke of Bourbonne.
who some years before had revolted from the King of France, as we said
already. He upon his march with an Army to Naples, appeared before Rome, and
next day after, which was the sixth of May, took it by Assault and plundered
it. Pope Clement with the Cardinals and other Prelates, having with much ado
escaped to the Castle of St. Angelo, were there blocked up for seven months,
and at length delivered by the Emperors command. It is not to be expressed with
what cruelty and insolence the German and Spanish Soldiers behaved themselves
in Rome; for besides their horrid Butcheries, Plunderings, Ravishings, and
Devastations, they vented all sorts of Reproaches and contumelious Scoffs
against the Pope, Cardinals, and the rest of the Clergy. The Emperor took a
great deal of pains to excuse that Action, alleging that they had no orders
from him to do it; and he wrote about it particularly to the King of England,
telling him, that though he believed it to be a just Judgment of God, who
revenged the injury and violence that had been done unto him; yet he would make
it his endeavor, that this very calamity should be an occasion and beginning
of the welfare of Christendom. When the news of this was brought to the Emperor
in Spain, he presently commanded all public Plays and Shows to cease, which
were then made for the birth of his Son Philip. The King of England made an
Answer to that Letter of the Emperors, but the Pope being now Prisoner, whom he
highly reverenced, and the Emperors power increasing, he began to think of War,
and for that end sent the Cardinal of York Ambassador into France.

None of the Princes came to the Diet at Ratisbonne, but sent only their
Deputies; so that nothing was done, except only that May the eighteenth, they
wrote to the Emperor, The (...) of the Diet of Ratisbonne.
to give him an account why nothing could be done, and tell him, That it would
conduce much to the interest of Christendom, that Civil Wars should be
composed, and that, above all things, his Presence was necessary in Germany.

At this time there was a new kind of Doctrine broached, The sect of the
Anabaptists.
by those whom they call Anabaptists: These are against Infant Baptism, are
themselves rebaptized, and teach that all goods should be in common. Both
Luther, Zuinglius and many others, wrote against them, and the Magistrates
punished them in all places. They bragged also of Visions and Dreams; and at
San-Gall a Town of Switzerland, one of them cut off his brothers head, in
presence of his father and mother, whom he persuaded that God had commanded him
to do so; but being apprehended by the Magistrate, he suffered the same kind of
death himself. How they afterward increased, and what troubles they raised in
Germany, you shall hear hereafter. This year it was ordered by the Senate of
Strasburg, that the dead should no longer be buried within the City, and they
appointed some burying places without the Town. The French King renews a War in
Italy.


When the French King heard of the taking of Rome, having made a League with
the King of England, he sent a puissant Army into Italy, under the command of
Lautrech a Gascoin, Alexandria and Pavia taken by the French.
for the relief of the Pope. He being come into Lombardy, and joined by the
Venetians, took first Alexandria, and then Pavia, partly by composition and
partly by assault, where the Soldiers enraged that their King should have been
taken there; having made great slaughter of the Towns-people, plundered it.
July the twenty seventh, Charles Duke of Bourbonne, who had been lately killed
at the taking of Rome, was condemned of High Treason by the Parliament of
Paris, his name and memory declared infamous, his arms torn, and his goods and
lands forfeited. Anthony du Prat the Chancellor, pronounced the Sentence.
Bourbonne bore a mortal hatred to the French King, and being about to besiege
Marseilles, as we mentined in the Fourth Book, he wrote to the Cardinal of
York, among other things, that he would spare neither pains nor perils in
assisting King Henry for the recovery of the Right and Title he had to France.
For above two hundred years the English have laid claim to the whole Kingdom of
France, but especially to Normandy, Gascony and Guienne. By these Letters
therefore, Bourbonne oblique stirred up the King of England, to prosecute his
Right there; and they coming after into the hands of the French King, incensed
him far more against the Duke. Leonard. Caesar Burnt for Religion.


There was at that time in Bavaria one Leonard Caesar, a Professor of the
Gospel; who being apprehended by orders from the Bishop of Passaw, maintained
these points of Doctrine; That man was Justified by Faith alone: That there was
but two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper: That the Mass was not a
Sacrifice, and availed not the Quick and the Dead: That the Confession of sins
was a counsel and not a precept: That Christ alone made Satisfaction for us:
That the Vow of Chastity was not obligatory: That the Scripture did not speak
of Purgatory: That there was no distinction of Days: That the Dead were no
Intercessors, and that in spiritual and divine matters, Man had no Free Will.
When he was brought to Trial, he would have spoken more fully of all these
Points to the People, but was not suffered. Eckius was one of those that tried
him; and all spoke in Latin, that the People might not understand; save only
the Prisoner, who discoursed in Dutch but could not get them to do the same: At
length he was condemned for a Heretic, and being delivered over to the
Temporal Magistrate, William Duke of Bavaria, under whose Jurisdiction he
lived: August 16 he was burnt; for the Bishop did not pronounce Sentence of
Death against him, lest he might pollute holy things; Ferdinand made King of
Bohemia.
and become irregular, by having a Hand in his Blood. Ferdinand, who had been
the Emperor's Deputy in Germany, after the Death of King Lewis, being chosen
King of Bohemia, and standing in competition with the Vaivode of Transylvania
for the Crown of Hungary, which occasioned a War. Philip Marquess of Baden, who
was substituted unto him, called a Diet in the Emperor's Name, to be held at
Ratisbonne, in the beginning of March following; whither the States should
repair, to consult of Religion, and the Turkish War.

You heard before of the Disputation of Baden; A Dispute at Berne.
but since the Acts of the Dispute and Conference were not communicated to
those of Berne, the most noted and powerful Canton of all the Switzers, though
they had desired it, and that the Differences about Religion increased, all the
Ministers not agreeing among themselves in Doctrine, they appointed another
Disputation to be had within their own City, December 17; whereof they made
public Intimation, and called thereunto the Bishops of Constance, Basil,
Sitien and Lausenne, warning them to come in person, and bring their Divines
with them; else they threatened them with the loss of all the Lands and
Possessions they had within their Territories; afterward they made a List of
the Clergy-M^n, of their Jurisdiction, and appointed the Scriptures of the Old
and News Testament, to be the only Rule, and to have the sole Authority in all
the Debates,; giving likewise a Safe Conduct to all that pleased to come: This
Order they also made, That all things should be carried on modestly, without
railing or reproach; and that every Man should freely speak his Mind, and so
distinctly, that what they said might be taken by Clerks: they also ordained,
That what should be agreed upon and determined in that Conference, should be of
Force, and have its course through all their Dominions. And that all might know
what they were to dispute about, and come the better prepared; they published
Theses to the number of ten, which their Ministers Francis Colb and Berthold
Holler offered to maintain and prove by Scripture: And these were, That the
true Church, whereof Christ is the only Head, springs from the Word of God,
perseveres therein, and will not hear the Voice of another: That this same
Church made no Laws besides God's Word: That therefore the Traditions of Men,
who bear the name of the Church, no farther oblige us, than as they are
consonant to the Word of God: That Christ alone made Satisfaction for the Sins
of the whole World: That therefore, if any Many say, There is any other way of
Salvation, or of expiating of Sins, he denies Christ: That it cannot be proved
by Scripture, That the Body and Blood of Christ are really and Corporally
received: That the Rite of the Mass, wherein Christ is offered up to his
Heavenly Father for the Quick and the Dead, is repugnant to Scripture, and a
Reproach to that Sacrifice which Christ made for us: That Christ alone is to be
prayed unto, as the Mediator and Advocate for us with God the Father: That it
is not to be found in Holy Scripture, that there is any place, where Souls are
purged after this Life: That therefore the Prayers, and all the Ceremonies and
Anniversary Offices which are performed for the Dead, Tapers, Lamps, and the
like, are of no use at all: That it is contrary to Holy Scripture, that any
Image or Picture should be proposed to be worshipped: That therefore if they be
placed in Churches for that end, they are to be removed: That Marriage is
forbidden to no Order of Men, but that for avoiding of Fornication, the
Scripture permits all to marry: And that since all Whoremongers, are by
Testimony of Scripture really separated from the Communion of the Church,
impure and unchaste Celibacy is least of all becoming the Order of Priesthood.
When those of Berne had written concerning these things to all the Cantons,
exhorting them to send their learned Men, and to give Safe Conduct to all
others who pleased to come, The Cantons of Lucerne, Vri, Switz, Vnderwald, Zug,
Glaris, Friburg and Solothurne, answered by a long Letter, seriously exhorting
them, That they would desist from their Enterprise, putting them in mind of
their League and Association, and of the Disputation of Baden, whereof they
themselves were the Authors and chief Advisers; nor was it lawful, said they,
for any People or Province, to make Innovations in Religion; but that it
belonged only to a General Council: They prayed them not to attempt such a
heinous Wickedness, nor suffer themselves to be misled into Error, by a few
Strangers; but to persevere in the same Religion, which they themselves and
their Ancestors had lived in, wherein they had got so much Honor and
Reputation, wherein they had so enlarged their Territories, and wherein they
had been so often Victorious: That it was reasonable they should obtain that at
their Hands; but if otherwise, that then they could not grant a Safe Conduct,
as they desired; but that when they should know who the Persons were, they
would pick and choose; for that they would give no more Safe Conduct to those,
who being, upon public Assurance given, called to the Disputation of Baden,
either out of Contempt or Distrust came not: That besides, they would neither
send, nor suffer any of their Divines to come. 1528.
Those of Berne, nothing moved at all this, proceeded, and at the Day
appointed, which was January 7, commenced the Dispute. None of the Bishops, we
named, came; but they of Basil, Scafhausen, Zurich, Appenzel, San Gall,
Mulhausen, and the neighboring Grisons also sent their Deputies: As also did
the Cities of Strasburg, Vlm, Ausburg, Lindaw, Constance and Isue. The Doctors
of the City of Berne, whom we named, began the Disputation, and their These
were defended by Zuinglius, Occolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Blancer, and several
more. Among others who impugned, was one Conrad Treger, and Augustine Friar, of
great Fame; who at length, offering Arguments from other Topics, than from the
Bible, and the Presidents of the Dispute, not suffering that, as being contrary
to Order, departed. The Dispute ended, January 26, and the Points of Doctrins
we mentioned, were approved by the Plurality of Voices; whereupon the
Magistrates, not only of Berne, but of some neighboring Places also, ratified
and approved them, commanding them to be observed; Mass, Altars and Images
being everywhere abolished and pulled down. In Constance, some things had been
changed before, Popery abolished in the Canton of Berne.
and Fornication, Adultery and Dishonest or Suspected Company, being by Law
prohibited there, the Canons left the place in great Anger. Their Preacher was
one Ambrose Blancer, a Gentleman of good Birth, who had been a Monk in
Alperspack; but being a Man of Parts, and having read Luther's Books, he
changed his Mind, and after much heart-burning, which he suffered from his
Companious, left the Order, and returned home to his Parents and Relations: Now
that Abbey stands in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, then in possession of Ferdinand
Archduke of Austria; wherefore the Abbot got the Governor of the Country to
send to the Senate of Constance, Ambrose Blancer at Constance.
that he might be reduced to Duty, and sent back to his Monastery: Whereupon
Blancer published a Narrative of the whole matter, and propounded Conditions,
upon which he was willing to return: But they were such, as his Abbot would not
admit of, There Mass, Images and Ceremonies are abolished.
so that he remained still at Constance; and this was in the Year 1523. After
the Disputation of Berne, the Mass, Images, Altars and Ceremonies were
abolished also at Constance. The People of Geneva, in like manner, followed the
Example of Berne, As also at Geneva.
in casting away Images and Ceremonies. Wherefore the Bishop and Clergy, in
Anger left the City. Upon the change of Religion, the Canton of Berne renounced
the League with France, and prohibited all mercenary Warrings, as they of
Zurich had done, contenting themselves with that yearly Pension, which the
French King paid them, to keep the Peace; and made an Inscription in Golden
Letters upon a Pillar, of the Day and Year when Popery was abolished, to stand
as a Monument to Posterity.

We told you before, The Kings of England and France send Ambassadors to the
Emperor.
That the Cardinal of York was sent Ambassador into France; where having
concluded a League, both Kings sent Ambassadors to the Emperor; the French
King demanding, That he would take his Ransom, and deliver him up his Sons,
who were in Hostage; and the King of England, That he would pay him a
threefold Debt he owed him; to wit, three hundred thousand Crowns of lent
Money; fifty thousand for not fulfilling his Contract of Marriage; and his
Pension for four Years; which was promised him by the Emperor, as we showed
you in the third Book. When the Emperor had made Answer to these Demands, not
according to their Minds, the King of England also sent him a Defiance, by a
Herald; for at that time he was projecting, How he might be Divorced from his
Queen Catharine the Emperor's Mother's Sister, and marry another, which he
did; as shall be said hereafter. The Emperor bitterly accused the French King
to other Princes, for his breach of Faith and Promise; and had often twitted
the French Ambassadors therewith: Wherefore the King sent a Herald to him
with Letters, dated at Paris, March 28, to this effect: From the Discourse,
said he, which thou had with my Ambassadors, I understand, That thou have
spoken some things to my Dishonor; as if contrary to Faith and Promise, I had
escaped out of thy Hands: Now, though he who has Guards set over him, after
matters are transacted, is freed from Obligation: And although this be enough
to excuse me; yet to justify my Honor and Reputation, I have thought fit to
tell thee in short, That if thou blamest what I have done, and my departure, or
say that I have ever acted any thing unworthy of a Prince, I tell thee
plainly, Thou lie; for I am resolved to maintain my Honor and Reputation to
my last breath. The French King challenges the Emperor to a Duel.
There is no need, then, of many Words, and if thou have any thing to say to
me, let me have no more Writing from thee, but name the Place, where we may
fight it out hand to hand; for if thou delayest to give me a Meeting, and in
the mean time ceasest not to asperse me, I protest thou art base, for a Duel
will put an end to the Dispute.

We took notice before of the Competition of Ferdinand and the Vaivode of
Transylvania, A War betwixt Ferdinand and the Vaivode.
concerning the Crown of Hungary; and now a War ensuing thereupon, wherein
Ferdinand had the better on it; the Vaivode in the Month of April, wrote to the
States of the Empire, as follows. After the deplorable Fall of King Lewis, said
he, The Vaivod's Complaint to the Princes of Germany.
I was chosen and crowned King of Hungary, by the common Consent of all the
Nobles, except three; whom Poverty, Hatred, and Hopes of better Fortune so far
transported, as forgetting the Interest and Welfare of their Country, to
declare themselves for Ferdinand King of Bohemia. And when I was wholly
employed in succouring my Country, and recovering our Losses, that by that
means I might procure your Quiet; He at the same time, in a hostile manner,
invaded my Country, makes himself master of some Towns, and by those of his
Faction, I mentioned, is created King at Presburg. It was to me, indeed, both a
great Wonder and Grief, That this Nation, which was miserable enough before,
should now be afflicted by him, who chiefly ought to protect the same. It had
been easy for me at that time to have repelled his Hostilities; but I was not
willing rashly to venture what remained of this Kingdom after so many
Shipwracks; I only made my Complaint to Pope Clement VII, Francis King of
France, Henry King of England, and Sigismund King of Poland: And indeed,
Sigismund, unknown to me, dealt with Ferdinand by Ambassadors, That he would
not, at so unseasonable a time, by promoting Civil Discord, open a way for the
Enemy, which afterward neither he, nor any other could be able to stop up
again: But that he would live in Peace with me, and join his Forces to mine
against the common Enemy. And when Ferdinand affirmed that he had done nothing
contrary to Right and Justice; it was agreed upon that some fit Men should meet
at a certain Day, to attempt an Accommodation of the Controversy: I embraced
the Condition; and at the same time by my Ambassadors, whom I sent to make
submission in my Name to your Arbitrament, I begged of you that you would not
assist my Adversary: But when they arrived in Ferdinand's Country, they were
apprehended and made Prisoners, contrary to the Law of Nations, so that they
could not discharge their Commission; for they were to go forward from you to
the Emperor. Though this, indeed; was a heinous Injury, yet at the Day
appointed by Sigismund, I sent some Men, who were both of their own
Inclination, and by my Orders too, very desirous of Peace: But Ferdinand's
Commissioners making most unreasonable Propositions, they broke up without
concluding any thing. Whilst these things were on foot, some of the Nobility
tampered with, by the Artifices of Ferdinand, have violated their Allegiance to
me. Now seeing I have no free Passage left either to come or send to you, I
resolved, at last, to acquaint you by Letters, how unjust a War he carries on;
that he may recover, perhaps, the Honor, which in the Age past, his Ancestors
the Emperors Frederick and Maximilian lost here; for my Uncle drove the one of
them out of all the Country, and baulked him of Hungary, when triumphantly he
was about to make himself King of it: And my Father Stephen Sepsy so mauled
them both, in the Reign of King Matthias, as that he joined Vienna to Hungary:
Nay, and I my self too, though then but a Youth, put a stop to Maximilian in
his Progress against us, and would have done the same against the present
Enemy, if he had not acted more by Cunning and Treachery, than by Valor and
Force of Arms. I have, indeed, hitherto born with that Injury, as patiently and
as well as I could: But consider with your selves, most Noble Princes, How
grievous a thing it is to be cast down from Supreme Dignity to the state of a
Private Man. Hardly, I think, is there any Man to be found so tame and patient,
as having received so many Injuries, would not look about him for assistance,
wherever he could have it. Seeing, then, I have at no time, since I entered into
the Government, refused to hearken to any reasonable Conditions, nor do at
present reject them, but would do any thing rather than cause a Civil War; and
that my Enemy goes on obstinately, I make Protestation, That it ought not to be
imputed to me as a Fault, if I take any sort of course for my own Defense and
Protection. And that if any Prejudice redound from thence to Christendom, that
is not to be attributed to me, who have essayed all ways of Peace, but to my
Enemy, who with highest Injustice invades the Kingdom of another. He is careful
indeed to stop all the Ways, that no News may be brought to you; but yet, I
suppose, you have heard, how he deserted his Brother-in-law, King Lewis; for
though he had been often, and with very earnest Entreaty solicited, yet he
neither sent him Men, Artillery, nor any other Aid against his Powerful Enemy.
And why? because his Heart and Eye were already upon the Crown, after his
Death: Besides, he sent the Public Aids of the Empire, designed for Hungary,
to his Brother, to plague Italy with, whilst I sent and paid about three
thousand Men of my own Forces, under the command of my Brother, to the
Assistance of King Lewis, designing to have been present in person at the
Battle, had not the King commanded me to continue in Transylvania; but my
Brother dyed bravely in the Fight. Ferdinand also took a solemn Oath, That
before he had recovered Belgrade, and some other Castles, he would not take
upon him the Government: But he forfeited his Promise herein; for the Turks
made an Incursion far up into the Country, and having wasted the Land, and
taken the strong Castle of Jaitza in Bosnia, returned home loaded with Spoils.
This Castle was heretofore taken from the Turks by King Matthias, with a great
loss of his Men; my Uncle Emerick, also held out a long Siege therein, and
defended it against them; and our Kings, likewise, were at vast Charges in
fortifying it: But this General of ours, who made such glorious Promises, as an
Essay of his Valor, fairly suffered it to be lost, and being now destitute of
all things, implores, I suppose, your Aid and Assistance, as if he were in
Danger for the sake of Germany: But his Designs tend a quite different way; for
it is not against the Turk that he is preparing Arms, to whom, by Ambassadors
lately sent, he offers a yearly Tribute: But his Aim is, That with your Men and
Money he may assist his Brother in Italy, and by undoing of me enslave Hungary.
Which being so, I most earnestly beseech you, to take Care, That this private
Wrong, which is now done to me, may not turn to the Prejudice of all
Christendom.

Not long after, he wrote also to the Emperor much to the same purpose,
praying him to divert his Brother; and these things he published in his own
Defense. But King Ferdinand insisted upon the Compact, King Ferdinand's Title
to Hungary.
which in the Year 1491, the Emperor Maximilian made with the Hungarians and
King Ladislaus; wherein it was stipulated, That if Ladislaus dyed without Heirs
Male, that then the Kingdom should fall to Maximilian, and the Heirs of his
Body. Since therefore King Lewis, Son to Ladislaus was dead without Issue, as
we said before; Ferdinand, who was Grandson to Maximilian, and Archduke of
Austria, and besides was married to the Sister of King Lewis, pretended that
the Kingdom of right belonged unto him.

At the very same time, The Elector of Saxony and Landgrave prepare for War.
Philip Landgrave of Hesse, and the Elector of Saxony having raised Forces,
prepared for War; And the Reason of it was this, A certain Lawyer, Otho Becken,
a Man of Noble Extraction, and one of the chief Counselors of George Duke of
Saxony, being occasionally in Discourse with the Landgrave, admonished him to
look to himself; for that lately King Ferdinand, the Elector of Brandenburg,
George Duke of Saxony, William and Lewis, Dukes of Bavaria, the Bishops of
Mentz, Saltsburg, Bamberg and Wurtzburg, had entered into a League for the ruin
of him, the Elector of Saxony, and the Reformed Religion; and to gain credit,
showed him a Copy of the Instrument of Confederation, promising also to produce
the Original. Whilst they were raising Forces, and prepared for War, all men
were agog, what the meaning of it should be; for various Reasons were given
out, as it happens commonly in such cases: But at length, when all things were
in a Readiness, they began to send Letters and Messengers into all parts,
published the Copy of the League, and at the same time sent Ambassadors and
Letters to those, who were said to be engaged in it, that they might know what
their Purpose was: However they all purged themselves severally, by Public
Declarations, affirming it to be a Fiction, and that it could not be proved.
Especially George Duke of Saxony, the Landgrave's Father-in-law, urged him to
name his Author, or otherwise that he would look upon it as a Contrivance of
his to raise Commotions, and disturb the Peace of Germany. Their first Attempt
was to have been upon the Bishops, their next Neighbors; and therefore they
prepared themselves, and raised all their Forces they could make on a sudden:
But when Becken could not produce the Original, as he had promised, the
Landgrave began to act more slowly, and, at length, through the Mediation of
the Prince Palatine, and Richard Archbishop of Treves, they laid down their
Arms, upon Condition, That for the Charges of the War, the Bishops should pay
the Landgrave an hundred thousand Florence, the Archbishop of Mentz forty
thousand, Wurtzburg as much, and Bamberg twenty. Afterward, when the Deputies
of the Princes, whom this Accusation concerned, had met at a Day appointed,
Becken, whom the Landgrave presented there, was convicted of Forgery; but being
dismissed, at length, by the Landgraves means, he wandered for some Years as an
Exile, amongst Foreign Nations, till at last he lost his Head at Antwerp.
Matters being thus quieted, the Confederates of the Schwabian League, whom we
have often mentioned before, accused the Landgrave, That he had offered
Violence, and done Injury to their Associates; and when this seemed to threaten
some new Stirs, the Matter was at length taken up, about the end of December,
at Worms, by the Invention of the Prince Palatine. There were some who
thought, That it was not altogether without-book, what he said of the
Confederacy; and that meeting of some Princes, which was four Years before, at
Ratisbonne, as we said before, in the fourth Book, increased this Suspicion: So
that it was thought some such Project had been laid, but not brought to
Maturity, nor resolved upon; which nevertheless I would not affirm for a Truth,
but leave every one to his own Judgment. We told you before of another Diet of
the Empire, which was appointed to be held at Ratisbonne, in the beginning of
the Spring; but in that Tumult of War, it did not meet, the Emperor's
Vice-Deputy sending them Word not to come.

The Emperor received not the French King's Challenge, dated about the end of
March, which we mentioned before, till the seventh of June; but having received
it, The Emperor's Answer to the French King's Challenge.
he sent him a Herald, with this Answer, June 24. I do not blame nor accuse
thee, said he, for going home; since thou had my leave to do so; but because
thou have not delivered thy self up again Prisoner to me, as thou did
faithfully promise to do, if thou did not fulfill the Articles of Peace, as
may be proved by Letters under thine own Hand. Had thou done so, thou
would have acted like a Good and Worthy Prince: But now since thou have
broken thy Promise therein, I tell thee, and that without lying, That thou have
acted basely and knavishly. And because thou demandest of me, to name a Place
for Duel, I am content, and appoint the Place, by that River which runs betwixt
Fontarabia and Andey; which thou ought not to refuse: For if two Years ago
thou trustedst the Safety of thy self and Childen to it, when having got thy
Liberty, and returning Home, thou did diliver them up to me as Hostages; thou
may now safely trust thy self thereunto. But that no longer Delay be made,
let skilful Gentlemen be sent on both sides, to pitch upon the Ground, and
appoint the Weapons and Day: And if thou sendest me not an Answer within forty
Days after the receipt of this Letter, that I may know thy Mind, the Blame and
Shame of the Delay shall lie at thy Door; and so to the Crime of Breach of
Faith thou wilt also add Baseness. This Letter the Emperor gave to the Herald,
commanding him to carry it to France, and read it publicly to the King; or if
he refused to hear it, that he should deliver it into his own Hands to be read.
When the Herald, at length arrived at Paris, coming into the Kings Presence,
who was surrounded with his Nobles; his Majesty asked him, if he had brought
him a Defiance: He told him he had; That he had something besides to say unto
him, and that he was enjoined to read it publicly, or to give it into his own
Hands: Wherefore he desired leave to do it. But the King, who was not Ignorant
what the Emperor had to charge him with, would not suffer it to be openly
read; but having exchanged some Words with the Herald, started up, and would
neither hear him speak more, nor receive the Letter from him, as the
Imperialists affirm in their Public Writings.

By Letters dated at Valladolid, August 1, A Diet appointed at Spire.
the Emperor appointed a Diet of the Empire to be held at Spire, the beginning
of February next year, to consult about Religion and the Turkish War: But
excused himself that he could not be there, because of other Affairs; naming
for his Commissioners, his Brother King Ferdinand, Frederick Prince Palatine,
William Duke of Bavaria, and the Bishops of Trent and Heildesheim. Cantreck the
French General, after the taking of Alexandria and Pavia the Year before, as
has been said, had his Winter Quarters in Bolonia, but marching forward again,
Naples besieged by the French.
in the beginning of the Spring, he besieged Naples, which was defended by
Alphonso d'Avalos, Vgo Moncada, Ferdinando Alarco, Philibert Orengio and
Ferdinando Gonzaga: But in the Month of July a very violent Plague swept away a
great part of his Army, whereof Lautreck himself dyed, August 14, and not long
before him the Duke of Vaudemont, Brother to Anthony Duke of Lorrain, who
served the King, in hopes of obtaining the Kingdom of Naples, to which the
Family of Anjou, from whence the House of Lorrain are descended, pretends a
Right and Title.

How after the Disputation at Berne Religion was changed in many Places, it
has been formerly mentioned; A Contention at Strasburg about the Mass.
wherefore the Ministers of the Church at Strasburg, upon this Occasion
preached, as they had often done before, against the Mass, affirming it, among
other Errors of the Popish Doctrine, to be Impious and very Reproachful to the
Name of God; and that therefore it was to be abrogated, and the right
Administration of the Lord's Supper restored; refusing no kind of Punishment,
if they proved not their Doctrine by Testimonies of Holy Scripture. But the
Papists teaching the contrary, The Popish Preachers silenced by the Senate
there.
there happened a hot Contention, which the Senate would have ended by having
the Opinions of both stated and examined by a Disputation; and when it could
not be obtained, and that the Papists accused the others of Preaching Impious
and Erroneous Doctrine, but yet would not come to a fair Trial about the Matter;
they commanded them not to Preach any more for the future. In the mean time the
Bishop, by frequent Letters and Messengers, admonished and entreated the
Senate, to persevere in the Ancient Religion of their Forefathers, and not to
give Credit to new Doctors; which he said, was a matter of great Danger. The
Senate, on the other hand, prayed him, as they had also done some Years before,
that he would endeavor that such things as related to the true Worship of God,
might be instituted; but all things else antiquated and abolished; for that
that was properly his Duty: But though he had sometimes appointed a Day and
Meeting for that purpupose, yet nothing was done by him, only he deterred them
by Letters from their Enterprise, and mingled Threats sometimes with
Entreaties. This producing no effect, and being now almost in Despair, he
applied himself to the Council of the Empire, which then was at Spire, praying
them to interpose their Authority. These sending a solemn Deputation about the
latter End of December, desired the Senate that they would not abolish the
Mass; for that it neither belonged to the Emperor nor States, to alter the
Ancient Religion received from their Forefathers, but to a General or National
Council; but if that seemed to be too far off, that they would delay, at least,
till the ensuing Diet of the Empire, which was shortly to meet, and there
propose their Demands; that they made no doubt, but they would obtain a
reasonable Answer. That it was contrary to Law, that a Private Magistrate
should rescind those things which had been decreed by the common consent of all
the Christian World; that therefore it was but Reason, that they should prevail
with them in that particular. But that if they would needs proceed, since there
was Violence in the case; the Emperor, who was their chief Magistrate, and
King Ferdinand, who was his Lieutenant in the Empire, would take it very ill:
That they also would be obliged in Duty, both to write to the Emperor about
the Affair, and also to apply such proper Remedies as it required; which they
were unwilling to be brought to do. That therefore they prayed them, seriously
to bethink themselves, and listen to sound Counsel: That the Emperor would
take it very well at their Hands, and they themselves would find the Praise and
Advantage thereof. The Senate having declared their Reasons for what they had
done, civilly dismissed the Deputies.

A little before, the Bishop of Heildesheim had been there, and had demanded
the same thing in the Emperor's Name, exhorting them to comply; especially
seeing the Emperor had Thoughts of calling a National Council of Germany: For
that else the Emperor and the rest of the States would take some other Course.
Besides, the Bishop of Strasburg addressed himself privately to some of the
Senators of the City, Gentlemen who held their Lands of him; and writing to
them severally, admonished them seriously, That since they were bound to him in
Fealty, they should not approve, but with all their Might oppose the abolishing
of the Mass; in the mean time, the Senate, after the matter had been in
agitation for above two Years, and the Ministers of the Church urged them daily
in their Sermons, as the Citizens plied them with frequent Petitions, they
called a Great and Common Council, to the number of three hundred, as it was
usually done in difficult matters; and having stated the whole Case unto them,
and told them on the one Hand, the Danger they were in of the Emperor's
Displeasure, if they abolished the Mass; and on the other hand, How much God
would be offended if they did not; they gave them time to deliberate, and
enjoined them to meet and consult in their several Companies, that in their
next public Assembly they might by Common and Universal Consent conclude and
determine what was to be done. When, therefore, the Day appointed came, they
who were for abrogating the Mass, carried it by plurality of Voices. 1529.
Wherefore an Order and Decree past February 20, That the Celebration of the
Mass ought to be suspended and intermitted, until the Adversaries should prove,
Mass by common Consent abolished at Strasburg.
That it was acceptable Worship unto God. This Decree the Senate ordered to be
observed, not only in the City, but abroad also, within the whole Precincts of
their Jurisdiction, and then certified the Bishop of the same by Letters; who
wrote back to them, That with sighing, and a most sorrowful Heart, he had
received their News; that he was forced to bear it patiently; but that he would
do in the Case what his Office and Duty obliged him to.

There had been for some Years also, A Dissension about Religion at Basil.
great Dissentions in Basil, upon account of Religion; but the Senate ordered
at length, That there should be one uniform Doctrine throughout the whole City;
and that because Mass still continued in some Places, that they should meet on
a Day prefixed, and having debated the matter publicly, come to a final
Resolution, what was to be done therein: But the Papists for all that went on
in their way, and in their Sermons taxed their Adversaries a little too
sharply; which being connived at, many looked upon that Impunity, as an
Approbation of the chief and leading Men; wherefore a select number of Citizens
were employed to petition the Senate again, and to mind them of their
Agreement; these, after much Debate, and diligent prosecution of their
Commission, demanded, That those Senators, at whose Desire the Papists
preached, (since their so doing was not only a contempt of the Decree, but
tended also to Tumult and Sedition) might be turned out of Place: But the
Senate refusing absolutely to do that, the People met in the Month of February,
this Year, in the Gray Friars Church, and having there consulted about the
matter, demanded of the Senate the same thing that they had done before, but
not so submissively; and at the same time flocked together into the chief
Places of the City, but without Arms: That Day, toward the Evening, the Senate
made answer to them, That they were satisfied, that such as they desired to
have turned out, should not for the future be present when any Matters of
Religion were brought before them; but that in all other things, they should
retain their Place and Dignity: When by this Answer it appeared, That a few
Persons took to themselves the Supreme Power, the Citizens were more incensed,
and therefore publicly protested, That they would take Measure for the future,
not, indeed, for maintaining their Religion; but for asserting their Rights and
Liberties. Thereupon presently they ran to Arms, possessed themselves of the
Towers and Gates, and having placed Guards in proper Places, kept Watch and
Ward in the same manner as in a Camp, when there is Danger from a neighboring
Enemy. Next Day the Senate desired Time to consult, referring the Matter to
those who lately had been Intercessors. The Citizens did not refuse that, but
in the mean time, would have those they accused turned out, and that they
should prosecute their Suit at their own Private Charges; but that for
themselves, who maintained the Cause of the Public, and of Posterity, their
Charges should be defrayed by the Public. The Senate granted these, and some
other slighter matters, that thereby they might mitigate their Anger. The same
Day, some of the Town's-People, who had Orders to go the Rounds about the City,
and see that no Abuses were committed, went into the Cathedral Church, where
one of them, with his Pike, pushed at the Image of a certain Saint, which
thereupon tumbled down and was broken: This gave them an occasion to lay Hands
afterward on more; but the Priests, who were extreambly troubled at that,
interposing, they that they might not go beyond their Commission, departed
without any further Quarrel. When the Report of this was brought to the
Marketplace, and made greater than indeed it was, three hundred armed Men were
forthwith sent to the Church, to the assistance of their Brethren, who were
said to be hard put to it, and in Danger; But before they came, the rest were
gone: However, that they might do something for their coming, they broke down
all the Images they found there, and so proceeding, did the like in all the
rest of the Churches. Then some of the Senate came running, to prevent any
Tumult or Riot; to whom the Citizens said, What you have been consulting about
any time these three Years, whether you had best do it or not, in one Hours
time we have dispatched, that there may be no difference among us hereafter
about Images. So that the Senate condescended to all they desired, and twelve
Senators were turned out, but without Disgrace; among whom were Henry
Meltinger, at that time Burgo-master, Mass abolished at Basil,
and Lucius Zeigler Dean of Guield. A Decree also passed, That Mass should be
abolished and Images broken down, both in the City, and abroad also in the
Country throughout all their Jurisdiction: That besides, the Senate should for
the future admit of two hundred and threescore of the Members of the City
Companies, to deliberate with them about those things which concerned the Glory
of God, and the Welfare of the State. When the Citizens had got those two
Decrees made, they joyfully returned home to their Houses, and wreakt their
Fury only upon the Images. And Images burnt.
The third Day after, which was Ashwednesday, the Wooden Images were
distributed among the Poor, to be made use of for Fuel: But they quarrelling,
and falling to Fisty-cuffs about dividing the Spoil, it was thought fit to burn
them publicly. Wherefore there were nine Piles of them made before the
Cathedral Church, and burnt. And so it happened, That the very same Day, on
which the Papists used to sprinkle the People's Foreheads with Ashes, to put
them in Mind that they are but Dust and Ashes, was a pleasant and joyful Day to
the City, because then the Images were reduced into Ashes. February 12, the
Common Council of the Companies, which were mentioned, approved the Acts of the
Senate; and the next day after an Oath was taken by all the Companies, and then
all quietly departed. When the Cantons of Zurich, Berne and Solothurn had
Intelligence of these Stirs, they presently sent Deputies to make Mediation,
but before they came all was over.

We made mention a little before of the Diet of Spire, The Diet of Spire.
which the Emperor appointed to meet in the beginning of February; but it was
not opened before the beginning of March: The Princes and States made a great
appearance there; and the Elector of Saxony brought Melanchthon with him. The
first thing they fell upon was matter of Religion, and after much Debate, they
made a Decree therein, as shall be said hereafter. Now the Drift of the Papists
was to divide the Duke of Saxony and the other Princes from the Cities, that
they might not consult and join together in Design: And because all the Cities
were not of the same Judgment the Princes were, about the Lord's Supper; they
were in good Hope they might accomplish their Desires, but that was in vain, as
you shall hear hereafter. King Ferdinand also, and his Colleagues, sent for the
Deputies of some of the Cities separately, April 5, and severely chid them for
having made many Innovations contrary to the Emperor's Edict; but then he
exhorted them to comply and join in Opinion with the rest of the States, lest
through their Dissentions the Diet might be dissolved. They made answer, That
what Innovations they had made were no ways prejudicial to the Emperor, that
above all things they desired Concord, would do any thing for the Emperor, and
did not refuse to submit to the Judgment of a lawful Council.

Zurich and Berne, the two far most powerful Cantons of Switzerland being
agreeed in Religion, Five Cantons of Switzerland make a League with King
Ferdinand.
as we have said, the Cantons of Lucerne, Vri, Vnderwalt, Switz and Zug, who
above all others spighted that Doctrine, made a League with King Ferdinand. In
the mean time Pope Clement, April 23, sent John Tomaso of Mirandula, to incite
the Princes to the Turkish War; and to tell them, That though of late Years he
himself had sustained great Losses, nevertheless he promised Aid, and that he
would make it his endeavor, that Peace being made betwixt the Emperor and
French King, a Council should forthwith commence, that Germany might, at
length, embrace the same Religion that other Provinces did.

The Council of the Empire we mentioned, some Months before had been removed
from Esling to Spire, The Deputy of Strasburg not admitted to sit in the
Council of the Empire.
whither the City of Strasburg having sent their Deputy Daniel Meige, to
consult and act with the other Counselors, about the Affairs of the Public,
he was not admitted to sit, because the Strasburghers had lately abolished the
Mass, and would not stay till the Conclusion of the present Diet. This being
known, the rest of the Cities, perceiving it to be a Precedent which concerned
themselves also, did mediate, and demanded that the Custom of the Empire might
be observed: That though they might have done some things contrary to the
Ceremonies and Rites of the Church, yet ought they not therefore to be denied
their Right, before the Controversy were determined in a Lawful Council;
especially seeing no such thing had hitherto been attempted, nor had any Person
been as yet in the least debarred from his Right in the public Dyets of the
Empire, upon account of Religion. Afterward James Sturney, Deputy for the City
in that Diet, protested, That if contrary to the Laws and Custom of the Empire,
they were in this manner turned out of Place, it must not be expected, that for
the future they would contribute any thing to the defraying of the Charges of
that Judicature. But all these Courses were ineffectual, and King Ferdinand
answering the Mediators himself, told them, That any other City which observed
the Emperor's Edicts, might be substituted in place thereof. After a long
Debate about Religion, they made a new Decree, wherein resuming in a few Words
the Acts of the former Diet of Spire, how that it had been ordained there; That
as to the Emperor's Decree of Worms, all should so behave themselves, that
they might be able to render an account of their Actions both to God and the
Emperor, but that it being now abused by many, who under color and pretext
thereof excused and defended all sorts of New and Horrid Doctrins; it was
therefore enacted and decreed to this effect, That they who had hitherto
observed that Edict, should do so for the future, The Decree of the Diet of
Spire.
and oblige their People to do so also, until the meeting of the Council, which
the Emperor gave great Hopes of very speedily: But that they who had changed
their Religion, and could not now retract for fear of Troubles and Sedition,
should for the future moderate themselves, and make no more Innovations before
the sitting of the Council: Moreover, that the Doctrine of those who dissent
from the Church about the Lord's Supper, should not be received, neither the
Mass abolished, nor those who were willing, hindered from going to Mass, in
those Places where a New Doctrine was taught: That Anabaptists also, who
obstinately maintain their Tenet, should be put to Death, and that Ministers
should preach according to the Sense and Interpretation of Scripture, approved
by the Church: That they should not meddle with other Points, which probably
might be controverted, but expect the Decree of a Council: Besides, that all
States should live together in Peace, do no Injury to one another upon account
of Religion, and not take the Subjects of others Jurisdiction into their
Protection: And that such as did otherwise should be put to the Ban of the
Empire.

This Decree was opposed by the Elector of Saxony, The Protestation of the
Princes against the Decree of Spire.
George Marquess of Brandenburg, Ernest and Francis Dukes of Lunenburg, the
Landgrave and Count Anbald, who April 19, publicly read their Protestation
against it in Writing: And in the first place they repeat the Decree of the
former Diet; whereby all are permitted the free exercise of their Religion,
until the meeting of a Council; from which they ought not to recede, nor
violate those things which for Peace-sake were then agreed upon, and confirmed
by Oath, under Hand and Seal: That for their own Parts, they were ready, in
imitation of their Ancestors, to comply with the Emperor in any thing, and to
spend their Lives and Fortunes in his Service: But that the present Case
concerned their Eternal Salvation; and therefore prayed that it might not be
taken ill, if therein they dissented from the rest: For that as the former
Decree had been made with the unanimous Consent of all, so also could it not be
repealed and made void, unless all in like manner agreed to it: That they were
not against it, but that they themselves might appoint what Form of Religion
they pleased within their own Territories, and prayed God that he would
enlighten the Minds of all with his true Knowledge: That for some Years now
past, there had been great Dissension and Quarrelling about Religion; and that
who were the Authors and Causes thereof, it had, in some measure been made out
in the Diet of Norimberg, and by the Confession of the Pope himself, and the
Grievances and Demands of the Princes and States, which to the number of
eighty, had been delivered to the Pope's Legate; whereof, nevertheless, no
redress was as yet made: That the Result of all Deliberations had always been
this, That the readiest way to put an End to Controversies and corrupt Abuses,
was a free Council: But that now, laying that Course aside, they should Decree,
That they who had changed the Form of their Religion, and could not without
Troubles recede from what they had done, should make no other Innovations, they
could not approve nor admit of that, unless they would professedly derogate
from the Doctrine, which hitherto they had owned as True and Holy: For to
forsake that Doctrine, provided it might be done without Stirs and Commotions,
what was it else, than to deny the pure and uncorrupted Word of God which they
had? than which there could not be a more grievous Sin: For that it was to be
professed not only in Word but in Deed also. Besides that, what Mischief such a
Denial would bring with it, and how pernicious it would be to many Professors
of the Gospel, it was easy enough to be conjectured. That as to the Popish
Mass, it was well known, How the Ministers of the Churches within their
Dominions, had by firm and unanswerable Arguments and Testimonies of Holy
Scripture quite overthrown it, and in place thereof appointed the Lord's
Supper, according to the Command and Institution of Christ, and the manner
observed by the Apostles; so that neither could they approve that Clause of the
Decree, nor give leave to their People to repair to Mass, which was already
abolished: For that granting, That the use of the Popish Mass were never so
Right and Pure, yet if they should admit of two contrary Masses in their
Churches, it was obvious to all Men, how bad an example that would give, and
what grumbling and heart-burning would thereupon ensue. That again, they
wondered very much, That they should prescribe to them, what they were to enjoin
their People, and what Laws they should make within their own Jurisdictions,
especially seeing if the like were attempted upon them, they would by no means
suffer it: That all Men knew what was taught in their Churches of the Presence
of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, so that it needed no farther
Explication: But that nevertheless, as they had often said before, so it still
seemed to them, That no such Decree was as yet to be made against those, who
taught otherwise, because there was nothing of that mentioned in the Emperor's
Commission; and besides, because the Assertors of that Doctrine were neither
called nor heard: That therefore it was seriously to be considered, How
unreasonable and unbeseeming a thing it would be, to pass a Judgment at any
time, upon such difficult and weighty Affairs, without hearing those, who were
concerned, speak for themselves. Now as to what they said, That the Gospel was
to be taught according to the Interpretations approved and received by the
Church, it was right indeed; however, the Dispute still was, Which is the True
Church: But that since no Doctrine was more certain, than that of God's Word,
since nothing should be taught besides it; and that the obscure Places of
Scripture could not be better explained, than by other clearer Places of the
same Scripture, they would therefore stick to that, and make it their
Endeavor, That the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament should be plainly
and purely taught: That this alone was the Sure and Infallible Way; but that
the Traditions of Men were no sure Ground to build upon: That the Decree of the
last Diet was made for Peace and Concord's sake; but that if the present Decree
should be in Force, it would open a way to great Troubles and Discontents; for
that now, since, whilst that Decree of Worms was still in suspense, some
Princes pretended to the Estates of their Subjects, as forfeited for not
observing the Edict, it might be easily understood, what would be done, if the
same Edict were again established, and some of the other Princes and States
should by Force attempt to compel them to those things which they could not
perform with a safe Conscience; That moreover it was not fairly alleged, That
the Decree of the last Diet was conceived in such Words, that most men, in the
mean time did abuse it, and thought they might do what they pleased, until the
meeting of a Council: These being Rumors spread by those who stood but little
in awe of the last Judgment, when all things should be made manifest: That for
their own Parts, they were willing to answer such, as would accuse them of
transgressing that Decree, before any impartial Judges. And that therefore
since the Case was so, they did not assent to this Decree of theirs, but would
give Reasons for what they did openly to all Men, and to the Emperor himself;
and that in the mean time, till the meeting of a General or Provincial Council
of Germany, they would not act any thing, which they could not maintain by Law:
That, after all, they were not ignorant, neither of their Duty, as to what was
decreed concerning living in Peace, not invading other Men's Possessions,
Anabaptists and Printers, etc.

Some of the chief Cities, Some Cities join in this Protestation.
after consultation had, joined with the Princes in this Protestation; as
Strasburg, Norimberg, Vlm, Constance, Ruteling, Winshaim, Memmingen, Lindaw,
Kempen, Hailbrun, Isne, Weissemburg, Norlingen and San-Gall. And this is the
Original of the Name of Protestants, The Original of the Name of Protestants.
which is famous and common, not only in Germany, but also amongst Foreign
Nations. King Ferdinand was gone out of the Assembly, before this Protestation
was made, though he had been desired by the Elector of Saxony and his
Associates to stay a little. Afterward the Protestants drew up and published a
kind of an Appeal; wherein having related what had been done, they, at length,
appeal from all the Proceedings of the Diet of Spire, The Protestants appeal to
the Emperor.
and the Decree there made, to the Emperor, to a Lawful General Council, or
Provincial Synod of Germany, and in short, to all impartial and unsuspected
Judges, determining withal, to send Ambassadors to the Emperor.

Not long after, A Civil War among the Switzers.
those of Zurich and Berne took the Field with an Army against their Enemies;
the five Cantons, whom we mentioned a little before, and the Zurichers
published a Declaration of the Reasons and Causes that moved them to do so,
instancing many Injuries done by them, and among the rest that in the Canton of
Switz, some of their People, who came to demand Money due unto them, had been
whipped: That they of Vnderwalt had hung up their Arms, and the Arms of Berne,
Basil, and City of Strasburg upon the Gallows: That they all also had made a
League with King Ferdinand for the Suppression of the Reformed Religion;
wherein they said, It was stipulated, That what Lands of theirs, on this side
the Rhine, should be taken by the Assistance of King Ferdinand, should all
belong to them; from whence it may be easily seen, say they, that it is their
Design to cast us out of our Country, by the Aid and Assistance of Foreigners:
Wherein they not only violate the Law of Nature, but their Covenants and
Agreements also, when to our Ruin they conspire with the most Ancient and
Implacable Enemy that our Nation has, against whom, for so many Years, even
from the beginning of our League, we have so unanimously joined all our
Strength and Force. When the Armies on both sides had taken the Field, and were
encamped, by the Mediation of their Neighbors, and of the City of Strasburg
also, the matter was accommodated, and both laid down their Arms. King
Ferdinand had sent them Auxiliary Forces, which were advanced as far as the
Rhine. It was agreed upon betwixt them, That they should make no War one
against another, upon account of Religion; and that for the future they should
abstain from Railing and opprobious Words, under a severe Penalty.

The French King being affected with the condition of his Children, whom he had
left Hostages in Spain, and his unsuccessful Wards in Italy, where he had
lately lost an Army, and his General Lautreck, as we said; having likewise lost
Andrea d' Auria a Genoese, and most Famous Sea-Commander, who much about the
time that Lautreck dyed, revolted to the Emperor, and regained the Liberty of
his Country, began to incline to Peace. Peace betwixt the Emperor and French
concluded at Cambray.
Wherefore at Cambray a City of Hainault, there met Margaret the Emperor's
Aunt, Aloisia the French King's Mother, and many Nobles, among whom was Erard
de la Warch Cardinal and Bishop of Liege, and in the Month of August concluded
a Peace, wherein that Resolution taken in Spain three Years before, as has
been said, against the Lutherans, was revived and confirmed. The other
Conditions were partly altered; for the Emperor resigned Burgundy to the
French King, in case he had a Son by his Sister, and the King was to pay for
the Ransom of his Sons, to the Emperor, twenty hundred thousand Crowns,
therein comprehending the Debt due to the King of England. Solomon besieges
Vienna.
Not long after, the Emperor came to Genoua from Spain; and at the same time
Solomon the Emperor of the Turks, being invited by Jerome Alasky, a Polonian
of extraordinary Parts, sent for that end Ambassador from John the Vaivode,
marched through Hungary, with a most numerous Army, into Austria, where laying
Siege before Vienna, the chief City thereof, September 13, and having by
battering and springing of Mines, made a Breach in the Walls, he gave the
Assault; but the Garrison, under the Command of Philip Prince Palatine, But is
forced to raise the Siege.
making a brave Defense: October 16, he raised the Siege, having lost many
thousands of his Men in the Retreat, who were partly slain, The Vaivode made
King at Buda.
and partly made Slaves. But upon his Departure, he made the Vaivode King at
Buda.

A new kind of Disease also invaded Germany this Year, A New Disease in Germany.
for Men being taken with a Pestilential Sweating, either dyed within four and
twenty Hours, or if they sweated out the Poison, recovered by degrees their
Health again; but before any Remedy could be found for it, many thousands
perished. The Distemper in a very short space of time, spread it self from the
Ocean, all over Germany, and with incredible celerity, like a Fire, raged far
and near. It is commonly called, The Sweating Sickness of England, for in the
first Year of the Reign of Henry VII, of England, which was in the Year of our
Lord 1486, the same Plague infested that Country: And because there was no
Remedy known for such a new Distemper, it swept away a vast number of People.
At this time also, there was a great Scarcity of Corn and Wine; so that all the
Judgments, wherewith God in his Anger uses to punish an unthankful people, as
the Sword, Pestilence and Famine, fell upon Germany at one and the same time.

At this time also were Prisoners at Cologne, Two Learned Men burnt at Cologne
for Religion.
Peter Flisted and Adolph Clarebacke, two learned Men, because they differed in
Judgment from the Papists concerning the Lord's Supper and other Points of
Doctrine. The Senate of that Town has Right and Power to imprison Offenders;
but the Archbishop alone has the Power of Life and Death; and it may fall out
that whom the Senate has condemned to Death, the Bishop's Judge may acquit:
Now these two having lain in Prison a Year and an half and more, were, at
length condemned by both Judicatures, and burnt, to the great Grief and
Commiseration of many. Most People blamed the Preachers for that, who cried
that the Wrath of God, who afflicted us with a new kind of Disease, was to be
appeased by the Execution of the Wicked and Ungodly. Adolph was a handsome Man,
Eloquent and Learned; and when they were led to the place of Execution, they
made profession, and gave the Reasons of their Belief, confirming and
encouraging one another with Texts of Scripture, so that all People fixed their
Eyes and Thoughts upon them.

We told you before of the Difference betwixt Luther and Zuinglius about the
Lord's Supper; when this had been tossed to and fro, for above three Years,
with much Contention, many, who were troubled that this single Controversy
should hinder an Uniformity in Doctrine, earnestly wished that some Remedy might
be thereunto applied; therefore the Landgrave having communicated the matter to
his Associates, A Conference at Marpurg betwixt Luther and Zuinglius.
and prevailed also with the Switzers, appointed a Day, when Learned Men of
both Parties should meet at Marpurg, and calmly discourse the Point. From
Saxony came Luther, Melanchthon and Jonas; from Switzerland, Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius; from Strasburg, Bucer and Hedio; and from Norimberg, Osiander:
many Grave and Learned Men were present besides; though none but Luther and
Zuinglius reasoned the Point: But the Sweating Disease infecting that Town
also, the Conference was broken up, by the Landgrave's order, and this
concluded upon; That since they all agreed about the chief Points of Doctrine,
they should for the future refrain from all Contention, and pray to God, that
he would also enlighten them in this Controversy, and put them in the way of
Concord. And so they friendly parted in the beginning of October.

It has been said already, That at the Diet of Spire, which was held three
Years before the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave made mention of entering into a
League, this matter was several times brought into deliberation afterward; and
especially now that this Decree was made, they began to think of it more
seriously, so that after the Diet was over, a certain Draught of it was made at
Norimberg, and afterward more fully debated. And when in the Month of October,
the Deputies of the Princes and States met at Swaback; it was propounded in the
Names of the Elector of Saxony, and George Marquess of Brandenburg, That seeing
the Defense of the True Religion, was the Ground and Cause of this League, it
behoved first, that all should be unanimous in the same; wherefore the sum of
their Doctrine comprehended in some Chapters was read and approved by all, only
the Deputies of Strasburg and Vlm alleged, That no mention had been made
thereof in the former Assembly, nor had they any Instructions concerning it.
They were not all of the same Opinion about the Point of the Lord's Supper, as
we told you before, and this was the only Scruple. Seeing therefore nothing
could be concluded, because of that, another Meeting was appointed to be at
Smalcalde, the thirteenth of December. Erasmus writes a Book against the
Reformers:


When the Emperor was now come into Italy, Erasmus of Roterdam, who having
left Basil, because of the Change of Religion, and to avoid Suspicion, was come
to Friburg, a Town belonging to King Ferdinand, in the Month of November,
published a little Book, entitled, Against some, who falsely called themselves,
Gospel-Teachers; but in reality he has a Touch at all the Reformed; for among
many other things, he says, he never knew any of them, who appeared not to be a
worse Man than he was before. Which is answered.
This Book was afterward answered by the Divines of Strasburg, because they
and those of Basil were chiefly aimed at, but above all others Bucer.

When the Emperor was coming to Bolonia, Francis Sforza, who had been before
in League with the Pope and French King, went to meet him, and having pleaded
his own Cause, Sforza recovers the Duchy of Milan.
at the Intercession of Clement VII, at length recovered the Duchy of Milan
from the Emperor, but upon this, among other Conditions, That he should pay
him nine hundred thousand Crowns, one half the same Year, and the rest within
ten Years successively, by equal Portions; and as a Pledge, the Emperor was to
keep in his Hands Como, and the Castle of Milan, until the first Years Payment
should be made.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK VII.
The CONTENTS.
The Protestant Ambassadors sent to the Emperor, appeal from the Answer they
received at Piacenza, where they were stopped; which the Protestants
understanding, appoint a meeting at Smalcalde. The City of Strasburg makes a
League with Three of the Switz Cantons. The Emperor being Crowned by the Pope
at Bolonia, calls a Diet of the States of the Empire at Ausburg, where the
Protestants exhibit a Confession of their Faith; which in a contrary writing,
is Answered and Confuted by their Adversaries. Some are appointed to
accommodate the matter amicably, and to find out some means of Concord. The
Emperor sollicites the Protestants, who notwithstanding all the Exhortations
that were made unto them, the Objections and Calumnies wherewith they were
charged, steadfastly persevered in their Confession; and having given in their
last Answer, depart. The Tyber overflows at Rome. Eckius and Faber demand and
obtain an honorable Reward, for the Refutations they wrote against those of
Strasburg, and other Cities. The Transaction of Prusia is rescinded. The Decree
of Ausburg is related. Luther, who was come nearer to Ausburg, comforts
Melanchthon, then in Anxiety, because of that Decree. Bucer goes to him, that
he might reconcile him with Zuinglius. The creation of Ferdinand, King of the
Romans, comes into Agitation, and is withstood by the Elector of Saxony, and
other Princes; but nevertheless he is created King, and installed in the
Kingdom.

WE told you before, The Protestant Ambassadors with the Emperor.
that the Protestants resolved upon sending Ambassadors to the Emperor. These
were John Ekinger, Alexius Fraventrute, and Michael Caden, of Norimberg, who
being advanced as far as Genoua, were informed, that the Emperor was come from
Spain; and arriving afterward at Piacenza, were on the Ninth of September
introduced into the Emperor's Presence by Mercurine Cattinario, who the day
before had been made Cardinal. Count Henry of Nassau, Alexander Schueisse, and
Alphonso Valdesio, a Spaniard. The Emperor assigned them the Twelfth of
September for the day of Audience; but withal, admonished them to draw up their
Demands in writing, and to be as short in their Discourse as they could, by
reason of his many and weighty Affairs. When they came at the appointed day, he
again admonished them, by an Interpreter, to be short. They, according to their
Instructions, repeat in order the Decree of the Empire made Three Years before,
that was lately abrogated by another Decree; which if it should be of force,
must needs occasion very great troubles and disorders. That therefore the
Elector of Saxony, and his Associates, with whom some Cities were joined, at
that time publicly protested, that they did not assent to that Decree; that
therefore they prayed his Majesty, that he would not take it ill at their
hands, but impute it to necessity: That in the mean while, till a Council
should be called, they would not do any thing, but what they hoped would be
approved of both by God and his Majesty. Again, That in imitation of their
Ancestors, they were ready to undertake any thing for the safety and honor of
his Person and Empire, whether it were to war against the Turk, or undergo any
other burden whatsoever: That they also besought him, if perhaps the matter
were otherwise reported unto him, not to give credit to it, but believe this
Relation; nor conceive any displeasure against them, till first he should hear
their Justification; especially seeing they had always professed, that if they
were better instructed from Testimonies of Scripture, they would do nothing
obstinately nor undutifully; that therefore they desired his Majesty, that he
would take them into his Protection and Defense, and with the first
opportunity, give them a gracious and favorable Answer in writing: And that
because all that they had to say, could not be conveniently delivered by word
of mouth, they would, in obedience to his Majesty's Commands, couch into
writing what was necessary for the fuller understanding of the matter.
Afterward the Emperor, by his Interpreter, answered them, That he had heard
what their Demands were; that he was very well pleased with the obedience which
they professed in their Prince's Name; and that having advised with his
Council, he would give them an Answer. At length, October the Thirteenth he
gave them his Answer in writing, as they had desired it: That before they came,
he had been informed of all the Proceedings in the Diet of Spire, and of the
Decree which past there, by his Brother Eerdinand, and his Colleagues; and that
he was extremely troubled at that dissension, which gave occasion to so many
evils and inconveniences: That seeing it was his duty to prevent them; or if
they should happen, to redress the same; he had therefore, after long and
serious deliberation with his Council about the whole matter, found that that
Decree was made with intent, that nothing should be innovated for the future,
nor no place hereafter left for any Sect; of which there were many broached at
present, and very foul ones too: and then that Peace and Concord should be
settled in the Empire; which the Elector of Saxony, and his Associates, ought in
reason to have assented to: for that he, and the rest of the Princes, were no
less concerned for their Souls Salvation, and the Peace of their Consciences,
than they were; nor no less desirous, than they, of a Council, for composing
the Affairs of Christendom; which Council, nevertheless, would seem not to be
altogether so necessary; if those things which were enacted by public and
common Consent had their due course; and also if that Decree made some years
since at Worms, with the approbation of all the States, and the Edict
thereunto added by him, were observed, as they themselves acknowledged, that
such Decrees ought to be firm and stable: That these things being considered,
and since it was a received Custom, that it was not lawful for the smaller part
to annul what had been enacted and decreed by the major part of the States of
the Empire; He had therefore written to the Duke of Saxony, and his Associates,
commanding them to ratify and approve that Decree, not to act to the contrary,
but to obey the same, upon the Allegiance which they owned to him and the
Empire: for that otherwise he would be necessitated, for maintenance of his
Authority, and for Example's sake, to punish them severely; but that he
supposed his Letter was already, or would very shortly be delivered unto them,
and that they would do as he had commanded them: That that would be very
acceptable unto him; especially at this time, when it was certainly reported,
that the Turk, the Enemy of Christendom, was marching through Hungary, with all
his Forces, into Germany: That for this reason then, it was highly requisite to
be in Peace and Concord at home: For that though they should contribute Money
for the Turkish War, and other public uses of the Empire, yet without mutual
consent of minds, without peace and good will amongst all the States of the
Empire, nothing could successfully be undertaken or carried on against such an
Enemy; which was not to be understood of one or two Provinces only, but of all
Christendom; and especially Germany: For that not only the Wives, Children, and
Fortunes of all and every one, but the Faith, Religion, Laws, and whatever was
near and dear unto men, lay now at stake; that head was therefore to be made
against him with all expedition, and with united hearts and hands; or all those
horrid, sad, and dismal evils, undoubtedly to be expected: So that were there
no other reason to move, yet this alone were sufficient to incline them
cordially to embrace what the greater part of the States of the Empire judged
proper and convenient. That this being the State of Affairs, he again required
and commanded them, that they would submit to the Decree made, as the rest of
the States did, who were no less desirous than they were, to approve themselves
unto God both by a good Life, and true Religion also; and that laying aside all
strife and dissension, they would consult with the rest, and determine, how his
Brother, King Ferdinand, might be aided, and the violence of the Turk
repressed, that it might not spread farther: That he was about to treat of
these Affairs with the Pope in Person; that is, how both the most cruel Enemy
might be withstood, and all Disputes about Religion be ended, to the glory of
God, and to the Peace and Tranquillity of all men. That having also settled the
Affairs of Italy, to the good of all Christendom, he would with all expedition,
bend his whole Force against the Turk; which made him hope, that considering
the greatness of the danger, they would do what otherwise they were in duty
obliged to do. When the Ambassadors had read this Answer, as it was given them,
they having an Appeal ready, presented it to Alexander Schueisse, in presence
of Witnesses, The Ambassadors appeal from the Emperor's Answer; and are
confined to their Lodgings.
as is usual; but he at first refused to take it: however, at length he
received the same, and carried it to the Emperor; but returning the same day
in the Afternoon, after some other discourse, told, that the Emperor confined
them to their Lodgings, commanding them not to stir out of doors, not to write
home to their Principals, nor to send any of their Servants abroad, till
further Orders, upon pain of forfeiture of Life and Goods.

Whilst this was doing, Michael Caden was accidentally abroad, and being
immediately advertised of the matter by a Servant, wrote an account of all that
had past, to the Senate of Norimberg, taking care that his Letters should be
conveyed with all speed; for he was not obliged as his Colleagues were. At
length, October the Thirtieth, having followed the Court to Parma, as they had
been ordered, Nicholas Granvel, who then supplied the place of Mercurine, that
lay sick, told them there, That though the Emperor was displeased at the
Appeal that was brought unto him, yet he gave them leave to return home; but
commanded Caden to stay, upon pain of death: And this was the cause of it: The
Landgrave had given him, upon his departure, a Book finely bound and gilt,
containing the Summary of the Christian Doctrine, Caden presents a Book about
Religion to the Emperor in name of the Landgrave.
to be presented to the Emperor; and he taking occasion, as the Emperor was
going to Mass, gave it him; who presently put it into the hands of a Spanish
Bishop, that he might know what it was: The Bishop fell accidentally upon that
place, where Christ admonishes his Apostles, not to affect Rule and Dominion;
for that suited not with their Profession, since it was the Kings of the
Gentiles who exercised that power. The Author, amongst other things, had
handled that place, showing what was the Duty of the Ministers of the Church:
But he having superficially read it, made a report to the Emperor, That the
little Book aimed at the taking away of the Power of the Sword from Christian
Magistrates, and allowing it only to Heathens, who were strangers to the
Christian Religion; for this cause therefore he was detained. Granvel told him
further, that it was the Emperor's pleasure, that he should deliver the same
Book to the Pope: But when upon making an Apology for himself, For which being
stopped, and in danger, he makes his escape, and returns home.
he received no Answer to his mind; and from Granvel's discourse, perceived the
danger he was in, he secretly hired Horses, and posting first to Ferara, and
then to Venice, returned home. The Senate of Norimberg having received Caden's
Letter, which we mentioned before, presently gave notice thereof to the Duke of
Saxony, the Landgrave, and their Associates, October the twenty fourth; who
having consulted about the matter, resolved to hold a Convention at Smalcalde
about the latter end of November. Thither came at the day appointed, the
Elector of Saxony, and his Son, John Frederick, Ernest and Francis, The
Assembly of the Protestants at Smalcalde.
Dukes of Lunenburg, Philip the Landgrave, the Deputies of George Marquess of
Brandenburg, and of the Cities also of Strasburg, Vlm, Norimberg, Hailbrun,
Ruteling, Constance, Memmingen, Kempen and Lindau. About the same time the
Ambassadour's returned from Italy; and having made a report of their Embassy,
to the effect above related, it was thought fit to treat first of all of
Religion, the Heads whereof had been lately proposed. Wherefore the Deputies of
Strasburg and Vlm, are desired to tell what their Judgment was in the matter;
and they make Answer to the same effect, as they had lately done: That at that
time, when a League was first proposed, no mention had been made of that
Affair, and yet it was only then moved, how mutual aid and assistance should be
given, in case any of them should be molested, or in danger, upon account of
Religion: That it might be plainly enough perceived, what their Adversaries had
in their thoughts, and what designs they were hatching: That some of the Heads
of Doctrine proposed, might be controverted; and that if Learned men did not
agree about these, it was to be feared, that some division might thereupon
ensue, which would be very seasonable and advantageous to their Adversaries:
That it was therefore their Opinion, that all their Deliberations should be
directed to the making of a League, which was the thing proposed at first. The
Duke of Saxony, and with him the Brothers of Lunenburg, and the Deputies of
Brandenburg, got the Deputies of Norimberg to deal with them, that they might
assent: But the Landgrave, taking a middle course, was for an Accommodation
betwixt the Two. When this could not do, the Deputies of the rest of the Cities
are also called, to whom it was represented, that if in all things they
approved that Doctrine, they would treat of entering into a League with them.
They make answer, That they had no Commission as to that, and urge the first
thing that had been proposed. At length they depart with this Resolution, That
they who would profess and receive this Doctrine, should meet at Norimberg, in
January following, to consult what was to be done for the future.

In the mean time, the City of Strasburg, that they might secure themselves
against all Force, The League betwixt the City of Strasburg and the Switzers.
and unjust Violence, made a League with those of Zurich, Berne, and Basil, who
were both their Neighbors, and agreed best with them in Doctrine, after this
manner: If those Cities we named, should be attacked, and molested upon account
of Religion, they shall mutually aid and assist one another with as many Forces
as the matter shall require; yet so, that for every thousand Foot, the City of
Strasburg shall pay two thousand Crowns a Month, by way of Subsidy: On the
other hand, if the Switzers be attacked, the Strasburgers shall send no Forces,
but shall, during the War, disburst three thousand Crowns a Month: Moreover,
That if the Enemies of the one be found within the Jurisdiction of the other,
they shall not be spared, but be treated according to the Law of Arms. That if
they be attacked all at one and the same time, then they shall defend
themselves severally at their own charges: That Strasburg shall at a convenient
time, whilst they are in peace, send ten thousand weight of Gunpowder to
Zurich, and as many Bushels of Wheat to Basil, but not to be touched, unless in
time of War and Want, and then to be distributed amongst the Town's People at
reasonable rates. However, if they come to the aid of Strasburg, they may make
use of as much of the Powder as shall be needful; but in time of a common War,
pay half price for it. This League was made for Fifteen Years, and concluded
the Fifth day of January. When this came to the knowledge of the Council of the
Empire, 1530.
whereof Frederick, Prince Palatine, was then President, about the latter end
of this Month, they wrote to the Senate of Strasburg, That it was commonly
reported; they had made a League with some of the Cantons of Switzerland: That
it was very much wondered at by them, that they who were bound in Allegiance to
the Empire, should, without the Consent of the Emperor and States, make any
League with any People: And that though all men generally affirmed it to be so,
yet they were unwilling to believe it, before they understood the matter from
themselves; and that therefore they desired, that they would write to them who
supplied the Emperor's place, how matters stood, and upon what Conditions they
had entered into League.

The Deputies of the Princes, and some few Cities, came to that Assembly, which
was appointed to be at Norimberg; where it was concluded, that Ambassadors
should be sent to the Emperor and King Ferdinand; but that Resolution was
altered. And because they believed the Emperor would call a Diet of the Empire
in the beginning of the Spring, it was thought best to consult in the mean
time, what they ought to propose therein; and that within a Month's time a
report of their several Opinions should be made to the Elector of Saxony, that
the rest also might be acquainted therewith by him. So they broke up on the
Ninth of January.

In the mean time, the Emperor, who came to Bolonia on the Fifth of November,
by Letters sent into Germany, dated the One and Twentieth day of January,
called a Diet of the States, to meet at Ausburg the Eighth of April, there to
consult of Religion, and of the Turkish War.

On the Twenty Fourth of February after, The Emperor crowned by the Pope.
he was Crowned by the Pope, with great Splendour and Magnificence, having first
taken an Oath to be the perpetual Defender of the Dignity of the Sea of Rome;
Before he arrived at Bolonia, three Cardinals, sent by the Pope, met him upon
the Confines of the Ecclesiastical State, to require his Faith and Promise,
That he would never encroach upon the Liberties of the Church. He gave them
such an Answer, as intimated, that he would not part with any thing of his
Right; meaning thereby Parma and Piacenza, Two Towns of the Duchy of Milan,
which then the Church of Rome possessed. Leaving afterward Bolonia, he made
Frederick Gonzaga, Duke of Mantoua. Mantoua was heretofore a free Imperial
City; but being afterward embroiled with various stirs and civil troubles, the
People resigned the Government to Ludovick Gonzaga, portrait of Philip
Melanchthon PHILIPPUS MELANTHON GERMANICE DICTVS SCHWARTZERD
Natus Bretta. Anno. 1497. 17. February.

Augustanam Confessionem composuit A. 1530.

Obijt Witteberga 19. Aprilis. 1560.

who had expulsed the Tyrant Passevini in the year 1327. John Francis, the
Grandchild, Grandson of Ludovick, was by the Emperor Sigismund, created
Marquess of Mantoua on the Second of September, 1434. The Duke of Mantoua first
made from a Marquess.
and in that degree they continued till the time we now mentioned.

The first that came to Ausburg was the Elector of Saxony, with his Son, John
Frederick. Amongst the rest of his Train, were Philip Melanchthon, John Islebe
Agricola, Justus Jonas, and George Spalatine. The City of Vlm sent their
Deputies to meet and welcome the Emperor: and when, with much a-do, they were
at length admitted into his Presence, he required of them, that they would
renounce the Protestation that had been made the year before, and for the
future promise to be obedient. The Senate of Ausburg had levied Eight Hundred
men, for a Guard to the City; but when this came to the Emperor's Ears, he
commanded them to be disbanded, and others raised in his Name, who swore to be
true to him; and likewise demanded one of the City Gates to be put into his
hands. Some few days before he arrived there, Cattinario, whom I named before,
and was lately made Cardinal, died at Inspruck, and Granvel, born at Besanzen,
succeeded into his place. Much about this time Queen Elenor came from Spain
with the French King's Two Sons, The French King's Sons return to France with
his Queen.
Francis and Henry, who had been there Four whole Years, Hostages for their
Father.

Not long after the Emperor's Coronation, the Pope sent a Nuncio to King
Ferdinand, Petro Paulo Vergerio, a Lawyer, with ample Commission: but his chief
instructions were, That he should use all endeavors to prevent the holding of
a National Council of Germany; and that King Ferdinand should oppose any Treaty
of that kind. He carefully acquitted himself of his Commission, and did all he
could to hamper and vex the Lutherans, being very liberal to Faber, Eckius,
Cochleas, and Nauseas, that they might ply them briskly: He made also Eckius a
Canon of Ratisbonne, as being the Pope's Legate, who being present, the Right
of Election commonly ceases.

The Emperor came to Ausburg on the Fifteeneth of June, toward the Evening.
Most of the Princes were there before, who all went forth to meet him, and most
civilly received him. The Emperor makes his entry into Ausburg.
In his Retinue was Cardinal Campegio, being sent from the Pope, with plenary
Power and Commission. Betwixt him and his Brother Ferdinand, the Emperor
intended to have made his entry into the Town; but because that was contrary to
the Custom of the Empire, the Electors of Mentz and Cologne went immediately
before him; and after him came Ferdinand and Campegio. The next day was Corpus
Christi day; wherefore the Emperor went to Church to his Devotions, and the
Archbishop of Mentz said Mass. All the Princes were there present, except the
Elector of Saxony, the Landgrave, the Two Brothers, Dukes of Lunenburg, George
Marquess of Brandenburg, and the Count of Anhalt. The Emperor had sent them
word, both that they should be there, and also discharge their Divines from
preaching: but they did not come, and withal alleged, That since this Diet was
appointed for hearing the Opinions of all, they would not impose silence upon
their Divines, before their Cause were tried. Two days after came forth an
Edict, commanding the Preachers on both sides to desist, until the matter of
Religion should be decided; but that nevertheless the Emperor should appoint
some to preach, without reflecting on any person. This Edict was proclaimed by
an Herald, and a Penalty appointed for the transgressors of it. June the
Twentieth, the Diet was opened, and the Emperor being about to go to Mass,
according to Custom, commanded the Elector of Saxony to be there, and to carry
the Sword before him; for that is the duty of the house of Saxony, on such
solemn occasions: He having consulted his Divines in the case, who told him,
That he might lawfully do it, since he was called upon to do his duty, not to
go to Mass, went, accompanied by George Marquess of Brandenburg; but none of
the rest came. After Mass, they went into the Public Hall; where Frederick,
Prince Palatine, having made a short Preamble, excused the Emperor's delay;
and again told them the Causes why the Diet was called. After that, there was a
long written Speech read, The Emperor's Speech in the Diet of Ausburg.
as is usual; and the effect of it was, That they themselves knew, how that as
soon as he was by common consent chosen Emperor, he had held a Diet of all the
States at Worms; but that at the same time he had been drawn into a War; so
that although he earnestly desired to have continued in Germany, yet he was
forced to return into Spain; which nevertheless he did with their consent, and
not before he had ordered the Affairs of the Empire, having constituted a
Judicature and Council, and left his Brother Ferdinand, as his Lieutenant, to
represent his Person in his Absence; and that in the good Opinion he conceived
of their Loyalty, Diligence and Virtue, he had left Germany, with the greater
Quiet and Satisfaction of Mind, trusting that they would, as, indeed, they had,
so administer the Government, that nothing could be found fault with: But that
in the mean time, whilst he was in Spain, he had heard, That there were not
only great Strifes and Dissentions in Germany, about Religion, but also that
the Turks had invaded Hungary, and the neighboring Countries, putting all to
Fire and Sword: And that Belgrade and several other Castles and Forts being
lost, King Lewis and the Nobles had sent Ambassadors to desire the Assistance
of the Empire, with which they doubted not but they might be able, not only to
beat off the Enemy, but also to regain what they had lost: But that if they
should be left destitute, the same Calamity that then lay upon them, would soon
after fall upon their Neighbors also. That he had been very much concerned at
these things, and had therefore, that Aid might speedily be sent, commanded,
That all that Money which they were to have furnished him for his Expedition to
be crowned at Rome, should be converted to that use: But that when his Orders
therein were too slowly executed, the Enemy having taken Rhodes, the Bulwork of
Christendom on that side, marched farther into Hungary, overcame King Lewis in
Battle, and took, plundered and burnt all the Towns and Places betwixt the
Rivers Save and Drove, with the Slaughter of many thousands of Men: That they
had afterward made an Incursion into Sclavonia, and there having burnt,
plundered and slain, and laid the whole Country waste, they had carried away
above thirty thousand Men into miserable Slavery, and killed those poor
Creatures that could not follow after with the Carriages: That they had again,
the Year before advanced with an innumerable Army into Austria, and laid Siege
to Vienna, the chief City thereof, having wasted the Country far and near, even
as far as Lintz, where they had practiced all kinds of Cruelty and Barbarity,
sparing neither Sex nor Age, ripping up the Bowels of young Infants deflowring
Maids and Women, driving them away before them like Brute Beasts: So that he
had been fully resolved then, all other things laid aside, to have marched
thither with his Forces, and to have bent all his Strength against them, having
written to his Brother Ferdinand, and the Noblemen, and Commanders of the Army,
who were besieged in Vienna, to expect his coming; and that, in the mean time,
they should valiantly behave themselves. But that upon the Retreat of the
Enemy, he had altered his Resolution, and for many Reasons judged it best,
having quieted all things in Italy, to have a Conference with the Pope, about
settling the State of the Public, and the Affairs of Religion, and to call this
Diet: That he could have been Crowned at Rome, without any Impediment, and from
thence gone to Naples, as the State and Condition of that Kingdom then chiefly
required; but that he had preferred the Interest of the Public before his own
Private Affairs, and made all the haste he could to be present at this Diet:
That now, though the Enemy could not take Vienna, yet the whole Country had
sustained great Damage, which could hardly be in long time repaired again: And
that although the Turk had drawn off his Army, yet he had left Garrisons and
Commanders upon the Borders, to wast and destroy, not only Hungary, but Austria
also, and Stiria, and the Places adjoining; and that whereas now his
Territories in many Places bordered upon ours, it was not to be doubted, but
upon the first Occasion he would return again with far greater Force, and drive
on his Designs to the utter ruin chiefly of Germany. That it was so well
known, how many Places he had taken from us, since he was Master of
Constantinople, how much Christian Blood he had shed, and unto what Streights
he had reduced this Part of the World, that it ought rather to be lamented and
bewailed, than enlarged upon in Discourse: That doubtless the Minds of all
ought exceedingly to be affected with so many and such grievous Calamities, and
being moved by the sad Examples of past Times, to conclude for a certain, that
if now, as heretofore, things were carried on so slowly and remissly; and that
if his Fury were not resisted with greater Forces than hitherto, they must
expect no Safety for the future, but that one Province after another being
lost, all at length, and that shortly too, would fall under his Power and
Tyranny: That there had been frequent Dyets of the States held during his
absence, about those Affairs, whereat he had wished himself present, but by
reason of his Enemies and Wars, he could not, as he had by Letters and Agents
several times Declared: But that so soon as he could, he had sacrificed all his
Private Quarrels and Injuries to the Public; had made Peace with his Enemy,
and remitted much of his Right for the sake of Public Peace and Concord; nor
would he longer delay his Return into Germany, but having left the most
flourishing Kingdom of Spain, had with great danger crossed the Seas to Italy;
where he had reduced the remains of his Enemies, and so quieted that whole
Country, which had been a great Hindrance unto him, that he could not come at
the Day appointed. And that since by those occasional Subitaneous and Broken
Aids, nothing had been as yet effected, there was need of new Methods, and more
ample Deliberation; for that since the Design of the most cruel Enemy was, to
make Slaves of; nay, even to sweep all Christians off of the Face of the Earth;
it was now to be taken into Consideration, how Aids might be perpetuated, that
is, That at no time Men and Money might be wanting, not only for carrying on a
Defensive, but also an Offensive War; nor for recovering alone what had been
lost, but for taking from him also, all that possibly could be done. That the
Pope had made him very liberal and ample Promises: And that for himself also,
although he had granted all the Money which had been promised him upon account
of his Coronation, for this use, having been at all the Charges of the
solemnity himself; and though he had laid out a great deal of Money besides,
yet in so Holy and Necessary a Work, he would do what was befitting his
Character and Person: That the same might be expected from his Brother King
Ferdinand, who stood now, in a manner, as the Rampart of Christendom,
especially of Germany, against the Fury and Rage of the Turk: That other Kings
and Princes also would not be wanting, to some of whom he had written, to that
purpose, and would also solicit the rest. That now, as to Religion, he had no
sooner stepped into the Government, but that to his Grief and Sorrow he had heard
of this Dissension arisen among them; and therefore that it might be remedied
in time, a Decree past in the Diet then held at Worms, with their unanimous
Advice and Consent, which, if it had been obeyed, would have prevented all
those Evils and Troubles that for some Years now had afflicted Germany; among
which were chiefly to be reckoned, the Insurrection of the Boors, and Sect of
the Anabaptists: And that since he perceived that hitherto there had been
nothing done by all their Treaties, he thought his own Presence might be of
great moment: That therefore he had called this Diet, that therein every one
might propose what they had to say in Writing, that so the matters might be the
sooner and better understood and determined: That for his own part, he would in
this and in all other Causes of the Empire, for the Love and Affection he bore
to his Country, do what in Duty he ought: And that therefore, he demanded of
them all, that every one of them would testify the like Zeal and Good Will
toward the Public.

The Princes, after deliberation had, were of Opinion, That Religion should be
the first thing debated. Four Days after Cardinal Campegius made a Latin Speech
to the Princes, Campegius's Speech to the Princes.
in presence of the Emperor, exhorting them, That in the cause of Religion,
they would obey the Emperor, whose Virtue and Piety he much extolled; that he
also would in the Pope's Name, endeavor that all should profess the same
Faith, and with reconciled Minds undertake a War against the Turk. Next, the
Deputies of Austria, represented the great Damages they had sustained from the
Turks, and demanded Aid. After this, the Elector of Saxony, George Marquess of
Brandenburg, the Duke of Lunenburg, and the Landgrave entreated the Emperor to
hear their Confession of Faith, The Protestants Confession of Faith presented
at Ausburg.
that was drawn up in Writing. He ordered it to be produced and laid down: They
again insisted, and because it was a matter that concerned their Reputation,
their Lives and Fortunes, and the Salvation of their Souls; and because
perhaps, he had been misinformed in the thing, they desired it might be heard.
The Emperor commanded them to wait upon him next Day at Home, but, in the mean
time, desired to have the Writing presently: They again with all imaginable
importunity urged and entreated that it might be read: Nor did they think, said
they, that that would have been denied them, since he heard Men of far
inferior Rank, about Matters of much less importance. But when he would not
change his Resolution, they desired him to leave the Writing with them, until
it should be read. That being granted, they come next Day, and in the Assembly
of all the States, read it in the Emperor's hearing: Afterward they gave it
him in Latin and High Dutch, offering to explain any thing in it, that might
seem obscure; and that if the matter could not, perhaps, be now determined,
they did not refuse to submit to a Council, so often promised and expected. The
Emperor, who had spent the whole Winter, from November to March, with the Pope
in Bolonia, and had lived in the same Palace with him, designed wholly, if he
could, to accommodate the Difference about Religion, without a Council, as
knowing that to be most acceptable to Pope Clement, whose scope was, That if
the matter could not be composed by fair means, it should be crushed by force
of Arms. Wherefore June the twenty sixth, he sent for the Deputies of all the
Cities to come to his Lodgings, and there made Frederick Prince Palatine
declare unto them, in his Name, That in the last Diet of Spire, a Decree had
been made, which was obeyed by most, much to his Satisfaction; but that some
others had rejected the same, which he took very ill at their Hands: That
therefore he required them not to separate from the rest, or else to give their
Reasons why they did not comply. To this the Deputies of the Protestant Cities
made answer, That they had done nothing undutifully; nor were they less
desirous than any of their Ancestors had ever been, to testify all Loyalty and
Obedience to his Imperial Majesty; but that since he demanded to know the
Reasons why they had not admitted of the Decree, they desired time to
deliberate. Afterward, on the seventh of July, they gave their Answer in
Writing, much to the same effect, as they had done the Year before, when, as we
said, they sent Ambassadors to him into Italy: Unto which Embassy, and the
Reasons there alleged, they also referred themselves.

Two Days after, the Emperor caused the Question to be put to the Elector of
Saxony and his Associates, Whether or not they would exhibit any thing more?
They said no; only resumed in few Words the sum of the Confession of Faith
already delivered. Afterward he commanded the Deputies of the Cities, who
pretended, That in Conscience they could not obey the Decree of Spire, to give
in Writing those Heads which they scrupled at; and delivered the Duke of
Saxony's Confession to the rest of the Princes, to be examined by them; who
presently gave it to their Divines, of whom the chief of all were John Faber
and Eckius. The Popish Divines confute the Augustane Confession.
These battered it with a contrary Writing and Confutation; which being read
over before the Princes, some of them judged it to be too sharp, and thought
fit that some Men should be chosen to peruse the Writings of both Parties, and
to soften them; but their Opinion prevailed, who would have it delivered to the
Emperor, as it was, and the whole matter to be committed to him. In the mean
time the Cities of Strasburg, Constance, Memmingen and Lindaw, delivered a
Confession of their Faith to the Emperor also in Writing. These, as we said
before, differed in Opinion from the Elector of Saxony and his Associates about
the Lord's Supper. The Matter being deliberated with the Pope's Legate, the
Emperor ordered an Answer to be made to the Saxou-Writing, which he
communicated to the Princes on the first of August. The conclusion of it was
severe and hard, no less than the Ban of the Empire being threatened to those
who obeyed not: But that was qualified by the Advice of the Princes; wherefore,
August the third, he called together all the States, and made Frederick Prince
Palatine tell them, That he had long and much considered the Saxon Confession
of Faith, and also ordered some Honest and Learned Men, to give their Judgment
of it, What was Orthodox therein, and what contrary to the Doctrine and Consent
of the Church: That they had done so, and had given their Judgment in another
Writing, which he approved. Then was the Confutation of the Confession, written
by the Divines of the contrary Persuasion, read; and it proceeded in this
Method; They divided the Saxon-writing into two Parts; the first contained one
and twenty Chapters; of these they had admitted some and rejected others; some
were admitted in part, and in part rejected, alleging many Testimonies of
Fathers and Councils. Among the rejected, were these; That Good Works are not
Meritorious: That Justification is attributed to Faith alone, and not to Works
also: That the Church is the Congregation of the Godly: That Men cannot make
Satisfaction for Sins: That the Saints do not make intercession for us: Other
things they admitted of, with certain modification, as the Doctrine concerning
Ceremonies; as also that the real Body and Blood of Christ was so in the
Sacrament, that Christ was under each Species; and that the Bread and Wine were
wholly changed: The Doctrine about Confession they admitted, provided the People
were obliged to confess yearly, at Easter, to declare all their Sins exactly,
receive the Lord's Supper, and believe that there are seven Sacraments in the
Church: They made a Proviso also, That none should be suffered to preach to the
People without a License from the Bishops: Besides, that all the Canons and
Laws of the Church should be observed, and restored again in those Places,
where they were abolished. The second Part contained five things chiefly; the
Communion under both kinds was rejected, and the Emperor required, That in
this they would follow the Custom and Consent of the whole Christian World. As
to the Marriage of Priests, he wondered, he said, how they could demand it,
since it was never in use from the very Age of the Apostles; that therefore, it
could no ways be be granted. Their Mass was admitted, provided it were
celebrated according to the Rite of the Church of Rome; but if otherwise, it
was rejected: And at the same time the Mass affirmed to be a Sacrifice for the
Quick and the Dead; and that Private Mass ought not to be abolished: That
Daniel had prophesied long before, That when Antichrist should come, the daily
Offering should cease: That that was not, indeed, as yet come to pass; but that
nevertheless in those Places, where Mass was despised, Altars destroyed, Images
burnt; where nothing was sung in the Churches, nothing read, no Lights burnt
any longer, there, indeed that Prophecy was fulfilled: That therefore all
should have a special Care, That they did not make way for the coming of
Antichrist: That Monastic Vows were grounded upon the Authority, as well of
the Old as New Testament, that therefore they ought to be punished, who
forgetting their Profession, forsook their Order: That Bishops had Power not
only to teach, but also to bear Rule in Civil Matters, and therefore ought not
to be impeded in the Execution of their Right, which they enjoyed through the
Liberality of our Ancestors: That not to abstain from Flesh on Days prohibited,
not to fast in time of Lent, and not to Confess Sins, was frowardness, and not
Christian Liberty. These Points being thus read, they confessed, That there
were some things which needed to be reformed; for the amendment whereof, and
the Reformation of the state of the Church, the Emperor promised to use his
utmost Endeavors, and was in good Hopes, he said, that since they agreed in
many things, the Protestants would return into the Bosom of the Church, and
submit themselves to him, which if they would do, they might expect any thing
at his Hands: But if not; that then he must needs act, as it became the
Guardian and Defender of the Church.

To these things the Elector of Saxony answered both in his own Name, The Duke
of Saxony's general Answer to the Confutation of the Popish Divines.
and in the Name of his Associates, That seeing they had professed in the
beginning, That if they set about a Reconciliation in Religion, they would do
any thing that they could with a safe Conscience: Again, that if by Testimonies
of Scripture, it could be proved that there was any Error in their Doctrine,
they would not be obstinate: That moreover, if a fuller Explanation of their
Confession were desired, they would give it: And that now, since some Points of
Doctrine which they offered, were admitted, and some rejected, it behoved them
to confirm and make good what they had asserted; they therefore desired that a
Copy of the Confutation might be given them. Two Days after the Emperor,
having long consulted about the matter, said, They should have a Copy of it,
but upon condition that they would not publish nor print it: And that he would
admit of no more Debate, but required them to close with him: But they made
Answer, That they would not receive it upon that Condition. The Landgrave
departed from the Diet.
Next Day after, which was the sixth of August, the Landgrave departed with a
small Company, leaving Deputies in his Place. The Emperor took that ill, and
commanded the Magistrates of the Town, That they should suffer no person
whatsoever to depart out of the City by that private Place, which used only to
be open in the Nightime; and having next Day sent for the Elector of Saxony
and his Associates, he did not dissemble his Displeasure, and required them to
stay till the conclusion of the Diet; for that he would omit nothing, that
would make for Peace and Concord. They excused the Landgrave, because of his
Wife's Sickness, telling his Majesty, That he had left Deputies, and that they
would not depart: But that, in the mean time, they wondered why Guards should be
placed at the Gates, which never used to be done in the Dyets of the Empire.
The Emperor excused it, because of a Murder that had been committed, and
because of the Quarrels that happened betwixt the Spaniards and Germans: But
that if any Tumult should happen in time to come, he would do no such thing,
before he had acquainted him who was Marshal of the Empire. The Duke of Saxony
answered, That if any thing should happen, wherein his Duty was required, he
would be ready, as it became him. So that the same Day the Guards were removed
from the Gates.

About that time ended the War of Florence, The Florentine War.
of which a little by the by. At the time that Rome was taken, and the Pope
shut up in the Castle of St. Angelo, we said before, the Florentines cast out
the Family of Medicis, and then assisted the French in their Wars in Naples.
But the Pope being restored, that he might right himself and Relations, sent
his Legate into Spain, and made a League with the Emperor, promising, amongst
other things, to crown him, if he would punish the Florentines, as they had
deserved. The Emperor embraced the Condition, and not long after arrived at
Genoua. Thither came Ambassadors from the Florentines, to make their
submission, and beg pardon; to whom the Emperor, having sharply rebuked them,
made this Answer; That though they had deserved to be severely punished, yet
their Fact might be pardoned, provided, they would receive the Pope again; and
that there was no other way but that, of obtaining peace. When the Ambassadors
were returned home with this Answer, the matter was much debated; but at
length, the Opinion of one or two carried it, who were for defending their
Liberty to the last; and the rather, that, as they alleged, Pope Clement, and
the Emperor, being now exhausted with long Wars, were both in great want of
Money. Nevertheless, when the Emperor was come to Bolonia, they sent
Ambassadors again; but they were not admitted to Audience, through the
Persuasions of the Pope. So that having maintained War, and defended their City
against the Forces of the Emperor and Pope, for almost a Year, on the Ninth
Day of August they capitulated with Ferdinando Gonzaga, General of the
Emperor's Army. Afterward the Emperor, by his Letters Patent, addressed to
them, appointed Alexander de Medicis, to whom he had promised Margaret, his
Natural Daughter, in Marriage, to be their Prince, who afterward built a
strong Citadel there, which was the beginning of their bondage. The Town being
taken by surrender, Pope Clement caused some of the chief Senators to be
beheaded, and appointed a kind of Commonwealth amongst them, being assured in
the mean time, that Alexander would be made their Duke; for that was the Advice
he himself had given the Emperor, when he sent his Legate to him into Spain.
But now to our purpose again.

After much debate, Commissioners for reconciling Religion.
on the Thirteenth of August Seven were chosen on each side to adjust measures
of a Reconciliation. On the side of the Catholics were, the Bishop of Ausburg,
Henry Duke of Brunswick, two Lawyers, one of Cologne, and another of Baden, and
three Divines, Wimpin, Eckius, and Cochleus. For the Protestants, were, George
Marquess of Brandenburg, John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, two Lawyers, three
Divines, Melanchthon, Brentius, and Schnepsius. These agreed upon some Points;
but the great Controversy was about the Mass, the Marriage of Priests, the
Lord's Supper in both kinds, Monastic Vows, and the Jurisdiction of Bishops;
but especially about Mass, and Monastic Vows; for in that the Papists would
not bate an Ace: but for the other Points, though they disapproved them, yet
they said, they might be tolerated until the meeting of a Council. Marriage
they allowed also to Priests, but only to those who had Wives already, not to
the rest, and all that to prevent further troubles. As to the Power and
Jurisdiction of the Bishops, the Saxons granted a little too much, and more
than was allowed of by the Commissioners for the Landgrave, Lunenburg and
Norimberg. Afterward, it was thought fit to abridge this number; so that there
were Three chosen on each side, Melanchthon with Two Lawyers, and Eckius with
as many; but Melanchthon was enjoined to grant no more: Thus when they could
not agree in Opinions, the Papists were for having the matter again debated by
more Persons; but the Protestants perceiving, that their design was to find out
more ways of Accommodation, declined that Treaty; but if they thought fit to
consider of ways of settling Peace until the meeting of a Council, they were not
against it. During these Negotiations, the Emperor dealt with George Marquess
of Brandenburg, by means of the Elector of Mentz, and others of the same
Family, and with the Duke of Saxony, by the Mediation of Frederick, Prince
Palatine, the Count of Nassau, and George Truchses, that they would desist from
their Enterprise. He endeavored also to divide the Duke of Saxony from the
rest, as being the chief of all, and refused to invest him in his Dukedom,
according to the Custom of the Empire, unless he would first be reconciled to
the Church of Rome: The other he threatened, That unless he did comply, he
should lose the Ward and Guardianship of his Nephew Albert, his Brother
Casimires Son. They endeavored to persuade the Landgrave, The Pope gives King
Ferdinand leave to make use of the Ornaments and Goods of the Church.
That if he would obey the Emperor, Vlrick Duke of Wittemberg should be
restored, and his Controversy with the Count of Nassau, concerning
Catzenelbogen, accommodated by the Emperor's Mediation. In this Diet the Pope
gave leave to King Ferdinand, to make use of the Ornaments, and the Gold and
Silver Plate of all the Churches of Germany; and also to lay a Tax upon the
Clergy, for the Turkish War: But the Princes would not consent to it, and made
application to the Emperor, that he would vacate that Bull. August the
Eighteenth, Erasmus of Rotterdam, wrote from Fribourg to Cardinal Campegius,
That the Power of the Emperor was, indeed, great; but that all did not
acknowledge it: That the Germans so acknowledged his Authority, as that they
commanded, rather than obeyed: That Luther's Doctrine was spread all over
Germany; so that from the Ocean, as far as Switzerland, that Chain of Mischief
was stretched: That if the Emperor should declare, That he would in all things
comply with the Interest and desire of the Pope, it was to be feared, he would
have but few to approve his doings: That there was great danger also threatened
from the Turk, who was so powerful, that all the Force of Europe was hardly
able to match him: That many instances could be given, how unsafe it was to go
to War with Soldiers that were unwilling to fight: That the Emperor, without
doubt, was inclined to Peace, though by a certain destiny he was drawn into
War: That for many years now France and Italy had suffered much by Wars; but
that unless care were taken, this War would prove more fatal than all the rest:
That People were generally persuaded, that the Pope had the chief hand in all
these things; but that it was to be feared, the Emperor might run the greatest
risque: That they who loved Sects, deserved, indeed, to be punished; but that
the welfare and safety of the Public ought more to be regarded: That the State
of the Church had been sore distressed in former times, when the Arians,
Pagans, Donatists, Manichees, broached their Doctrins, and Barbarous Nations
also made War against it; and yet it weathered all those Storms at length: That
Time and Patience sometimes cured the worst Distempers: That the Bohemians were
tolerated, though they acknowledged not the Pope: That if the same thing were
allowed to the Lutherans, it would not be amiss, in his Judgment: And that
though this would be bad enough, yet was it much easier to be born with than a
War.

September the Seventh, The Emperor's Speech to the Protestants.
the Emperor sent for all the Catholic Princes and States, to come to Court
about Noon; and two hours after, for the Duke of Saxony, and his Associates;
where all being removed, except his Brother, King Ferdinand, the Bishops of
Constance and Seville, Granvel and Truchses, he ordered Frederick, Prince
Palatine, to speak to them in his Name, to this purpose: That having given them
so kind and gracious an Admonition, after they had presented their Confession
of Faith, he had confidently hoped, that they would have complied with him: And
that although he was disappointed of his hopes therein, yet at the intercession
of the Princes, he had condescended, that some Commissioners should be chosen
on each side, to endeavor a Reconciliation; which had put him again in fresh
hopes of a future Accommodation: But that now he had learnt, to his great
trouble, that they dissented from the rest in the chief Points of Doctrine, a
thing that he could not have expected at their hands; for that he did not
imagine, that they who were but few in number, would have introduced Novelties,
contrary to the Ancient and most Sacred Custom of the Universal Church; or that
they would have framed to themselves a singular kind of Religion different from
what was professed by the Catholics, by himself, his Brother, King Ferdinand,
and by all the Princes and States of the Empire; Nay, and utterly disagreeing
with the Practice of all the Kings in the World, and of their own Ancestors
too. But that since, they now demanded to have a General Council called, and a
Decree past in this Diet, for securing the Public Peace, He, who above all
things, loved peace, would use his Interest with the Pope, and the rest of the
Christian Princes, that as soon as the Place could be agreed upon, a Council
should be called; that he promised them this upon his Royal Word; but on this
Condition still, That in the mean time they should follow the same Religion
which he and the rest of the Princes professed: For that to procure the calling
of a Council, and yet to suffer things to continue at such uncertainties, and
not to put a stop to those Innovations, all men did see how prejudicial that
must needs prove both to himself and others.

They having consulted, The Protestants Answer.
returned this Answer, That they had not caused any new Sect, nor separated
from the Christian Church: That they heartily thanked his Majesty, for that he
was not against a Council; and begged, that with the first opportunity an Holy
and Free Council might be called in Germany, as it had been decreed both in the
last and former Diet of Spire: but that to receive the Rites and Doctrins of
the Church of Rome, which were now abolished, they could not do it with a safe
Conscience.

After long Deliberation the Emperor caused Truchses to tell them, That he had
carefully read over, Truchses his Speech to the Protestants in the Name of the
Emperor.
and perused the Memoires of the Conference, and found that they dissented very
much from the Christian Church: That he wondered also at the Condescension of
the Commissioners, who had granted so many things; and at their stiffness, in
not accepting what had been offered: That whereas they grounded their demanding
of a Council upon the Decrees of the Empire, they had no Right to do so, since
they rejected the last Decree of Spire, against which they had protested, and
appealed from it; though he looked upon their Appeal as void and null, since it
was but reasonable, that the smaller number should be determined by the
greater: and what an inconsiderable Party were they, if compared with the Pope,
with himself, and the rest of the Princes? That therefore he desired to know of
them, if they were willing to enter into any further Treaty and Conference: for
that he would spare no pains nor trouble, that he might by any means make way
for Concord and Agreement; but that if they refused a Treaty, and would needs
pursue their designs, then he must do as became the Protector of the Church:
And that because it was drawing toward Night, he gave them till next morning
to consider on the matter. Their Answer.
Next day, when all the States were met at the hour appointed, Pontane, a
Lawyer, made answer, in Name of the Duke of Saxony, and his Associates, to this
effect: That if the Emperor understood the whole Affair, as it was acted, he
would then believe their former Relation: Nor did they doubt, but their Doctrine
would be judged consonant to the Word of God, in the Judgment of an Holy and
Free Council: And that so it was the less to be wondered at, that they did not
accept of what had been lately granted and offered: That that Appeal was for
necessary Causes, made only against that part of the Decree which struck at the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Custom of the Primitive Church: That in all
things else they obeyed it: That besides, at the very opening of that Diet, and
long before the Decree was made, a Council had been promised them by his
Deputies: Nor so only neither, but in all the Dyets of the Empire, that had
constantly been the Opinion of all: That since then they had appealed to his
Imperial Majesty, and a free Council, they were in hopes, that he would not
derogate from their Appeal, until a lawful Sentence should pass thereupon: That
it was not a place to dispute, whether or not in this Controversy the smaller
number should be concluded by the greater: That that had, indeed, been the
chief Reason which had obliged them to appeal; and that they would in Council
give their Reasons more fully for what they had done: That therefore since all
former Dyets had decreed a Council, without any limitation or condition, they
earnestly desired that he would not rescind those Decrees, but therein
condescend to the Will and Resolution of the rest of the States: That they
rendered his Majesty most hearty Thanks, That he was pleased to offer them a
farther Conference and Treaty; but that seeing it easily appeared by the Acts
of the last Conference, that they had condescended as far as possibly they
could; and that he himself wondered at the Papists for granting so much; it
might with small Difficulty be gathered, what his Majesty's Judgment was in the
case; so that it would be in vain to appoint any other Treaty, because it would
bring a Delay and hindrance to other Affairs: But that they were very willing
to consult of any way that might preserve the Peace of the Empire until the
meeting of a Council, as they had said at first, and that, in the mean time,
they would do nothing but what they should think pleasing both to God, and to a
lawful Council also. After they had been commanded to withdraw, they were, at
length, called in again; and because it was a weighty affair, the Emperor said
he would consider of it, and withal desired the Duke of Saxony, as being the
chief of the Party, not to depart from the Diet. George Truchses and Veh, a
Lawyer of Baden, propounded some things privately concerning the Mass and Vows,
in order to a Reconciliation; but that was in vain: And therefore the Emperor
commanded a Committee to be chosen, Commissioners chosen for framing a Decree.
for framing a Decree. The Parties chosen were, the Archbishop of Mentz, the
Elector of Brandenburg, the Bishops of Saltsburg, Strasburg and Spire, George
Duke of Saxony, William Duke of Bavaria, and Henry Duke of Brunswick. When the
Duke of Saxony was thinking of returning home, the Emperor, September the
eighteenth, desired of him that he would stay but four Days longer. In the mean
time the Princes of the Committee, The Tenor of that Decree.
drew up the Form of a Decree, and September the two and twentieth, the
Emperor sent for the Duke of Saxony and his Associates to come to Court; and
in a full Assembly of the Princes, caused that to be read, which concerned
Religion; which was, That the Duke of Saxony and his Associates had exhibited a
Confession of their Faith, which had afterward been refuted by Testimonies of
Scripture; and that through the Pains that he himself and the rest of the
States had been at, things were after brought to this pass, that they had
received some Doctrins of the Church and rejected others; which being so, that
therefore, to show how desirous he was of Peace, and how far from acting any
thing unadvisedly or out of Private Interest, he was graciously pleased to
grant them time to consult, until the fifteenth Day of April, that in the mean
time they might consider with them selves, and come to a Resolution, if in the
remaining Points of Doctrine they would acquiesce to what the Pope, he himself,
and the whole Christian World besides professed: That in the mean while, it was
his Will and Pleasure, that all Men throughout the Empire should live in Peace;
that the Duke of Saxony and his Associates, should not, during that Interval,
suffer any Innovations in Religion within their Dominions, nor any new thing to
be printed; nor yet allure or compel any Man to come over to their Persuasion:
That they should not by any means hinder or molest those within their
Territories, that made Profession of the Ancient established Religion: That
they should not disturb Monks and Friars, nor no Religious Persons in the
exercise of their Worship, hearing Confessions, and celebrating the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, after their own manner: That they should consult with
themselves, and with the rest of the States, How Anabaptists, and those who
maintained Opinions concerning the Lord's Supper, different from the Doctrine of
the Church, were to be punished and restrained: That lastly, since for a long
time there had been no Council, and that many things needed to be reformed,
both in Church and State, he would use his Endeavors with the Pope and other
Kings, that a Council should be called within six Months time, and begin within
a Year after.

The Duke of Saxony and his Associates, What the Protestants find fault with in
the Decree.
after deliberation, made answer to these things, by the Mouth of Pontane; That
whereas it was mentioned in the Decree, That their Doctrine had been refuted by
the Authority of Holy Scripture, they did not acknowledge nor grant that: But
that, on the contrary, they thought it so well grounded on God's Word, that
nothing could be found erroneous in it, and that if they could have had a Copy
of the Confutation, which was read to them, they could have plainly
demonstrated so much: That nevertheless, lest that Confutation should be past
over in Silence, they had begun to draw up an Answer unto as much of it as they
could retain in their Memories, immediately after they had heard it read; which
Answer was now after much Labor and Pains completed; and that though all
things could not be therein answered, for the Reason abovementioned; yet if
the Emperor would be pleased to peruse it, they made no doubt, but he would
find their Confession, still firm and unshaken, notwithstanding the Battery of
their Adversaries. When Pontane had thus far proceeded, he presented the
Apology to the Emperor, and Frederick Prince Palatine received it; but the
Emperor, to whom King Ferdinand had whispered somewhat, making him a Sign, he
delivered it back again. Pontane afterward went on: That whereas it was
decreed, That in the mean time, they should not innovate nor print any thing,
they had so answered as to that in the former Diet, that they thought they had
given Satisfaction: That they were still of the same Mind, and would not do any
thing that might lawfully be censured: That they had nothing to do neither,
with Sects; and that though the Doctrine which they professed, was true, yet
they had compelled no Man to embrace it, nor never would: That as to
Anabaptists, and those who despised the Sacrament of the Altar, they had never
tolerated any such Men within their dominions, that their Divines had always
preached against them, and that they had also punished Anabaptists, insomuch
that that Sect was so far from taking root, that it did not subsist among them:
But that seeing it was a very weighty Cause, which concerned the Eternal
Salvation or Damnation of their Souls, and required most serious Deliberation,
and that besides the Deputies of their absent Associates were necessarily
obliged, to make Report of all to their Principles; They earnestly begged that
they might have a Copy of the Decree, that they might consider among
themselves, and resolve upon what they were to answer upon the main, at the Day
appointed.

Next Day the Emperor let them know by the Elector of Brandenburg, That he
could not wonder enough at their Confidence, in affirming, That their Religion
was True and Pious, when it was not only refuted by the Authority of Holy
Scripture, but also many Ages since, condemned in all former Councils; and that
it increased his Admiration, that they should charge him and the other Princes
with Error and False Doctrine; for that if what they alleged were true, then
were all their Ancestors, and even of the Duke of Saxony himself, who had
observed and promoted that Religion, to be accounted Heretics; so that he
could not be persuaded, nor grant what they said, That their Doctrine was
grounded on the Word of God: That therefore, since he had, out of gracious
condescension, and the desire of Peace, ordered the Decree to be framed in that
manner, and therein granted more than in Reason he ought to have done; he
demanded of them, That they would admit of it, as the rest of the Princes did,
and weigh with themselves seriously, how great occasion they might give to
Troubles, and be therefore accountable to God, if they did not: That besides,
it could not be shown in Record or History, that any Man might rob and spoil,
and then excuse the Fact, as if he who had sustained Injury was not obliged to
Restitution. That as to their Paper, in answer to the Confutation, he had
already declared, That he would admit of no farther Dispute about Religion;
since he neither might, nor ought in Duty to allow it; which was the Reason he
had rejected the same; for that unless they submitted to, and approved that
Decree, he would take another Course, and do what became his Person and
Character. The Marquess of Brandenburg said farther, That they themselves were
sensible what Labor and Pains the rest of the States had been at, to have got
that Difference amicably composed: That now therefore he prayed them to
consider with themselves how much it concerned their own private Interest, and
the Welfare of the Public, that they should comply with the Emperor and
submit to the Decree: For that unless they would obey, the rest of the States
would do what the Emperor should please to command them, having already
promised to assist him with their Lives and Fortunes, for putting an end to
that Affair: And that he, on the other Hand had past his Word to bend all his
Force and Power that way, and not to depart out of the Empire, before he had
seen it accomplished: And that he now represented these things unto them by
order from the Princes and States.

The Protestants on the other hand, persisted in it, That their Confession of
Faith agreed with the Word of God, which the Gates of Hell were not able to
prevail against: And that the same was made out more fully in that other Paper
which had been lately offered, and which answered all that their Memories could
retain of the Confutation read to them; but that they could not with a safe
Conscience approve of the Decree made, and therefore begged a Copy of the whole
Proceeding, and time to advise in, until the Day appointed; for that they would
do nothing obstinately, but in all things condescend, as far as the Word of God
would give them leave, and give their plain and positive Answer by the Day
prefixed: not refusing in any thing else to venture their Lives and Fortunes for
his Majesty's sake: That, in the mean time, they thought it very strange that
the Princes and States should in that manner engage themselves to the Emperor,
since they had never given any cause for their so doing, and were ready, in
imitation of their Ancestors, to do any thing for his sake, being resolved,
when occasion offered, not to be the last: That they also confessed what was
said to be true, That no Man was to be spoiled of his Goods, but that they were
innocent therein: For that as to Monasteries and Religious Houses, they had
often declared, That they would so manage that Affair, in the mean while, until
the sitting of a Council, that it should be visible and apparent to all Men,
that it was not their own private Profit and Advantage which they coveted.

The Emperor having duly considered these things, ordered the Elector of
Brandenburg, again, to tell them in his Name; That he did not grant nor
acknowledge what they bragged of their Religion: That he himself also had a
regard to his own Conscience, and the Salvation of his Soul, and would far less
forsake the Ancient Religion which had been handed down through many Ages, than
they would do theirs: That nothing could now be altered in the Decree already
made; that if they did admit of it, well and good; but if not, that he had
occasion given him, to join with the rest in making a new Decree, and in taking
such Measures, as that the Sects lately sprung up, might utterly be rooted out,
that Peace might be restored to Germany, and the Ancient Faith, Religion, Rites
and Ceremonies be preserved in Force; which were things that belonged properly
to his Care and Duty. That if they would not comply, he would acquaint the
Pope, and other Kings and Princes with all their Disobedience, and make use
both of their Aid and Counsel in the Affair: That to what they said, they had
given no Man any Cause of offense, many things might be alleged to the
contrary, for that their Ministers and Preachers had had no small hand in the
Rebellion and Wars of the Boors, wherein near an hundred thousand Men perished;
and besides, many things had been done within their Territories to the
Ignominy, Reproach and Contempt of the Pope, himself, and the rest of the
States; And that so, they were not so Innocent as they pretended: That it was
out of no private end neither, but mere duty, that the Princes and States had
promised and engaged to him their Services; especially since the Protestants
would not hearken to any Overtures of Concord; that nevertheless it was neither
very honorable nor decent for them to make such a defection, who had formerly
commended and approved the Decree of Worms. In the last place, that he willed
and commanded, That Abbots, Monks, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, whom they
had ejected, should be fully restored to their Possessions; for that their
Sighs and Complaints came daily to his Ears, and that they made continual
Instance unto him for Restitution.

The Protestants having taken some time to deliberate, made answer; That seeing
they could not obtain a Copy of the Decree, nor time to consider of the whole
matter, it was to no purpose for them to urge any farther; and that therefore
they committed their Cause to God, in whom was their Hope of Salvation: That
also what besides, had been objected to them of the Rebellion of the Boors,
they could not in the least be blamed for it, and their Consciences wholly
cleared them of that Guilt; for that it was manifestly known what they had done
at that time, and that they had spared neither Danger nor Cost; it having been
clearly made out also, four Years before, in the Diet of Spire, what the Cause
and Original of that Rebellion had been; at which time it was resolved, That
Ambassadors should have been sent to his Imperial Majesty into Spain, to have
given him an account of the Rise and Progress of the whole matter, but that
that Resolution was altered: That therefore it was not well done, to turn the
Envy of that Accident upon them; and they looked upon it as an Injury; since
that if any Man had ought to lay to their Charge upon that or any other account
whatsoever, they were ready to answer it, and stand a fair Trial at Law: That
therefore they prayed his Majesty not to conceive any heavy Displeasure, nor to
give way to Hatred and Anger against them; seeing they had, no less than the
other States, bequeathed all they could command to his Use and Service. The
Protestants depart from the Diet
When they had thus spoken, they took their Leaves and departed, leaving
Deputies in their Places. But before their Departure, the Electors of Mentz,
Treves and Palatine sent to acquaint the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgraves
Deputies, That what the Marquess of Brandenburg had said of giving Aid and
Assistance for the Defense of Religion, was done without their Orders; that
they had been free to tell the Emperor as much, and that they had no cause of
enmity against them: That therefore, if they had conceived any sinistrous
Opinion of them, they prayed them to lay it aside. The Elector of Saxony
admitted of their Justification, telling them that they might expect all mutual
Love and Friendship also from him. The Day after they went away, the Emperor
assembled all the States, and ordered Truchses, first to tell the Deputies of
the Cities, That they should not offer to be gone, before the Conclusion of the
Diet; and then to declare unto them, what had been acted with the Duke of
Saxony and his Associates; and that seeing the Cities of Strasburg, Constance,
Memmingen and Lindaw, had exhibited a particular Confession of their own, he
would also treat with them, after that other Public Affairs of the Empire, and
among the rest the Turkish War, A great Inundation at Rome.
were taken into Debate. At this time there happened at Rome an extraordinary
Inundation of the Tyber, to the great Terror of the Inhabitants, for the Tide
and Winds from the Sea keeping back the Stream of the River, made it overflow
the Banks, The like in Holland.
and do a great deal of Damage. The like, but much more dreadful Calamity,
happened to the Hollanders and their Neighbors, by an irruption of the Sea,
which breaking through their Dykes and Banks, overflowed and drowned the
Country a great way up.

At length, The Draught of the Decree read to the Deputies of the Cities but a
Copy of it denied to them.
October 13, all the States, except the Protestants, being assembled in the
Court-Hall, the Decree was read over to the Deputies of the Cities; but when
they asked a Copy thereof, it was denied them, and ordered to be read once or
twice more. And now, when for the most part all had approved the same, the
Deputies of Ausburg, Frankford, Vlm and Hall, desired time to consider of it.
Eight Days after the Deputies of the Duke of Saxony and the Associates, went
and told the Archbishop of Mentz, who is chief of the Princes of the Empire,
That if they might be suffered to enjoy their Religion peaceably, until the
sitting of a Council, they would also contribute Money for the Turkish War.
Being therefore sent for next day to appear in Court, there was a certain form
of Pacification read unto them; wherein they only were comprehended, who had
approved the Decree that was made: whereupon a Debate arising, and the Deputies
alleging it concerned not them; or if it did, that it ought to have been
conceived in clearer terms, lest by its ambiguity, it might afterward occasion
dispute; they made answer, That they would make report thereof to the Emperor.
Two days after, the Emperor sent for the Deputies of Strasburg, and their
Associates, to come to his Lodgings; and in the Assembly of the States, ordered
the Confutation of their Confession of Faith to be read; a prolix, and biting
Paper; especially in that part where it treated of the Lord's Supper. The
Authors thereof were, John Faber and Eckius; who having an odious Subject to
descant on, made use of all the severe Reflections they could, that they might
incense the Emperor and Princes. The upshot of all was, That whereas, in
matters of Religion, they professed an Opinion different from all others, and
approved that most grievous Error about the Lord's Supper; That they had also
thrown Images out of the Churches, abolished the Mass, pulled down Public and
Religious Houses, built in former times by the Liberality of Emperors and
Kings; cherished and promoted several Sects, by Books and Pamphlets which they
published, and dispersed amongst the People all over Germany: That therefore he
again required them to retract and embrace the Ancient Religion; for that
otherwise he would certainly do what in Duty he was obliged to do. Some time
after they made answer, That in the Confutation, many things were read,
otherwise than they were contained in their Paper: That some things also were
so bitterly represented, that, if true, they deserved not only censure, but
punishment also; but that these things were not rightly charged upon them: for
that no such thing was done within their Cities; and if any person whosoever,
durst break out into the like Licentiousness, they would certainly be punished
for it: That since then, they had a clear Conscience, that it was a weighty
Cause, and that the Paper was very long, and could not be answered, before they
had made a Report thereof to their Principals; therefore they desired, in the
first place, That a Copy of it might be given to them; and then, that no Credit
should be given to that Charge and Accusation, before their Justification were
heard and examined: That in all other things they were ready to serve his
Imperial Majesty to the utmost of their Power. The Emperor told them, He would
consider on it, and five Days after the Elector of Brandenburg made answer in
his Name; That he could not give them a Copy; for that upon weighty
considerations, the same had been denied to the Duke of Saxony, and that all
farther Dispute about Religion was prohibited: But that if they had a desire to
be reconciled, and to return again into the Bosom of the Church, he would not
refuse them the hearing of the Confutation read once or twice more: But that he
charged them withal, That they would profess the same Religion that the other
Princes and States did, and contribute Aid against the Turk; for that unless
they would give way, and leave off to be so stubborn, he would by the Advice of
the Pope and other Kings, act as it became him.

After some time granted them for Deliberation, they made their Reply, in
presence of all the States; That they had Orders to demand a Copy of what had
been objected against their Confession, that they might send it home; which in
their Opinion was done, not for more Disputes sake, but, that if perhaps, the
Learned Men, of the other side should interpret the meaning of their Paper
otherwise than it ought, or if any Crime might be laid to their Charge, they
might be in a Readiness to answer and justify themselves: That now, since by
what they could retain in Memory of the Confutation read, they perceived that
their Confession was perverted, contrary to the Sense and Meaning of their
Magistrates, and otherwise interpreted than the very Words of it could bear;
that, besides, since many horrid things were reckoned up, which could in no
ways be attributed to them, as they had said before; they therefore again
desired and prayed, that they might have a Copy of the Confutation granted
them, whereby they might be enabled to purge themselves of what was objected
against them; especially seeing in the close of their Confession, they had
begged of the Emperor, That he would refer this Difference about Religion, to
the Determination of a Lawful Council of Germany, being the only way that had
been always looked upon as the most proper and convenient; and that therefore
since they were resolved to maintain no error knowingly, nor to be obstinate
in any thing; they begged again and again, that the Cause might be decided by a
Free and Holy Council: That they would not refuse what should therein be
decreed, according to the Testimony of Holy Scripture: That in the mean time,
they would serve the Emperor with their Lives and Fortunes; and that they had
lately acquainted the Deputies of the Cities, with their Resolutions, as to
their contributing Aid and Assistance for the Turkish War; which was, That if
Peace were settled throughout the Empire, and security given them for the free
Exercise of their Religion, until the meeting of a Council, they were willing
to contribute what in Reason they ought: For that the Year before they had
liberally given, and more too than came to their shares: Which being so, and
that since hitherto they had received no answer, they once more most earnestly
prayed, That Peace might be given to Religion; for that otherwise, though they
might be never so willing, yet they would not be able to contribute any thing.
The Marquess of Brandenburg said, That he would make a Report of it to the
Emperor. In the Afternoon, some Commissioners read unto them a Draught of the
Pacification, wherein they only were comprehended, who should receive the
Decree, as has been said before, of the Duke of Saxony and his Associates.
They made answer, That neither was there a Copy of the Decree given them, nor
were they comprehended therein, so that they could not promise any thing in the
Names of their Principals; and that since the matter was still left at an
uncertainly, they expected to know the Emperor's Pleasure therein, as they had
also declared themselves to the Elector of Brandenburg. The Deputies for the
State of Strasburg in this Diet were James Sturmey and Matthias Pharrer, and
the ^ormer pleaded the Cause with the Emperor and Princes, both in the Name of
his own City, and also of their Confederates. Whilst these Matters were in
Debate, Some Cities urge a Council.
the Cities of Ausburg, Frankford, Vlm and Hall, declined the Decree made about
Religion, and urged a Council: But Faber and Eckius, Faber and Eckius well
rewarded, which occasioned a merry Saying of Erasmus.
for writing the Confutation, demanded and obtained a Reward from the Princes,
promising their Services in defense of the Popish Religion for the future. For
these, as generally all the rest, proposed to themselves Preferment, by the
downfall of Luther; and Faber afterward obtained from King Ferdinand the
Bishopric of Vienna: Hence it was that Erasmus of Rotterdam was wont merrily
to say, That Poor Luther made many Rich.

In the mean time the Deputies of Saxony and the Associates presented a
Petition to the Emperor, praying his Majesty to settle a public Peace
throughout Germany, and not suffer any Man to be molested or brought into
Danger upon account of Religion. On the eleventh of November after, the
Emperor ordered Frederick Prince Palatine to give them this Answer; That
because they had rejected the Decree, he had therefore entered into a
Confederacy with the rest, not offensive but defensive, in case any Violence
should be offered to those who professed the same Religion with him: That what
they demanded, That they might not be sued criminally, nor brought into the
Crown-Office, was unreasonable, since it properly belonged to his Duty, to
administer Justice to all, wherein he could not be empeached, nor have any
thing prescribed unto him. This being all they could obtain, they wrote a
Letter to all the States, wherein having in short, resumed what had past, they
desired that in the close of the Decree, the Names of their Princes might not
be inserted among the rest: And seeing that they had in vain sued for Peace,
they could not contribute any thing toward the War against the Turk: That,
besides, since it was provided by the Decree, That they only should have place
in the Imperial Judicature and Chamber, who had admitted the same Decree, they
desired that might be altered and amended; for that otherwise, they could not
contribute any thing toward the Charges of the Chamber. The Agreement of the
King of Poland, and Marquess Albert of Brandenburg made null.
Having represented these things, November 12, in the Afternoon, they departed.
We told you, in the Fifth Book, That Albert of Brandenburg, swore Allegiance to
the King of Poland, and put himself under his Protection: Now the Emperor
being solicited by Walter Cronberg, res^inded that Transaction, as made in
prejudice of the Empire; and November 14, declared it to be void and null.

Five Days after, the Decree was read in the Assembly of all the States, the
Emperor being present; The Decree of Ausburg.
wherein, after a recapitulation of all the Proceedings, the Emperor Enacted
and Decreed, That they should not be tolerated for the future, who taught
otherwise of the Lord's Supper, than had hitherto been observed: That nothing
should be changed in Public or Private Mass: That Children should be Confirmed
with Chrisme, and Sick People anointed with Consecrated Oil: That Pictures and
Images should not be removed, and where they had been taken away, should be
restored: That the Opinion of those who denied Man's Free Will, should not be
received, because it was brutish, and reproachful to God: That nothing should
be taught, which might any manner of way lessen the Authority and Dignity of
the Magistrate: That that Doctrine of Man's Justification by Faith alone, should
not be admitted: That the Sacraments of the Church should be the same in
Number, and have the same Veneration, as anciently: That all the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, the Offices for the Dead, and the like, should be
observed: That vacant Benefices should be conferred on fit Persons: That
Priests and Churchmen, who were Married, should be turned out of their
Livings, which immediately after this Diet should be given to others; but that
such as forsaking their Wives, should return to their former State, and desire
to be absolved, might be restored by their Bishops, with consent of the Pope or
his Legate: That as for the rest, they should have no Refuge nor Sanctuary, but
be banished, or otherwise condignly punished: That the Priests should lead
honest Lives, wear decent Apparel, and avoid giving of Scandal: That all
unreasonable Compacts and Agreements that Priests have been any where forced to
make; and that all unjust Sale also of Church-Goods, or the application of the
same to Profane Uses, should be void and null: That no Man should be admitted
to Preach, but he that had an Authentic Testimony from a Bishop of the
Soundness of his Doctrine and Conversation: That all should observe the Rule
here prescribed in Preaching, and not venture upon that Expression, which was
usual in Sermons, That some were endeavoring to stifle the Light of the
Gospel: That they should also forbear flouting and reviling: That they should
exhort the People to hear Mass, be diligent in Prayer, to invoke the Virgin
Mary, and the rest of the Saints, keep Holidays, Fast, abstain from Meats
prohibited, and relieve the Poor: That they should put it home to Monks and
other Religious, That it was not lawful to forsake their Order and Profession:
In short, That nothing should be changed in those things that concerned the
Faith and Worship of God: That they who acted otherwise should forfeit Lives
and Goods: That what had been taken from the Clergy, should be restored: That
in those Places where Monasteries and other Religious Houses had been
demolished, they should be rebuilt, and the usual Rites and Ceremonies
performed in them: That they who within the Territories of the Adversaries,
followed the Ancient Faith and Religion, and submitted to this Decree, should
be taken into the Protection of the Empire, and have liberty to depart whither
soever they pleased, without any Prejudice: That Application should be made to
the Pope, about a Council, that within six Months he would call one to meet in
a convenient Place, there to begin with the first Opportunity, and within a
Year at farthest. That all these things should be firm and stable,
notwithstanding any Exceptions or Appeals made or to be made to the contrary:
That to the end this Decree might be observed and put into Execution, in as far
as it concerned Faith and Religion, all Men should be obliged to employ
whatsoever Fortune God has been pleased to bestow upon them, and their Blood
and Lives besides: And that if any Man should attempt any thing against another
by Force, that the Imperial Chamber, upon Complaint thereof made, should warn
the Party that used Force, or offered Hostility, to desist, and sue his
Adversary at Law: That if he obeyed not, he should be prosecuted criminally,
and to an Outlawry, which being published, the neighboring Princes and Cities
should be charged and commanded, forthwith to give Aid and Assistance to him
that was in fear of being assaulted: But that no Man should be admitted into
the Judicature of the Chamber, unless he approved this Decree made about
Religion; and that they who refused to do it, should be turned out.

During this Diet, Luther was at Cobourg, in the Borders of Franconia, by
Command of his Prince, Luther's Book to the Bishops and Prelates.
that he might be the nearer to Ausburg, in case there should have been any
need of his counsel. Now that he might in his absence, contribute what he could
to the Public Good, he wrote a Book to the Bishops and other Prelates in that
Diet, laying before them the state of the Church under the Roman Papacy, how it
had been overspread with thick Darkness, Impious Doctrine, and Foul Errors, and
admonishing them of their Duty, in most weighty and serious Words, he upbraids
them with Cruelty and Bloody-mindedness. Moreover he exhorts them, not to let
slip the Occasion of healing the Evil; alleging, That since his Doctrine agreed
with the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, all counsels taken against God
would be in vain. Luther comforts dejected Melanchthon.
Whilst the Emperor and Papists were thus venting their Rage and Threats
against the Protestants, Melanchthon was very much dejected and disconsolate,
not, indeed, for his own sake, but Posterities, and those who were to come
after, and wholly gave himself over to Grief, Sighing and Tears. But when this
came to Luther's Knowledge, he endeavored to Comfort and Cheer him up by
several Letters; and seeing this was not the Work of Man, but of God Almighty,
he advises him to lay aside all Thoughtfulness and Anxiety, and cast the whole
Burden of it upon him: And why, said he, do you in this manner Afflict and
Torment your self? If God gave his own Son for us, why do we Doubt and Fear,
why are we cast down and dismayed? Is Satan stronger than he? Will he who has
bestowed so great a Blessing upon us, forsake us in smaller Matters? Why are we
afraid of the World, which Christ has overcome? If we maintain a bad Cause,
why do we not change our Mind? If it be Just and Holy, why do we distrust God's
Promises? Certainly the Devil can take nothing from us but our Life; but Christ
lives and reigns for ever, who takes upon him the Defense and Protection of
the Truth; he will not cease to be with us until the consummation of all
things. If he be not with us, pray, where is he to be found? If we be not of
the Church, do you think that the Pope and the rest of our Adversaries are?
Sinners we are, it is true, and that in many things; yet Christ is not therefore
a Liar, whose Cause we maintain. Let Kings and the Nations fret and rage, as
much as they please, he that dwells in Heaven shall hold them in Derision.
God has hitherto, without our Counsel, governed and protected this Cause, he
also will henceforward, bring it to the desired end. What you write of the Laws
and Traditions of Men, may easily be answered: For it is not lawful for any Man
to appoint or choose a new Work, as the Worship of God; since both the first
Commandment, and all the Prophets, condemn such Works. They may, indeed, be a
bodily Exercise; but if they come once to be worshipped, they become Idolatrous.
As for any Reconciliation, it is in vain hoped for; for neither can we depose
the Pope, nor can the True Religion be safe, so long as Popery continues. That
ye give the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in Both kinds, and yield not to the
Adversaries in that, who will have it to be indifferent, you do well; for it is
not in our Power, to appoint or tolerate any thing in the Church, which cannot
be defended by the Word of God. We condemn the whole Church, cry they: But we
say, That the Church was unwillingly surprised and oppressed by the Tyranny of
a divided and half-Sacrament, and is therefore to be excused, in the same
manner as the whole Synagogue was to be excused, when being captive in Babylon,
it observed not the Law, and other Rites of Moses, for it was hindered by
Force, that it could not. Take special heed, that ye grant not too great a
Jurisdiction to Bishops, lest more Trouble ensue thereupon hereafter. For my
part, I dislike all this Treaty about accommodating the Difference in Religion;
for it is all Labor in vain, unless the Pope would utterly abolish his
Kingdom. If they condemn our Doctrine, why do we seek for an Uniformity? if they
approve it, why are the Ancient Errors retained? but they openly condemn it.
All they do then, is but Sham and Dissimulation. They take a great deal of
Pains, as it appears, about Ceremonies: But let them first restore the Doctrine
of Faith and Works: Let them suffer the Church to have Ministers, that will
perform the necessary Duties. They require that Monks may be again put into
possession; but let them, on the other hand, give us back so many Innocent and
Pious Men, whom they have slain; let them restore so many Souls, lost by
Impious and Erroneous Doctrine; let them restore those great Revenues got by
Fraud and Knavery; let them, in short, restore the Glory of God, dishonored by
so many Reproaches. When once they have made Satisfaction as to these things,
then will we reason the case with them, who has the best right to the Goods of
the Church. Bucer Essaies a Reconciliation betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, etc.
Since the chief, and almost sole difference betwixt Luther and some others
was, about the Lord's Supper, as we have said before, and that that exceedingly
rejoiced the Papists, as it grieved the others. Bucer, with the consent of the
Elector of Saxony, and his own Magistrates, went from Ausburg to Luther, to
attempt a Reconciliation, and had a very fair Answer from him; insomuch that he
made a Progress from thence to Zuinglius and the Switzers, that he might essay
to unite them more closely in Mind and Opinion. This, The Landgrave makes a
League with Zurich, Basil and Strasburg, upon account of Religion.
then, being the state of Affairs, and all things tending to Stirs and
Troubles, the Landgrave concluded a League for six Years with the Cities of
Zurich, Basil and Strasburg, That if any Violence should be offered upon the
account of Religion, they should mutually aid and assist one another: And this
League was made in the Month of November.

At the same time the Emperor wrote to the Elector of Saxony, commanding him
to come to Cologne by the 21 day of December, about difficult and weighty
Affairs, ^elating to the Public. The same Day he received this Letter, which
was November 28, he had a Messenger with Letters from the Archbishop of Mentz,
the design whereof, The Elector of Saxony cited by the Archbishop of Mentz, for
choosing a King of the Romans.
was to acquaint him; That the Emperor had desired of him, that he would
assemble the Princes Electors, about the election of a King of the Romans; and
therefore he cited him to be present at Cologne December 29. This thing being
known, the Duke of Saxony forthwith dispatched Letters to the Landgrave, and
the rest of the Protestant Princes and Cities, praying them to meet at
Smalcalde, December 22; but, in the mean time, he sent away in all haste, his
Son John Frederick, with some of his Counselors to Cologne, that they might be
present at the Day appointed by the Emperor. To them he gave Orders to
represent, That the Citation of the Archbishop of Mentz was not legally made;
and that this same creation of a King of the Romans was a signal Violation of
the Right and Liberty of the Empire, The Smalcaldick League among the
Protestants.
and of the Statute of the Emperor Charles IV: And that therefore he did not
ratify nor approve that Proceeding. When all met at Smalcalde, they drew up
the Draught of a League, not Offensive, but altogether for their own Defense.
This was immediately signed by the Princes, as also by Albert and Gebard Counts
of Mansfield, the Cities of Magdeburg and Bremen; but Strasburg, Vlm,
Constance, Lindaw, Memmingen, Kempen, Hailbrun, Ruteling, Bibrach and Isne,
engaged only so far, as that they would acquaint their Principles therewith,
and give the rest a positive Answer within six Weeks, what they intended to do.
It was agreed upon to write to George Marquess of Brandenburg, and the City of
Norimberg, because their Deputies had no Commission to act in that affair. It
was likewise decreed, That Ambassadors should be sent to solicit the King of
Denmark, and the Dukes of Pomerania and Mecklenburg, as also the Cities of
Hamburg, Embden, Northeime, Frankford, Brunswick, Gottingen, Minden, Hannover,
Hildesheim, Lubeck, Stetin, and other Maritime Cities.

When the Pope understood, The Pope's Complaint to the King of Poland.
what the Issue of this Imperial Diet was, he wrote, among others, to the King
of Poland; That he had fully hoped, the Presence and Authority of the Emperor,
would either have quite crushed, or at least, quieted Luther's Heresy: That he
had been put into this Hope from the very first time the Emperor came into
Italy; which had been the chief Cause why he went to Bolonia, that he might
spur him on, though he was forward enough of himself: For if that had
succeeded, it would have secured Religion, and the Salvation of a great many,
who were in great Danger through that Heresy, and then ways might have been
found out for resisting the Fury of the Turks: But now that he understood by
Letters, both from the Emperor and his own Legate, that they were so far from
being reclaimed, they were more and more hardened, he who sat at the Helm, to
steer the Ship of S. Peter, in so tempestuous a time, and bore the greatest
share of all the Care and Trouble, having consulted with the Cardinals, could
not think of any safer Remedy, than that which his Predecessors had had
recourse unto, to wit, a General Council: That therefore he gave him warning,
that when this Design should be accomplished, he would either be present
himself, or by his Ambassadors promote so Holy a Cause; for that so soon as
possibly he could, he would call a Council to meet in some convenient Place in
Italy. This Brief was dated December 1.

The Confederate Princes, The Protestants Letter to the Emperor about the
Election of a King of the Romans.
we named, wrote to the Emperor from Smalcalde, December 24; That they heard,
and it was commonly reported, That he had a Design to have his Brother
Ferdinand chosen King of the Romans, a Dignity which he solicitously courted
and canvassed for: That it was a thing now known to all Men, what Power and
Right the Princes Electors had in that affair, by virtue of the Statute of the
Emperor Charles IV, when upon the Death of the Emperor, another was to be
chosen in the Name of the whole Body of the Empire: That nevertheless, his
Majesty being alive and in Health, and no such case having as yet happened, the
Princes Electors had been summoned by the Archbishop of Mentz, to meet at
Cologne toward the latter end of this Month, quite contrary to the Proscript
of the Law, and the Custom of the Empire: That they likewise heard, That at his
Request, the rest of the Electors were also to be there, that Ferdinand's Suit
and Pretention might be carried by way of Anticipation and Compact; so that
this being the Report that went far and near, they thought good to represent a
few things unto his Majesty; and that though they had rather abstain from this
kind of Discourse, yet for the Love they bore to him, and the Liberty of their
Country handed down to them from their Ancestors; and then, in consideration
that in this Decrepit Age of the World, many things were surreptitiously and
craftily brought to pass, they could not otherwise choose but do it. That in the
first place, then, his Majesty knew, how seriously and solemnly, and by what
express Words and Articles, he had bound and obliged himself to the Empire: How
he had promised by Oath to observe the Caroline Constitution, on which the
Liberty of the Empire chiefly depended; how he had stipulated neither to act
any thing himself contrary thereunto, nor suffer others to do it; which were
Compacts and Promises that could not be violated, broken nor changed, unless
with the Advice and Consent of all the States: But that now, if whilst he was
alive, a King of the Romans should be chosen, and that his own Brother too, who
canvassed and made suit for it; he himself could not but see that it was
plainly contrary to Law, contrary to the Right and Liberty of the Empire, and
contrary to his Compact and Stipulation, and the Faith and Promise, whereby he
bound himself to the State: Nay, and how convenient and uneasy it must also
be, both to himself and the whole Empire, when at the self same time, there
would be two Lords and Masters to be obeyed. And that seeing they would take it
very ill, if they themselves should either be upbraided with the Breach of
Faith and Promise; or with Baseness, in not defending the Rights and Liberty of
the Government; therefore they most earnestly besought his Majesty, to impute
this their Letter, to the love they bore to him and their native Country, and
the present state of the Times: That he would reflect upon things past, and
according to Duty, interpose his Authority for preventing the Election of any
new King, weighing seriously with himself what Evils and Inconveniences might
follow thereupon, unless a Remedy were applied in time: That they would write
of these things to the rest of the Electors also; and were in good Hopes, they
would do what was expedient for the Commonwealth, and endeavor to prevent any
Rupture or Division among the States: That, in fine, they were ready to serve
his Majesty, and do for him, to the utmost of their Power. Afterward the Duke
of Saxony wrote by himself to the rest of the Princes his Colleagues; That since
he was cited by the Archbishop of Mentz to appear at Cologne, he had therefore
sent thither his Son and some Counselors, that in his Name they might propound
and act what should be thought needful: That he believed they had heard already
part of his Thoughts from them; and should hear the rest on December 29: That
however he prayed them to desist from their Purpose, and consider with him,
What Prejudices and Inconveniences, that Action would bring with it, both to
themselves, and to their Posterity also, through the Violation of the Rights,
Dignity and Liberty of the Empire: That it was his Desire also, That in those
things which his Son and Counselors might treat of with them, they would so
behave themselves, as it might plainly appear, That the Interest of the
Public, and their native Country, were dear unto them. At the same time the
Duke of Lunenburg, the Landgrave, and the Counts of Anhalt and Mansfield, wrote
at large to the Electors, to the same purpose, seriously advising them, that
they would not offer such Injury to the Laws and Rights of their Country; and
the rather, since it was a common Report, That there were Bribes and Promises
in the case, which was directly contrary to the Caroline Constitutions.
Afterward, on the last of December, both the Princes and Cities, we named
before, wrote to the Emperor a common Letter, in all their Names; wherein they
resumed all the Proceedings at Ausburg, what Solicitations they had made for
Peace, what Answer his Majesty made at length, especially concerning the
Actions of the Crown, and what kind of Decree was afterward made there; and
that though his Majesty had himself qualified that Expression of the Elector of
Brandenburg, by telling them that the Agreement he had made with the rest of
the Princes, was not Offensive, but only for the Defense of himself and Cause;
yet, nevertheless, if that Authority specified in the Decree, should be given
to the Imperial Chamber, who could doubt but that it might extend to Force and
Violence? Since therefore both they and their Ancestors, had given evident
Proofs of their Zeal and Affection, both toward him and his Predecessors, they
prayed, That as he had in Word softened that Expression of the Elector of
Brandenburg's, so he would also really and indeed mitigate and put a stop to
those Prosecutions of the Chamber, that they might have assurance, until the
meeting of a Free and Holy Council, that they needed not be afraid of any
thing: And that if they could obtain this at his Majesty's Hands, they would
hereafter, as in Times past, contribute their Money, Aid and Assistance, not
only toward the Turkish War, but also for the other Public Uses of the
Government.

In the first meeting of the Princes Electors at Cologne, The Reasons of
creating a King of the Romans.
the Emperor gave these Reasons for creating a King of the Romans. Because he
himself had several Kingdoms and People to govern, and could not be always in
Germany: Because Christendom, and especially Germany, was in a Troublesome and
Dangerous State, by Reason of the Difference in Religion, the Power and Force
of the Turks, the late Insurrection and Rebellion of the Boors, and because
many things were undutifully and disobediently acted in Germany; for that
though by their own Advice and Consent, in former Years, there had been a
Senate and Judicature of the Empire appointed, yet it was not obeyed, as it
ought to have been: And that therefore it seemed absolutely necessary to him,
for the Welfare of the State, that a King of the Romans should be chosen, who
might under him, and in his absence, be, as it were, another Head of the
Empire; that he ought to be a Man of Parts, Vigilant, Industrious and Powerful,
a Lover of Peace and Concord, acquainted with the Affairs of the Empire, and in
short, altogether such, as he himself might Trust and Rely upon: But that he
knew no Man more capable, of that Province, than his own Brother Ferdinand,
King of Bohemia and Hungary; whose Limits and Kingdoms were as a Wall and
Rampart for the Safety and Preservation of Germany against the cruelty of the
Turks. 1531.
The Princes Electors, after deliberation had, praid the Emperor that he would
not leave Germany, but settle his Court and Residence in it: Ferdinand declared
King of the Romans.
But he persisting in his Purpose, on the Fifth of January they declared
Ferdinand King of the Romans. The Elector of Saxony did all he could, which was
to make his Son give Reasons why he could not approve that Election, and to
protest against it as illegal. Long before the Diet of Ausburg broke up, there
was a Report spread abroad, That Ferdinand would be promoted to that Dignity.
From Cologne they went all afterward to Aix la Chapelle, where King Ferdinand
was Installed on the eleventh of January; who presently dispatched Letters to
give notice of it all over Germany: The Emperor also commanded by
Proclamation, That all should own him for King of the Romans, and wrote
separately to the Protestants, to the same purpose. In the mean while that the
Emperor was at Cologne, the Protestants Letter was delivered unto him, wherein
they desired to be exempted from the Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber, as
we said before. Thereunto he made answer at Aix la Chapelle, January 13, by the
Mouth of Frederick Prince Palatine; That they needed not to go any farther, or
wait longer for any Answer; for that he had not as yet considered of it, but
that he would in time think on what answer he should give them. Having done so,
he went into Brabant, a Province of the Netherlands.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK VIII.
The CONTENTS.
The Princes assembled at Smalkalde dispatch Letters to the Kings of England
and France, wherein they let them understand what false Reports are gone abroad
against them. They solicit the King of Denmark, and the Maritime Cities to
join with them in the League, as far as they shall think it convenient. The
Switzers are not admitted into this Confederacy. The King of France returns an
Answer to the Protestants Letters, and the King of England does the same. The
Ambassadors of the Cities deliver in at Franckford their Sentiments concerning
the Creation of a King of the Romans, and there likewise the Controversy
between the Bishop of Bamburg and George Duke of Brandenburg is agitated. The
Emperor appoints a Diet to meet at Spiers, to which the Elector of Saxony
refuses to come. There are some Conditions laid down, upon which the
Protestants do promise to make their appearance there. A Civil War breaks out
between those of Zurich and the five Confederate Cantons; in which Zuinglius is
slain: Soon after OEcolampadius departs this life. A Treaty is held about
entering into a Peace with the Protestants, till such time as a Council should
sit. -- Christiern King of Denmark is taken Prisoner. Solomon the Grand
Seignior invades Austria, and is driven out of it again. The Elector of Saxony
dies. The Pope sends an Ambassador into Germany, to propound certain Rules and
Methods for the holding of the intended Council; to each of which the Duke of
Saxony, having diligently considered the matter, returns a very full Answer
within a few days.

IN the former Convention at Smalkalde, this, among other things, was agreed
upon, that since the Adversaries were very busy in throwing dirt upon their
Cause, and endeavored every where by numerous Calumnies to bring their
Profession of the Gospel into Disgrace, the Kings of England and France should
in the first place be written to, that they would not suffer themselves to be
influenced by such false Reproaches. Accordingly on the 16 day of Febr. The
Protestants Letters to the Kings of England and France.
the Dukes of Saxony, Brandenburg, Lunenburg, and the Lantgrave, together with
the Cities of Strasburg, Nurenburg, Magdeburg, and Vlm, did, both in their own
Names, and in the Names of the several Princes and Cities, their Allies,
dispatch Letters of the same purport to both those Princes. That they could not
but know how of a long time Complaint had been made against Ecclesiastical
Corruptions; which had often been observed, and with much Gravity reprehended
by many eminent Men; and of late, for instance, by John Gerson in France, and
John Colet in England. That the same thing had of late years happened in
Germany; where a sort of Expiations, commonly called Indulgences, had been
carried up and down by certain Monks, which to the great Reproach of
Christianity, and the eminent endangering of men's Salvation, they every where
recommended, and in an infamous manner exposed to sale; whereupon they were by
some very good and learned Men gently admonished not to do so any more; but so
far were they from desisting, that they flew with great Indignation in the face
of their Monitors; which put these upon a necessity of undertaking the defense
and vindication of the Truth; and upon this occasion they were forced to
inspect and censure several other Practices. On the other side the Adversaries,
who by their impudent Tricks, and holy Cheats had given the great occasion of
Scandal, never rested till they had procured this Doctrine (which was thus
advanced against their trifling Impostures) to be condemned as Impious, before
any just or legal Cognizance had been taken of it; and to the end that they
might utterly crush and sink it, they had found out ways to render it highly
odious both to the Emperor and other Princes. But Truth, like the Sun,
displaying it is light, made it manifest to all, beyond the possibility of
denying, that many ill things, through the depravity of some Men's judgments,
had crept into the Church. That the States of the Empire had in the first Diet,
which the Emperor held at Worms, exhibited many things by way of Petition,
which they said ought of necessity to be redressed. Afterward, when the matter
had along time been debated in several other Conventions of the Empire between
the States and the Emperor's Ambassadors, it was adjudg'd by the unanimous
consent of all, That the best and most expeditious way of ending the
Controversy would be by a free Council of the Christian World. That the
Emperor too was well pleased with this Method, as soon as he knew of it; and
from that time the matter under deliberation was the time and place for holding
the Council, as may appear from the Decrees that then were made. But when the
Emperor was come from Spain, The Protestants Confession at Anspurg
through Italy into Germany, his whole endeavor at the Diet of Auspurg was,
that the matter might be taken up without a Council; which they believed he did
with a good intent, and therefore they made a public recitation of their
Confession in that Assembly, which they presented to him, and offered, if there
should be occasion, a farther Explication of it: That soon after a Writing was
recited in answer to this their Confession; of which when they requested a Copy
from the Emperor, they could not obtain it, but upon such a condition, as might
have proved dangerous and ensnaring unto them. After this there were some
chosen out of the whole number to be as it were Umpires and Arbitrators in the
Case: but neither could they so agree, although 'twas professed on their side,
that they would do any thing that might be done with a safe Conscience: Then
were there some Proposals made by the Emperor to be observed till the time that
a Council might be called; but of such a nature, that they could not comply
with them, without offending God, and injuring their own Consciences. The
Protestants Appeal to a free Council.
But when after all, a very harsh Edict had been set forth by the Emperor, they
were then of necessity constrained to Appeal to a free Religious Council. And
although this be the true state of the Case, this the present condition of
Affairs; although they desire nothing more than that their Cause may be fairly
heard and known; yet they are informed that their Adversaries make it their
sole business to exasperate the Emperor and other Princes against them by
scandalous Reports; that several Opinions, unjustly imputed to them, are
scattered up and down; such as are not only dissonant from Holy Writ, but even
from common sense; such, as should any one endeavor to propagate within their
Dominions, he would not escape unpunished. Again, how great the dangers are
wherewith they are threatened upon the score of their Profession, there is no
body but plainly sees; in which certainly they would never involve themselves,
were they not assured, that this their Doctrine is agreeable to the Word of God,
and therefore to be adhered to for the Glory of his holy Name. Tho on the other
side their Adversaries did insinuate with Strangers, Calumny against the
Protestants.
that they did not embrace this kind of Doctrine upon any religious account, but
only for an opportunity of invading the Goods of the Church; but that this
Calumny had already been answered in the former Diets, and would still be more
particularly refuted in a general Council. In the mean time wise and judicious
Men, upon comparing their dangers and advantages together, might easily see,
that this Charge is no less absurd and ridiculous, than it is cruel and
malicious. For is it possible that there should be any Church Possessions
within their Territories so great, that for their sakes they should so
evidently hazard their Reputation and Honor, their Wives and Children, their
Lives and Estates? Can there be any advantages so dear and charming, to which
they would not mightily prefer the Favor of the Emperor and such glorious
Kings as themselves? Certain it is, that their Ancestors and Forefathers had
not only lived in Splendour at home, but also helped to sustain the Public
Charge, without laying hands upon consecrated Goods; nay they erected and
liberally endowed several new Churches, as likewise enriched and beautified the
old ones. As to the Ecclesiastical Possessions within their Dominions, they are
but moderate, and though they are necessary for the Support of those Ministers,
who are appointed for the Instruction of the People, and whose annual Incomes
are now grown very slender; yet do they not refuse, if a Council shall judge it
fit, to have them converted to other pious Uses; provided it be such a Council
where prejudice and partiality do not prevail. But this above all is the
foulest Scandal, this the highest and most dangerous Charge, that the Doctrine,
which they profess, tends to the subversion of Magistrates, and to the
enervating the force of Laws: but to this Accusation an Answer was given in
that Writing, which they exhibited and recited at Auspurg. Nay this moreover
may be said, that the learned Men of these times have done more toward the
adorning of Magistracy, and maintaining the Dignity of Laws, than any former
Age has done: for they made it their business so to instruct and form the
minds of Men, that the Magistrate himself might clearly understand his station
and condition of life to be highly acceptable to God; and the People on the
other part might be sensible, that Honor and Obedience to the Magistrate was
required from them by the Law of God, who would not hold him guiltless who
should offer Contempt to the Power ordained by Him. Besides, since they
themselves by the Divine bounty are appointed Governors over others, what a
madness must it be for them to tolerate such a Doctrine, as would let loose the
reigns upon the necks of Men, dissolve their Obedience, and arm the People
against themselves? What their present sense is of the Governors of the Church
they have manifestly declared in the foresaid Writing, viz. That they are
convinced of the legality of administering Ecclesiastical Affairs, and that the
Ministry of the Word, or the Power of the Keys is entertained by them with the
greatest Veneration.

And now since they understand themselves to be loaded with these and such like
Imputations; and being sensible how much it would be for the Public Interest,
that they, who are Princes of so great prudence and authority, should have a
right and regular understanding of the Cause; they were therefore willing, for
the better clearing of themselves, to acquaint them thoroughly with these things
in writing, and humbly to entreat them that they would not give Credit to those
Calumnies, nor entertain any sinister opinion of them; but that they would keep
themselves unprejudiced, till they have an opportunity given them publicly to
clear themselves, which is the thing they most earnestly desire. They likewise
beseech them to use their Interest with the Emperor, that, since the greatness
of the Cause, and the good of the whole Church requires it, he would convene a
free and religious Council in Germany as soon as may be; and that he would not
determine too severely against them, till the matter was legally debated and
decided.

For that hitherto they had always faithfully discharged their Duty to the
Empire, and that it is neither out of covetousness nor petulancy, but for the
Glory of God, and in Obedience to his Commands, that they now make Profession
of this Doctrine, for which they are called in question: And this it is that
gives them the greater hopes that their Requests will not be rejected by them:
For it must needs highly redound to their Honor, if by their Authority and
Interposition they could so bring it about, that these Controversies might not
be decided by the Sword, but that a right Judgment might be made of things,
that so these Distempers might be healed, and the Churches reconciled, and no
violence offered to the Consciences of Men. Lastly, they should esteem it a
very signal Favor, if they would let them understand by Letters their Pleasure
in this Affair.

In the month of February the Elector of Saxony summoned all his Allies to make
their Appearance at Smalcalde on the 29th day of March, A Convention of the
Protestants at Smalcalde.
there to concert about making a Defense against any Hostile attempt that might
be made. These were those Princes and Cities we before mentioned; but the Duke
of Saxony being himself ill, sent thither his Son John Frederick. In the former
Convention it was agreed upon to solicit Frederick King of Denmark, together
with the Saxon and Martime Cities concerning the League. Therefore now at their
second meeting, that Transaction is reported, together with what Answer each of
them did make. The Dane replied, That truly the Doctrine of the Gospel was very
dear unto him; but that he had in his Kingdom many Bishops, who were very
powerful as well in Wealth as in their dependencies and conjunction with the
Nobility; and therefore it would not be safe for him to enter into the League
as King; but however he refused not to do it in right of those his Provinces,
which held of the Empire. Henry of Mecklenburg excused himself upon the account
that his Ambassadors had subscribed the Augustane Decree; however he promised
that he would not be their Enemy. Bernin Prince of Pomerania said, That he was
not at all averse, but that the chief management of affairs was yet wholly in
the hands of his elder Brother. The Lubeckers did not decline it, but said it
ought to be considered that they had been at vast Expenses in the War; and if
Christiern King of Denmark, who was driven from his Kingdom, should attempt any
thing, they desired to know what Assistance they might expect from them. The
Lunenburgers declared, That they would do whatever should seem good to Ernestus
their Prince. The next things that fell under their deliberation were the
procuring of Votes for the speedy raising of Forces, the Contribution of money
for the keeping up those Forces, the choice of Commanders, and the admitting
those into the League, which were willing to come in; the appointment likewise
of Proctors and Advocates, who might answer for them in Court, if any Suit
should arise in the Exchequer, either by the Command of the Emperor, or the
Solicitation of others. To this branch of the defense George Duke of
Brandenburg, together with the Cities of Nuremburg, Camin, and Heilsburg do
make themselves Parties, though the League it self they refused. It was farther
decreed, That all notorious Enormities should be severely punished in each of
their Dominions. But before they entered into the League, not only the Lawyers,
but Divines also were admitted into the Consult. It had indeed been always the
Doctrine of Luther, That Magistrates ought not to be resisted, and upon this
Subject there was a Book of his Extant. But when the Learned in the Law had in
this Consult declared, That Resistance is sometimes permitted by the Laws, and
had shown that the present State of affairs was such, as the Laws, in relation
to that case, do particularly mention; Luther ingenuously confessed that indeed
he had been ignorant of this Legality: But now since the Gospel, according to
his constant Doctrine, does not militate against, nor abolish political Laws;
and since things might so fall out in these perilous and difficult times, that
not only the Law it self, but also necessity of Conscience might call upon them
to Arm; he therefore pronounces that they may justly make a League in their own
defense, if either the Emperor himself, or any body else in his Name, should
make War upon them. He likewise publishes a Writing, wherein he expresses how
obstinate the Papists had been in the Diet of Auspurg, and then strictly
charges all Men not to yield Obedience to those Magistrates that should command
their assistance in such a War. And having ripped up the many grievous Errors of
the Popish Doctrines, he tells them, that whoever list themselves on that side,
do take up Arms in defense of those Errors; and this he says is highly wicked
and sinful. Having therefore shown them how much the minds of Men were in these
days enlightened by the knowledge of the Gospel, he exhorts them to forbear
associating themselves in so impious a War.

Some of the Cities had so dealt with those of Zurich, Bern and Basil, that
they promised not to refuse the League, provided they might be admitted
indefinitely without exception to any of their Opinions; which John Frederick
promised he would report unto his Father. As to what was propounded about
providing for their defense, the Cities declare, That they will give in their
full Answer in relation to that business in the next Assembly at Franckfort:
and as to the creating a King of the Romans the Princes determine, as before,
That they will not yield Obedience. And since the Emperor had by his Letters
commanded them to acknowledge Ferdinand for King of the Romans, it was agreed
that the Prince of Saxony should in the mean time draw up the Form of an
Answer, which should be produced in public at Franckfort; and that then the
Cities likewise should declare their Sentiments about creating King Ferdinand.
The fourth of June is the day appointed for the Convention of Franckford. In
the mean time, during their stay at Smalcalde, News of the Turks Incursions.
they receive Letters from the Emperor, to acquaint them, that he is from all
parts alarmed with the news of the Turks design to invade Germany with a
mighty Army; his Commands therefore are, that they contribute their Aids
without any Exception. They, after the manner of their Ancestors, do declare,
that they will not decline the sustaining any Charge, or the doing any good
Office, which they owe to the Public; but that he himself must needs know,
what was the purport of the Elector of Brandenburg's Speech at the Diet of
Auspurg, which yet he himself did afterward in some measure qualify, as
likewise what was then and there decreed concerning the Imperial-Chamber; that
they then did make it their earnest request that he would by his authority set
aside all actions that might be issued out from the Imperial-Chamber upon the
score of Religion; but being then not able to prevail, they had some few months
since renewed their Requests, both by their Letters and Ambassadors; but could
obtain no other answer, but what the Palatine Frederick had at length given
their Ambassadors, viz. That 'twas to no purpose for them to proceed or expect
any farther; but that he would at his own leisure consider what answer was fit
to be made. This they confess was much beside their expectation, however they
could not imagine, but that some time or other something would have been
offered by way of answer.

Now in that they are urged to contribute their assistance against the Turk,
before they have made their own Peace at home; the World may easily judge how
dangerous and inconsiderate an action it would be in them to part with their
own Defenses, and as it were ham-string themselves in so difficult a juncture,
when they can hardly expect any thing at home but Confiscations and Violence.
For should actions be let loose upon them from the Exchequer upon the account
of Religion, who can doubt but this would be a direct act of violence? they
therefore again and again entreat him, that he would come to some determination
at last, and afford them some peace and security, by suspending all Exchequer
actions till the time of a Council; that they on their parts would to the
utmost of their power endeavor to discharge their duty not only in this War
against the Turks, but also in all other concerns of the Public. Their farther
request is, that he would acquaint them by these Ambassadors what his
Resolutions are in this affair.

In the month of March, The death of the Archbishop of Trier^.
Richard Archbishop of Triers departed this life, whose authority among the
Electors was very considerable, both for his great experience in affairs, and
his endeavors after Liberty. There was some suspicion of Poison, and one of
his Domestics being put to the Torture, did by his hardiness and constancy
escape the danger. At the earnest request which those of Vlm did make to the
Senate of Strasburg, Bucer was sent unto them, who by the help of Oecolampadius
and Ambrose Blauret constituted Churches within their Territories, and drew up
for them a religious Form. The Queen of Hungary is made Governess of the
Netherlands.
About this time there came into the Netherlands Mary the Emperors own Sister,
whose Husband, as we said before, was Lewis King of Hungary. She was by the
Emperor substituted Governess of all those Provinces in the room of Margaret
his Aunt, lately deceased. There was a Contest between Clement the Seventh and
Alfonsus Duke of Ferrara about Regiun and Modena, The Emperor is made Umpire
between the Pope and the Duke of Ferrara.
which by mutual consent they submitted to the Arbitration of the Emperor; who,
being at this time in the Low Countries, pronounces for the Duke of Ferrara.

The King of France on the 21 of April returns this answer to the Letters which
were sent him from the Princes and Cities. That there is nothing which he more
heartily wishes for, The King of France his Answer to the Protestants.
than the Peace of Europe, and that he is not a little pleased to find their
Inclinations that way, and that to this end they desire a Council may be
called, which to him seems not only convenient but necessary. For where ever
mention is made of healing the Public Breaches, there it is always his
judgment, that they cannot possibly lay a firmer Foundation for it, than by
calling in the Blessed Spirit, that gracious discoverer of Truth, to their
assistance: and would but the rest come to this Resolution; was there but a
place free from all danger or suspicion set apart for the Council, where every
one might have liberty to speak freely his Opinion, and where no allowance
should be given to prejudice, then indeed they might reasonably hope for a
prosperous Issue. As to the Concern they have lest he should be alienated from
them by the false Criminations of their Adversaries, they have no reason to
fear; for it had been his constant custom not to pronounce any thing rashly,
even against the Reputation of his Enemies,: But since there is so close and so
ancient a Friendship between the Kings of France and the Princes of the Empire,
what a grand Barbarity would it be to entertain any sinister opinion against
these his Friends and Allies, before their Cause is heard? Now how great a
value he sets upon this ancient Alliance, is visible from hence, that even when
there is War between him and the Emperor, the Germans and Citizens of the
Empire have always found an open ingress into France, and a regress from
thence, where they have the advantage of Trading as freely as if they were at
home; so that France may properly be called A Mansion of the Princes and
Citizens of Germany. These Privileges are very well known, and yet they are
not so great, but that he will take an opportunity much to enlarge them for
their sakes, especially if, according to their Declaration, they will stand to
the Decrees of a religious and free Council. For that the Controversy (as they
desire) may be decided rather by Arguments than the Sword, seems to him not
only most equitable, but also most safe for the Public, which must needs be
brought into a most miserable condition, should the matter come to be
determined by Arms.

What he speaks concerning the Affinity between Germany and France, How the
French and Germans come to be akin.
is thus made out. The German Franks that were Borderers upon Schwaben, having
made an Irruption, and overrun those of Triers, Kesel, Morini, Hainault,
Amiens, Beauvais and Soissons, set down at length in that part of Gaul, which
from them was called France and retains it is name till this very time, of which
Province Paris is the Capital City. And when many of their Kings had reigned
there by Succession, and enlarged their Borders, the Government at length
descended to King Pipin and his Son Charles, who for the vastness of his
Exploits was called The Great; How Charles the Great was saluted Emperor.
he, when he was the fourth time at Rome, was by the Pope and all the People
saluted August Emperor, and took Possession of Germany, Italy and France; his
Son Lewis also, and those that descended from him, were Kings of France. Hither
it is therefore that King Francis traces his Original, and derives his Pedigree
from the Stock of the Franks. The same Wheedle he some years since made use of,
when after the death of Maximilian he affected the Imperial Dignity. For
knowing that the ascent to this Honor was precluded to all Foreigners by an
ancient Law, he had a mind this way to demonstrate himself to be a German. But
the truth of it is, the last King of France of the Male-Line of Charles the
Great was Lewis the Fifth, Lewis the Fifth the last of Charle's Race.
who died without Children in the year of our Lord 988, when the Possession of
the Kingdom had been in that Family for the space of 238 years. After his death
the right of Succession devolved to Charles Duke of Lorain, Uncle to Lewis by
the Father's side: but Hugh Capet, said to be Earl of Paris (whose Mother
through a long Genealogy traced her Kindred up to Charles the Great) having
vanquished and taken the Duke of Lorain, Hugh Capet Invades the Kingdom.
invaded the Kingdom, and transmitted it to his Son Robert, whose Male-Issue
was continued down by Succession even to this Francis. There are some who
affirm, that this Capet was of a very mean and obscure Parentage; but most
Historians deny that, and ascribe unto him the same Original, that I have done.

Henry* the Eighth King of England returned his Answer on the third of May,
That he was to his great Satisfaction informed by them, The King of England's
Answer to the Protestants.
that their great aim and design was to heal the Distempers of the Church, and
procure a Reformation of those things, which either through the naughtiness or
ignorance of men had been depraved and corrupted, without doing any injury to
Religion, or disturbing the Public Peace. That he takes it very kindly, that
they had in their Letters given him a Scheme of the whole Action: for there had
been a Report raised to their disadvantage, as if they gave Protection to
certain mad Men, who endeavored to confound and level all things. But that he
had given no Credit to these Reports, as well because Christian Charity so
required, as because he judged it impossible that such Crimes could stick to
such illustrious, wise, and noble Persons. And though he never would have
believed any of those things which were thus reported of them without a certain
demonstration, yet he is very glad to see them take this method of clearing
themselves, because it confirms that judgment and opinion he always had of
them. As to their desire of rectifying Abuses, in that they may expect both
his, and all good Men's concurrence with their Endeavors: For such is the
condition of Humane affairs, that as in the body Natural, so likewise in the
Politic, and in all public Administrations, there is almost a continual
occasion for remedies. Those Physicians therefore deserve the greatest
Applause, who so apply their Medicines as to heal the Wound, or cure the
Disease, without exasperating the parts; and he does not doubt but their
Endeavors have such a tendencies as this. However they ought diligently to
beware of a sort of Men, who aim at Innovations, and Preach up Levelling
Principles, and endeavor to render Magistracy contemptible; for that he lately
met with some persons of this Leaven within his own Dominions, who were come
thither out of Germany. And since they make mention in their Letters of the
Reverence due to Magistrates, he therefore gives them this short advice, that
they would not open a gap to any Licentiousness this way; and if they use but a
sufficient Caution in this Point, their Endeavors after a Reformation will
prove a kindness of the highest Import to the Public. As for a public
Council, there is nothing which he more desires; and his Prayers to God are,
that he would inspire the hearts of the Princes with care and diligence in that
Affair: That he hopes all things well of them, and there is nothing which he
would refuse for their sake; he will likewise earnestly intercede with the
Emperor, that some terms of Accommodation may be found out, and in this
business he will so behave himself, as they at their several opportunities
shall judge most convenient.

When at the day appointed they were assembled at Frankfort, The Opinions of
the Cities concerning a King of the Romans.
the Ambassadors of the Cities, according to appointment, declare their
Sentiments concerning the Creation of a King of the Romans. That after mature
deliberation they conclude it not at all advisable to raise an unnecessary
Squabble, or create to themselves danger about giving the Title to King
Ferdinand. For as long as the Emperor is alive, and within the Bounds of his
Empire, the whole Sovereign Power is in his Hands; but in his absence, the
chief Administration indeed falls upon Ferdinand; but still he must execute in
the Emperor's Name, and as his Substitute. That they had several times offered,
as much as lay in their Power, a resignation of all their Affairs to the
Emperor: and should they now oppose the creation of a King, they must expect
that most Men would upbraid them with the falseness and vanity of their
promise, and so upon that account become their enemies; and thus they should
draw upon them the enmity of many, who otherwise upon the score of their
Religion would never have acted against them. There is likewise great danger
lest others should by these Measures be deterred from entering into the League,
who might otherwise have complied. For these Reasons they think it is not safe
for them to oppose Ferdinand in this business. They will therefore carry
themselves indifferent as to the matter of the Election, which way soever it
goes. But should Ferdinand Command any thing contrary to the Word of God, they
will then by no means obey; and should he make any forceable Attempts, they
will then act according to the form of the League, and contribute all they can
toward a Defense.

But the Princes write thus to the Emperor and to Ferdinand; that they cannot
possibly approve of any thing that is acted contrary to the Customs and Liberty
of the Empire, and therefore cannot confer upon him the Title of King of the
Romans. But the Duke of Saxony adds this in his Letters to the Emperor, That if
the matter be carried on in a legal way, he will not show himself unlike his
Ancestors. The reason why the Switzers are not admitted into the League.
Concerning the admittance of the Helvetians into the League, which the Cities
very much desire, the Duke gives in this Answer by his Ambassadors; that he
cannot enter into any Society with them, because they entertain a different
Opinion concerning the Lord's Supper. He is not indeed ignorant of how great
consequence their Accession would be upon the account of their Strength and
Power; but this is what he least of all regards, lest the event thereof should
prove as dismal, as is recorded in Scripture to have fallen upon them, who for
the strengthening of themselves, had recourse to any sort of unlawful
Assistances.

During this Assembly there were Letters brought from the Duke of Saxony and
the Lantgrave, to the Ambassadors of the other Princes and Cities, the Contents
of which were to this effect: That the Emperor had permitted the Bishop of
Mentz and Lewis the Prince Palatine to be Mediators of a Peace, who by their
Letters had desired that they likewise on their parts would give them the same
permission, and that then they would appoint a day for a Meeting. After some
deliberation the Ambassadors do return their consent; and then the Lantgrave
and the Duke of Saxony make the Mediators this Answer, That they are not
against the Expedient, provided the Exchequer will be quiet in the mean time;
this therefore being obtained of the Emperor, they appoint the 30th of August
for the day of Meeting. The Cities which had their Ambassadors in this
Convention were these; Strasburg, Vlm, Lubesk, Nuremburg, Constance,
Rutelingen, Memmingen, Lindaw, Bibrach, Isenach, Kempen, Hailbrun, Magdeburg,
Bremen, Brunswick and Gottingen.

Wigand Bishop of Bamburg had some years before made a Complaint to his
Associates of the Schwaben Confederacy against George Duke of Brandenburg, The
Controversy between the Bishop of Bamburg and the Duke of Brandenburg.
the substance of which was this; That he had disturbed him in his
Ecclesiastical Rights, that he had very much sunk his Customs, that he had
converted the Revenues of the Church to other uses, and forced the Priests into
this Novel and false Religion, or else ejected them for their noncompliance.
All which things are not only a Violation of the Pope's and Emperor's Edicts,
but also of common Equity and the Laws of the Country; and since he highly
suffers by them, he desires, that they would either by their Interest and
Authority reduce him to his Duty, or else afford him such Assistance, as they
are obliged to by the League, whereby he may be enabled for the time to come to
defend his own, and recover what he had lost. But when after various Disputes,
a day was appointed for the hearing of this Cause at Nordlingen, the
Ambassadors of the Protestants, at the Brandenburger's entreaty, came thither
in the month of July. With the Bishop of Bamburg were the Bishops of Auspurg,
Wurtzburg and Aichstadt, as his Assistants and Counselors. The Plaintiff puts
in his Charge, wherein he sets forth how great Injury and Damage he had
sustained; and withal declares, that notwithstanding the Associates of the
League had under a penalty commanded the Defendant to desist from his
Undertaking, and to restore the Plaintiff to his own, yet nothing as yet had
been effected. He therefore prays that he may be proceeded against according to
the Prescript of the League. The Defendant on the other side demurs to that
part of the Charge which properly belongs to Religion and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, The Elector of Brandenburg's Appeal to a Council.
and Appeals from their Edicts and Decrees to a Council. But they after some
days intermission, reply that they very much wonder, he should put in such an
Appeal as this; because it is unusual and against the Prescript of the League,
which takes care, that the Plaintiff and Defendant shall be both concluded by
the Determination of select Judges: That in this they had all agreed, to defend
the Ecclesiastical Liberties, and therefore the Cognizance of this Cause does
properly belong to them. And since He himself had hitherto without any
exception acknowledged their Jurisdiction, with what reason could he now reject
it? As for a Council, they are not by any means to be superseded by that, nor
ought the Preference to be given unto it in this matter: for these reasons
therefore they do not accept his Appeal, but proceed to confirm their former
Edicts; and if he will not yield Obedience, they declare that they must proceed
against him according to the Stipulation. The Defendant on the contrary
protests, that he will stick to his Appeal in what relates to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nor will he take any notice of their Sentence.
This Cause was managed by the Duke of Brandenburg, both in his own Name, and
upon the account of his Nephew Albert, Son to his Brother Casimire, whose
Guardian he was.

In the mean time the Emperor appoints a Diet of the Empire to convene at
Spiers upon the Sixth of September, A Diet appointed at Spiers.
for the composing of Religious Differences: But upon the 21th of August there
came to the Duke of Saxony the Counts of Nassaw and the Count de Newenar, Men
of great Reputation for their Virtue; and being permitted by the Emperor to
treat of a Reconciliation, Arbitrators for a Peace apply themselves to the Duke
of Saxony.
they to that end lay down five Propositions, relating to the Supper of our
Lord, Ecclesiastical Rites, the Goods of the Church, Assistance against the
Turk, and the Election of King Ferdinand. But when it appeared from their
Discourse, that the Emperor lay under a persuasion, as if the Duke was a
Favourer both of Zuinglius his Doctrine and of the Anabaptists: His answer was,
That it is sufficiently known from the Augustine Confession what kind of Doctrine
it is which he professes, and which the Ministers within his Dominions do
Preach in the Churches: That it is farther plain, that while he was at the Diet
of Auspurg, he had held no Correspondence with those who are reputed
Zuinglians; nor yet afterward, till they had given him an explication of their
Opinion: That he still continues in the same mind, and shall, by the Grace of
God, till his last breath, persist in that Doctrine, of which he made profession
at Auspurg: he therefore prays, that, as to that point, they will vindicate him
to the Emperor. They tell him that, as for their parts, they were before very
well satisfied of his Innocence, and will therefore do him justice to the
Emperor, to whom they doubt not but this will prove very pleasing and
acceptable News. As to the other Propositions, they were pleased to refer them
to the next Imperial Diet. However they entreated him that he would either come
himself in Person to that Diet, or at least send thither his Son. His Answer
was, that truly he was desirous in all things to oblige the Emperor, but that
he was now very aged, and altogether unfit to undertake a Journey; besides he
had in reserve several weighty Reasons why he could neither come himself, Upon
what Conditions the Duke of Saxony will come to the next Diet.
nor yet send his Son thither, for he had met both at Spiers and Auspurg with
some things, which were none of the best Presidents; so that unless the Emperor
would publicly pass his Word for the safety both of himself and his Friends,
they could by no means make their Appearance. Besides, in what place soever he
was, he could not be without the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Preaching of the
Word of God; nor could he endure that in the matter of Diet any difference of
meats should be prescribed unto him. Now if the design was to treat about
Religion, the very nature of the thing required, that he should bring Luther
and other Divines along with him, for whom he likewise expected a convenient
Security. Moreover he had often applied himself to the Emperor, that he might
be inaugurated into his Government according to the Custom of the Empire, as
likewise for several other things, none of which he could ever obtain,
notwithstanding many specious Promises had been passed upon him. Nay Frederick
the Palatine had by the Emperor's Command returned him such an answer to his
Demands in the last Diet at Auspurg, as did let him plainly see that his
Imperial Majesty had great Resentments against him, which he had but little
deserved. For these reasons he thinks it not safe for him to make his
appearance there. However would but the Emperor by their Mediation grant him
these Requests before the sitting of the Diet, he promises not to absent
himself.

About the later end of August the Ambassadors of the Elector of Mentz and the
Prince Palatine arrive at Smalcalde, The Elector of Mentz and the Prince
Palatine send Ambassadors to the Protestants.
and there express to the Protestants Ambassadors how tender a regard their
Princes have for their Country and the Public good. For since the Diet at
Auspurg was broken up before the differences could be adjusted, they,
considering how great dangers might arise from such Dissentions, could not rest
till they had obtained leave from the Emperor to be the Mediators of a Peace:
To which end they think it the best way to concert those things again, which
could not be decided at Auspurg, and so to begin there now, where they left off
then. To this the others made answer, That their Masters were ignorant what
Proposals would be made, and so had not given them any certain and determinate
Commission how to act, but had only commanded them to return to them in writing
the Propositions that should be laid down: so that if they now pleased to make
their Proposals, they would act therein according to their Masters Commands.
They on the other side do again largely rhetoricate about their Princes
affection to their Country, and wonder that, since their requests about the
Exchequer are obtained; they should not be furnished with a larger Power to
act, especially in those things which could not be determined at Auspurg; but
if they must stick there, and cannot stretch their Commission any further, it
will prove a matter highly disagreeable both to the Emperor and their Masters.
On the other side it is replied, That they are not to be blamed upon this
account. For since the Mediators had propounded no particular method of Treaty,
but had only spoke of Peace in general; their Orders could not well be
otherwise. And then for the debating of such Matters as these, it is necessary
that Divines and Men of Learning be made use of, to whose Function it belongs.
Since therefore they were ignorant of what nature the Treaty would be, they
pray that they may not be misunderstood, and that they will excuse them to the
Emperor, if need so require; and their earnest desire is, that they will in the
mean time lay down some terms of agreement. Their Answer again is, that they
might easily have collected from the Letters sent to the Duke of Saxony and the
Lantgrave of what nature the Treaty was like to be. That it is none of their
design to meddle with religious Dogmas; but since they themselves desire an
Accommodation till such time as a Council may be called, they are therefore
willing to enter into discourse with them, that so they may come in the mean
time to some resolution about those Opinions which are as yet undecided; that
they have indeed Orders to treat about these things, and to try which way a
Peace, or at least a Truce, may be established; which it is impossible to
effect, before they come to some determination about the Points in
Controversy. But if they are not permitted by their Commission to meddle in
these things; yet however they ought to point out what they think to be the
best and most convenient Expedient for accomodating the business. They return
for answer, that there was nothing found in the Letters, which did signify any
Conditions of the future Treaty: and as to their desire of knowing what is to
be done (till a Council shall be called) in relation to those Points which are
not yet determined, they do not see how they can come to any resolution in that
matter, unless it be first demonstrated from Scripture what is Pious and True,
what Impious and Fictitious; for the effecting of which, this is by no means a
proper place. For both the Writing which they exhibited at Auspurg, and also
the Answer unto it were of a considerable bulk, and contained a great many
things, for the handling of which, Men well skilled in Divinity ought to be
made use of. But for them to appoint some Expedient for a Reconciliation, they
conceive it not to be their Duty, since they stand upon the defensive part. In
the Diet of Auspurg the Emperor had often been solicited for Peace, and
afterward too both by Letters and Ambassadors more than once; and they now do
earnestly desire the same thing. It Is replied on the other side, That they
think the Expedient, which they before had mentioned, to be very proper; but
since they say that they have no Orders to act in that matter, they will not
urge it any farther. However they think it not advisable to break up after this
manner, and since the Emperor, at the Intercession of their Princes, had
granted a Cessation, they think it may not be improper to appoint a certain
day, upon which the Princes themselves, together with the Ambassadors of the
Cities, may have a Meeting. And since a Diet of the Empire is shortly to be
held at Spiers, where without question the Emperor, and the rest of the States,
will be present, what if they should agree to meet together there some time
before the Diet; the doing of which may possibly procure the Cessation to be
continued for some longer time, however it seems absolutely necessary that one
Point be particularly considered, namely how every Magistrate ought in the mean
time to behave himself as well toward his own Subjects as Strangers. But if
after all they will not appear there unless the Public Faith be given for
their Security, although they think there is no need of it, yet they question
not but the Mediators will easily obtain it of the Emperor. The Protestants
reply, That they had already acquainted them how far their Commission reached,
namely that whatever Propositions should be made, they should carry them home
in writing: and therefore they have no Power to act in those Affairs which they
desire, or to propound any other Methods of agreement. As for their Princes,
they are great Lovers of Peace, and all their Counsels are directed that way,
as may easily be manifested from their former Actions. That they themselves are
likewise of the same mind, and do acknowledge it to be their duty to labor for
the advancement of the Health and Happiness of the Public. When nothing else
could be done, they at last agreed upon meeting at Spiers upon such a day as
the Mediators should think fit; but first they are to understand the pleasure
of the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave, who at the first opportunity are to
return their Opinions in that matter, both in their own names, and the names of
their Allies. This Decree was made on the second day of September.

But in the beginning of October the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave dispatch
their Answer in writing to the Elector of Mentz and the Prince Palatine, The
Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave's Letters to the Arbitrators.
wherein they show from the example of the former Treaty, that nothing can be
done to any purpose in relation to the matters proposed without the assistance
of Divines: As for themselves they still persist in that Religion, of which
they made profession at Auspurg. And since almost in every Diet, not only in
the absence of the Emperor, but also of late when he was present, a Council had
been promised, and promised too with such an Air, as if it was to have been
called, and to begin its Session soon after the breaking up of the Diet: They
now hope that the Emperor will take care to procure one in Germany with all
speed. Then and there both they and their Associates shall make a larger
Explication of their Doctrine, and shall omit nothing that may make for a pious
Reconciliation. But for the prevention of Tumults in the Empire, their earnest
and hearty desire is that they will prevail with the Emperor to suffer those to
live in peace, who either are already Professors of the Evangelical Doctrine, or
shall hereafter make Profession of it, till such time as the Decrees and
Authority of a legal Council shall intervene. Now if they shall think fit to
treat about Articles of Peace, and shall appoint a day for that purpose, they
will send thither their Ambassadors. But if any one thinks that there still
remains any Error at the bottom of that Doctrine which they exhibited at
Auspurg, and shall evince the same; or if he cannot do that, shall submit
himself to the Testimony of Holy Scriptures, it will prove a matter highly
agreeable both to them and their Confederates. If for this end the Emperor
shall prefix a day for a meeting at Spiers; if he will vouchsafe a convenient
Security to them and their Friends, and likewise to Luther, whom among other
Ministers of the Church they will bring along with them; if he will permit the
Word of God to be freely and publicly Preached, and the Supper of our Lord to
be administered according to Christ's Institution; and if he will not oblige
them to any distinction of Meats; then they will either come thither
themselves, or else send their Ambassadors with necessary Orders; and then
before the Eyes of all they will give in a rational Explication of their
Doctrine. But if in that Assembly this Confession of their Faith cannot be
refuted from Holy Scripture, then they hope that the Emperor will stir no more
in this matter, but suffer them quietly to enjoy their Religion. Now because
they have Appealed to a legal Council, and nothing has as yet been found in
their Doctrine repugnant to the Word of God; and since it is evident both from
Law and Custom, that, during an Appeal, the Appellant ought not to be
rigorously proceeded against; they have good confidence that the Emperor, at
their Intercession especially, will preserve the Peace of Germany.

We have spoke before of a Diet of the Empire to be held at Spiers on the Sixth
of September, The Diet appointed to be held at Ratisbon.
but the Emperor being certified by several Letters and Messengers of the Turks
Preparations, he Adjourns it till the next January, and sets out Ratisbon for
the place, because that is so much nearer to Austria, where he foresaw the Seat
of the War would be.

We have shown in the Sixth Book how the War, A quarrel among the Switzers.
which above two years ago those of Bern and Zurich were about to make upon the
five Confederate Cantons, was prevented by the Interposition of the
neighboring Cities. This year the Sore was rubbed up afresh, and these two
Cities, having possessed themselves of all their Passages and Avenues, would
not suffer any Provisions to be carried unto them. This happened about the
Summer Solstice, and now the face of things looking as if some great Storm was
approaching, the King of France, together with those of Glarys, Articles of
Peace propounded.
Friburg, Soleurre and Appenzel, after their Mediation, and after a long
Debate, they propound these Articles; That the remembrance of all Reproaches be
laid aside, and such things forborne for the future, and that the Calumniators
be at present pardoned; that those who were banished for the sake of Religion
be recalled; that the five Cantons may indeed retain their own Religion, but
however they shall not forbid their People the reading both of the Old and New
Testament; that no Molestation be given to the Associates of Zurich and Bern;
and that they afford one another mutual Assistances. These Overtures being made
in vain, those of Zurich and Bern do publish a Writing, wherein they declare
that they had been forced by great and manifold Injuries to put a stop, as they
had done, to the Provisions of their Adversaries; and since they had rejected
the Conditions of Peace which were propounded by the Mediators, and by that
means given a plain demonstration of their Hostile Intentions; The five Cantons
are hindered from Provisions.
since they had violated the Agreement made some years before, wherein it was
provided, that no body should be put upon for the sake of Religion; they think
they may very lawfully hinder them from Victuals. If therefore any Disturbance
shall arise from hence, it ought to be laid at their doors, who are in love
with nothing so much as Quarrels. This was done upon the ninth day of
September. The War breaks out between them.
But when those of the five Cantons were very much pressed with the want of
Necessaries, having privately hired Forces, they marched out on the ninth of
October, and arrived at the Confines of Zurich with greater celerity than could
be imagined; In these Coasts those of Zurich had planted a Guard of above a
thousand Soldiers; who upon the approach of the Enemy gave notice to those in
the City by several Messengers to fly with all speed to their assistance; but
such was the Expedition of the Enemy, that they could not come in so
opportunely to their Relief; for having got upon the top of a Mountain, over
which they were to pass, they beheld from thence their Friends in the Valley
beneath very hardly pressed, and in a dangerous condition; having therefore
encouraged one another, they made a confused descent from the Mountain, the
nature of which was such, Those of Zurich are vanquished.
that they could not pass above one at a time. Being therefore not able to draw
up all their Forces, they were overwhelmed with multitudes, and having lost
many of their Men, they at last turned their backs. This happened upon the 11th
day of October. Among the number of the slain Zuinglius was found. Zuinglius is
slain.
For the custom of Zurich is such, that upon any Expedition, the principal
Minister of their Church goes out along with them. Now Zuinglius who was in his
own nature a very stout and courageous Man, considered likewise with himself,
that if he should stay at home, and the battle should go against them, he must
needs draw upon himself a great Odium for animating other Men by his Preaching,
and yet shrinking back himself in the time of danger, he therefore resolved to
run the common risque. They used his dead body very barbarously, which showed
that their revenge could not be satisfied even with his death. He was aged 44
years, being four years younger than Luther. There was a Comet seen almost all
the month of August, and about that time died Lovice Mother to the King of
France, she was Sister by the Father's side to Charles Duke of Savoy.

Those of Bern, who were to make War upon Vnderwalt, having understood the
misfortune, send to encourage their Friends of Zurich, and to promise their
assistance, assuring them that they will shortly be with them with all their
Forces, desiring that it might be left to them to revenge their Quarrel. But
when upon a meeting, which was held about eight days after the battle, they of
Bern appeared somewhat slack in performance; the people of Zurich having
received Aids from Basil, Schaffhausen, Suntgaw and Mulhausen, draw out from
their whole Body some select Troops; who Marching out in the night do plant
themselves in a Mountain near Memmingen, that so they might be ready, as soon
as the Moon was up, to make an effort, and surprise on a sudden the City Zug.
But the Enemy, who lay encampt not far off, having notice of the Project, flew
to their Arms with all speed, and marching before it was light, came upon them
unawares, setting up mighty Shouts and Cries for the greater incussion of
Terror. This was upon the 20th of October. Those of Zurich again defeated.
Many were on both sides killed; and though the five Cantons had the better of
it, yet those of Zurich would not in the least abate of their zeal for
Religion. At length a Peace being made up through the mediation of Friends,
this, among other Articles, was inserted, That those of Zurich, Bern and Basil,
should depart from that League which they had lately made with the City of
Strasburg and the Lantgrave, and that the five Cantons should do the same with
Ferdinand. And thus having drawn up Instruments which did mutually oblige them,
the Confederacy was on both sides dissolved. Toward the end of November
OEcolampadius departed this life. OEcolampadius dies.
He had conceived an extraordinary grief at the death of Zuinglius, which was
thought to have heightened his Distemper, there having been an intimate
familiarity betwixt them: He was aged 49 years. There are some Exercitations of
his extant upon the Prophets, which are highly approved of by the Learned.

On the 19th of December* the Protestant Ambassadors met again at Frankfort,
and there came to an Agreement for a mutual Defense, which was the only thing
they wanted. In this Convention those of Gossar, Emberk and Embden were
admitted into the League, as those of Esling had been a little before. But
George Duke of Brandenburg was absent, as were likewise the Ambassadors of
Nuremburg, Camin and Heilsburg, who, though they professed the same Doctrine,
yet as we hinted before, were averse to the League. The Emperor leaving the
Low Countries in the beginning of January, 1532.
directed his Journey toward Ratisbon, in order to hold a Diet there, as we
have said before. Having in his way thither, arrived at Mentz on the last day
of January, the Archbishop of Mentz and the Prince Palatine intercede with him
again for Peace; about which when he had permitted them to hold a Treaty; they
sent advise to the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave, that they would likewise
give their Concurrence. Wherefore after some intercourse of Letters, it was
agreed that a Convention should be held in the beginning of April at
Schwinfurt, a Town of the Empire situated upon the Main. Here they began to
treat about establishing a Peace till the sitting of a Council. The mediating
Princes were there present themselves, and by the Emperors Order laid before
them these Injunctions, That they should Innovate, Teach, Conditions of a
Pacification laid down by the Arbitrators.
and Publish nothing about Religion, besides the Writing that was exhibited at
Auspurg; but should keep themselves within those bounds till such time as a
Council should sit* That they should not hold Communication with the
Zuinglians, or the Anabaptists; lest under the pretext of Religion they should
draw over to them, and receive under their Protection the Subjects of another
State. That they should not suffer any of their own Subjects to teach without
the limits of their Dominions: That they forbear all Reproaches, and give no
disturbance to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or to the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church: That they Contribute their assistance against the Turks, and
that they be Obedient to those Decrees which respect the Public Good, and the
administration of the Empire: That they be Obedient to the Emperor and the King
of the Romans, and that they dissolve whatever League has been made against the
Emperor, the King, or those States that are of a different Religion. If they
will comply in these things they hope that both the Emperor and the King will
lay aside all Resentments that have been formerly occasioned. The Duke of
Saxony being detained by Indisposition, had sent thither John Frederick his
Son; there were likewise present Francis Duke of Lunenburg and Ainhault; as
likewise the Ambassadors of the other Princes and Cities, to whom were lately
added the Cities of Nortingen and Hall and Suabe. After things had been long
debated, the Mediating Princes dispatched in writing all the Transactions to
the Emperor, who was holding his Diet at Ratisbone, to the end that they might
understand what his Pleasure was. As to that Proposition which required that
the Duke of Saxony and his Allies should yield Obedience to the King of the
Romans, they commit to writing, and deliver to the Mediators upon the 17th day
of April, what it is they desire and expect from the Emperor in relation to that
Affair; requesting that King Ferdinand would wave his design, and not carry
himself as King of the Romans. But if the Emperor shall think that he has
occasion for a Coadjutor, that then being assisted by the sense and counsel of
the Electoral Princes, Or the Law of Charles the Fourth.
he should Interpret the Caroline Law, and by his Edict give it a perpetual
Sanction, which, according to the rules of Justice, ought to run to this
purpose, viz. That hereafter no King of the Romans be chosen during the life of
the Emperor, The condition of creating a King of the Romans.
unless first the Electors and six other Princes of the Empire shall judge it
fit to be done: And when it shall plainly appear to them that it is for the
advantage of the Public, then the Elector of Mentz shall Summon his Colleagues
together, with the other six Princes, to some convenient place, there to
deliberate further about the Affair; and when they have thoroughly weighed and
discussed the Matter, then the Electoral Princes alone, with the addition of
the King of Bohemia, shall have the Power of creating a King: That the King of
the Romans, thus chosen while the Emperor is alive, shall not manage the
Public Administration in his own Name, but in the Emperor's; nor shall he
arrogate any Power or Dominion to himself. That the Princes and States of the
Empire shall not be bound in any Oath or Promise unto him till after the death
of the Emperor. Upon the creation of a new King there shall no Oath be taken,
but according to the tenor of the Caroline Law; nor shall it be in the Power
of the Electors to alter that Form: And whoever shall be convicted of acting
contrary to that Oath, or shall be under a violent suspicion of so doing, and
yet not be able to clear him, he shall be deprived of his Electoral right for
ever. Moreover, for the avoiding of Prescription, three Kings shall not be
successively created out of the same Family; and no Man shall be created King
of the Romans, who does not descend from some Family of the Princes of Germany.
That neither the Emperor nor the King of the Romans shall endeavor to alter,
what the Caroline Law has ratified about the creation of a King. When the
Electors shall see it convenient to create a King, they shall be under no
necessity of giving notice beforehand to the Emperor; nor may he in that Case
issue out his Orders to the Elector of Mentz to Convene the rest of the
Electors; but when they shall appear just and substantial Reasons for the
Creation of a King during the life of the Emperor; then the Archbishop of Mentz
shall Summon in his Colleagues to appear at Franckfort, upon an appointed day:
nor shall it be in his Power to appoint any other place for their Meeting,
unless the Colleagues shall for weighty Reasons allow of it. The Elector of
Mentz may not, without the consent of his Colleagues, demand the Crown and
Scepter, and other Imperial Ensigns from the City of Nuremburg. Nor shall he
cut off any thing from that in three months space, which is allowed to the
Princes for their meeting together, after they are Summoned; for it might prove
much to the prejudice of the Public, should the streightness of time occasion
the absence of one or two of them. While the Electors are upon their
Consultation at Franckfort, every body else shall be excluded. If any Breach
shall be made in these Conditions, then the Electors shall not be obliged to
appear there, or to make any stay; and whatsoever shall there be transacted by
them, shall be accounted void. Neither the Emperor nor the King of the Romans
shall suffer the Arms of the Electors to be displayed in Italy, France, or
other foreign Parts, or their proper Offices to be supplied, but by themselves
or their Ambassadors. The King of the Romans shall not accept his final
Inauguration, but in the presence of the Electors or their Ambassadors. Neither
the Emperor nor the King may hinder the Ambassadors of Foreign Kings and
Princes from coming to the Imperial Diets, and there propounding their
business; for this is not only consonant to the Law of Nations, but is also
full of Humanity and Civility. Neither the Emperor nor the King of the Romans
shall assume to himself any peculiar Power of judging in such Causes, as may be
depending between the Princes of the Empire, but shall suffer them to be
legally tried in the place where they ought. That the Emperor be careful to
Maintain those things which concern the Glory, Honor, and Safety of the
Princes and the Empire, and which he has faithfully promised to observe; and
that he rectify whatever has been acted otherwise; and that it be provided by
a Law, That, whoever is King of the Romans, he shall observe the same things.
If the Emperor will explain and confirm the Caroline Law in this sense, the
Duke of Saxony promises that he will not be wanting to his Duty, whenever the
Good of the Public shall require such a Consultation: but if the mediating
Princes cannot obtain this of the Emperor, he will not however decline a legal
Trial, provided that King Ferdinand does not in the mean time assume to
himself, or Usurp the administration of the Affairs of the Empire, or any other
Authority, especially over them, or over the two Brothers William and Lewis,
Princes of Bavaria. But if they cannot obtain so much as this, then their
Request is, That the Emperor would be pleased to give them a public Audience
in an Assembly of the Princes and other States; where they will demonstrate,
upon what just and weighty Reasons it is, that they cannot approve of this
Election. And now since they understand, that they have, upon the account of
this their noncompliance, incurred the suspicion of Rebellion, not only with
the Emperor, but also among Foreign Kings and People, they therefore earnestly
desire that the Emperor would not take it amiss, if they make known the reasons
of this their action to all Men, not only through Germany, but also beyond the
Limits of the Empire; for this they find it is but necessary for them to do.

Among other things it has been said, That the Electors are to swear according
to the tenor of Charles the Fourth his Law. Now the thing is thus; When they
are come to Franckfort, The form of the Oath which is taken by the Electors
according to the Caroline Law.
having performed their Devotion, they go up to the Altar, and laying their
hands upon a consecrated Book, as they call it, they, in a set Form of words,
most religiously swear by that Faith which they owe both to God and the Empire,
that they will choose such a chief Magistrate of the Christian Commonwealth, as
they think to be worthy of so great a Charge, and who is every way fit and
qualified for it, as far as the best of their skill and understanding will give
them leave to judge; and that this they do without the prepossession of any
Bargain, Gift, Reward or Promise. Now the reason, that the two Brothers of
Bavaria were inserted in the number, The Princes of Bavaria oppose the Election
of King Ferdinand.
is this: They among the rest had opposed the Election of King Ferdinand, and
having communicated their Counsels with the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgrave, and
the King of France, they entered into the League for the defense of the
Liberties of Germany: And the King of France had deposited 100000 Crowns in the
hands of the two Brothers, that they might be in a readiness when occasion
would serve.

The Mediating Princes upon the 20th of April return an Answer to those things
which we have recited. The Arbitrators Answer to the Protestants.
That it is for the sake of Peace and Concord that they negotiate this Affair;
nor could they think, that such things as these would have been propounded by
them. Now that a King of the Romans should be chosen whilst the Emperor is in
being, they have many weighty Reasons to urge, which reasons have been formerly
made use of to John Frederick, who was then his Fathers Ambassador, and should
now, if the matter so required, be more copiously explained. But since they are
not alone concerned in this business, but likewise the Emperor, the King, and
the other Princes their Colleagues; they will not debate this Point any longer,
but leave it undecided, that so they may come with greater ease to the
accommodating of other things, as the occasion of this Assembly does require.
However if it be expected that they should give them and their Allies a reason
for what they do, they will not decline the trial, and they question not but
they shall back their Cause with such Proofs, as will not admit of any
Exception. But now if an account of these things should be brought to the
Emperor, they are very much afraid that they will be so far from taking any
place there, that they will rather prove an occasion of interrupting at least
this Pacifick Treaty, if not of wholly taking it away.

To the end therefore that a Truce and Reconciliation may be brought about as
well in relation to the matter of Religion, as to that of the Election, and
that there may not be a separation between those two Points, they earnestly
entreat the two Princes of Saxony, the Father and Son, that they will have some
regard to themselves in this Affair, and depart from their Resolution. For then
they have reason to hope, that both the Emperor and King will abundantly take
care, that this Election shall never be prejudicial either to them or their
Heirs. Nay they doubt not but they will lay aside all Resentment, and afford
their Favor to them all, especially to the Duke of Saxony, in promoting that
business which he now solicits, and even in the Cause of Religion, as far as
it is possible to be done. For they are very much afraid that he cannot be
prevailed with to grant them a Peace as to matters of Religion, whilst the
Point of Election remains undecided. As for their parts it is out of Love and
Friendship that they give this advice, and do entreat them so to accept it, and
that they would so manage themselves, that they at length may see, that this
their Intercession was not without it is weight, nor their Diligence employed to
no purpose.

Four days after John Frederick the Prince made them this return; The Prince of
Saxony's Answer to the Arbitrators.
viz. That he had not expected from them such an Answer as this; for in that
they had among other things affirmed, That 'twas for the Safety and Dignity of
the Empire that a King of the Romans should be created, he is under a necessity
of giving an Answer to this, as well in the Name of his Father as the other
Associates, whose persuasion it is, that this Election is irregular, and not at
all for the Welfare of the Empire. Now since they sustain the Character of
Arbitrators, he greatly hoped that they would not have defended this Cause, but
have propounded it as a doubtful and controverted Point. For as to the other
things mentioned by them, they do not properly belong to Arbitrators, but ought
to be referred to such a time, when they may fall under a common deliberation.
Indeed when at Cologne, the Emperor desired that his Brother Ferdinand should
be admitted into a Partnership of the Empire, there were some Reasons offered
for the doing of it, but they were not of such weight, that for their sakes the
Caroline Law, together with the Rights and Liberty of the Empire, should be
violated; that at the same time He, together, with the rest of his Father's
Ambassadors gave in their Reasons, by way of Answer, why it ought not to be
done. He therefore now again repeats, what he said before, that, if the Emperor
would not admit of these their Propositions, then the Cause may come to be
discussed in a fair Trial, that so the reasons of their Descent may be known.
Now since it is their part to act equally and impartially, he did imagine, that
being Arbitrators in other matters, they would likewise in this Controversy
find out some honest Expedient, which might be for the advantage of the Empire;
but since nothing of this is done, he will not urge them any further. As for
his Father and his Confederates, they will undoubtedly make it evident (without
injuring any Man) how great a Breach this is upon the Laws and Liberty of the
Empire; and that they are not to be blamed, if any inconvenience arises from
thence. He hopes likewise, that, since these things concern the Honor and
Safety of the Empire, the Emperor will not take it unkindly.

Among the other Propositions, The Tricks of the Popish Party.
the first, which belongs to that head in which the Zuinglians are concerned,
has this tendency, viz. to hinder the Princes from confederating with a number
of Cities, and so indeed the Umpires did in their debate explain it. That if
the Zuinglians would confess and forsake their Error, then they should be
included in the Peace; The Agreement between the Zuinglians and the Lutherans.
but if otherwise, then they were to be deserted, no assistance to be afforded
them, nor any League to be made with them. But last year at Smalcalde there
happened to be a good understanding between the Protestants; for when those of
Strasburg, together with some Cities of Schwaben, had made a fuller explication
of their Doctrine about the Lord's Supper, The Protestants lay down their
conditions of a Pacification.
which before had only been propounded in the Diet at Auspurg; this their
Interpretation was accepted of by the Saxons. Being therefore now unanimous,
they all of them return the same Answer to the former Propositions, and agree
at last to lay down these conditions of Agreement. That they, who have
exhibited a Confession of their Doctrine, and an Apology for the same, at
Auspurg, as likewise those, who hereafter shall receive the same Doctrine, shall
keep themselves within those bounds, and shall make no further Innovations,
till such time as a Council shall sit, which has so often been promised and
agreed upon, that they shall not join themselves (as to the Doctrinal part)
with those, who entertain different Opinions about the Lord's Supper and
Baptism, from what is contained in the Writing set forth at Auspurg. They shall
not draw over to them, or give Protection to the Subjects of other States, upon
the score of Religion. But if there be any whose condition is such that they
may lawfully go whither they will, these, having first given notice to their
Governors, may Travail, if they please, and be entertained; they shall not send
out any Preachers to teach without their Dominions, unless the Magistrate of
such a place, where a Convention is held, shall desire or permit it: But if he
refuses it, they shall then have liberty to do it privately at home. But
whenever they are present at a Diet of the Empire, or do send out Forces
against the Turks, they may then make use of their own Teachers, and receive
the Supper of our Lord according to the Institution of Christ. That all
Reproaches be forborne, however the Ministers of the Church may, as they are in
duty bound, rebuke Vice and Error, and show which is the right way, provided
they do it with temper and moderation. That those of their Religion be not
excluded from the Imperial Chamber. That Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction stand
where it does, but that the Bishops may not bring those into danger or trouble,
who make profession of this Doctrine. That those Ordinances, which have been
made (but are not yet put in execution) concerning Religion, Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, Ceremonies, and the Goods of the Church, be suspended till the
time of a Council: That the Goods of the Church be made use of and enjoyed by
them, who are in possession of those places, to which those Goods do properly
belong, and that nothing be taken by violence from any Man; but that the annual
Revenues be disposed of to those places, which have formerly received them,
till such time as a Council shall decree otherwise. That in political Affairs
every Man perform his duty; that all Men endeavor the good of the Public, and
exercise acts of mutual kindness and fidelity to one-another.

Though both sides stood thus at a distance from one another, without any
probability of a nearer Conjunction, yet the Arbitrators thought fit to proceed
in the Treaty; and therefore, for the convenience of dispatching a more speedy
account of all things to the Emperor, they appoint another Meeting to be held
at Nuremburg upon the third of June. Now though the main Controversy could not
here be made up, yet by reason of the Turks Interruption into Germany, the
Emperor finding himself obliged to draw his whole Strength together from all
parts, The Emperor upon necessity confirms a Peace to all Germany.
ratified a general Peace to all Germany; and did by his Edict command that no
Disturbance should be given to any Man upon the account of Religion, till such
time as a Council should sit; and if no Council should be held, then till such
time as the States of the Empire should find out some expedient to salve these
Differences. To those that shall disobey this Edict he threatens a very severe
punishment, and declares, that he will use all his Endeavors, that a Council
may be called within six months, and begin it is Session the year following: But
if this cannot be brought about, then the whole matter shall be brought to an
Issue in a Diet of the Empire. He therefore Commands that all judicial Actions
commenced upon the score of Religion, be suspended; and that no Process be
hereafter carried on against the Protestants, or if there be, that all such
Process become null and void. The Protestants on the other side, who were then
seven Princes and 24 Cities, The number of the Protestants.
do make him a tender of their utmost Obedience and Devoir, and promise their
Assistance against the Turks. This Scheme of a Peace was by the Arbitrators
drawn up on the 23th of July, and the Emperor, to whom they had addressed by
Letters and Messengers, gave it his Confirmation on the second of August, and
ratified it afterward by a public Edict, commanding the Imperial Chamber and
his other Judges to be obedient to it. Whilst these things are transacting, the
Emperor, as we said before, is holding a Diet at Ratisbon, where, among other
things, he declares, that he had some time since sent an Embassy to the Pope,
and the College of Cardinals, about calling a Council, to which he has
likewise received an Answer, which he communicated to the King of France; whose
judgment it is, that a Council is necessary. But as to what the Pope has writ
back concerning the manner, but more especially the place of holding the
Council, there arises very great difficulty, nor can they as yet come to any
Resolution about it. But because these differences about Religion do daily
increase, from which there is great danger feared, he will therefore endeavor
to prevail with the Pope, to call a Council to some convenient place within the
time appointed, and he hopes that he will not be wanting either to his own
Duty, or the Public Good. But if this cannot be effected, then he will
endeavor to find out some remedy in another Diet of the Empire, which he will
call for that purpose. It was decreed in the Diet at Auspurg, Delegates
appointed to reform the Imperial Chamber.
that a Reform should be made in the Court of the Imperial Chamber. To which
purpose the Emperor adds two Commissioners in his own Name, and moreover
delegates the Elector of Mentz and the Prince Palatine, together with the
Bishop of Spiers, John Simmerius the Palatine, William Bishop of Strasburg, and
Philip Marquess of Baden. The Ambassadors of all which Princes, having met
together at Spiers on the first day of March, do Enact certain Laws, which
partly affect the Judges, partly the Advocates, and partly the Litigants: A
Copy of this Reform they present to the Emperor, with which, having first
consulted his Friends, he declares himself to be well pleased, having first
made some small additions to it.

This year (which was the Tenth of his Exile) Christiern King of Denmark having
got together a Navy, The King of Denmark taken Prisoner.
had some hopes of recovering his Losses, but being taken at Sea, he was
committed to Custody, and about the same time his Son died, being a young Man,
and educated by the Emperor his Uncle.

In a former Book we took notice, how the Emperor had rescinded the Contract
that was made between Albertus Duke of Prussia and Sigismund King of Poland:
Albert Duke of Prussia proscribed.
but Albert, persisting in his purpose, was about this time proscribed by the
Imperial Chamber, at the Suit of Walter Cronberg. Which thing when the King of
Poland understood, he set forth in this Diet by his Ambassador, how Prussia had
been anciently under the Command and Patronage of his Kingdom, and therefore
desires that this Proscription may be totally reversed. But Cronberg on the
third of June did in a long Harangue declare, that Prussia was a dependency of
the Empire, and did not at all belong to the King of Poland. For though their
Ancestors being overcome in battle, had been forced to promise Fealty to
Casimire Sigismund's Father, yet this was altogether contrary to former
Covenants: and that this is true, may be evinced even from the testimony of
Albert himself, who about eight years since professed the same thing at the
Diet of Nuremburg: He prays therefore, that the King of Poland's Demand being
rejected, the Sentence pronounced against Albert may be put in execution. In
this Diet the chief thing that fell under Deliberation was the War against the
Turks. And now Intelligence being daily brought both by Letters and Messengers,
An Irruption of the Turks into Austria.
that the Turk had sent before vast bodies of Horse toward the Danube; and the
Ambassadors from Austria and other Neighboring Countries having given an
account what great danger they were in; It was resolved that there should be a
general Contribution of Aids, and that the States of the Empire should send
supplies of Men rather than Money toward this War. Therefore upon the 27th of
July this Diet broke up, and all went to prepare for the War. Upon the 6th of
August the Elector of Saxony ended his days, to whom John Frederick his Son
succeeded.

When Solomon was come to Belgrade, he struck off toward the left, and
attacked in vain the Town and Castle of Gunza, which was very bravely defended
by Nicolas Jurisch; from thence he sent out 1500 Horse to Plunder under the
Command of Cason; who making Excursions as far as Lintz, which is above Vienna,
and having ravaged the Country far and near, exercised all manner of
Barbarities. But being about to retreat, The Turkish Horse destroyed.
they fell among our Horse, who had been sent out to hinder their Plunders and
Rapine, and being charged in diverse places, they were at length almost all cut
in pieces, and Cason himself was slain in the action. Solomon keeping more and
more to the left, came at last to Gratz, a Town of Stiria; which when the
Emperor, who was then at Lintz, understood; he considered what was to be done,
and came at last to this Resolution, viz. To encamp his whole. Army near
Vienna, and there to expect the Enemy. But Solomon went back without performing
any memorable Action.

The Emperor had sent to the King of France for his Assistance; but his answer
was (as the Emperor then reported it) that Germany was powerful enough of it
self to oppose the Incursion of the Turk* The King of England was also very
dilatory and obscure too in his Answer. Pope Clement did contribute his Aid,
and committed the chief management thereof to Cardinal Hippolitus of the house
of Medices. The Switzers, though solicited by the Emperor, would not stir. At
this time in the months of September and October there appeared a Comet before
Sunrising. When the Turks were retired, the Emperor, contrary to the opinion
of those, who advised him to pursue the Enemy, broke up his Army, because
Winter was near, The Emperor goes for Italy.
and departed from Vienna toward Italy.

When he was at Mantua he dispatched Letters, dated the 10th of November, to
the States of the Empire, wherein he signified, that his Brother the King of
the Romans was to Govern the Empire during his absence. That 'twas for very
weighty Reasons that he had left Germany for Italy: and that there he would
treat with the Pope about a Council, as it had been resolved upon at Ratisbon;
he hopes therefore they will preserve that Peace, which he had lately ratified
by his Edict, and that they will pay the same Obedience to his Brother as to
himself. Going from thence to Bononia, he came to a Conference with Pope
Clement the Seventh, and among other things he held a Consult with him about
Religion and a Council. He likewise enters into a League with him, and the
other Princes of Italy; or rather he verbally renews it for half a year longer,
in order to maintain the Peace of Italy; or indeed rather to preclude the
French from any entrance thither. The French Ambassadors vigorously opposed it,
but Clement advised them to act more calmly, giving them notice privately, that
it was not like to last long. For the Emperor had brought with him a great
number of Spanish Forces, of which the Pope had a desire to clear Italy: He
therefore approved of this League in compliance with the times.

After this the Emperor in the month of March sets Sail for Spain, 1533.
and soon after the Pope sends Hugh Rango Bishop of Regium Ambassador into
Germany. Who coming to the Elector of Saxony, The Popes Embassador's Oration to
the Duke of Saxony.
in company with the Emperor's Ambassador, made a Speech to this effect: That
some months since the Pope and Emperor entering into a Consultation at Bononia
about several weighty Affairs; they likewise took the Cause of Religion into
their Consideration: upon which account the Pope has thought it convenient to
send an Embassy into Germany. And though the greatness of the Affair deserves
that a Man of larger abilities and experience should be employed in it, yet
this Province is put upon him, though very much against his will. The occasion
therefore of his present coming is to let him understand the Pope's mind and
pleasure in this matter: nor are these things done without the consent and
approbation of the Emperor. It has been the earnest desire of Clement the
Seventh ever since his entrance upon the Papacy, that these Differences, which
have been created in Germany about Religion, should be composed, that so he
might manage the Government of the Church with greater Ease and Tranquillity.
That for the effecting of this he has more than once sent Men very eminent for
their Learning into Germany; but his labor has hitherto proved to no purpose.
But when the Emperor was come at last from Spain into Italy, and was about to
depart from thence into Germany, the Pope had then great hopes that he might by
his Countenance and Authority easily appease these Animosities: Nor did the
Emperor spare any diligence whereby he might restore his Country to its ancient
Religion; to which purpose though he held several Diets, yet he could effect
nothing; especially since those his excellent Endeavors have been slackned and
impeded by the Incursion of the Turk, that Enemy of the Christian Name. But now
since the Emperor has been a second time in Italy, and held a long Discourse
with the Pope, wherein he discovered it to be his sense, that there could not
be a more proper and efficacious remedy found out, than a general Council would
be, of which likewise the German Princes are eagerly desirous: The Pope
likewise declares himself to be well pleased with this Expedient, both for the
sake of the Public, and of the Emperor, whom he is very willing to gratify.
This is the occasion of their Embassy, and they are obliged by their
Instructions to declare this unto him in the name of the Pope. But since the
nature of the thing requires, that they should first deliberate about the
manner, time, and place of holding the Council; they have therefore brought
with them certain Heads subscribed by the Pope, which contain the whole Model
of that Affair; some of which do relate to the Method and Order of it: As, that
it shall be a free and general Council, such as the Fathers were wont to hold,
whose minds were undoubtedly guided by the Divine Spirit. Then that all, who
are present at the Council, shall promise to be obedient to the Decrees
thereof: for unless care be taken of that, all their labor will be in vain.
For to what end will it be to enact Laws, which no body will observe, and which
any Man may safely violate? Moreover they, who cannot be present themselves,
shall send thither their Deputies: And lastly, that in the mean time all things
shall remain in the same posture and condition they are in, and that no
Innovation be made till such time as it shall be decreed by the Council. About
a Place, the Pope has been a long time considering: For it is highly fit that
such a Place be made choice of, as is fruitful, and able to supply Provisions,
and such an one as has likewise a wholesome Air. He therefore conceives that
Piacenza or Bolonia will not be incommodious; or at least Mantua, which is a
City of the Empire, and near to Germany, situated in a pleasant place, and
abounding with all things necessary. They have therefore their liberty to
choose one out of these three places. But if there be any Princes, who will
neither come themselves, nor yet send their Deputies, the Pope however shall go
on with the business of the Council. And if there be any, who shall refuse to
obey its Decrees, and shall make a Revolt from the Pope, then it remains that
the Emperor with other Kings and Princes undertake the Defense both of him and
the Church, that they may not receive any Injury. But now the great reason why
a Council should not be called immediately, is this; because it is necessary
beforehand diligently to weigh and consider all the Circumstances of it; and
therefore the Emperor, who has so often given them hopes of seeing a Council,
has pleased to take care that the Princes of Germany should be acquainted with
the Pleasure of the Pope in this matter: And now if the King of the Romans and
the rest of the German Princes shall return an agreeable Answer to these
Proposals, it will have this effect, that the Pope will Proclaim a Council
within six months, which shall begin to sit the year following. That so in that
interim Provisions and other necessaries may be got together, and all Men
(especially those who live furthest off) may have time to prepare for their
Journey. When he had thus harangued, he delivered the foresaid Heads drawn up
in writing to the Elector. The Emperor's Embassador's Speech to the Duke.
And then the Emperors Ambassador began his Speech, which was to this purpose:
That since the settlement of religious Affairs has hitherto been in vain
attempted in all the former Diets, and it is judged that the matter may be
accommodated by a Council; the Emperor has therefore lately prevailed with the
Pope, that one may be held after the same manner, and at the same Time and
Place as his Ambassador has now particularized. The purport therefore of this
his Message from the Emperor is, To testify that a Council is very acceptable
to the Pope; and since his Ambassador has already fully spoken to the whole
matter, 'twill not become him to enlarge any further. He only prays that this
his Relation may be entertained as a truth, and a friendly Answer returned. The
Elector replies, that, since it is a matter of great Importance, he will take
some time to consider of it, and therefore desires that they will not be
uneasy under a short delay. To which the Pope's Ambassador makes answer, That
he is very much in the right to proceed deliberately, and that so arduous an
Affair does justly deserve some time for consideration. These things were done
at Weimar. The Duke's answer to the Ambassador.
A few days after the Duke of Saxony returned this Answer, That he heartily
rejoices to find that the Emperor and the Pope have determined for a Council.
For the Public State of Affairs does necessarily require that such a Council
be held, as the Emperor has often promised to the Germans; a Council, wherein
things may be regularly handled, and according to the Standard of the Word of
God: and if this be done, he doubts not but all things will go very well. As
for his part, he earnestly prays to God, that he would grant this, and his
advice to all the people within his Dominions shall be, that they would do the
same: He likewise will use the best of his endeavors for the effecting of it,
and will take care that his Allies shall apply their Industry the same way: His
desire truly is to give in his Answer forthwith; but there are many of the same
Religion, who in company with his Father made profession of this Doctrine before
the Emperor at the Diet of Auspurg: And therefore 'twill neither be just, nor
yet for the advantage of the Cause, to give in a private Answer, without taking
them into a Consultation; but an Answer under all their Hands will be much
better. Now because the Pope and the Emperor had by their Letters dated, last
Winter, from Bononia given the States of the Empire hopes that there would
shortly be an Embassy, and consequently upon that a Council: He therefore and
his Allies had agreed to meet together at Smalcalde upon the 24th of June,
there to deliberate about the whole business. As soon therefore as the
Confederates shall meet together (which will be at the day appointed) they will
enter into a Consultation, and dispatch away their Answer with all speed either
by Ambassadors or Letters. As for his part, he shall by the Grace of God, so
behave himself, that not only the present Age, but Posterity also may see, that
of all things in the World he desires nothing more, than that pure Religion and
a flourishing Peace may be established not only in Germany, but also through
the whole Christian World; and that the Emperor, as Supreme Magistrate, may
enjoy all that Honor and Dignity which justly belongs unto him.

Accordingly when the Confederates had met together, A full and large Answer of
the Protestants to the Pope and the Emperor.
and concerted the whole business, upon the last day of June they return an
Answer by Letter in the name of their whole Body: wherein they give the Emperor
all possible Thanks for taking such pains for the Glory of God, and the Public
Welfare; nor do they in the least doubt, but it is from his heart, that he
desires a Council. They therefore pray God to confirm his Resolution, and so to
direct him, that Truth may again be brought into fashion, and that false
Doctrine, with corrupt Rites and Modes of Worship, may be taken away, and all
Error may be rooted out from the hearts of Men, that so the pure Worship of
God, and other Pious performances may be again revived. For they sincerely
desire such a Council, where the Points in Controversy may be rightly and
orderly determined; and such a Council too the Emperor has formerly promised,
and it has been decreed upon weighty deliberation in many Diets of the Empire
that the same should be called together in Germany. For the Fountain, from
whence these Dissentions have been derived, was the overgrown Impudence of some
Men, who preached up things here called Indulgencies. At which time likewise
certain egregious Errors (such as could not be dissembled) were detected and
exposed. And though Pope Leo condemned this Doctrine which laid open those
Errors, yet to this his condemnation they confronted the Testimonies of the
Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore they always thought a Council to be highly
necessary, wherein they might come again to a right understanding of the Cause,
that is, wherein it might be made plainly appear what is Truth, and what is
Error. And this was not only their own sense, but also the judgment of all the
other Princes and States; because they plainly saw and confessed that many
things had crept into Religion, which ought either to be taken away or
reformed; and because they well knew what it was that Men did wish for, and
what was requisite for the Public Good. But when the Pope had condemned this
their Doctrine, Decrees were made in the Imperial Diets in these very words,
viz. That a free and Christian Council should be convened, either of all
Nations in general, or else of the German Empire only. And the reason, that
they were conceived in these very words, was, that the Cause might not be
prejudged or overruled either by the foresaid Sentence of the Pope, or by the
force and power of any Man whatever. And that Judgment might be made of the
whole Controversy, not from the Pontificial Laws, or the Opinions of the
Schools, but from the Holy Scriptures. For if any Man's authority be so great
as to overballance the Holy Scriptures, and right reason; who can doubt but
that all their pains and endeavors will be in vain, when placed in opposition
to the Pope? For it is well enough known what Progress has been made that way in
some past Councils; where a Reformation indeed has been set on foot, but by the
Interposition of the Popes has still been wholly set aside. It has therefore
been for very weighty Reasons decreed, that a Council should be held in
Germany: and this has likewise been approved of by the Emperor. But these
Proposals of the Pope do altogether run counter to the Decrees of the Empire,
which have passed the Seals both of the Princes and the Emperor. For though he
speaks of a Free Council, yet who can doubt but that he has quite another
Prospect, since his great Endeavors are to bring over Kings and Princes to his
side? For was he willing it should be Free, to what purpose would these
Engagements be? But since he is so very industrious this way, it is manifest
that his design must be this, to keep up and maintain his Power and Tyranny by
the Authority of a Council; that so no body may dare to reprehend these Errors
and Corruptions, or if any one be so hardy, he may pay very soundly for it.
What others will do they cannot tell; but their opinion is, that these his
Proposals are of such a nature, and so contrived, that they are apt to deter
Men from a Council, rather then invite them to it. For who will engage himself
at this rate, especially when it does not yet appear, what is like to be the
Order, form, Method of the Council? When it is not yet known whether the Pope
will not set up his own Authority as Supreme there, and whether he is willing
the Controversy should be discussed according to the Holy Scriptures, or
according to those Traditions and Canons, which are not confirmed by any
Testimonies from Scripture? The Freedom of the Council is likewise in danger
from that expression of his, That it shall be managed after the ancient and
received manner. Now, though they do not in the least reject those Decrees of
ancient Councils, which are consonant to the Holy Scriptures; Yet they think
that there is a vast difference between those Councils, and these which have
been held within their own Memory, or somewhat before; wherein the Pope and
Humane Decrees have been advanced to an extravagant Pitch. Therefore when he
says it shall be held after the wonted manner, it is a captious expression,
and may include, that there shall not be such a freedom of Votes as they
desire, and the Cause it self requires; but that Judgment shall be given
according to his own Laws, and that Power which he has arrogated to himself, as
it has been done in some of the last Council. But such proceedings as these are
so far from reconciling the Churches, and extricating doubtful and afflicted
Consciences, that they will rather involve them in thicker Darkness, and plunge
them into a deeper Slavery. Since therefore the Pope has not yet answered the
desire of the Emperor and the other States, their earnest Request is, that the
Emperor would consider the vastness of the Cause (wherein the whole Christian
Commonwealth is concerned) and endeavor that it may be justly and legally
managed. For this is his proper Province, and he has Power by the Laws to do
it, whenever Truth shall be obstructed by the Pope. For care is to be taken
that he may not be both Party and Judge at the same time. Besides, all People
are set on tiptoes with the hopes of this Council, and it is the Subject of
their most eager wishes and prayers, that they may at last be delivered from
the doubts and anguish of an afflicted Conscience, and be set into the right
way to Salvation. For there have not been, for many Ages, such struglings about
such momentous Affairs, as there are now; the occasion of which are those
numerous Errors and Corruptions, which long before our time have broke into the
Church. Now if the general expectation shall be thus made frustrate, and such a
Council, as has formerly been promised, cannot be obtained, we may easily
imagine what a surprising sorrow and affliction it will strike upon the minds
of Men. Moreover, if the Pope shall refuse to come to a fair Judgment of
things, it is much to be feared that both the Church and State will be agitated
with more dangerous Tempests than ever. But since all the States of the Empire
have in all their Diets decreed for a regular Council, they cannot doubt but
they will stick to their Principles, and kick in pieces those Snares which the
Pope is preparing for them: They likewise expect the same things from the other
Princes. For this Engagement, which is now working, is altogether full of trick
and design; and it is impossible that Men should ever make a true and right
judgment of things, unless all their minds be kept free and unbiased. But if
he be resolved to go on, and to have a Council after his own way, they will
then commit the whole Affair to God Almighty, who will undoubtedly Vindicate
his own Cause and Religion. However if things shall come to that pass, that the
Pope must have his mind in this business (which they can hardly believe) they
will yet consider what is further to be done. And if they happen to be cited,
and see that they can do any thing for the Glory of God; they will then make
their appearance, if they may but have convenient Security given them upon the
Public Faith. Or else they will send thither their Ambassadors, who shall
publicly propound whatever the necessity and reason of their Cause requires.
This however shall be the condition, that the present Propositions of the Pope
shall not be accepted of, nor any such Council allowed as is contrary to the
Decrees of the Empire. For they cannot see how this Project of the Pope has the
least tendency to advance a lasting Peace either to the Church or State; nor
does it become him to act after this Rate, if he intends to discharge the Duty
of a faithful Pastor; which obliges him to advise Men for the best, and to
dispense unto them the wholesome Food of sound Doctrine. Now since these things
are so, they earnestly desire them to deliver in this their Answer to the
Emperor and the Pope; hoping that the Emperor (whom with all Reverence they
acknowledge to be the Supreme Magistrate constituted by God,) will not receive
it with any Resentment; but will use his Interest that ^uch a Council may be
called as is agreeable to the Decrees of the Empire, and that the whole
Controversy may be discussed by pious and unsuspected Men. For it will without
doubt very much redound both to his Glory and Advantage, if he shall employ all
his Power and Authority toward the propagating of sound Doctrine, and not to
strengthen the cruel hands of those Men, who have been for many years
committing Outrage upon innocent Men, only for their honest profession of such
a Doctrine as is most agreeable to the Gospel. Now for what remains, they tender
the Emperor their Service in all things, and shall yield him a ready Compliance
in all his other Affairs.

There was then with King Ferdinand, Vergerius the Pope's Legate, who has been
mentioned in the former Book. And because the Bishop of Rhegium was both
ancient and infirm, Clement had given Orders to Vergerius to take upon him the
Embassy, if any difficulty should arise; and that he should be sure to keep
always in his View what the Pope's design and intentions were in relation to a
Council. He must therefore keep himself very close to his Orders, and the
forementioned Proposals; and not recede one hairs breadth from them. But must
take care not to run the Pope into streights, and bring him under a necessity
of holding a Council; though he be never so hardly pressed by King Ferdinand
himself.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOKS IX.
The CONTENTS.
George Duke of Saxony his Malicious Artifice to discover the Protestants,
related. He complains of Luther to his Cozen German the Elector of Saxony. Pope
Clement marries his Niece at Marseilles to Henry Duke of Orleans, Son to the
French King. The Duke of Wirtenburgh is outed of his Dominions. Henry King of
England is divorced from his Queen, and denies the Pope's Supremacy. The
misfortune of the Franciscans at Orleans described. The Duke of Wirtenburg has
his Country recovered for him by the Lantgrave. A Peace concluded between
Ferdinand and the Elector of Saxony. The Articles of it explained. Paul Farnese
is chosen Pope upon the death of Clement. A new Persecution in France,
occasioned by the fixing of Papers in several places, containing Disputes about
Religion. A great many are burned upon this account. The French King excuses
his Severity to the Germans. The Emperor takes the Town of Tunis, and the
Castle Gulette. Sir Thomas More and the Bishop of Rochester are beheaded in
England. Pope Paul intimates a Council at Mantua by his Nuncio Vergerius. The
Protestants also who were now convened at Smalcalde; after they had debated the
Point, write an Answer to Vergerius. The French King sends his Ambassador
Langey to this Convention, who presses them to enter into a League; and
touches upon a great many Heads, to which the Protestants return an Answer.
The King of England also dispatcheth an Embassy thither to put them in mind
what Consequences may reasonably be expected from the Council. The League made
at Smalcalde is renewed and strengthened by the addition of a great many
Princes and Cities.

WHen they had given the Ambassadors this Answer, they made these following
Decrees: First, That a Committee of Divines and Lawyers should be chosen to
draw up a Scheme of those Points which they were to insist upon at the Council
in relation to Form and Debate. 2ly, That their Answer to the Pope should be
published, and imparted to foreign Princes and States. 3ly, They decreed to
dispatch away their Agents to the Judges of the Chamber of Spire, who has
prosecuted some Persons upon the account of their Religion, contrary to the
Emperors Edict. Which Prosecutions, if they were not ceased, the Protestants
resolved to demurr to the Jurisdiction of their Court. 4ly, That an Embassy
should be sent to the Elector of Mentz and the Palsgrave, who were Princes of
the Mediation; and an account of all their Proceedings transmitted afterward
in writing to the Emperor.

I have already mentioned in several places that George Duke of Saxony had a
particular hatred to Luther's Person, George Duke of Saxony makes Search after
the Lutherans.
as well as a general aversion to his Doctrine. Now this Prince understanding
that many of his Subjects maintained that the Lords Supper was to be received
according to our Savior's Command, ordered the Parochial Clergy that those who
came to them at Easter and confessed themselves conformably to the ancient
Custom, and received the Eucharist according to the Canons of the Church of
Rome; should have Tickets given them, which they were to deliver into the
Senate, that so the Roman Catholics and the Lutherans might be distinguished.
This scrutiny discovered seventy Persons at Leipsick (the Capital Town of that
Country) without Tickets: These Persons had consulted Luther* before what they
should do, who wrote them word, that those who were justly persuaded that the
Communion was to be received in both kinds, should do nothing against their
Conscience, but rather run the hazard of losing their Lives. This advice kept
them constant to their Opinion; so that when they were summoned to appear
before their Prince, and had almost two months time allowed to consider; they
could not be prevailed upon to alter their Resolution, though they* were singly
dealt withal in private; but rather chose to be banished the Town, which was
executed accordingly. Luther in the Letter which I spoke of, called the Duke of
Saxony, The Devil's Apostle. This Language made a great Noise and Disturbance,
and the Duke immediately complained against him in a Letter to the Elector his
Cozen German, that he had not only affronted, and railed on him; but that he
endeavored to harangue his Subjects into a Rebellion. Luther publishes a Book
to justify himself.
The Elector writes to Luther about it, and tells him, among other things, that
unless he can clear himself of the Crime objected against him, he must be
forced to punish him. This made Luther purge himself in Print, where he
affirms, that he did not advise any persons to resist their Prince, though his
Commands were wicked, but rather submit to Banishment: Now this cannot in any
reasonable Construction be called teaching of Rebellion. Those only are
chargeable with that Imputation, who assert the Magistrate may be lawfully
resisted by force of Arms. And as for the Duke, his swearing his Subjects to
Persecute the reformed Religion, he refers it to all Men of sense to determine
how defensible such a method is: Nay he knows his temper so well, that if the
Prince Elector should oblige his own Subjects to return him any usage of the
like nature, he does not question but that he would look upon it as Seditious.
Now as touching Magistracy and Laws, no Man can raise their Character and
Sacredness higher, nor represent them with more advantage than he has done in
his Writings. Indeed when Popery governed Christendom, this Doctrine concerning
Magistrates underwent the same fate with other material Truths, the mistakes
about it making part of the ignorance of those things; for then most People
were persuaded that such an active sort of life was not acceptable to God
Almighty. But those who advance such Tenants as these, are Seditious to
purpose, and St. Peter has given us a Prophetic description of their doom. But
he did wonder at the Duke's accusing him in this manner; for the Professors of
the true Religion have always been loaded with the Charge of Sedition. Our
Savior himself was haled away, and ignominiously put to death under this
pretense, as if he designed to set up himself for a King, and endeavored to
draw off the People from their Allegiance to the Emperor. To this little Book
he added a Consolatory Letter to the Leipsickers who were banished; exhorting
them to bear their present Adversity patiently, and also to give God thanks for
that Fortitude and Constancy which they have hitherto showed. That the
satisfaction which the Enemies of the Gospel took in their success, would not
last long, but fall off sooner than was generally imagined; As all their former
Attempts by the especial Mercy of God had been disappointed, and brought to
nothing. I have already mentioned the Interview between the Emperor and Clement
the Seventh: Now when the Emperor was returned into Spain, the Pope at the
request of the French King sailed through the Sea of Genoa to Marseilles, where
he arrived in Autumn; and that there might be a more intimate Correspondence
between them, An account of the Family of the Medices.
he married his Niece, Catharine de Medices, to Henry the Kings Son, who was
Duke of Orleance, and about fifteen years of age. And in regard the occasion
seems to require it, I shall give a short account here of the Family of the
Medices. Sylvester, Averard and John, stand in the Head of the Pedigree, and
were Noblemen of Florence; But Cosmo was the first who raised the Grandeur of
the Family, being far the richest Man, not only of his own City, but of all
Italy* Cosmo his Son Peter begat Laurence and Julian; Julian had a Son born
after his death called Julius, who was afterward Clement the Seventh, although
there are different Reports concerning his Extraction. Laurence had Peter,
Julian and John, who was at last Pope Leo the Tenth. Julian left no Children:
Peter who was banished Florence, and afterward cast away in a Storm at the
mouth of Garigliano; had a Son named Laurence, who married a French Woman, of
the House of Bolen, and had this Catharine we now speak of, by her. The Pope
staid about a month at Marseilles, and before he returned home to oblige the
King and his Nobility, he made four French Men Cardinals, Clement creates four
French Men Cardinals.
whom he knew to be the Kings Favorites, viz. Odet Castillon, Philip of Bolen,
Claude Gifre, and John Vener Bishop of Lisieux. Most People believed this
Affinity would produce a change of Affairs in Italy; and the disproportion of
the Match was generally wondered at: Nay they say Clement himself doubted the
Event, and scarce believed the French King in earnest, The Lantgrave endeavors
the Restitution of Ulrick Duke of Wirtemburg.
till the Marriage was consummated. Some few months after the Lantgrave took a
Journey to the French King, the occasion of it was this: In the year 1519.
Vlrick Duke of Wirtemburg was expelled his own Dominions by the Confederates of
the League of Schwaben, because he had lately taken Ruteling a Town of the
Empire, and under the Protection of the League: This Country the Emperor
purchased of the Confederates, and afterward gave it his Brother Ferdinand
when they divided their Inheritance. Now in the Diet at Auspurg several of the
Princes interceded that Vlrick, who had now been banished eleven years, might
be restored: But this motion was to no purpose, for the Emperor at that time
after he had declared the Reasons at large why Vlrick was dispossessed, he
publicly gave his Brother the Ducal Ornaments and Badges of Sovereignty for
that Country. The Lantgrave therefore who was nearly related to the Duke, and
very much his Friend, had thoughts of attempting something in his behalf at
that juncture, but being disappointed by Persons, who had promised their
assistance, he deferred his Design till he had a better opportunity. But now
the Emperor being absent, and the League of Schwaben which was made for a
eleven years past exired, away he goes for France and Mortgages Mount
Pellicarde to the King in Duke Vlrick his name, 1534.
for a certain sum of Money; Upon condition, that if the Duke did not discharge
the Mortgage within three years, the Premises should be annexed to the Crown of
France. Besides this Sum, the King promised to lend him another, and gave him
some hopes, that he would not demand it again.

At this time there was a very great alteration of Affairs in England, A great
Revolution in England.
which happened in this manner; Henry the Seventh, King of England had two
Sons, Arthur and Henry. Arthur married Catharine, Daughter to Ferdinand King of
Spain, and died without Issue. Henry the Father who desired the Alliance he had
contracted with Spain might be continued, procured a Dispensation from Pope
Julius the Second, and got Catharine contracted to his other Son, who succeeded
him in the Kingdom at his death, in the year 1509. Henry the Eighth therefore
who married this Lady soon after his Father died, when he had reigned a great
many years, and was well settled in his Kingdom, acquaints some of the Bishops
that he was dissatisfied in his Conscience; puts them upon an Enquiry, whether
it was lawful for a Man to marry his Brothers Relict, and as it is said
abstained from the Queen's Bed for several months. The Bishops, by the King's
Order, discourse the Queen privately, and acquaint her that the Popes Bull was
not sufficient nor authentic. She answered, that it was too late to complain
of the Bull now, since they had approved it so long before.

And when the Dispute began to grow warm, the Pope's assistance was desired to
determine the Matter. The Queen had miscarried several times, neither did any
of her Children live, excepting the Princess Mary. The Pope therefore undertook
the Cause, and delegated the hearing of it to the Cardinals Campegio and York.
And after a long debate, when the King had hopes given him from Rome, that
things should go on his side, Campegio, by the Pope's Order, when he was just
upon the Point of the Sentence, began to draw back, and to throw in delays.
This Turn they say was occasioned by the death of General Lautrech, and the
loss of the French Army before Naples, Andrew Auria likewise happening to
revolt from Francis at the same time; which made the Pope conclude that the
Emperor, Catharines Nephew by her Sister, who was now so prosperous in Italy,
ought not in prudence to be disobliged. Campegio therefore at last leaves
England, without bringing the Affair to any point, at which the King was
extremely dissatisfied. But that he might not seem to do any thing rashly, he
dispatched away several Agents into France, Italy, and Germany, to Collect the
sense of the Divines concerning his Marriage; The Parisians and most of the
rest seemed to declare for the unlawfulness of it, though they were suspected
to be bribed into their opinion: Now there was one Anne Bolen in the Queens
Service, an incomparable handsome Maiden-Lady; This Person the King began to
set his Affections upon, and discovered intelligibly enough that he had a mind
to marry her. As soon as Cardinal Woolsey who was most intimate with the King,
and as they say, moved first for the Divorce, understood this design, he
changed his Resolution, and writing to the Pope, advised him not to null the
Marriage; for if he did, another Woman infected with Lutheranism, would succeed
Catharine.

When the King was acquainted with the Cardinals proceedings, by his Ambassador
at Rome, he was very much offended with him, and not long after removed him
from his Office of Lord Chancellor, and deprived him of two of the three
Bishoprics which he held. At last being reduced to a private Life, and letting
fall some passionate indecent Expressions, importing a desire of revenge; The
King commanded him to dismiss the greatest part of his Servants, and to come to
Court with a small Retinue. Woolsey dies with discontent.
The Cardinal not being able to avoid it, sets forward, but before he reached
the King, he fell into an acute Distemper contracted by the dissatisfaction of
his mind, and died upon the way. Now the Pope, that Campegio might have some
pretense for coming away, revokes the Cause to himself at Rome. And foreseeing
the Marriage with Anne Bolen would be of very ill consequence to himself, he
plies the King with Admonitions, and sometimes with Threatenings, to give over
his design: But not being able to prevail there, upon the 24th of March this
year, to oblige the Emperor, he gave Judgment on the Queens side. When the King
was already divorced from her, had declared his Daughter Mary Illegitimate, and
married the other Lady above a year since. As soon as the King understood that
Sentence was pronounced against him, he began to hate the Pope mortally, and
immediately passes an Act, in which he declares himself Head of the Church of
England next after Christ, denies all manner of Obedience to the Sea of Rome,
and makes it death for any one to maintain the Pope's Supremacy: Peter Pence
forbidden.
He likewise refuses to pay the yearly Tax which the Pope's Collector used to
receive, and forbids the Conveyance of any Money to Rome under severe Penalties;
all which Injunctions were confirmed by the States of the Realm, which they
call a Parliament. Francis the French King is thought to have struck a
Considerable stroke in this Divorce, that he might make an irreconcilable
Breach between Henry and the Emperor. As concerning the Tax which I mentioned,
the Case stands thus: Ine King of England in the year 740. out of a sense of
Piety made his Kingdom Tributary to the Pope, (as the History of those times
informs us) and charged every house with the payment of a penny. From that time
the Popes sent their Collectors thither yearly to receive this Duty, which was
commonly called Peter Pence. This payment having been made by the English
without any Interruption from the first Grant, this Henry was the first who
forbad the Continuance of it any longer.

I have given an account in the Fourth Book how Luther and Erasmus wrote
against each other concerning the Subject of Free Will. A Pique between Luther
and Erasmus.
This year the Pique between them broke out again: For Luther in a Letter to a
Friend takes occasion to charge Erasmus very high, as if he ridiculed the
Christian Religion, and exposed it to question and contempt; and cites several
places in his Writings to make good his Accusation. He also objected, that the
other had an equivocal two-handed way in expressing himself, and made a
Tyrannical use of his Elocution; And in regard he takes the liberty to play
with religious Arguments at that ambiguous rate, when he both can, and is
obliged to be more clear, he ought always to be construed in the worst sense.
This Letter was afterward answered by Erasmus, and smartly too, who was more
sensibly concerned for nothing than to keep up the Reputation of his own
Writings. The Imposture of the Francisca^s at Orleans.
About this time the Franciscans made a strange tragical piece of Work of it,
at Orleans in France. The thing was thus; The Provost's Wife of that Town had
ordered in her Will to be buried without any Ceremony or noise. For when any
one dies in France, it is the Custom for Funeral Cryers, who are hired for this
purpose, to go about the principal Streets in the City, and call the common
people together with their hand-Bells. When they have done this, they tell the
Name and Quality of the Person deceased, and exhorting the Company to pray to
God for his Soul; they let them know when and where he is to be buried. When
the Corpse goes to the Grave, the Mendicant Friars are usually invited to attend
it, and a great many Torches are carried before the Hearse. In these
Solemnities people commonly strive to outdo one another, for the more
expensive the Funeral is, the greater Crowd there is to see and admire it. But
this Woman I spoke of would have none of all this. Her Husband therefore who
loved her entirely, performed this part of her Will, and burying her by her
Father and Grandfather in the Franciscans Church, presented these Gentlemen
with no more than six Crowns; whereas they expected a much greater Sum.
Afterward when he felled a Wood and sold it, they desired him to give them
some Timber, but were denied: They took this very heinously, which, with their
former Disgust, made them resolve to revenge themselves upon him, by raising a
report, that his Wife was damned. The principal Contrivers of the Farce were
Coliman and Stephen of Arras, both of them Divines and Preachers. The first was
likewise an Exorcist, and had all his Conjuring Artillery ready, which was
proper upon such occasions. Now they threw their business into this method.
They ordered one of their Novices to plant himself upon the roof of the Church;
This young Fellow in the dead of the night, when they came to mutter over their
prayers, according to their custom, makes a great noise, upon this alarm they
presently let fly some Conjurations and Exorcisms at him; but not a word would
he speak: When they bid him make a sign to let them know if he was a dumb
Spirit, he falls a clattering again at a very considerable rate, by which they
were to understand that he could not converse more intelligibly with them. When
their Plot was thus well grounded, they go and make a Visit to some eminent
Citizens of the Town, who had a particular regard for them: Here they relate
that a sad Accident had befallen them as Home, without mentioning what it was,
but desired them that they would please to come to their Nocturnals: As soon as
these Townsmen came thither, and Prayers were begun, the Gentleman upon the top
of the House makes a rout and a disturbance as his Superiors had directed him.
When they asked him what he would have, and who he was, he let them understand
that he had not the liberty to speak: upon this they command him to make signs
to their questions. Now there was a hole in the Roof, by laying his Ear to
which, he could understand what the Exorcist said: besides he had a Board in
his hand which he stroke with that force upon every question, that they might
hear him below in the Church. The first thing they asked him was, whether he
was buried there? Then they named a great many of those who were interred
there, till at last they came to the Provosts Wife. Here he makes a sign to let
them know he was her Spirit: Then they ask him, whether he was damned, and for
what? 2. Whether it was for Covetousness or Pride, or Lewdness or
Uncharitableness, or for Luther's new Heresy? Lastly, they would know what he
meant by that bustle and stir? Whether he would have his body dug up out of
that holy place, and carried some whither else? He makes answer to all these
questions as he had been preinstructed, by signs, which stood for Yes, or No,
according as he gave two or three knocks upon the Board: And when he had let
them understand that he was damned for the Lutheran Heresy, and that his Body
must be dug up; the Monks desired the Townsmen they had brought thither to
make Affidavit of what they had seen, and subscribe the Register which they had
lately made of this Accident: This the Townsmen upon consideration refused to
do, for fear of disobliging the Provost, and bringing themselves into trouble:
The Franciscans notwithstanding take up their unleavened Wafer, which they call
the Host, and Body of our Lord, together with all the Relics of the Saints,
and carry them to another place, and there they say their Mass. This custom the
Church of Rome enjoins the Priests to observe, when any place of Devotion is to
be consecrated over again, for lying under the Censure of ill Reports and
Profanation: And there is a particular Order in their Rituals what they are to
do upon such an occasion. When the Bishops Ecclesiastical Judge, whom they call
his Official, heard this Relation, he resolved to understand the bottom of the
matter, and therefore comes to the place himself and brings several
considerable Persons along with him; bidding the Monks begin their Exorcisms,
and that some of the Company should go upon the Roof and see if they could
discover any Apparition. Now Stephen of Arras did not like this way by any
means, but dissuaded them from it with all the earnestness imaginable, for the
Spirit he said ought not to be disturbed. And though the Official was very
urgent to set them a Conjuring, yet he could not prevail. In the mean time the
Provost after he had acquainted the other Judges of the Town with his
Intentions, goes to Court and relates the whole Story to the King. And because
the Monks insisted upon their Privileges and Exemptions, and refused to
acknowledge the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Secular Magistrate; The King sends
a Commission to certain Persons of the Parliament of Paris to try the Cause,
and gives them full Power for Examination and Sentence: The same Authority was
given them by the Chancellor, Anthony du Praet, who was a Cardinal and the
Pope's Legate for France. Therefore having nothing to except against their
Judges, they were carried to Paris, and forced to plead to the Indictment: but
no Confession could be gotten out of them. However they kept them under
distinct Confinements: The Novice was secured in the house of one Fume a
Gentleman of the Parliament, and was often pressed to a discovery, but would
make none, for fear of being murdered by his Confederates for disgracing their
Order. But when the Judges promised him a Pardon, and that he should not be
returned into the Jurisdiction of his Fraternity, he gave a full account of the
whole Intrigue: And being confronted by the other Criminals, maintained his
Testimony to their Faces. These Monks notwithstanding they were convicted and
taken almost in the very act; yet they excepted against their Judges, and made
a noise with their Privileges. But this was to no purpose, for they were
condemned by the whole Court to be sent back to Orleance, and imprisoned, and
then to be brought publicly to the Cathedral and to the place of Execution,
and there to make an acknowledgment of their Lewdness. But at this time there
happened to be a Persecution against the Lutherans, as I shall show afterward,
which was the reason why the Sentence was not executed, though it was a very
gentle one, considering the nature of the Crime. For Lutheranism being so
violently hated, they were afraid if any severity had been used, it would have
looked more like an affront to the Society, than a punishment of the
Malefactors of it: And whatever they had suffered, most people believed the
Lutherans would have been extraordinarily pleased with it. Now the Order of the
Franciscans has a great Reputation for Sanctity with the generality. And when
these Brothers were condemned at Paris, and carried away to Orleans, several
Women out of mere pity went sighing and weeping after them to the Gate of the
Town. When they came to Orleans, they were committed to distinct Prisons, where
they insisted again very strongly upon their Immunities and Privileges. And at
last, after a long Imprisonment, they were set at liberty without undergoing
any greater Punishment. During their Imprisonment they were very liberally
supplied with Money, especially by the Women, who furnished them sufficiently,
both for the procuring of Diet and Interest too. But if that Persecution and
burning of Christians, which I just hinted had not happened, and taken the King
from his design, he was resolved, as they say, to have pulled down their
Convent, Apparitions frequent in the times of Popery.
and levelled all their Works. And here we may observe that before the
Reformation there was abundance of Apparitions. For the Spirits of the dead, as
was supposed, used to be very troublesome to this World as soon as their
Funeral was over; and come and tell people either why they were damned, or
tormented for a time in Purgatory; begging their near Relations or Friends to
have pity on them. Now it was common for them to desire either that their Vows
which they had made to the Saints might be discharged, or that the Prayers and
Sacrifice of the Mass might be repeated as often as they gave directions for
their enlargement. This practice confirmed the belief of Purgatory wonderfully,
and gave a mighty Reputation to Masses, and enriched the Priests more than can
be well imagined. But after Luther's Doctrine appeared, and got Footing, these
Goblins went off by degrees and vanished. For Luther proves from the Holy
Scriptures that departed Souls are at rest, and confined till the last
Judgment: And that those Disturbances, those horrible Noises and Sights are
caused by the Devil; who omits no opportunity to establish an unlawful Worship,
and to confirm Men in mistaken Notions concerning Religion, that so he may make
the Incarnation of our Savior ineffectual.

The Lantgrave after he had contracted with the French King, The Lantgrave his
Expedition.
raises an Army in the beginning of the Spring, and before he proceeded any
farther, the Duke of Wirtemburg and himself wrote to King Ferdinand to justify
what they had done; but receiving no other satisfaction from Ferdinand, than
that he was willing to have the Difference decided by Law; at last they brought
their Men into the Field: And upon the 13th of May meeting with the Enemy, who
were ten thousand strong in Foot, they played their Cannon upon them, and
routed them near Laufen, a Town in the Dukedom of Wirtemburg. Philip Prince
Palatine who was Ferdinand's General, was wounded with a Musket Shot in this
Action, and lost his Feet; And a great many of his Soldiers were drowned in the
River Neckar, which they attempted to cross in their flight. After this Defeat
almost all the Dukedom of Wirtemburg submitted to Vlrick their Prince. And at
last Auspurg which was built upon an extraordinary steep Rock, together with
Aurach, Tubingen and Nipha, all strong Forts upon the account of their
situation, surrendered themselves. Upon the first of May Ferdinand published a
Proclamation, and wrote particularly to all the Protestants, That none should
be aiding to the Faction of these Princes, but resist them to the utmost of
their Power. The Emperor also set forth an Edict to the same purpose a few days
before; insomuch that no body gave them any assistance openly, and all Peoples
thoughts were in suspense and concerned about the Consequences of this
Commotion. A Pacification between Ferdinand and the Elector of Saxony.
While this War was carrying on, the Archbishop of Mentz and George Duke of
Saxony, who was Father in law to the Lantgrave, endeavored a Reconciliation
between King Ferdinand and the Elector of Saxony; and at last, upon the 29th of
June, they concluded a Pacification upon these Conditions: That no Violence
should be offered upon the account of Religion, nor no Law Suits commenced; and
that the Peace which the Emperor had made, should be kept: That Ferdinand, by
the Emperors Authority, should stop all manner of Processes of the Chamber of
Spire against the Protestants, under which denomination neither the
Anabaptists, nor the Sacramentarians, nor such other Sectarists, were to be
comprehended: The Elector of Saxony and his Confederates should be obliged to
acknowledge Ferdinand King of the Romans, and give him that Title. Ferdinand
also engaged himself to procure a Decree of the Emperor and the rest of the
Electors to this effect; When there shall be an occasion to make a King of the
Romans in the Emperor's life time, that then the Electors shall meet
beforehand, and consult whether there is good and sufficient reason for such a
creation; if it appears there is, then they shall proceed according to the Form
of the Caroline Law: All Creations contrary to this Provision shall be reputed
null: In case this Decree is not made within ten months, the Elector of Saxony
and his Allies are not to be obliged by this Treaty: The Emperor likewise shall
within the said term confirm the Elector of Saxony his Succession to his
Fathers and Ancestors Dominions. And lastly, that Ferdinand should endeavor to
get the Emperor's Approbation of the Elector of Saxony his Marriage, with the
Duke of Cleave's Daughter. While these things were debating, A Treaty between
Ferdinand and the Duke of Wirtemburg.
another Treaty was brought on; where the Elector of Saxony engages as a
Person Commissioned by the Lantgrave and the Duke of Wirtemburg, that those
Princes will make good whatever is concluded by him: At last, after a long
Dispute, which continued till all the Dukedom was recovered by force, they came
to this Agreement: By virtue of which Duke Vlrick and his Heirs-Male were to
come under Vassalage to Ferdinand as Archduke of Austria, and hold the Dukedom
of Wirtemburg of him as Lord of the Fee: And if the Family of the Wirtemburgs
should happen to be extinct, or have no Heirs-Male, that then this Territory
was to descend upon the Archdukes of Austria, who were to hold it of the
Empire, to which they should be obliged to pay Homage and Service upon this
account: Vlrick was bound to acknowledge Ferdinand King of the Romans; and
never enter into any League against him: The Lantgrave and Vlrick were to make
Restitution of those Estates and Goods which had been seized on during the War;
To force no persons to change their Religion; To permit the Clergy the
enjoyment of their Revenues without any molestation: That those who have
withdrawn either upon the account of danger or contempt, may return home, if
they please; and others who have a mind to depart the Country, shall have the
liberty to carry their Effects with them: The Ordnance with which Auspurg was
fortified, shall be delivered to Ferdinand: The money which Ferdinand has
borrowed and converted to his own use, he shall pay himself; but that which
has been laid out for the advantage of the Country, shall be discharged by
Vlrick: Duke Vlrick and his Heirs shall do Homage to Ferdinand and his Heirs,
Kings of Bohemia, for those Lands in the Duchy of Wirtemburg, which they hold
of that Kingdom: Philip Prince Palatine and the rest of the Prisoners shall be
dismissed without Ransom: The Lantgrave and Vlrick are obliged within a
certain time to be specified, to beg King Ferdinand his Pardon either in their
own Persons, or by their Ambassadors; at which time the Duke shall be put into
full Possession by Ferdinand, who promises to intercede for their Pardon with
the Emperor also. Nothing shall be required of either side for the Charges of
the War. The Lantgrave and Vlrick oblige themselves to supply Ferdinand with
five hundred Horse and 3000 Foot out of the Forces they have now in pay, and to
send them at their own Charge to the Siege of Munster, where they shall swear
Allegiance to Ferdinand, and continue in his Service for three months if there
be occasion. Sabina Vlrick his Duchess shall enjoy her Jointure without any
Interruption. Lastly, this Treaty shall be ratified by the Nobility and all the
Commons.

Munster a City of Westphalia which the Anabaptists had possessed themselves
of, was besieged at that time, as shall be showed afterward in its proper
place; Now to carry on this Siege Ferdinand required Supplies of them. Vlrick
Duke of Wirtemburg recovereth his Country.
And here we may observe, that at last when the Territory of Wirtemburg was
almost all recovered, the money was brought to the Duke which the French King
agreed to lend upon the Mortgage; though it is true it was none of the King's
fault that it came no sooner, but his Treasurers, who disliking the drawing of
the Conveyance, delayed the affair longer than his Majesty intended. Now when
the Peace was concluded, and the Army disbanded, the other money came which the
King promised to furnish him with, without Security. But before the year came
about, Vlrick paid off the Mortgage, and redeemed Mount Pellicarde: As for the
money that was borrowed upon Honor, which was no inconsiderable Sum, the King
made him a Present of it.

Peter Paul Vergerius the Pope's Nuncio took this Pacification very ill, and
reprimanded King Ferdinand in his Master Clement's Name for coming to an
Accommodation with the Lutheran Princes. The King told him, he did it only to
prevent greater Broils and Disturbances, and that he was obliged to comply with
the necessity of the times. Christopher Ulrick Duke of Wirtemburg his Son.
When Vlrick was banished his Country, his Son Christopher was about four years
of age, who at first was Educated by William Duke of Bavaria his Uncle, but
afterward he was sent to Inspruck a Town under Ferdinand his Jurisdiction. And
when the Emperor upon the Turk's retreat, returned into Italy, which I have
already mentioned; Then this young Prince left the Emperor's Train, and went
into Bavaria, which was hard by his Fathers Dominions; being before advised and
importuned by his Relations and Friends to make this Escape. For he being the
only Heir, it was thought the Austrian Party had a design to carry him into a
foreign Country, and make him a Clergyman. But after his Father was restord he
traveled into France, and put himself into King's Service. The Lantgrave his
Letter to the Emperor.
After things were accommodated, the Lantgrave upon the 21st of July wrote to
the Emperor into Spain by a Currier, where he acquainted him with the
Conditions of the Pacification, and begged his Pardon for himself and Duke
Vlrick, and promised that both of them would pay his Majesty and King Ferdinand
all Obedience for the future. To this the Emperor returns him an answer from
Valencia, dated September the first, in which he tells him, that he had
received an account of the whole business from his Brother Ferdinand. To whom
he had already declared his Resolution in writing, and now had sent his
Ambassador to do it by word of mouth. Therefore he refers him to his
Brother, who would shortly acquaint him with his Clemency and Inclination to
Peace; afterward he advises him to make good his promise, and show himself
obedient, and not to engage in any turbulent Designs. During the Wars in the
Duchy of Wirtemburg, Francis Sforza marries.
Francis Sforza the Second, Duke of Milan, married Christina, Daughter to
Christiern the Captive King of Denmark, and Niece to the Emperor by his Sister.
The French King was about to make War upon this Duke, but the death of Clement
the Seventh with whom he had lately entered into a League, Clement the Seventh
dies.
was thought to have hindered him from prosecuting his Design at present. This
Pope died at the later end of September of a distemper in his Stomach, which
had continued a great while upon him, and was occasioned by his altering his
Diet in his old age, which he did by the advice of his Physician Curtio. Paul
the Third chosen Pope.
Paul the Third of the House of Farnese was his Successor, who not long after
created Alexander and Ascanio Cardinals, both of them his own Grandchildren,
and very much under the age of Manhood; his natural Son Aloisio was Father to
the former, and the other was the Son of his Daughter Constanza. Afterward he
recalls Vergerius out of Germany, and enquires concerning the State of Religion
there, and consults with the Cardinals how they may prevent a National Council,
till, by private and unsuspected Contrivances, they have embroiled the Emperor
and other Princes in a War. At last he resolved to send Vergerius back into
Germany, to proffer that Nation a general Council as they call it. More
particularly his Instructions were to take care that his proceedings might not
be like those of Clement, fall under the suspicion of artifice and reserve, and
that he should go to all the Princes, acquainting them that the Pope would call
a Council at Mantua, and there the Regulations of it should be settled: But he
was more especially to observe what Form the Protestants would insist upon in
reference to the Qualifications, Votings, and Disputations of the Council, that
when this was known, there might be such Terms and Laws imposed upon them,
which he was assured they would not consent to: He also commanded him to
exasperate the Princes of the Empire against the King of England, whose
Dominions he was now thinking to give to any Body that could Conquer them: He
was likewise to consider if there was no possible Expedient to bring over
Luther and Melancton. In this Consistory there were nine Cardinals and Bishops
pitched upon to draw up a Form for the Reformation of Ecclesiastical Persons,
and Concerns, which afterward became public, as shall be discoursed in its
place. Now the reason why Vergerius was sent back into Germany, was, because
King Ferdinand had recommended him to the Pope, as a Person extraordinarily
well qualified for the manage of that Employment.

At this time Andrew Grittus was Doge of Venice, Andrew Grittus Doge of Vinice.
Lewis Andrew his Son.
a Person of very great Reputation for his Prudence and Experience. This
Nobleman when he lived at Constantinople had a natural Son named Lewis, who
being brought up there from his Childhood, and having by his singular Industry
and Ingenuity, raised a vast Estate, and gained himself a considerable Interest
by his Liberality; got acquainted with the Courtiers first, and afterward by
the Recommendation of Ibrahim the Grand Vizier, who then had the sole direction
of Affairs, was so well known to Solomon, that he admitted him to a private
Discourse. And pursuing this lucky opportunity, he worked himself so far into
Solyman's Favor; that at last he was sent into Hungary with a very splendid
and numerous Attendance, having a Commission to possess himself of that part of
Sclavonia which bordereth upon the Venetians; but the lower Hungary (of which
Belgarde is the Capital Town) he was to Govern as the Grand Seignior's
Lieutenant. His Son Anthony was Bishop of Five-Churches, and very near greater
Preferment; for Pope Clement, to oblige his Father and Grandfather, intended to
make him a Cardinal. But then the remarkable Turn came in, for which Lewis
promised himself no less than a Kingdom, and had his Expectations stretched to
the height in all respects. His Father likewise being mightily transported with
his Son's Success, there was a Faction formed against him upon the account of
some misunderstanding, by which he was taken Prisoner and beheaded, A
Persecution in France.
much about the time that Paul the Third came to the Popedom. This year there
was a Persecution raised in France against those who were any ways suspected of
Lutheranism, the occasion was this; At Paris and in some other places, not
excepting the King's Palace, there were Papers posted up in the night,
containing a great many Controversal Disputes, especially concerning the Mass:
Upon this there was diligent enquiry made after the Criminals, some of which
were discovered by Informers, others were apprehended upon suspicion, and put
to the Question, and both sorts of them burned after a barbarous manner: For
they were tied to a Pulley and drawn up a great height, then they let them down
into the fire, and presently after snatched them up again; at last the
Executioner cut the Rope and dropped them in the Flames. Those who were thought
to be a little more learned than the rest, had their Tongues cut out before
they were brought to the Stake, lest they should tell the people why they
suffered, and what they believed. John Morin under-Provost was a very fit
Person to carry on this Cruelty. For as he was very dextrous in finding out
those who were in the least suspected, so when they were once convicted, he
punished them with that rigor, which showed he had scarce any thing of the
tenderness of humanity in him. Notwithstanding there came out a little Book of
an unknown Author, written in French against the religious Hucksters of those
times; the Pamphlet was pleasant enough, but yet with a mixture of gravity. And
first he tells us, that Trade is a Calling neither uncreditable, nor
unprofitable to the State, if we can but stand clear of cheating and
covetousness. For our Savior took his Similitude from this sort of Employment,
when he commands us to make use of the Talent we have received, that it may
turn to account, which place is to be understood in a figurative sense; For
there is nothing more unbecoming the Character of a Churchman, than the least
reasonable suspicion of his being inclined to enrich himself by sordid
advantages. Notwithstanding God being offended with our Sins, has not only
permitted Tradesmen of vast Fortunes to circumvent, but Thieves to rifle his
Church. For who can deny his being a Thief, who sells another Man's Goods for
his own, and counterfeit for right? Do you think the Buyer is not finely
cheated of his Money? But this has been our Misfortune long since; For in stead
of Shepherds, Woolves of an unusual greediness have worked themselves into the
Flock. And though no Man has Parts or Language to lay open all their Tricks,
yet I will venture to give you a taste. Now you must know that these Men we are
talking of, are wonderful subtle Merchants, and have laid in such a prodigious
Stock, that there is scarce any place or corner without a Shop of theirs in it,
and all this is done under a pretense of Holiness. Their Habit is different
from that of other people, and most of them have shaven Crowns. For none are
allowed to Traffic but those who have the Mark of the great Beast upon them.
These and these only are the Men who sell and barter, and chop, and that at all
times and seasons; whereas other people of Trade shut up their Shops upon
Holydays, especially upon those which are most remarkable. Besides, most of
them deal only in one sort of Merchandise, either for example in Wool or Silk,
or Corn or Wine, etc. But these Gentlemen lie idle at no time of the year, and
trade in all manner of Commodities; neither Men nor Women, Infants born, or in
Kelder, can escape them. Indeed there is nothing in nature but what they make
their Markets out of; Their avarice gets something by Heaven and Hell, they
make Time it self, and all Creatures not only living but inanimate, as it were,
Tributary to them; and set an Excise upon Bread and Wine, upon Oil, Flax, Milk,
Butter and Cheese, upon Water and Salt, Fire and Fumigations. Out of all these
Things they have Chemistry enough to extract Gold and Silver, to the great
Impoverishing of the People in their Fortunes; but especially in their Minds;
for the true Notions of God and Religion are corrupted and almost quite lost by
this means. I desire to know if it be not a cunning sort of a way to sell a
Commodity, and at a great rate too, and yet let the Buyer have nothing but the
sight of it? It Is a Proverb among other Tradesmen, when they show their Goods,
to say, Look and welcome, and it shall not cost you a ^arthing: But those we
are now describing are nothing so Frank. For supposing a Man dies, they
presently come to their Customers, and ask you, whether you will bestow a fine
Pall upon your Friend, or a course one? whether you will have a rich or an
ordinary Crucifix carried before him? For accordingly as you choose, you must
pay. Now pray what have you for your money? what do you carry off, excepting the
bare sight? for after they have shown their Wares a little, they fold them up,
and the next day sell them to another for as much. It Is much the same sort of
Trick to make a Man pay for the Tradesman's fine Clothes: Now this is done, for
a Mass shall cost you a great deal more, when an Abbot or a Bishop Officiates,
than when it is said by a plain Monk, or a Vicar. In which practice they are
just like Strumpets; for these Mortals when they are well dressed, always sell
their Lewdness the dearer. To this we may add their selling the same entire
Thing to several Persons at the same time, which they do without letting the
Buyers be ever the wiser, especially in those places which are populous. For
example, a Gentleman comes to a Church of the Dominicans and desires a Mass,
the Monk agrees with him at such a price, soon after there comes another, a
third, and so on, desiring the same thing: At last the Religious comes out in
his Pontificalibus, and performing the Service, takes the whole Sum of every
Man, though they had but a single Mass among them all. This is ingenious you will
say: Besides, commonly they do not need any great Stock to set up with; for
they shall get you almost an Estate out of a piece of Wax: If any ordinary
Woman happens to come into a Church, and presents a Saints with a light Taper,
my Merchant is presently upon the Spot, whips up the Candle, and claps his
Extinguisher over it, and by repeating this method, sells it over and over
again to others. For you must note that most of them deal in Wax, the little
people manage it on the way, I just mentioned; but those who make any Figure,
such as those they call Officials, Public Notaries, Clerks of the Signet, and
Datary-Men, use it for Diploma's and other Writings. It Is true, the principal
Person of all, who calls himself Most holy, does not make use of any Wax, but
then he has a singular Art of turning Lead into Gold. Moreover, he makes
abundance of money of Hats, especially of Purple ones, which convey a wonderful
share of Quality into those who wear them, and makes them ambitious of showing
their considerableness in all public Appearances; upon such a Promotion they
fly as brisk as Bees about the Country, and usually dance after Princes Courts,
and enjoy the greatest Privileges: For they hold as many Benefices as they
please without any Charge or Encumbrance; And then their Order is such, that
they are but one Remove from the highest Dignity. This example has taught the
Sorbonists of Paris to sell their Caps too, to those who stand for Degrees in
Divinity, and to feast at the expense of the Candidates at a great rate. And
here I would gladly know, Whether John the Eighth, who they say was a Woman,
and brought to bed in the third year of her Popedom; first I say I would know
whether she was chosen by the direction of the Holy Ghost? then whether the
Titles to those Cardinalships, Bishoprics, and Abbeys, which she sold, are
good in Law? Lastly, what is to be thought of her indelible Character? But I
shall pursue my design, which is to show, that there is not a subtiler, more
ensnaring sort of people in the World than these Merchant-Adventurers. Don't we
see how they have hooked in vast Estates, and got Towns, Provinces, Kingdoms
and Empires into their Jurisdiction? Have they not often brought Kings and
Princes under their Girdle, stripped them of all their Fortunes, and reduced them
to the utmost streights? And now they are come to that height, as to defend
their Encroachments by force, and had rather Heaven and Earth should go
together, than that the least thing should be taken from them. Insatiable
Wolves! how exactly have the Prophets and Apostles described you many Ages ago,
especially St. Paul and St. Peter?

Other Tradesmen do not force their Goods upon any Man, but these Monsieurs
will make you buy in spite of your teeth; and if any refuses, they cry out
upon him for a Heretic. Suppose a Man dies very poor, and leaves Wife and
Children behind him, which makes the circumstances of the Family very sad, and
the Widow ought in all humanity to have some charitable assistance afforded
her. What do you think these Men do in this case? why they are so far from
pitying her, that they presently fly upon the Spoil, and after they have
muttered over a few Orisons, they demand a Treat, and money for their pains^ Now
what can be more unrighteous than for a Man to sell that which does not belong
to him, nay to sell it to those who have a right to it already, and the same
thing to several persons? Pray at whose Charge were the Bells cast? who does
the consecrated Ground belong to, I beseech them? Is it their Patrimony? no
such matter. Why then cannot we have a toll of a Bell nor a hole to bury us in
for nothing? why do they so often sell these things which do not belong to them
at such excessive Rates? I suppose they will say, they are Rights of the
Church: I grant it, but not of that Church which was founded, and washed, and
sanctified by our Savior; but of that in which they are concerned, where
Thievery, Rapine, and all manner of wickedness is so frequent: For our Savior
has commanded all these things to be given gratis. To proceed, it is a very
pleasant Comical sight to see these Vultures fight over a Carcass. For when any
person of Estate dies, they presently flock to him, and every one strives might
and main to carry off the Prey, especially those they call Mendicant Friars:
For it is common to see the Franciscans charge the Dominicans, and the
Carmelites at Daggers drawing with the Augustinians, striving who shall bury
the Corpse: A lazy sluggish sort of people they are, and not only Insignificant,
but very troublesome, and deserve if they were right served to be banished the
Commonwealth. These are notorious Truths, and cannot be denied; and yet people
are so wretchedly infatuated, that they will not understand what Spirit these
Men are of. When any Benefice or Dignity is void, bless us! what making of
Interest is there, what posting up and down, how narrowly do they enquire into
the value of it, how much a Resident, or non-Resident may raise out of it? How
much the Christenings and Marriages, the Relics of the Saints, Obits, Burials,
Legacies and Wills, may be worth to them? But their greatest gain is by those
Saints who have the reputation of being very powerful; as if like their Heathen
Vejovis's, they were ready to do a Man a Mischief, if they were not sweetened up
with Vows and Presents. That Princes should connive at such wicked, such
scandalous Practices! Why are their Majesty's so tame and so slow in their
resentments of so great an affront? It Is true, they refuse to be tried in their
Courts; but notwithstanding their Exceptions, you have a Jurisdiction over them
whether they will or no: For God has delivered the Sword into your hands, and
given you Authority to restrain Disorder; why do you not make use of it then,
and punish these merciless Sharks? God expects this Service from you, and will
not suffer the neglect of it to go unpunished. I heartily wish you were as
vigilant, and as much concerned in the promoting his Glory, as they are in the
management of their own business; for they never let ship any opportunity, but
are always upon duty, always waking, and in a posture of Intelligence, and look
out as sharp as Father Janus or Argus. If a Bell does but stir any where, away
they run. If a Person that is worth any thing happens to fall sick, they are
presently with him, and there is no getting rid of them, till they have rifled
the house of something or other. If any Body is to be married you have them
there too, where their Chastities will needs be saying their Prayers upon the
Bride-Bed: Indeed such mortified Saints as they are may do any thing, who live
Batchelors only to abuse married Men, and to debauch with the greater freedom.
Now the Character which I have given of these Gentlemen belongs to the
she-Traders too, of which there are several sorts, their common name is Nuns.
Now it is not to be expressed what a horrible deal of rank Idolatry these
Recluses have been the occasion of. O Lord be pleased after so long
forbearance, to appear in the Vindication of thy Honor, which ought not to be
shared by any created Beings.

This Butchering of Men which I have mentioned being begun in November, 1535.
in January following the King came to Paris, and to avert the wrath of God,
went in Procession to the Saints Churches, and was attended with a prodigious
crowd of people, St. Genevefe the Protectress of Paris.
who were very devout in their way. At Paris Genevefe, who was a Virgin, has a
greater Worship paid her than almost any other Saint. Now her Image was carried
in the Streets with the rest at this Solemnity; which is never done but in
great Extremities, either when they endeavor to remove some signal Judgment by
their Humiliation; or when they are about to fight an Enemy with the Forces of
the whole Kingdom; or when they are afraid of Scarcity and Famine: In such
cases they address themselves to this Lady as their only Refuge and Support;
and it is generally believed She is never invoked to no purpose. Her Image is
carried by the Butchers, according to ancient Custom, who for several days
before the Procession, prepare themselves by Prayer and Fasting for their
Employment. They have likewise Officers upon this occasion to clear the way,
which is done with a great deal of difficulty: For the people press upon the
Image with all the Devotion imaginable, and happy are they who can but touch it
with their Finger, or their Hat, or any part of their Linen. When Mass was
over, the King was entertained at the Bishop's Palace which was hard by; and
after Dinner, his Children, all his Nobility, and some foreign Ambassadors
being present; he made a very pathetical Harangue, in which he declared how
much he was troubled at the Insolence of some wicked Men: And after he had told
them at large how observant he had been of the Church, he charged them all to
have a care of this pestlent Sect, for whoever was convicted should most
certainly be punished. Nay he added, that if he knew any of his own Limbs were
infected, he would tear them from his Body, to stop so fatal a Cotagion. Now to
purge the Town from the guilt of Heresy, there were six brought to Execution
that day; who were fastn'd to Pulleys in the manner above mentioned, and burnt
in several places which the King was to pass in his return to the Louvre, and
it so happened that the Fires were kindled the same minute his Majesty came by,
and the poor Creatures begged of him to have pity on them. The custom in France
is to put Malefactors to death in the Afternoon; where first Silence is cried,
and then the Crimes for which they suffer are repeated aloud. But when any one
is executed for Lutheranism, as they call it; that is, if any Person has
disputed for Justification by Faith, not by Works, that the Saints are not to
be invocated, that Christ is the only Priest and Mediator for Mankind; or if a
Man has happened to eat Flesh upon forbidden Days; Not a syllable of all this
is published, but in general they Cry, That he has in effect renounced God
Almighty, behaved himself contemptuously toward the blessed Virgin, and the
rest of the Saints, and violated the Decrees of our common Mother Holy Church.
This aggravating way makes the Vulgar believe such Persons the most profligate
Wretches under the Cope of Heaven: insomuch that when they are broiling in the
Flame it is usual for the people to storm at them; cursing them in the height of
their Torments, as if they were not worthy to tread upon the Earth.

Now in regard the Turkish Ambassadors were in France at this time, The French
King writes to the Germans.
and the King understood that he was both suspected and hated in Germany upon
this account; Besides a great many were displeased at those Executions which I
just spoke of: Therefore upon the first of February he wrote to the Princes of
the Empire and all the States: And first he excuses his Correspondence with
the Turk, and then falls a Reflecting, that of late years some Persons (not
naming who) used to exchange Ambassadors with the Grand Seigneur, without
acquainting those with it who were concerned to know what they did: Nay to gain
their ambitious Designs, they have not stuck to pay a yearly Contribution to
the Port; whereas if he would but come up to a bare Neutrality, he might have
very advantageous Conditions of the Sultan, but he has refused them always
hitherto, and will do for the future, that other Kings and Princes may be
comprehended in that Peace; which good effect is hindered from taking place by
the ambition of these Men, of whose designs the Turk is very sensible; and
cannot endure they should grow so fast upon the World, for fear their Power
should prove troublesome to himself afterward: whereas was he once assured
that every one would be contented with his own Jurisdiction, and not encroach
upon his Neighbors; there is no question but that he would recall his Arms out
of Christendom, and employ all his Forces against other remoter Nations. It
lies in our Power therefore to take off so formidable an Enemy, without any
expense of blood and slaughter, and in his opinion it is the most prudential way
to treat with him about a Truce or a Peace, especially at this time when the
Church and State are so unfortunately embroiled with so many different and
perverse Persuasions in Religion. Now if it had pleased God Clement the Seventh
had lived longer, all this Controversy had been ended: For he had a great deal
of Discourse with him upon this Point, and nothing then hindered the intimating
of a Council, but that his Holiness had promised the Emperor to convene it in
Italy. Whereas he was of a contrary opinion; For seeing things were not
perfectly settled in Italy, the Emperor and the Pope having an Army on foot
there, neither was the reason of its continuance ceased as yet, he insisted
that a Council might be called in Germany; for while these Forces were kept up
in Italy, it was neither safe for him to go thither, for fear an actual War
should break out, nor yet for all the Germans, upon the account of their
different Religion: But that which could not be effected when Clement was Pope,
he heartily wishes might have a happy Issue under the Government of Paul the
Third. And here taking an occasion to commend this Pope, he said, That there
was no Simony, no exceptionable circumstance in his Election, and therefore he
needs not be afraid (as some have been) of appearing before a proper and lawful
Tribunal: And though it was not difficult for him to have promoted one of his
own Subjects to this Dignity, yet he chose rather to persuade those Cardinals
in which he had an Interest, to Elect this Person. And afterward when he was
created, he desired him both in his Letters, and by his Ambassadors, to call a
Council as soon as was possible in a safe and convenient place: Therefore he
would have them be of good cheer, and not despair of an Accommodation in
Religion, for he was resolved not to spare any pains, and desired only to know
what they would have him do for them with the Pope. Afterward he proceeds to
take off the other Objection, where he owneth that, contrary to his custom and
temper, he had been forced upon rigorous Methods by some bold and flagitious
Persons, who, under a color of Religion, endeavored the ruin of the Kingdom:
Therefore to stop this Plague of disloyalty from spreading, he had punished
them severely, as his Ancestors had also had done in the like cases. And if any
Germans had been taken among them, they should have been served all alike. For
if any of his own Subjects had committed the like Crimes in their Dominions, he
should not have been against their punishing of them with the utmost severity;
But to his great satisfaction there was never a German engaged with this wicked
Cabal, and therefore that Nation should be as welcome to his Kingdom, and to
his Court too, as the Frenchmen themselves. But he is sensible what the
Authors of these Calumnies drive at, they misrepresent him on purpose that they
may break off the Correspondence there is between France and Germany; which is
a very politic design, without question; for by creating such
Misunderstandings they have a better opportunity to compass their own Ends, and
make themselves Masters of both.

In the beginning of the Spring the Lantgrave went to King Ferdinand to
complete the Reconciliation, The Lantgrave goes to Ferdinand in order to a
Reconciliation.
according to agreement the last year. Peter Paul Vergerius was then lately
returned from the Pope to Ferdinand, and took this occasion to acquaint the
Lantgrave with his Instructions concerning the Council in the manner above
mentioned. To which he received no other answer, than that his Proposals should
be considered within such a time. After this Vergerius went, as he was ordered,
to the rest of the Princes, and negotiated with them. Now some few months after
the Lantgrave had been with King Ferdinand, Duke Vlrick made his appearance
before him too: And because they were not both of them there at the same time,
Ferdinand excused them the condition by which they were obliged to ask his
Pardon in a petitioning way. But Vlrick stomach'd that Article extremely, which
made him a Homager to the House of Austria, and was very angry with the
Lantgrave, and with the Elector of Saxony (who interceded) for complying with
it; insomuch that he was in suspense a great while, whether he should ratify
the Peace or not: The Emperor sails into Africa.
At last being persuaded by his Friends, he took a Journey to King Ferdinand,
as the Treaty obliged him. In April the Emperor set Sail from Barcelona, and
landed an Army in Africa, where after he had taken Tunis, and the Fort of
Gouletta, he restored Muley Hazem a Mahumetan, who was King of that Country,
and had been dispossessed by Barbarossa the Turkish Admiral: And having put
this Prince under Contribution, and fortified Gouletta with a strong Garrison,
he sailed back into Sicily. Pope Paul fitted out several Galleys for the
Emperor toward this War, under the Command of Virginius Vrsinus; and likewise
gave him the liberty to demand the Tenths of all the Clergy in Spain.
Barbarossa by the negligence and ill Conduct of the Christians, stole away to
Bone, and from thence to Argiers, where he rigged out his Fleet, Bishop Fisher
and Sir Thomas More are beheaded.
and sailed for Constantinople. There was at this time in England two very
eminent and learned Men, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More;
The Bishop has several Books now Extant against Luther: And More when he was
Lord Chancellor, which is the highest Office in that Kindom, was very severe
upon those whom he suspected to be Lutheans.

These Persons did not approve the King's Divorce, and much less that Act of
Parliament in which he threw off the Pope's Supremacy, and delcared himself
Head of the Church of England: Being committed therefore, and persisting in
their opinion, they were beheaded this year in July. The Pope made Rochester a
Cardinal when he was in the Tower, The death of Francis Sforza.
which it is thought did but provoke the King the more against him. About the
end of October Francis Sforza Duke of Milan died, leaving no Issue behind him.
This accident was the occasion of a new War, as will appear afterward.

In the mean time the Emperor left Sicily, and arrived at Naples, and from
thence wrote to the Protestants upon the last of November, acquainting them,
that he was resolved to stand to the Pacification at Nuremburg; but he was
informed, that they had seized upon the Fortunes of the Roman Catholics, and
when they were sued upon this account, they pleaded the Nuremburg Treaty in
their excuse, and refused to return the right Owners their Estates again. Now
this he thought was unreasonable, and could not choose but take it ill at their
hands. Much about this time the Elector of Saxony went into Austria to King
Ferdinand, Vergerius meets the Lantgrave at Prague.
and after he had dispatched his business, he came to Prague the Capital of
Bohemia in his return home, where he was accosted by Peter Paul Vergerius, whom
the Pope sent Nuncio into Germany to settle the Affairs about the Council, as
has been mentioned already. Vergerius relates his Commission to the Duke, and
tells him; That now the time was come for the celebrating a Council which had
so often been wished for, in regard his present Holiness, the Emperor, and King
Ferdinand made it their principal Concern to consider, how the Glory of our
Savior, and the Salvation of Men might be most effectually promoted; and the
same pious disposition was apparent in other Princes: The Pope likewise had
sent his Ambassadors into all parts, not for a color, but in good earnest: For
it was not his way to make large Promises, as some had done, and then act quite
contrary to what was pretended; but he was solicitous about nothing so much as
that they might come to the Point as soon as was possible, that a religious
Council might be held, and free for all People to come to. As to the place the
Pope, for very good reasons, thinks none proper but Mantua: concerning the Form
and Method of proceeding that may be better adjudg'd when they are convened,
than now. The Protestant Princes have always hitherto desired a lawful Council,
and had lately published some Papers about it, which he was glad to see. And
now the Pope comes up to their Proposals, and offers them what they would have,
and the Emperor and King Ferdinand will omit nothing which may expedite the
Affair.

Now if his Electoral Highness should be the only Person who refuses to comply,
most people would conclude, that no sort of Method could please him. Clement
the Seventh charged his Offer with some Conditions, which his present Holiness
has not done, and therefore there is the less reason for noncompliance. What
the rest of the Princes Inclinations are in this case he is well satisfied of,
for he has been importuning them all: And the Pope has set his heart so much
upon it, that if it should not go on, his life would be uncomfortable to him.
Nay he does believe his Holiness's Nuncios are now upon their Journey to
intimate the Council. Now therefore at this juncture his Holiness is obliged to
show his Zeal for God's Glory and the good of Christendom. For if he pleases
to concur, the business will be managed with more advantage; but if he
dissents, the Council will begin notwithstanding: Therefore the present
opportunity is by no means to be neglected, it being scarce ever to be
retrieved again. But though his Highness should choose to stand by, Vergerius
gives the Lantgrave a Copy of his Speech.
and not assist the Council; yet our Savior himself will not deny them his Aid
and Protection. If his Highness would have any Point farther explained, he is
ready to give him satisfaction. The Elector told him, that he would consult his
Allies, and then return him an answer; and after some other discourse he
desired him to give him a Copy of his Speech. Vergerius therefore upon the
first of December gave in a Paper in which he was larger, and somewhat
different from what he had delivered by word of mouth. He said the Pope had
dispatched away Nuncio's to all the Courts in Christendom about the Council,
and that he was sent to King Ferdinand and the Princes of Germany for that
purpose. That the Emperor and Ferdinand approved Mantua for the place: Neither
ought this to seem at all strange, for his Imperial Majesty declared himself to
be of the same opinion two years since, by his Ambassador in Germany. Neither
could his Majesty be supposed to have any motive to alter his Judgment, but on
the contrary, this very good reason among others to persist in it; namely,
because Germany was full of Sacramentarians, Anabaptists, and such sort of
Sects; so that it was not safe for other Nations to come thither. For a great
part of those people are distracted, and will not hear any manner of reason;
therefore it is easy to imagine what a dangerous undertaking it must needs be
to come among such a Rabble, and condemn their Frenzy and Extravagance without
a Guard. And as for those who think either that the Pope will yield up his
Privileges which he has enjoyed for so many Ages; or that the Emperor will
call a National Council in Germany without his Holinesse's consent; they are
mightily mistaken. For there is no better Expedient to establish a lasting
Union in the Church, than a free and general Council: And though this remedy
happens to be slighted by some people; yet the Pope is resolved to proceed,
putting his whole trust in our Savior, whose Service he is there employed in:
Neither will he went the Concurrence of Kings and Princes, of whose
Inclinations toward so pious a Work he is well assured. And because his
Electoral Highness told him, he would return an answer as soon as he had
consulted his Confederates, he desires he would please to do it as soon as may
be. He was now going to King Ferdinand, and there he would expect their answer.
Now in reference to what his Highness mentioned concerning a safe Conduct, that
if they were obliged to go into Italy, they must beside Paper-Security, have
Hostages given them; he must needs say he did not understand the reason of such
extraordinary Caution: For Mantua was a City of the Empire, in the
Neighborhood of Germany, and bordering upon the Dominions of the Emperor and
the Venetians; therefore no danger could be apprehended there. Yet since it was
their request, the Emperor would gratify them in it, and so would the Pope
too, as far as it was in his Power, and consistent with former Precedents. I
have lately mentioned Vergerius his being sent back by the Pope into Germany;
Now after he had been with Luther at Wittemburg, and was traveling out of
Saxony to Ferdinand, he happened to meet with the Elector as he was returning
from the King's Court. The Protestants Answer to Vergerius.
The Protestants had already determined to meet at Smalcalde upon other
business upon the 6th of December; But the Nuncio's Embassy intervening, they
consulted upon it, and wrote him an Answer upon the 21st, That the Elector of
Saxony had informed them what had been transacted at Prague: And though all of
them were not authorized to concern themselves in this Affair, it being
impossible to acquaint all their Principals with it in so short a time; yet
because he desired to hear speedily from them, they had sent him an Answer to
his Proposals; which though it was not so exact as the Subject deserved, yet it
was clear, and intelligible. And first, They have already declared in several
Diets, how they stand affected toward a Council; particularly above two years
since they gave in their sense of this Point to the Emperor's and Pope's
Ambassadors. For the desire they have to promote the Welfare of the State, and
the Salvation of all Men in general, makes them heartily wish for a lawful
Council, and to this purpose they have addressed, with the rest of the Princes,
to the Emperor, who also thought it necessary himself: Neither did they
question but that all good Men earnestly desired such a Council as may tend to
the Reformation and advantage of Christendom. For a great many pious Men are
very much grieved to see the Orthodox Faith suppressed every where by unjust
Cruelty, the Church torn in pieces, and apparent Corruptions more and more
confirmed. But such Rigor as this does not become the Governors of the Church;
besides, if care be not taken, this is the way to bring Ruin and Desolation
upon Christendom. Therefore now, there is as much need of a Council as ever,
that old overgrown Errors may be removed, that unreasonable and cruel Violence
may be restrained, and that the Churches may be settled upon a good Bottom for
the future. Therefore they were resolved not to desert the common Interest, but
would come to such a Council with all their Hearts, as it had been already
decreed in several Diets of the Empire. And they beseech God Almighty that all
the proceedings there, may tend to his Glory, and the Salvation of Men. But
since the Pope has made choice of Mantua, they have great hopes that the
Emperor will not depart from the Decrees of the Diets in that Point; nor yet
from his own word which was given, when they had a legal Security passed for
the fixing the Seat of the Council in Germany. And whereas he objected, that it
was dangerous to come into Germany, and that no freedom of Debate could be
expected there; for this very reason they ought more especially to be convened
there; that the Controversy may be fairly and regularly managed, that good Men
may not be overawed in their Votes, nor frighted from speaking their Minds by
Violence and Faction. For what danger can there be in Germany, where all the
Princes and Cities acknowledge the Emperor's Authority? where the Towns are so
well Governed, that Strangers are secured from all Affronts, and used with all
the Civility imaginable? As for his saying, that those who came to the Council
should have as much satisfaction of the Pope in their safe Conduct, as was
customary to receive, and in his Power to give: They said, they did not well
understand the meaning of this Period, especially when they reflected upon the
Practices of the last Age: Christendom they were sure had need of a free and
religious Council, and to such an one they had formerly appealed. But now since
he declares the Form and Method is not to be stated beforehand; and gives
broad hints, as if the settling of this Point belonged to the Pope; they cannot
imagine that there is likely to be any liberty there. Two years since Clement
the Seventh made them a Promise of a Council, but clogged it with ensnaring
Conditions; And now the main Point, that is, the settling the Freedom of the
Council, and the Form and Method of Voting, is partly omitted out of design,
and partly given up to the Pope, wherein he affirms to have a Right to intimate
Councils, and preside in them. Now the Pope who has condemned their Religion
so often, is no less than a downright Adversary; but if he who is an
Adversary, is allowed to be a Judge too, then the Council can never be free: To
put it into a right Form, there ought to be certain unexceptionable Persons
chosen out of the whole Company, with the consent of the Emperor, and other
Kings and Princes, and the Controversy referred to this Committee, to be
examined and determined by them according to the Rule of God's Word. For
Councils are not the Pope's Court only, but others also in public and elevated
stations, in a Christian-Commonwealth, have an Interest in them. For it is easy
to demonstrate both from the Scriptures, and the practice of the Primitive
Church, that formerly Princes, and other Persons of Quality, were concerned in
the Debates of Councils. But to prefer the Pope's Power to the Authority of the
Universal Church, is an unreasonable and tyrannical Assertion. The Emperor
therefore and the rest of the States are obliged to insist upon their
Privilege in Councils, and make choice of proper Persons, especially in the
present case, where the Corruptions of the Bishops of Rome, their false Doctrine
and unlawful Worship, is opposed; for this is no more than what the Canon Law
it self allows. And since all Christendom, both Church and State, are
concerned in this Affair, it behooves the Emperor, and other Princes, to take
care that the Controversy may be fairly determined. Formerly several Bishops
have been condemned by their own Diocese, and so have Popes by the Emperor and
the Church, for persisting in their Errors. But at this time of day there was a
warm Contest about a great many weighty Points which the Pope does not maintain
only by force of Argument, but by ungodly and sanguinary Bulls, and punishes
those with the utmost severity who refuse to obey him. Therefore since He is an
Adversary and a Party, in the Cause depending, the universal Church, the
Emperor and other Princes, ought in all Justice to interpose their Authority,
and prescribe the Laws of Disputation and Voting. They now therefore repeat the
same request they have always made, that the Controversy may be managed
without design, and a just liberty reserved for defense; for this is both
equitable in its self, and likewise agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, and the
proceedings of the ancient Church. If the Differences between them are examined
with this Order and Integrity, they will assist the Council as far as lies in
their Power, and have great hopes that Truth will be discovered this way, the
Glory of our Savior promoted, and the Church reestablished in her former
Tranquillity. But if things are otherwise carried, there is no question but much
greater Disturbances will follow.

In short, they would never omit any opportunity to serve the common Interest
of Christendom; and as they could not depart from the true Religion, so in all
other cases they would make it their business to promote an Accommodation. The
French King who was now resolved to march an Army into Italy, The French
Embassador's Speech at Smalcalde.
sent William Bellay Seigneur of Langey Ambassador to this Convention at
Smalcade. This Gentleman had his Audience upon the 19th of December. And first
he excuses the King in reference to the late Severities. It Is true he had
punished some of his own Subjects, but this was no manner of reflection upon
them, though some ill disposed Persons did not stick to say, that by executing
those Criminals he had as it were condemned their Persuasion beforehand; But
he desires that they would not take any notice of such extravagant Calumnies,
but examine the whole matter impartially: For there was a great many in Germany
who were utterly averse to their Opinion, and some others, did not altogether
approve it; nay themselves who are now agreed, were not always of the same
mind. His Majesty is very glad that they are come to an uniformity in Doctrine
at the last: Neither does he question but that their Modesty and Candor is
such, that they will not offer to prescribe to any Body, nor force people into
their Religion against their wills. His Majesty uses to speak very kindly and
obligingly of them, and owns that they have determined some things most
primitively, but wishes there had been more temper shown in other cases: For
though he is sensible that Negligence, Superstition, and a long succession of
Ages, have given occasion to the bringing of several insignificant and needless
Ceremonies into the Church; yet he does not understand why they should all be
abolished upon this account, without distinction, or public Authority: For
Ceremonies add both strength and grandeur to Religion, and the Contemners of
them have always been punished with great severity. And since they have joined
so unanimously in the suppression of the Boars Insurrection, since they
restrain and chastise the Anabaptists, since they are unwilling to be thought
to do any thing without a cause; why are they not so kind as to entertain the
same opinion of a Prince who is their Friend? why do they not suppose that He
had very pressing Reasons, and absolute necessity to punish those Subjects of
his, though possibly some of them were none of the greatest Malectors? what
their Crimes were, is not proper to relate in this place: For oftentimes it is
not convenient to assign the reason publicly, why things are done; and
Punishments are sometimes abated, sometimes more rigorously executed, according
to the nature of the Times. Now his Majesty who has so large a Dominion to
Govern, is obliged to have a regard to the future as well as the present, and
was to take care that his Clemency did not encourage a great many others to
grow wicked. For though he was bred and born to nothing but Gentleness and good
Nature, yet he was constrained, for some time, to put a force upon his Temper,
and act disagreeably to his Inclinations: And as he was willing to hear Men
discourse upon any Subject, so he could not choose but be displeased with those
who attempt any rash Alterations without consulting their Superiors, whose
right it is to Determine. Besides, those whom he had done Justice upon, were of
a quite different Persuasion from them. Now as to their Religion, the King is
of opinion, that whatever they have done in that, was agreed by common consent;
but how justifiable their Tenants were he should not examine: For in cases of
that difficulty he was not willing to pretend to be a better Judge than others,
but believed there were some things to be approved and disapproved, in both
Communions: For the nature of Man is such, that if he is once allowed to
pronounce upon his own Sentiments, he is in danger of falling into Error and
Mistake. Afterward he endeavors to gain their good opinion more directly, and
confutes those Persons who say, that the Germans ought to take care how they
hold any Correspondence with foreign Ambassadors; maintaining that there was
great disadvantage and slavery at the bottom of this advice. For no State is so
well fortified in it self, as to be able to subsist and flourish for any
considerable time, without the Friendship and Alliance of its Neighbors: Now
there has been a very ancient and intimate Correspondence between the Kings of
France and the Princes of the Empire, for both Nations are descended from the
same Original, and by reason of their situation and nearness, they may be both
a Guard and an Ornament to each other: Therefore his Majesty is very much
troubled when he hears of any Misunderstandings among the Germans, and
endeavors to his Power to make up the Breach: And has often been afraid lest
this disagreement in Religion should have some unfortunate consequence: And
since he now understands they have formed an Association to defend their
Privileges and Honor, not excluding those of a different Persuasion, he has
great hopes that this Expedient will open a way for the reconciling of
Opinions. Being therefore acquainted with these Occurrences, he was willing to
send his Ambassador to let them know his sense in the Case; Now in regard the
present State of Affairs is such, that a free and general Council cannot be
convened as yet; The King thinks it most proper that all the Germans should
meet in the mean time, and by joint consent pitch upon some Method for an
Accommodation, which may easily be effected, provided things are not managed
with obstinacy, and Men do not account it a discredit to change their opinions
upon Conviction, and to yield to better Information: If they proceed in this
manner, his Majesty will join with them and assist them in this Undertaking:
For the present Pope himself confessed, when the Case was moved to him by the
King, that Humane Traditions are not to be so rigidly insisted on, but that
they may be set aside when the exigency of the Times, and the Peace of
Christendom require it; and declared, that if the Controversy was regularly
and fairly debated, he would yield a great many things in compliance with the
present Conjuncture, and to promote a general Agreement.

Now if they are desirous that some learned French Divines should be present at
this Conference, or if they please to send any of their own Clergy into France
upon this account, his Majesty will be extremely satisfied with it, and leaves
it wholly to themselves to do as they think convenient. In fine, he desires
them that they would live amicably together, and fortify their Interest by
keeping up a good Correspondence among themselves, for this, besides other
advantages, would contribute to the peace of their Country: And as for his
Majesty he would not assist their Enemies either with Supplies or Advice, as
long as they continued the same affection to him which they had hitherto
showed. The Judges of the Chamber are troublesome to the Protestants.
In the beginning of this Book I observed that the Judges of the Chamber of
Spire prosecuted the Protestants contrary to the Emperor's Edict. The case was
this, These Judges were most of them Roman Catholics, and being addressed to
for Justice by the Ecclesiastics (after the Emperor was returned into Italy
from the War in Austria) who complained of the Protestants; They ordered a Suit
to be commenced against them: And though the Protestants put in their
Exceptions, and alleged, that the Cause was of an Ecclesiastical nature, and
consequently included in the Emperor's Edict, who has barred all Process
relating to Religion; yet they overruled these Allegations, and went on in
their way. The Protestants therefore wrote into Italy to the Emperor,
complaining how they were disturbed, and procure another Mandate from him. Upon
this the Judges send the Emperor word, that they were at a loss how to act, and
how to obey his Majesty's Commands: For the Parties often contested the nature
of the Causes, whether they belonged to Religion or not, therefore they desire
to know his Majesty's Pleasure in this Case: The Emperor answers their Request,
and gives them Authority to determine, whether the Causes which come before
them relate to Religion or not. Being thus fortified, they proceed briskly, not
only interposing in mixed Causes, but in those which were purely Spiritual; for
besides Restitution to the Ecclesiastics, they command the Mass and all the
Ceremonies and Worship of the Roman Church to be set up again. Now while these
things were doing, it happened that the Elector of Saxony had occasion to go to
Cadan to King Ferdinand about some other business; where he complained how
himself, and his Confederates were used; and after they had agreed those other
Points which I have mentioned, Ferdinand confirmed the Imperial Edict, and
commanded the Pacification to be observed, and ordered the Chamber to forbear
all Prosecutions. The Protestants disown the Jurisdiction of the Chamber.
But they took no notice of this Order; The Protestants therefore solemnly
protested against the Jurisdiction of their Court, assigning the Reasons they
had to look upon them as Adversaries; and refer the Dispute to Henry of
Megelburg, Robert Duke of Bavaria, Christiern Duke of Holstein, George Duke of
Wirtemburg to the Senate of Auspurg and Worms, or to any other indifferent
Arbitrators, to determine whether the grounds of their Recusation were
reasonable or not. For things were come to that pass, that their Council durst
not speak out, nor plead their Cause home, for fear of disobliging the Court,
and coming into trouble. But the Judges set aside this Recusation, and declared
it null and void, as being contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Empire.
Afterward the Elector of Saxony came to Vienna to King Ferdinand (as has been
already related) where he got a new Order against the Chamber, but all to no
purpose, as shall be shown in its place. And because the Pacification granted
by the Emperor was to continue no longer than either till a general Council was
convened, or till the next Imperial Diet; the Elector moved King Ferdinand,
that this last Clause might be omitted. He also desired, The Elector of Saxony
treats with King Ferdinand.
that those who professed the same Religion with other Protestants might enjoy
the same Privileges, though they were not comprehended in the Treaty at
Nuremburg, and that no Prosecutions might be issued out against them. To this
Ferdinand replied, that he could make no new Provision in this case without the
Emperor's consent. The Elector of Saxony replied, that it was very hard, since
their Adversaries might recede from the Pacification when they pleased, that
himself and his Allies should be barred this Liberty: The Security which was
given them in the Treaty did not design without doubt to keep them in suspense,
and in the dark, without being able so much as to know what they were to hope
for, or expect. Besides, as soon as ever a Proclamation for a Diet came out, it
would be looked upon as a Signal to break the Peace, and be like beating a
Charge for new Disturbances; from whence great Inconveniences would follow. And
he must add, that if those of the same Religion with himself could not enjoy
the benefit of the Pacification, and happened to be proscribed, or otherways
aggreived, it would be very uneasy to him, and the rest of his Allies, to
connive at these things, and desert their Friends in their Distress. But the
Elector gained nothing more of his Point by this Remonstrance; only one of
Ferdinand's chief Ministers replied, that it was a long time yet before the
Empire was to meet, unless some great and unexpected occasion should happen;
and when there shall be a necessity for the holding of a Diet, the present
affair shall be settled by his Electoral Highness's, and the Lantgrave's advice.
Upon this, the Elector pressed this Request no farther. But when he desired the
Treaty might be ratified, Ferdinand answered, that he had not omitted to
Command the Chamber to desist the last year, pursuant to the Articles at Cadan;
But they told him, that there were several Causes purely Secular and Civil
intermixed with those that were Sacred; now these were perfectly under their
Jurisdiction, for they did not relate to Faith and Religion, but to Estates and
yearly Revenues. To this the Elector of Saxony replied, that these mixed Causes
were the only reason which made them so earnest for a Pacification; for though
they did concern Men's Goods and Estates, yet they were grounded upon Religion:
His Majesty may likewise be informed by the Princes of the Mediation, the
Elector of Mentz and the Palsgrave, that these sort of Disputes were mentioned
at the Treaty. As for other Causes in which their Creed, and their Consciences
are only concerned, the Chamber never had any thing to do with those; neither
was there any necessity that himself and his Confederates should desire the
Emperor to check the Judges upon such an account as this. Besides, long before
the Pacification at Cadan, the Chamber pretended that the forementioned Causes
were only Secular, and therefore, among other things, there was a particular
Provision made at Cadan, that his Majesty should interpose his Authority to
restrain that Court. After the Matter was thus discoursed, at last the King
yielded, and promised to undertake, that none of those Causes which his
Highness, and his Confederates at the Treaty at Nuremburg, counted Religious,
should be tried before the Chamber.

The French Ambassadors Speech, The Protestants Answer to the French Ambassador.
which I mentioned, was answered by the Protestants, as follows:
Notwithstanding there goes various Reports concerning those Executions in
France, yet because his Excellency says, those who suffered were contriving an
Insurrection, they could not blame the King's Proceedings, since they did not
tolerate such sort of Persons in their own Dominions. But in regard all people
have not every where the same Opinions of the established Doctrins and Rites,
they entreat his Majesty that this Severity may not fall upon all Persons
without distinction; but that those may be spared who having laid open the
Errors and Corruptions of the Times, had reformed their Creed into the same
purity the Scriptures taught it, and held to that Confession which themselves
had made at Ausburg. For it cannot be denied that many false and wicked
Opinions have broke in upon the Church, which are now very confidently
maintained by ignorant and malicious Men, upon Principles of Covetousness and
Ambition. Now it is their way, and they are Masters of it, to forge Accusations
against innocent and religious Persons, that so they may exasperate Princes
into rigor. And since Kings and Princes are more peculiarly obliged to promote
the Honor of God, to purge the Church from Error, and to check unreasonable
Cruelty; they earnestly beseech his most Christian Majesty, that he would lay
out his principal Endeavors upon so good a Work. If he pleases to do this,
they shall be assured that he has a real regard for them, which they hope may
prove auspicious both to themselves and the Church. What his Majesty discoursed
concerning the ancient and constant Friendship between the French Kings and the
Princes of Germany, was wonderfully entertaining to them: And they would make
it their business that this Intimacy and good Correspondence might be continued
for the future. And whereas his Excellency offers to excuse the King from some
Imputations, they are very inclinable to gratify him in this Point, and
acquiesce in his Apology, desiring above all things, that God would vouchsafe a
general Peace to Christendom, and Protect the Germans in their Liberties, which
were formerly gained at the expense of so much Blood. Now though that which his
Excellency mentioned concerning an Accommodation in Religion, belongs to an
argument too large to be dispatched in a few words; yet so prudent a Person as
the King, may easily perceive that the separation is wholly owing to the
obstinacy of their Adversaries, who have condemned all the reformed Doctrine in
a most violent manner. They have desired nothing more for these many years,
than that the whole Cause might be argued before a lawful Council; but the Pope
and his Dependents have opposed this Overture with all the rigor imaginable.
It Is true, Clement the Seventh proposed a Council under certain Conditions; but
then they were such as made it sufficiently apparent, that he could not endure
that Matters should be freely debated: And this Pope though he promises a
Council, yet he will not suffer the Form and Method of it be disputed
beforehand; and besides he will have it convened out of the Territories of the
Empire: From whence it is easy to conclude, that there is foul play, and deceit
at the bottom; and that nothing else is intended but to get the true Religion
suppressed by the Authority of a Council: And since the calling of the Church
together does not belong only to the Bishop of Rome, but Kings and Princes are
equally concerned in it; They beseech his Majesty to interpose so far, that
they may not have a servile and obnoxious Council convened in a dangerous
place; but that things of that weight and importance, in which the peace and
welfare of the Church in general, and every Person in particular is so much
concerned, may be examined with Freedom and Security. By appearing in this
manner not only the present Age, but all future Posterity will be mightily
obliged to his Majesty, and return him immortal Thanks for so great a Favor.
As to what his Excellency moved concerning a Conference of learned Men, it
deserves to be considered thoroughly and at leisure: Besides, being not aware of
such a Proposal, most of their Convention had no Commission to treat about it:
But as soon as they come to a determination in the Case, they would write his
Majesty an account of it; for they desired nothing more than that Truth might
be propagated as far as was possible. Lastly, they were very glad to hear his
Majesty promise not to furnish out any Supplies against them; and therefore
neither would they assist his Enemies in any case where the Emperor and the
Empire were unconcerned.

This Ambassador had private Conferences with Pontanus, The French King's
opinion concerning the Points in Controversy.
Melanchton, with the Lantgraves Divines, and James Sturmius, concerning
several Controversal Points, where he told them what the King, and the French
Clergy, especially those of Paris, thought of each of them. Particularly what
their sense was concerning the Pope's Primacy, the Eucharist, the Mass, and
Invocation of departed Saints, and Images; what Notions they had about
Purgatory, Justification, Monastic Vows, and the Celibacy of the Clergy. In
most of these Controversies he said, the King was inclinable to Melanchton's
opinion, in his Book Of Common Places. Concerning the Pope he told them, that
the King and Philip were agreed, for his Majesty did not believe his Holiness's
Primacy was founded on Divine Right, but Ecclesiastical Constitutions; but the
King of England would allow him neither one Right nor the other: And truly the
Pope has pretended to more than his share in deposing Kings and Emperors at
his Pleasure. And they say, he is about that Business now, with the King of
England, notwithstanding the King his Master, and several Cardinals, had
interceded with him to forbear. Indeed the Divines say, He is Head of the
Church jure Divino, but they failed in their proof when the King put them upon
it. They likewise defend the common Opinion concerning a fire in Purgatory; For
this Doctrine keeps up their Masses, their Obits and Legacies, and all the Trade
they have upon those accounts. But if the Mass was once put down, their
Authority would be sapp'd, and the Vitals of their Grandeur wounded. Now when
the King had given these Gentlemen several months time to prove their Opinion
about Purgatory by Scripture, at last they gave him this Answer, That it was
not prudential to furnish their Adversaries with Arguments, lest they should
turn them upon themselves. As to Monastery-Vows, his Majesty believes he can
prevail so far with this present Pope, that young people shall not be engaged
to that sort of life, till they have reached their full age; and that they may
go off when they please, and Marry. But his Majesty does by no means think it
convenient that those Societies should be dissolved, but continued as Nurseries
of Piety and Learning. The Divines likewise press the Celibacy of the Clergy;
and here the King has found out a middle Expedient; That those who have Wives
shall keep them, but that others shall not have the liberty to Marry under pain
of Suspension. For to that which is usually urged concerning Paphnutius his
persuading the Nicene Fathers, that Priests might be married; The Divines
answer, That it could not be proved, that Matrimony was ever allowed to
Priests: It Is true, before their Ordination they did not deny but that they
were sometimes married. Concerning the receiving the Lords Supper in both
kinds, the King had some discourse with Clement the Seventh about it; and he
hoped this Pope might be persuaded to make a Decree, that every one might have
the liberty to do as they thought fit. Moreover his Majesty observed, that
within the memory of our Fathers, the whole Communion was given in France to
all persons without distinction; indeed this was not done in the Bodies of the
Church, but in Chapels and Oratories. This relation the King had from some
very old Persons, who affirmed, that this was the custom in France about 120
years ago. Besides, the French Kings receive in both kinds; which practice when
his Majesty objected to the Divines in Disputation, they told him, that Kings
were anointed as well as Priests, and that the Scripture mentioned A Royal
Priesthood; and that others who had none of these peculiar Reasons to plead,
could not have this liberty. The King likewise owned that many passages in the
public Service of the Church ought to be corrected, and some quite struck out:
That Clement the Seventh committed this affair to the care of Cardinal de la
Cruz, a Spaniard, who printed a Book about it, which the Parisian Divines
condemned as Heretical. For there is a sort of people among them who are not
contented to cry out upon the Germans as Heterodox and wicked; but let the same
Censurers fly at the Cardinals and Popes themselves upon occasion. And since
the present Affair is so momentous and difficult in all the parts of it, his
Majesty is wholly intent upon it, that the Peace of the Church may be
recovered. He had likewise conferred with the Dukes of Bavaria to the same
purpose, who seemed to him to be more rigid than the Divines of Paris; though
afterward one of their Counselors of State said, that they were grown more
moderate; and the same thing was told him by Julius Phlugius concerning George
Duke of Saxony and the Elector of Mentz. The King therefore was of opinion,
that a public Consultation was altogether necessary; before the beginning of
which, if they pleased to send some few of their eminent Divines into France to
confer with the Sorbonists, his Majesty would take it very kindly; and so order
the Conference that some violent high-flying Men should be mixed with others of
more temper and moderation, that by this means the Truth might be wrought out,
and come to light. When he had said this, he desired that the Protestants would
not accept of any place for a Council without his Majesty's advice and the King
of England's, who would both of them return them the same Civility. It Is not
many years ago since Lewis the Twefth of France insisted, that the Pope could
not call a Council without the consent of the Emperor and other Princes; This
was also the Opinion of the King of Navarre; and when they were both
Excommunicated by Julius, Ferdinand of Spain seized upon Navarre as Executioner
of the Pope's Sentence. Now the King his Master was of these Princes mind;
neither could he approve any Council, unless it was held in a safe unsuspected
place, where every one might freely speak his Conscience without danger.
Besides, what I have mentioned, he pressed them very earnestly to enter into a
League with his Master; indeed this was the principal reason of his Embassy:
But they insisting, that they must except the Emperor, whom they declared it
was not lawful for them to Article against, he concluded nothing with them; and
before he went away, he told some Persons privately, that he wondered they
should refuse the Offer of sogreat a Prince, and that there would come a time
when they would heartily wish, that they had gone in to his Interest.

Henry the Eighth of England also sent an Embassy to this Convention, of which
Edward Fox Bishop of Hereford was chief. He began his Speech with telling them
what a near Relation there was between the Kings of England and the Dukes of
Saxony; The English Ambassador his Speech to the Protestants.
and that the King his Master had a great respect for his Electoral Highness
and his Confederates; especially since he saw their principal Design was to
propagate the true Religion among their Neighbors. And though they had a great
many hard words given them upon this account, yet these Reflections made no
impression upon him; neither did he believe them to be any other than good Men,
who would do nothing but what reason and their station obliged them to; aiming
only that the Gospel might be preached in its purity, and God glorified by it.
This (he said) was also the King's Intention, as appears sufficiently from the
alteration which was lately made in England. For now the greatest part of the
Corruptions in the Church were removed by his Royal Command, and the Pope's
Supremacy, and all his Legerdemain was banished the Kingdom by a general
Consent, no less than it was in Saxony. And since there are the same
Inclinations and Endeavors moving on both sides, his Majesty has a singular
Esteem for them, and desires them that they would go on as they have begun, and
unite in a general profession of the same Doctrine; for this will lay a lasting
foundation for Peace: But how much diversity of Opinions are apt to embroil the
State, his Majesty is very sensible, and the Anabaptists are a remarkable
instance. At this time the Pope pretends as if he was in earnest for a Council.
Now if there be any remaining Differences, and they do not come up to an
uniform Persuasion among themselves, this will disorder their Measures when
they are convened upon the place. But here he would not be thought to reflect
in the least upon their Divines; for the Church was never so happy as to be
perfectly free from Disputes (no not in the Apostles times) as appears from the
clash there was between St. Peter, St. Barnabas, and St. Paul. We ought
therefore to endeavor an Accommodation no farther than it is warrantable by
Scripture: Now the Pope makes it his whole business to hinder the Church from
agreeing upon such a Principle, insomuch that as long as his cruel and
tyrannical Government continues, his Majesty despairs of seeing a
Reconciliation. For now this Idol, this Antichrist rages like a mad Man, only
because the English have lately thrown off the most scandalous Slavery, and
recovered their Liberty by the King's assistance: And being not able to attempt
any thing by force, he betakes himself to Artifice and Fraud, and by forging
false Accusations against his Majesty, endeavors to provoke other Princes to
make War upon him. For though he will stick at nothing to keep up his pretended
Authority, yet now his particular Design is to exasperate both sides, and set
all in a Flame. This his Majesty was willing to acquaint them with, not that he
feared the Pope, for he was so well prepared, that he neither valued him, nor
his whole Party; but only that they might see what Antichrist was doing,
especially at this time when he seems so earnest for a Council, though he
means nothing less. It Is true, his Majesty grants that a regular Debate is
singularly useful, and very much for the advantage of Christendom; but then all
imaginable Care must be taken, that such a Council be not convened, as will
manage the whole Controversy only for the establishment of the Pope's
Greatness. Therefore he entreats them they would take his advice, and not allow
of any Council, till all Christian Princes were at Peace with each other;
withal desiring that the true Worship of God might be restored; and that he
was willing to engage with them for the completing and support of so pious an
undertaking. These things, he told them, his Instructions obliged him to
deliver publicly. But besides, he desired that he might discourse this affair
farther in private with some persons deputed for that purpose: For his Highness
the King had that regard for Religion, and themselves, that he was ready to
venture his Person, and all his Fortunes in the Cause. The Protestants Answer
to the English Ambassador.
To this, after some Ceremony passed upon the King for showing himself so
obliging and well disposed, they answer, That they desire nothing so much, as
that the Doctrine of the Gospel might be spread far and near; that whatever they
did in this case, was done out of a principle of Duty. And notwithstanding they
have been affronted and injured in the grossest manner, though they have highly
disobliged Persons of the most considerable Interest, though they have been
often swagger'd at and meanced upon this account, yet they have not slackned
their industry, and pursuit of the Holy Design. Now the reason of all this
violent and intemperate rage against them, is only because they have taken the
liberty to reject some false and wicked Opinions. Now his Majesty's promising
so frankly to concur with them in this Work, and his expelling the Popes
Tyranny, his Dominions, which is the Springhead of all his wicked and
erroneous Worship, is very acceptable News to them, and their Prayers to God
are that he may still proceed. They also return his Majesty many Thanks for his
advice to them to take care of the ill Consequences of different Opinions; but
really there was no disagreement among them, and they were resolved by Gods
grace to continue in the same Religion they had professed at Ausburgh. As to
the Anabaptists they punished them severely, when they could not be prevailed
with to give over their Extravagance. Besides this Sect domineered most in
those places where the reformed Religion was prohibited: What his Excellency
discoursed concerning the Pope's Politic Designs, gave them great
satisfaction; And now he had a Nuncio in Germany who promised a Council should
be called at Mantua, and had treated with the Elector of Saxony about it. Now
the Answer which they returned by common Advice to his Proposals, was set down
in a Paper, a Copy of which should be delivered to his Excellency for the King,
that his Majesty might understand what their Thoughts were in this Case. This
Nuncio pretends as if it belonged only to the Pope to intimate and convene
Councils; But they conceive other Princes and States will not yield him this
Point without asking them leave, especially at this juncture, when so many
Articles of Faith are concerned, and the cause of Religion lies at Stake; so
that now, if ever, a regular Examination of the matter ought to be secured. And
whereas his Excellency mentioned the Kings desire of an Alliance with them,
they are abundantly thankful to his Majesty for it; And are resolved that
neither pains, nor danger shall discourage them from endeavoring to carry on
the Progress of the Reformation, not doubting but God Almighty will preside
over the whole Action, and make it successful, notwithstanding all the
opposition of their Adversaries. And because he desires to treat more at large
in private, about this affair, they had commissionated certain Persons to
confer with his Excellency, to whom he might impart what he had farther in
Charge. And lastly, They request him to report their Answer to his Majesty, and
let him know how ready they are to serve him.

Upon the 12th of December the Elector of Saxony came to Smalcalde from King
Ferdinand; The League of Smalcalde renewed.
and upon Christmass-Eve they renewed the League which was within a
twelvemonth of expiring, for ten years more: Here also they settled those
things which were necessary for its defense, and agreed to receive all those
into their Association who had a mind to it, provided they would consent to the
Ausburgh Confession, and submit to the common charge and circumstances of the
rest of the Confederates: Those who were for engaging, were the two Princes of
Pomeren Robert of the House of Bavaria and Duke of Zweibrucken, the Cities of
Frankfurt, Ausburgh, Kempton, Hamburgh and Hannover; some of these desired to
be admitted at present, and the others gave them hopes of coming in afterward.
Concerning the Chamber of Spire they came to this Resolution; That in regard
King Ferdinand had promised to ratify the Pacification agreed by the Emperor,
they should all of them make use of this defense, if they should happen to be
cited by the Judges. But if they would go on notwithstanding, and fall a
proscribing, and press the Execution of their Sentence; Then the Protestants
were to publish a remonstrance in the name of the whole Confederacy, in which
the States of the Empire were to be desired and advised, not to take any notice
of the unreasonable Proceedings of the Chamber, but to stand to what the
Emperor and King Ferdinand have determined in the Case; and to look upon such
Sentences as these, as null and illegal, without offering violence to any
Person upon this account: For otherwise they must be forced to take
satisfaction for the injury, and to resolve upon a way to secure themselves and
their Allies. It was likewise agreed that the Article of the Pacification at
Nuremburgh, which provided that no Man should be forcibly disseized of his
Estate, should be punctually observed, but with this construction, That it
should be lawful for them to reform what was amiss in the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, in the Ceremonies and in other things of the like Nature. At the
same time William Count Na^^aw was admitted into the League, where though the
Lantgrave would not give his consent, because both of them laid claim to
Catzenellobogen; yet he declared that if the Earl was invaded upon the account
of his being a Protestant, Ausburgh receives the reformed Religion.
he would assist him upon his request. This year also the Senate of Ausburgh
after a long contest came to a unanimous resolution for the reformed Religion;
and wrote to Luther desiring him to send Vrbanus Regius, and some other
faithful Pastors of the Church to them.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK X.
The CONTENTS.
Bernard Rotman by his Preaching and private Persuasions prevails upon Munster
to receive the reformed Religion: Which made the Roman Catholics and their
Bishops leave the Town in a Disgust. Notwithstanding by the mediation of the
Lantgrave, both parties are reconciled upon Articles. John of Leyden a violent
Anabaptist comes thither; brings a great many over to his Opinion, even Rotman
himself, and at last infects the Town with his Frensy to that degree, that his
Sect grew uppermost, and introduced Polygamy and community of Goods. After the
death of their Head Prophet John Matthews, John of Leyden succeeds in the
Primacy, and soon after they make him their King. The Barbarities of his
Government, and his Antic State described. During the Siege of the Town, a
Convention is appointed at Coblentz to decree a speedy reinforcement of the
Army. The Anabaptists write to the Lantgrave, and send him a Book, wherein they
explain their Doctrine at large; the Confutation of which had already been
undertaken by Luther. At last the Town being straightened in Provisions, is taken
by Storm: A Convention meets at Worms to settle affairs there after its
reduction. The King and his Companions are taken: A relation of their
Execution. The Duke of Savoy makes War upon the State of Geneva, and is beaten.
The French King invades part of his Dominions, to facilitate his Conquest of
the Duchy of Milan; upon this occasion the pretentions of the King to that
Duchy are examined. The Emperor understanding those things, comes to Rome, and
charge the King with breach of Articles, and presses the intimation of a
Council. The Protestants make a League with the King of England. The Pope
intimates a Council at Mantua. A War breaks out between the Emperor and the
French King. The Siege of Peronne. The Archbishop of Cologne reformeth his
Church. Erasmus dies. The French King his Daughter married to the King of
Scotland. The Duke of Florence murdered by Treachery. The Swiss's Embassy to
the French King to intercede for those of the Religion who are imprisoned. The
Town and Castle of Hesdin is surrendered. Cardinal Pool is sent Ambassador to
the French King.

I Am now to proceed to the Siege of Munster, and I shall give an account of
those Occurrences which happened from the beginning of the Siege till that time
in which the Town was taken, and the Authors of the Sedition punished. Munster
a City in Westphalia.
In the first Book I gave a relation of Thomas Muncer, how he Preached the
Mobile into Sedition, what his Tenets were, and what end he came to: From this
Man's discipling there sprung a race of Men, who from their Doctrine and
Practices are called Anabaptists: The Anabaptists and their Doctrine.
For they will not suffer Children to be Baptized, and are rebaptized
themselves; affirming that all People ought to follow their example, and that
their former Baptism is wholly invalid. Their Actions have an appearance of
Holiness in them. They assert that it is not lawful for Christians to go to
Law, nor to bear any Office of Magistracy, nor to swear, nor have any property,
but that all things ought to be possessed in common. These were the singular
Doctrins they maintained at first; but afterward they broached others of a
much more pernicious Consequence, of which I shall speak hereafter. Now when
these People had spread their Sect over a great part of Germany; Luther and
almost all their learned Men crying out upon their Extravagance; The
Magistrates punishing, and watching with that care, that it was almost
impossible for them to meet in any considerable numbers; at last they possessed
themselves of the City before mentioned; and in regard it was very well
fortified, made it the place of their Residence, which happened thus: Not far
from the City of Munster there is a Church dedicated to St. Maurice, in which
in the year 1532, Rotman a Preacher of the reformed Religion.
Bernard Rotman preached the reformed Religion, and had a considerable Audience
from the Town; and when the Citizens had thoughts of bringing him in thither,
the Papists to prevent their design, give him a moderate sum of money, that he
might go and exercise his Faculties somewhere else. Away goes he, and
traveling to some places where he thought he could better improve and
advantage himself, returns again after a few months. But they being disgusted
at his coming back, endeavor to keep him from Preaching, but to no purpose,
for he was followed with the applause of the People.

Soon after some of the principal Citizens receive him into the Town; and
because he was barred the Churches, they make him a Pulpit abroad in the Porch;
and his Congregation increasing daily, they require the Papists to open him the
Church, otherwise they would break it open by force. Not long after by the
advice of a Committee of the People, he sends Letters into the Neighborhood
of Hassia, which belongs to the Lantgrave, and desires that they would send him
some religious and learned Men, to assist him in sowing the Seed of the Gospel:
Accordingly there are two sent him from Marpurg. When they came thither, six of
the reformed enter into consultation how they may clear the Town of Popery, as
soon as may be, that the Gospel may be Preached with the greater success: For
the effecting of which, they judged this following Expedient the most proper,
viz. To set down the Errors of the Church of Rome in writing; which when they
had digested into thirty Heads, they delivered them to the Senate; adding that
they were ready to submit to the utmost severity, if they did not demonstrate
from the Holy Scriptures, that all these propositions were repugnant to the
Word of God. The Senate orders the Papists to attend the Court, and reads over
all the objected Errors to them; The Papists are commanded to prove their
Doctrine by the Holy Scriptures.
and because they had always pretended that their Doctrine was unexceptionable,
and founded on Divine Revelation; The Preachers on the other side denying this,
and offering to make good their Assertions under the highest Penalties: The
Court therefore asks them if they would confute the Objections of their
Adversaries by the Scriptures: Being thus called upon, They confess their
Ignorance.
and perceiving that the Senate were earnest to have the matter brought to an
Issue; They answer in short, That they had nothing to say for themselves, and
that it was only Ignorance and Opinion which made them hitherto maintain their
Doctrine as Orthodox and Good. Thereupon in regard they were convicted of Error
and false Doctrine, had nothing to allege in their defense, and had made an
acknowledgement of their Wickedness, the Senate commands them to forbear
Preaching for the future; and to resign their Pulpits in all the Churches, to
the new Teachers who had discovered their Impostures. Afterward by the order
of the Senate and People, every Man has a Church assigned him to preach in,
which was very unkindly taken by the Papists, especially by those who belonged
to the Principal Cathedral Church, being most of them Gentlemen. These Persons
when they could do nothing else, go angry away, and apply themselves to the
Bishop of the City; where after consultation they resolve to possess themselves
of all the Avenues and Passes, that no Provision might be carried into the
Town. A little after they had blocked up all the ways, the Bishop and those
before mentioned come to Telget, to take further advice, which is a little Town
about a Mile distant from the City: From thence they dispatch a Messenger to
the Senate, with Letters importing that they should desist from what they were
about, and put things into their former order; otherwise they must be treated
as Enemies. The Bishops name was Francis Count Waldeck: His immediate
Predecessor was Ferdinand, own Brother to the Archbishop of Cologn. But he not
long before, either because he had not his Health there, or because he foresaw
some Disturbance, went off, and resigned up his Station, contenting himself
with a private Life in his own Country. The Citizens of Munster upon
Deliberation detain the Messenger; and upon Christmas-Eve Eve about nine
hundred of them marching out in the night, surprise the Village and take it,
and having secured the Gates, that none might escape, they seize upon all that
were in it; The Bishop by chance went away the day before: They immediately
bring the Prisoners into the City; amongst these there were some Papists of
great Quality, with some others of the inferior Nobility. The Senate asks them
what their intentions were, and whether they still designed to hinder the
Preaching of the Gospel; They very frankly answer that they would endeavor to
make that Doctrine flourish. Upon this a Treaty is concluded, a Copy of which
was sent to the Lantgrave by the Senate; withal, desiring him that for the sake
of Religion, and the Commonwealth he would assist in this Affair. The
Lantgrave sends several of his Subjects with a Commission, by whose mediation
they concluded a farther Treaty to this effect: That forgetting all former
Disgusts, they should be heartily reconciled to one another, and live peaceably
on both sides: That the Gospel should be Preached in six of their Churches:
That all impiety and superstition in Religion should be suppressed: That
nothing should be altered in the principal Church, or Cathedral, nor the
Citizens pretend to any Authority there. This Pacification was signed by the
Lantgrave, by the Bishop and his Tenants and Dependents, and also by the
Nobility and Commonalty, upon the 14th day of February in the year 1533. When
things were accommodated in this manner, John of Leyden a Botcher and
Anabaptist.
there comes to Munster a Dutch Botcher, one John of Leyden, a violent
Anabaptist. This Man at first privately asks some of the Doctors of the
reformed Religion, into whose familiarity he had insinuated himself, Whether
they thought the Baptism of Infants warrantable. Upon their affirming it was,
John who was a great Zealot for the contrary Opinion, began to deride and
contemn them. Which thing being understood, Bernard Rotman whom we mentioned
before, exhorts the People at an Assembly to betake themselves to prayer, that
they might be enabled to maintain their Doctrine in its Purity, and defend it
from the Corruptions of the Fanatics; especially from the Anabaptists, who had
now privately crept in amongst them, and mixed themselves in their
Congregations, whose Opinion if it should prevail, not only the State, but
likewise Religion would be in a miserable condition. Herman Stapred an
Anabaptist.
About the same time there comes Herman Stapred, who after he was joined in
Commission with Rotman, began to declaim publicly against Infant Baptism. His
Instructor was Henricus Rollius, who a little before had been punished at
Vtrecht for Anabaptism. This was as it were another step to that new Doctrine,
which had now gotten such footing, that the Anabaptists were talked on all the
Town over; Though as yet they managed their business privately, admitting none
to their Consults, but those of their own Sect: The Ringleaders of which did
not make an open profession of their Tenets, for they Preached only anights;
when other People were asleep, then they began to celebrate their Mysteries:
But their Practices being discovered, and most of the Citizens being highly
dissatisfied, and crying out that it was insufferable, that a Novel Doctrine
should be spread in such a secret and clandestine way; The Senate issues out an
Order that the Teachers should depart the Town, which they did, but return
thither by another way, pretending they had a command from God to stay there,
and to carry on the Cause with all the seriousness and application imaginable.
The Senate was somewhat alarmed and surprised at this: And therefore to prevent
greater danger and disturbance, both the Anabaptists, and the Doctors of the
reformed Religion, accompanied with some learned Men are commanded to come into
the Senate House. Here Rotman discovers his Sentiments which he had hitherto
concealed, and condemns Pedo-Baptism as impious and execrable. The Anabaptists
are expelled Munster.
But Herman Buscheus especially defended the contrary Opinion before the Senate
with such success, that there was a public Decree made to command the
Anabaptists to quit the Town forthwith, who pretending it was not safe for them
to travel through the Bishops Territories, the Senate procures them a safe
Conduct, and likewise furnishes them with Provision for their Journey: But they
who had resolved long before not to stir, retired privately to their Disciples,
and lie concealed for some time. The Senate in the mean time before the other
appeared abroad again, shut up all the Churches, leaving only one open: For
they were afraid lest the Anabaptists, whose numbers increased daily, should
sally with their Teachers, and throw the Ministers of the Gospel out of the
Churches. In November following, the Lantgrave at the request of the Senate,
sends them two Persons to instruct the People, the one was Theodorick
Frabritius, the other John Melsinger. This last understanding the Public
Disturbances, and being somewhat apprehensive of danger, returns home: But
Fabritius very courageously advised the Burgers to be very careful to avoid the
Anabaptists Doctrine; which Post he maintained till the Anabaptists got the
upperhand, and banished all the other Persuasions from the Town, as will appear
afterward: and that nothing might be wanting, he draws up a Form of Doctrine
and Church Government, which was approved by the Senate and People. Afterward,
by the leave of the Senate, Petrus Wirtemius began to Instruct the People, but
he had not preached many Sermons before he was ejected by the Anabaptists at
the Instigation of Rottman; who now being grown more Insolent, challenge
Fabritius and the rest to dispute. The Senate approving this Method, it was
proposed as most convenient, that the cause might be tried only by the Holy
Scriptures, or by Writings of a resembling Nature; that some unexceptionable
and learned Persons might be chosen as Arbitrators; who after a full hearing,
and consideration of the Arguments of both Sides, might pronounce Sentence:
That their Determination should oblige both Parties, this being the way to
remove Dissension, and to restore the Peace of the Church: But to this
condition Rottman and his Associates would not agree. Now their declining to
stand a Trial, made them begin to be generally slighted; therefore to recover
their Reputation, they pitch upon another more compendious Method. One of them
pretending to be Inspired, runs about the Town, and cries out, Repent and be
rebaptized, otherwise the Wrath of God will Overwhelm you. Upon this the Rabble
began to grow troublesome and tumultuous, and all that were rebaptiz'd bawled
out the same things, and in the same manner which he did.

A great many ignorant well-meaning People were circumvented and imposed on by
those Enthusiasts, and obeyed them in every thing for fear of the Wrath of God,
which they so solemnly denounced: Others joined with them for the security of
their Fortunes; A Civil War in Munster.
for the Anabaptists handled their Adversaries very severely, and outed them of
their Possessions: This happened about the end of December. And now those
beforementioned came out of the places where they absconded, and running in a
Body to the Marketplace, they make a great Outcry there, and order all
unrebaptiz'd Persons to be killed for Heathens and Wretches. Afterward they
seize upon the Town-Ordnance, and the Senate House, and offer Violence to a
great many of the Citizens. Some of which to Protect themselves and their
Friends from Outrage, possess themselves of part of the Town which was
naturally fortified, and take a great many of the other Party Prisoners: This
Skirmish with the Anabaptists, who kept the Marketplace, which they had
fortified on all sides, continued, till both Parties gave Hostages, and came to
a Treaty; in which it was agreed, That every one should Profess what Religion
they pleased, return to their respective Dwellings, and be quiet. But Rottman
in the mean time, and Knipperdoling who was the chief Incendiary, though they
had approved the Accommodation, yet they write privately to the Neighboring
Towns, and invite those of their own Gang, to leave what they had behind, and
to repair to them as soon as was possible; that they should receive ten times
as much as they left behind. Being encouraged with such large Promises, both
Men and Women flock in shoals to Munster, not questioning the advantage of
their Expedition, especially those of the poorer sort, who did not know how to
live at home. The Townsmen, those especially who were Rich, when they saw the
City filled with Strangers, withdraw as conveniently as they can, and leave the
Anabaptists and the rest of the common People together. This was done in
February about the time that Bacchus his Solemnity used to be kept, in the Year
1534. Thus the Forces of the other Party being weakened, the Anabaptists choose
a new Senate, all of their own Faction; then they fall to making of Consuls, to
which Dignity Knipperdoling is preferred; a little after they break into the
Church of St. Maurice in the Suburbs, and burn it with all the Houses
adjoining; then they ri^le all the other Churches, deface and spoil the inside
of the Cathedral. By and by they scamper all about the Streets in Clusters, and
first they cry out, Repent; but soon after, Away ye wicked Wretches, unless you
have a mind to be knocked on the head, and immediately they appear in a Body
all armed, and whoever was not of their Sect, they drive them forthwith out of
the Town, without any regard to Age or Sex, insomuch that by reason of the
Crowd, and the great have they were obliged to make their flight, several Women
who were with Child, miscarried As soon as they had done this, they seize upon
the Goods of those they had driven out; and though this happened the day before
the Bishop besieged the Town; yet when some part of the Company, which was
chased away by the Anabaptists, fell into the Bishop's hands, they were treated
as Enemies, and some of them were in danger of losing their Lives, and among
the rest, one or two of the Preachers of the reformed Religion. Petrus
Wirtemius.
Petrus Wirtemius whom we mentioned before, being himself in danger, was saved
by the mediation of the Lantgrave. The hearing of this usage surpised the
Townsmen who stayed behind, insomuch that a great many honest Men, when they
perceived that though they did quit the Town, John Matthew an Anabaptist orders
that all Men's Goods should be common.
yet they ran themselves upon apparent danger, were forced as it were to
continue there against their Will. About this time one of their Principal
Prophets, for they challenge that Name for themselves, John Matthew, commanded
that every Man should bring forth all his Gold and Silver, and Movables, under
pain of death; and for this use there was a house set apart for a Public
Treasury. The People were amazed at the rigor of this Edict, yet they obeyed
it. Neither was it safe for any Person to deceive these Saints, or to keep part
of his own Goods to himself; for there were two Prophesying Virgins who
discovered all foul play in this case. Nor did they only make a Common Bank out
of their own Stock, but likewise made bold with the Fortunes of those they had
banished. Afterward the same Prophet Commands, that none from thence forward
should keep any Book by him, except the Bible; all the rest he charge them to
bring out, that they might be abolished: This Command he pretended to receive
from Heaven. Upon this a great number of Books were thrown together, and all
burnt. About this time one Hubert Truteling a Smith happened to break a jest
upon those who called themselves Prophets; this being known, they Summon in the
Multitude, and command them to appear all armed; soon after they Indict the
Man, and condemn him to suffer death. The People were wonderfully surpised at
these Proceedings: But their Head-Prophet, whom I spoke of before, seizes upon
the poor Wretch; and having thrown him upon the ground, runs his Pike into him;
yet he did not wound him Mortally, though he had tilted at him with a very
great force. Afterward he orders him to be taken away, and carried some
whither else: Then taking a Musket from a Youth who stood by, he shoots him
through with a Bullet as he lay along; but not being dispatched this way
neither, the Prophet said, It was revealed to him from Heaven, that his Time
was not come yet, and that God had bestowed his Grace upon him; but for all
that the Man died within a few days after; which being divulged, the Prophet
snatches up a long Pike and runs full speed through the Streets, crying, That
God the Father had commanded him to beat the Enemy farther off the City. When
he came near to the Camp, he was encountered by one of the Soldiers, and run
through. And though he was very much out in his Prediction once again, The
Prophesies of the Anabaptists.
yet his Fellow-Prophet had so bewitched the People, and managed the Farce so
artificially with the Rabble, that his death was much lamented, and they said,
That the loss of so excellent a Person did portend some speedy Calamity to the
Town. But their second-rate Prophet, John of Leyden, bids them be of good
cheer, it being revealed to him long before, That Matthew was to die in that
manner, and that he was to marry his Widow. Upon Good Friday they run into the
Churches and ring all the Bells. Some few days after Knipperdoling Prophesies,
That those who were in the highest Station should be degraded, and others of
the meanest Condition advanced. Upon this he orders all the Churches to be
demolished, solemnly affirming, That God had commanded it should be so. His
Orders are accordingly observed, and that Edict which he told them came from
Heaven, was executed with great signs of alacrity and inclination. Much about
this time John of Leyden delivers a Sword to Knipperdoling, and makes him his
Executioner, telling him, That the Divine Pleasure was such, that he who had
born the highest Office before, and was Consul, must now act in the lowest
place, and be contented to be Hangman. The other was so far from refusing, that
he thanked him for the Employment. Now after the Bishop had carried on the War
for some months at his own Charge, Herman Archbishop of Cologn, and John Duke
of Cleve, sent him a supply of Money and Ordnance, with some Companies of Foot
and Horse. The Archbishop also went to the Camp to advise in the affair, and
soon after the Town was besieged in several places. But when there was no hopes
of taking it by Storm, they built seven Forts about it, to cut off Provision,
and ordered some Companies of Foot and Troops of Horse to take up their
Winter Quarters there. The Bishop of Munster in the mean time desiring
assistance for the continuance of the War and the Siege, of those Princes and
Cities which border upon the Rhine, as being more his Neighbors than the rest.
To settle this Affair, there was a Meeting intimated to be held at Coblentz
upon the 13th day of December, Anno 1534.

Germany in its whole extent is divided into six Provinces, Franconia, Bavaria,
Swaben, Saxony, the Palatine, and Burgundy. Within these bounds all the Princes
and Cities are still included in the Diets of the Empire, according to the old
Custom. But now Saxony is divided into the Upper and Lower; besides there is a
new addition of lower Germany, Westphalia, and Austria; so that now the Empire
contains ten Countries or Districts in it. After they had tried in vain to
carry the Town by Assault, John of Leyden composeth himself to sleep, and
dreams out three days; when he awaked he said never a word, but makes signs for
Paper, and writes down the names of twelve Men, some of them well descended,
who were to sit at the Helm, and as Heads of the Tribes of Israel, to have the
Direction and Government of all Affairs; this he told them was the Will of his
heavenly Father. And when he had prepared the way for his projected Monarchy,
by the Government of these twelve Men, he propounds a set of Doctrins to the
Preachers, desiring them that they would confute them by Texts of Scripture;
but if they could not, he would mention them to the Multitude, that they might
be approved and established into a Law. The sum of them was this, That a Man
was not obliged to confine himself to one Wife, but might marry as many as he
pleased. But the Preachers opposing this Doctrine, he Summons them into the
Senate House, and brings the twelve Magistrates along with him; when they were
all met, he pulls off his Cloak, and throws it upon the ground, together with
the New Testament, and making these as it were Symbols of his sincerity; he
protests and swears, That the Doctrine he had published was revealed to him from
Heaven; and therefore threatens them on a terrible manner, that God would never
bless them if they did not consent. At last they agree upon the Point, and the
Doctors do nothing but harangue upon Matrimony in their Pulpits for three days
together. Soon after he marries no less than three Wives, one of which was the
Woman I mentioned before, the Relict of the famous Prophet John Mathews. His
Example was so well followed, that they accounted the Repetition of Matrimony,
before they were Widowers, a very commendable thing. But some of the Citizens
who were very much dissatisfied with this way, giving a signal about the Town,
called all those, who adhered to the Doctrine of the Gospel, into the
Marketplace; when they had done this, they apprehend the Prophet and
Knipperdoling, and all the Teachers of that Persuasion: When the Mobile
understood this, they immediately betake themselves to their Arms, Rescue the
Captives by force, and murder about fifty of the other Party with great
barbarity: For they tied them to Trees and Stakes, and then shot them; the
chief Prophet applauding their Cruelty, and telling them, That if they intended
to do acceptable Service to God, they ought to be the first in discharging at
them; others were killed after another manner. Upon the 23d of June another
Prophet starts up, who was a Goldsmith, who after he had convened the Rabble
into the Marketplace, John of Leydon proclaimed King of the Anabaptists*
tells them, That it was the Will and Command of the heavenly Father, that John
of Leyden should be Universal Monarch of the World; Tha^ he should March out
with a most powerful Army, and slay all Kings and Princes without distinction,
giving Quarter to none but the Multitude, who were Lovers of Justice: That he
should possess the Seat of his Father David, till the Father required him to
Resign his Kingdom. For now the Wicked were to be destroyed, and the Righteous
to begin their Reign upon the Earth. These words being spoken aloud, presently
John of Leyden falls upon his Knees, lifting up his hands to Heaven, Men and
Brethren, says he, I have been assured of this Truth a great while since, yet
I was not willing to divulge it my self, and now you see, to make it the more
unquestionable, the Father has made use of the Testimony of another. Upon this
being chosen King, he immediately dissolves the Duodecimvirate, and, according
to the custom of other Princes, makes choice of some Noblemen for his own
Service: He likewise orders two Crowns, a Scabbard, a Chain, and Scepter, and
such other Regal Ornaments to be made for him forthwith, of the best Gold. Then
he appoints certain days in which he would give a Public Hearing to all those
who had a mind to address themselves to him. As often as he appeared abroad he
was attended with his Officers and Lords of his Household. Two young Men rid
immediately behind him; He on the right hand carried a Crown and a Bible, the
other a drawn Sword. His principal Wife appeared in the same State; for we are
to observe, he had several Wives at the same time. In the Marketplace there
was a high Throne erected for him, covered with Cloth of Gold. The Causes and
Complaints which were brought before him, usually related to Matrimony and
Divorces, than which nothing was more frequent, insomuch that some who had
lived together many years, were then separated. Now it happened that when the
People pressed to hear Causes, and stood very close in the Marketplace;
Knipperdoling springs out of a sudden, and climbing the Crowd, runs upon their
Heads, on his Hands and Knees; and breathing in their Faces, The Father (says
he to each of them) has sanctified thee, receive the Holy Ghost. Another day he
leads up a dance before the King, This is my custom, says he, sometimes with
my Concubine, but now the Father has commanded me to do it in the Kings
Presence. But when he over-acted his part, and would not give over, his Majesty
of Leyden took pet and went away: As soon as he was gone Knipperdoling mounts
the Throne, and sets up for King himself, but his Majesty coming by, tumbles
the Fellow down, and lays him in Limbo for three days. During the Siege these
Anabaptists write a Book and publish it, The Anabaptists Book, concerning the
Restitution.
which they call The Restitution: In this Book, among other things, they
affirm, That the Kingdom of Christ is to Commence in such a manner before the
last Judgment; that the Godly and the Elect shall Reign, the Wicked being every
where destroyed: They affirm likewise, That it is lawful for the People to turn
the Magistrates out of their Office; that though the Apostles had no Authority
to Challenge such a Jurisdiction, yet those who are the present Ministers of
the Church ought to take the Sword into their own hands, and new-mould the
Commonwealth by force. To this they added, That no Person who was not a true
Christian ought to be tolerated in the Church; farther, That no Body could be
saved, unless they resigned all their Fortune to the Public Use, without
reserving any Property to themselves: Luther and the Pope they said were false
Prophets, but Luther worse than the other. Lastly, That the Marriage of those
who were not enlightened with true Faith, was polluted and impure, and to be
accounted Fornication, or rather Adultery, more than any thing else. These
Tenants of theirs were principally opposed by Melancthon, Justus Menius, and
Vrbanus Regius, who published very large and satisfactory Treatises upon this
Subject. Some few weeks after, the new Prophet I mentioned before, sounds a
Trumpet through all the Streets, and commands them to meet armed at the Porch
of the Cathedral; for the Enemy was to be beaten off the Town: When they came
to the place of Randevouz, they found a Supper prepared; The Anabaptists Supper.
They are ordered to sit down, being about four thousand of them; afterward
about a thousand others sit down, who were upon Duty while the first number
were at Supper: The King and the Queen, with their Houshold-Servants wait at
the Table: After they had eaten, and Supper was almost done, the King himself
gives every one a piece of Bread, with these words, Take, eat, show forth the
Lord's death: The Queen in like manner giving them a Cup, Bids them show forth
the Lord's death; when this was over, the Prophet beforementioned gets into
the Pulpit, and asks them, If they would obey the Word of God? When they all
told him, Yes; It is the Command of the heavenly Father, says he, that we
should send out about eight and twenty Teachers of the Word, who are to go to
the four Quarters of the World, and Publish the Doctrine which is received in
this City. The Apostles of the Anabaptists.
Then he repeats the Names of his Missionaries, and assigns them all their
respective Journeys: Thereupon six are sent to Osenburgh, six to Varendrop,
eight to Soest, and as many to Coesfeld. Afterward the King and Queen, and the
rest of the Waiters, sat down to Supper, with those who were designed for this
Expedition. At Supper the King rises up, and pretends, That the Father had
commanded him to dispatch some business. By chance one of the Besiegers was
taken Prisoner by them; this Man the King Indicts of High Treason, as if he had
been a second Judas; when he had done this, he beheads him himself, and then
returns to his Supper, and relates his Exploit in a rallying way. After Supper
those eight and twenty Men we mentioned, were sent away by night; To every one
of which, besides Provision for the way, they gave a Crown in Gold, which they
were to leave in those places which refused to receive their Doctrine, as a
Testimony of their Ruin and eternal Destruction, for rejecting that Peace and
saving Doctrine which they had been offered. These Men went out accordingly, and
when they had reached their respective Posts, they cry out in the Towns, That
Men must Repent, otherwise they would shortly be destroyed. They spread their
Coats upon the Ground before the Magistrates, and throw down their Crowns upon
them, and protest, They were sent by the Father to offer them Peace, if they
would receive it. They command them to let all their Fortunes be common; but if
they refused to accept it, then this Gold should be left as a Token of their
Wickedness and Ingratitude: They added, That these were the Times foretold by
all the Prophets, in which God would make Righteousness flourish all the World
over; and when their King had fully discharged his Office, and brought things
to that Perfection, so as to make Righteousness prevail every where, then the
time would be come in which Christ was to deliver up the Kingdom to the Father.
As soon as they had done their Speech, they were Apprehended, and Examined
first in a friendly manner, but afterward upon the Rack, concerning their
Faith, and way of Living, and how the Town was fortified. Their answer was,
That they only taught the true Doctrine, which they were ready to maintain with
the hazard of their Lives: For since the times of the Apostles the Word of God
was never rightly delivered, nor Justice observed: That there were but four
Prophets, whereof two were Righteous, David and John of Leyden, the other two
Wicked, viz. the Pope and Luther, and this later the worst. Being asked why
they had banished a Company of innocent Persons their City, contrary to their
own Promise? why after that, they had seized upon their Goods, their Wives and
Children; and by what place of Scripture they could defend this sort of
Justice? To this they reply, That now the time was come in which Christ
foretold, That the Meek should Inherit the Earth: Thus in old time God gave the
Israelites the Wealth of the Egyptians. Speaking afterward concerning the
Forces and Provision of the City, they took occasion to say, That most of their
Party had more than five Wives a Man; That they expected to be reinforced from
Friezland and Holland, and as soon as their Auxiliaries were come up, their
King would march out with his whole Army to Conquer the World for Himself, and
that he would s^ay all Princes for their neglect of Justice. After they had
been put to the Question, and still persisted in their obstinacy, acknowledging
no Magistrates besides their own King, they were all of them executed, except
one who made his Escape. And now the City was very strictly besieged, so that
none had the liberty of going out; Therefore the Citizens fearing a Famine, and
being apprehensive of their own danger, designed to apprehend the King, and
deliver him in Chains to the Bishop. But the King, who was privately advertised
of their Plot, chooses twelve Men, out of the whole multitude, whom he
conceived would be most true to him; these he calls his Captains and Guards,
and assigns every one of them a distinct Post to maintain, for the prevention
of all Insurrection: Then he promises all the People that at Easter they should
be delivered from the trouble both of the Siege and Scarcity they were pressed
with: As for the Captains he promises them much greater matters, and tells
them, That he would make them all Lords, particularly naming what Province,
what Castles and Lands, each of them was to be rewarded with; adding withal,
That they must be kind to the Lantgrave, because he hoped that in time he would
come over to his Party. A meeting of the Princes at Coblentz.
I have mentioned already that in December there was a Meeting appointed at
Coblentz of those States of the Empire which belong to that Province which lies
upon the Rhine: To these John Frederick Duke and Elector of Saxony voluntarily
joined himself. In this Meeting the Case was considered, and there were
Supplies ordered to be sent to the Bishop forthwith, three hundred Horse, and
three thousand Foot, to be continued for six months. Vlrick Count Oborstein is
made General of those Forces, and has the management of the whole War committed
to him: They also decreed, That all the States of the Empire should be
solicited to send Supplies; and in regard the Emperor was in Spain, they would
entreat Ferdinand King of the Romans, to give notice that a Diet should be held
in April following, for the settling this Affair. Then they wrote sharply to the
besieged, and charge them to give over their Enterprise, which was so
scandalous and wicked, as nothing could be imagined more; protesting, That
unless they obeyed, and surrendered themselves to their lawful Magistrate, the
Bishop, who now besieged them, would be assisted with the Forces of the whole
Empire. This was done about the end of December.

Jan. 15th in the year 1635, the besieged return an Answer which was large, but
nothing to the purpose; however they spoke so far to the Point, as to approve
and defend their proceedings in general; as to what was objected to them
concerning their making a King they take no notice of it; but in their private
Letter to the Lantgrave they endeavor to excuse themselves, enlarging
themselves very much upon the destruction and universal Slaughter of the
Wicked, upon the Deliverance and Kingdom of the Saints, which was to Commence
in this life: They likewise send him the Book of Restitution, which I mentioned
before, and admonish him to Repent, and not like the rest of the other Princes
wickedly make War against innocent Persons, and the People of God. The
Lantgrave reads their Letter and their Book, and marking what he disliked in
it, commands some of his own Subjects to answer it. And because they had
written very briefly and somewhat obscurely, that their King was not so much of
their choosing as of God Almighties: He demands of them why they did not
publish those Texts of Scriptures which they founded the Action upon? why they
had not proved the lawfulness of their proceedings by Signs and Wonders? For
when Christ was to come into the World, God foretold it long before by all his
Prophet; and that in so evident a manner, that not only the Tribe and Family,
but the time when, and the place where was certainly known. The Anabaptists
likewise desired they might have a Hearing: To which the Lantgrave replies,
That it was too late to talk of that now, since they had usurped the Power of
the Sword, and been the Authors of so great a Calamity: For all Men saw what
they drove at, viz. To overturn all Laws and Government: And as their Design
was execrable and wicked, so their desiring their Cause might be heard, was
nothing but sham and pretense: He had taken care to send them faithful Pastors
of the Church, by whom he did not question but that they were well Instructed:
The Doctrine of the Anabaptists, and their wickedness.
But their broaching a Doctrine of their own, by virtue of which they had
rebelled against the Magistrate, possessed themselves of the Fortunes of their
Neighbors, introduced Polygamy, and chosen a new King; Their denying that
Christ assumed his Humane Nature of the Virgin Mary; their asserting the
Freedom of Man's Will; forcing People to relinquish their Property, and consent
to a Community of Goods, and denying Absolution to a Sinner that relapseth; all
these Tenants were repugnant to the Laws both of God and Man. When they had
received this Answer, The Anabaptists Book concerning the Mysteries of the
Scripture.
they reply to it, and send a Book with it concerning the Mysteries of the
Scriptures, written in the Vulgar-Tongue. In their Letter they flourish their
Cause over again, and defend their Tenants: In their Book they divide the
duration of the World into three Periods; The first World, which lasted from
Adam to Noah, was destroyed by a Deluge: This in which we now live, will be
consumed by Fire; And the third will be perfectly new, in which Righteousness
is to Reign. But before this last World commences, that which is now, must be
purified by Fire; but this will not come to pass till Antichrist is revealed,
and his Power utterly destroyed: Then the time will be come in which the
Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down, will be built again; That Christ
will be seated in his Kingdom on the Earth, and all the Writings of the
Prophets will be accomplished. As for the present Word it may be resembl'd to
the Age of Esau, for now Justice is clapped under Hatches, and the Godly are
afflicted: But as the Captivity of Babylon did not last always, so now the time
of Restitution and Deliverance from these great Calamities is at hand, in which
Vengeance shall be fully executed upon the Ungodly, according to what is
denounced against them in the Revelations: Now this Restitution is to precede
the future Age, that the Wicked being destroyed the Earth, may be the better
prepared to be the Seat of Righteousness. When this Book was read over, the
Lantgrave Orders some of his Church-Ministers to write against it. Some few
Agents of the Cities, who met at Coblentz did not like the Decree which was
made there, and said, They would report it to their Principals at home.
Afterward all the rest of the Cities of the Empire had a Meeting at Esling,
where it was finally resolved, That those who met at Coblentz before, had no
right to lay any Tax upon them: For to do this, it was requisite to have the
Consent and Authority of the Emperor, and all the States: Therefore they
refused to stand to this Decree, and promise to send Supplies to each other, if
any of them should happen to come into danger upon this account: But whatever
Provision was legally made for the Commonwealth in the Diets of the Empire, in
such cases they declare they would always be ready to perform their Duty. Now
in the month of February the price of Provisions was risen to that height, that
some People were ready to perish with Hunger; whereupon one of the Queens
compassionating the Condition of the Townsmen, happened to say to her Partners,
That she did not believe it was the will of God that Men should be starved at
that rate: The King who had his Storehouse furnished not only for Convenience
but Luxuxry; when he understood this thing, brings her out into the
Marketplace, together with the rest of his Wives; then commanding her to kneel
down, he beheads her, The King executes one of the Queens himself.
and sets a mark of Infamy upon her when she was dead, as if she had been a
Strumpet. The remaining Queens applaud this piece of Justice, and give thanks
to the heavenly Father. After that the King begins a Dance, and exhorts the
Multitude who had nothing but Bread and Salt left them, to dance and be merry.
When Easter was come and no Deliverance appeared, the King, that he might find
some excuse for being so lavish in his Promises, pretends to be sick for six
days together. After that he comes forth into the Marketplace, and says, That
he had rid a blind Ass, and that the Father had laid the Sins of the whole
Multitude upon him; now therefore they were all perfectly cleansed and
discharged of the guilt of all heinous Offenses; Luther's opinion concerning
the people of Munster.
this was the Deliverance which he promised them, with which they ought to be
contented. Luther, among other things which he published about this time in the
Vulgar-Tongue, breaks out thus upon this occasion, Alas, says he, what shall
I say, how shall I complain of those miserable Wretches, and deplore their
Condition? that Devils dwell among them in abundance is beyond all question:
However we have great reason to praise God for his infinite mercy toward us;
for though Germany deserves to be severely afflicted, for contemning the
Gospel, for dishonouring the Name of God, and for shedding the blood of
righteous Persons: Yet God is pleased to check the Career and Violence of
Satan; as yet he does not permit him to ravage at his pleasure; but gives us a
merciful warning, and by this ill contrived Farce at Munster, calls upon us to
reform our Lives! For unless God had restrained him and pulled him back, I do
not question but that so subtle a Spirit as he is, and who is so much his
Crafts-master, would have gone a quite different way to Work. But now since God
has disabled him, he does not tyrannize and embroil the World so much as he has
a mind to, but only so far as his permission reaches: For the evil Spirit, who
endeavors to destroy the Christian-Religion, does not usually make choice of
Polygamy for the compassing his Designs; he knows the Infamy and Wickedness of
such a practice is so notorious, that all Men abhor it. It Is true, States and
Civil Government may be disordered this way, but the Kingdom of Christ must be
battered with other sort of Engines. He that would deceive effectually, and draw
Men into his Toyls, must not pretend to Empire and Government, and play the
Tyrant; for all People dislike this way, and perceive what he aims at; but he
must lay his Contrivance deep, and lead by degrees to the main Design: Indeed
to go in a singular and negligent Habit, to put on a grave and mortified Face,
to look almost always upon the ground, to practice Fasting, not to touch a
Penny; to abstain from eating Flesh, to pretend an aversion to Matrimony, to
account Magistracy a profane Office, to refuse the offer of Greatness and
Government, and to make Profession of extraordinary Humility; This makes way
for the Kingdom of Darkness by the Arts of Dissimulation and Secrecy, and is
so well contrived a Method, that it is possible for wise Men to be circumvented
by it. But impudently to Vsurp a Kingdom, and marry as many Wives as his
Lewdness has a mind to, can be the contrivance of none but some raw unpracticed
Devil; or if he does understand his business, God has so bound him in Chains,
that he has not the liberty to show any more Cunning; which is done without
doubt to make us stand in awe of his Majesty, and to excite us to Repentance,
before he is provoked to let loose a more experienced Enemy, who will set upon
us in a much more formidable manner. For if this whiffling Grammaticaster has
been able to make such a Disturbance; what do we think will be Issue, when
Satan, of greater parts and understanding, shall pour in upon us? I mean a
Devil who understands Law and Divinity; indeed we need not much fear tha^ this
Clumsie Goblin will do any great harm: I believe all the People in the Town are
not pleased with his Diversion, but that most of them are heartily sorry for
it, and with sighs and tears wait for a Deliverance from God; as we know it
happened some years since in the Insurrection of the Boars. And I wish with all
my heart there was never a subtiller Devil in the World, than this of Munster.
For if God does not withdraw the assistance of his Word, I am persuaded there
are very few will give any Credit to this dull and sottish Pretender. Though
when the Wrath of God is kindled, there is no Error so absurd, and ill put
together, but that Satan may make it pass: As we see it has happened in the
Religion of Mahomet, for though it is all made up of Folly, yet when once the
light of God's Word was extinguished, it gathered strength, and spread it self
into that Extent and Prevalency which we now now see: And the same Fate had
happened to Germany, if God had not defeated the Design and Attempts of Muncer;
for Satan by the Divine Permission can blow up the least Spark into a mighty
Conflagration; neither is there any way so likely to put it out, as by the Word
of God; and since the Armor of the Enemy is all of it Incorporeal, it is to no
purpose to draw up Horse and Cannon against him. But our Princes and Bishops go
another way to work; they obstruct the preaching of the Gospel, which alone is
able to cure the Minds and Affections of Men, and go on rufling with
Punishments and Executions, in hopes to get the Body out of the Devil's
Clutches, never considering that they leave him in possession of the Heart and
Soul, which is much the better part of the Man. I expect they will have the
same Success in this Affair which the Jews had, who went about to destroy
Christ by Punishment and Crucifixion. Now as to those things which are reported
and written concerning the people of Munster, I believe there is nothing but
truth in them; and that which confirms me in this opinion, is the Book which
was lately published by them; in which they give a pleasant Description of
their Frenzy. First, they talk very absurdly about the Doctrine of Faith; as
also concerning Christ, as if he was not the Son of Mary, according to their
Style, though they grant him descended from the Line of David; but they do not
sufficiently explain the Point; It being the Devil's method to foster a
monstrous Production: This indeed he plainly intimates, that it is impossible
for the Seed of Mary, or the Flesh to redeem us; but his argument is ill
founded, for the Scripture says, That Christ is born of the Virgin Mary, which
word in all Languages relates to the Foetus, which being conceived and formed
out of the flesh and blood of its Mother, is brought forth into the World.
Another piece of their folly is shown in condemning the Baptism of former Ages
as a profane Practice; for they don't account it a Divine Institution, but
only a bare Humane Ordinance. Now if every thing which comes from the Wicked,
or belongs to them, is to be despised and rejected, I very much wonder why they
do not throw away the Gold and Silver, and the other Goods which they have
plundered from the Wicked, and make some new matter for themselves? for Baptism
as well as those is the effect of God's Power and appointment; when a wicked
Man swears, he Prophanes the Name of the true God; but if there was no such
thing as the Name of the true God for him to swear by, then he would not be
guilty of any Transgression. He that Steals or Robs upon the Highway, breaks
the Command of God; but upon the supposition there was no such real Command, he
is then no Sinner; in like manner if the former Baptism be nothing at all, then
those who are baptized with it are not chargeable with any fault; why therefore
do they abominate this Baptism as a wicked thing, when according to their own
assertion it is nothing at all? If, as they say, the Marriages of precedent
Generations, are to be esteemed no better than Fornication and Adultery,
because, according to their Cant, they were contracted by persons who wanted
Faith: I desire to know, Whether they do not confess themselves to be all Sons
of Whores? Now if they are all base born, and illegitimate, why do they enjoy
the Possessions of their own City, and Forefathers? Indeed since they are such
sort of People, it may reasonably be expected, that they should not possess any
thing by right of Inheritance; but if they would have a creditable Title, they
ought to raise themselves new Fortunes in their newly invented Matrimony; for
it does not become such Saints, such religious Ones, as they are, to live upon
these whorish and ill-gotten Estates, much less to take them away by force and
robbery from other Men: As touching the ridiculous Kingdom which they pretend
to, there are so many and such apparent Villainies in this one thing, that there
needs no further enlargement upon it; possibly what I have said already may
seem superflous and unnecessary, especially since this argument has already
been sufficiently managed, and explained by others. In the Diet at Worms which
King Ferdinand convened in April at the instance of the Princes, A Diet held at
Worms.
and in which he assisted by his Agents; The Cities which had contributed no
money, made a protestation at first, that their coming thither precisely upon
that day was not upon the account of the Decree which was made at Coblentz, but
in Obedience to the Emperor and Ferdinand King of the Romans; afterward they
had a great Dispute with the Princes about the Contribution. At last there was
a Supply decreed for five months, at the rate of twenty thousand Crowns a
month: They likewise decreed, That when the Town was taken, the innocent Crowd
should be spared; and that those honest Men who were either besieged, or had
removed some whither else, should have their Goods restored to them. When this
Decree had passed, the Bishop of Munster gives the Charge of his Army to Count
Obestein; but the Money being levied very negligently, and almost quite too
late, there was nothing considerable done; nay the Officers themselves were
more than once in great danger of their Lives by the Soldiers, who mutiny'd
for want of their Pay. Now when the Town was reduced to that Extremity, that a
great many perished daily with danger, many of them also deserting it, and
coming out so lamentable lean and meager, that the Enemy could not choose but
pity them: The Officers of the Camp gave the Townsmen to understand, that if
they would deliver up their King and some few Persons more, they should have
security for themselves. The Citizens though they were very desirous to comply,
yet the Severity and Vigilance of their King was such, that they durst attempt
nothing: For the King was obstinate to that degree, that as long as there was
any thing for him, and a few others to live upon, he was resolved not to
surrender. Therefore the Commanders write to them, and charge them not to let
any Persons come out of their City for the future, no not so much as Women or
Children: This was the first day of June. The day after they return an answer,
In which they complain, that they were not allowed a fair Hearing; That they
were used with extreme Rigor, without any just Provocation on their part; but
if any one could show they were mistaken, they would not fail to do their duty:
Then they fall of explaining the Vision of Daniel concerning the fourth Beast,
which was to be the cruellest of all: The conclusion of their Letter was, That,
by the Grace of God, they would persevere in this Confession of Truth; but all
this stuff was dictated by their King. Now when the Town was brought to the
last Extremity, two Persons made their Escape, one of them was taken by the
Soldiers, the other, after he had received Security, comes to the Bishop, both
of them enform him how he may make himself Master of the Town. Oberstein and
the Bishop after they had heard this Report of the Deserters, and consulted
upon the Point, upon the 22d of June they advise the Townsmen in a Parley to
surrender themselves, and preserve the Multitude from starving: They return an
answer by Rotman in their King's Presence, the Purport of which was, That they
would not depart from their Resolution. Two days after, about Eleven of the
Clock at Night, the Army marches up to the City without any noise, and by the
help of the Deserters, some Soldiers, who were drawn out for this purpose,
pass through the Ditch up to the Rampire, and kill the Sentinels; those were
followed by others, who finding a little Gate open, about five hundred of them,
with some Officers and Colors, enter the Town. Upon this the Townsmen joining
in a Body, dispute the Entrance of the rest, and at last, with great
difficulty, beat them back; and shutting the Gate, charge those who had broken
in already, and kill a great many of them; and when they had fought very
smartly for an hour or two, the Enemy who were shut in, break open the Gate
which was next to them, being defended by a very slender Guard, and make way
for their own Party, who came up immediately in a great Body. To whom the
Citizens made some resistance at first, and fortified themselves in the
Marketplace; but afterward finding they had lost a great many Men at the
first Charge, and desparing of Success, they beg Pardon, and obtain it: The
King and Knipperdoling were taken at the same instant, and Rotman having no
hopes of coming off, to prevent falling alive into the Enemies hand, charge
into the Body of them, and is run through. The Town being taken, the Bishop
reserves half the Booty and the Ordnance for himself; afterward he disbands
the Army, and keeps only two Companies for his Garrison. Another Diet at Worms.
After this there was another Diet of the Empire held at Worms upon the 17th
of July, in which Ferdinand, by his Ambassadors, proposes by way of question,
Whether since the Town was reduced, there was any thing farther to be done
toward the total Suppression of the Anabaptists: He also puts them in mind,
that the Princes should solicit the Pope about the calling of a Council. They
answer, That it was ordered by several Edicts already, what was proper to be
done to the Anabaptists: That the Pope had more than once been importuned by
the Emperor about a Council; and they said, That they could do nothing farther.
In this Diet the Bishop of Munster desired that his Expenses, and the loss he
had been at, might be made good to him; and complains that the money he was to
receive by agreement, was not paid. When they could make no farther
Establishment, and but few of the States were present, they appoint another
Diet to be held upon the first of November, in which the Accounts and Charge of
the War was to be stated, and the Form of Government which Munster was to be
under, settled. When the time appointed was come, the Ambassador of King
Ferdinand relates briefly the occasion of assembling the Diet; namely, that,
among other things, it might be debated how the City, which was lately
recovered, might continue in the ancient Religion. Afterward the Bishops
Ambassador mentions how expensive the War had been to him all along, what
great Debts he had contracted; how after the Town was taken, to prevent Danger
and Insurrections, he was obliged to build two Forts there, and place Garrisons
in them; all which things he desired might be considered. To this it was
answered, That the Bishop had taken the greatest part of the Booty, all the
Ordnance and the Goods of the Citizens, all which belonged to the State of the
Empire: That it was reasonable these things should be valued, and compared with
the Charges he had been at: That what was due to him after such a Computation,
should be accounted for. Afterward it was decreed, That the Bishopric of
Munster should be subject to the the Empire, according to ancient custom: That
the Nobility should be restored, and also the Citizens who had removed,
provided they were not Anabaptists: Touching Religion, the Bishop was to
proceed according to the Laws of the Empire: At the beginning of the next
Spring the Princes Commissioners should go to Munster, and enquire into the
behavior and condition of the Citizens, protect the Innocent, and slight the
Fortifications which the Anabaptists had raised: The Bishop also was to
demolish those Forts he had built in the Town, and to punish the Captives, the
King, Knipperdoling and Creching, according to their deserts, with the first
opportunity, and not to keep them any longer. Concerning that which was decreed
about Religion, the Elector of Saxony, the Lantgrave, the Duke of Wirtemburgh,
and Earl of Anhalt, openly remonstrated against it; the same Protestation was
made by the Cities; besides they were not willing the old Fortification of the
Town should be razed; as concerning the new ones they had nothing to object.
The King of Munster is carried about for a sight.
The King and his two fellow Prisoners were carried up and down the Country to
the Princes to show and expose them: this gave some of the Lantgraves Preachers
an opportunity of conversing with the King, with whom they dispute chiefly
these following Points, viz. concerning the Kingdom of Christ, concerning
Magistracy, Justification, Baptism, the Lord's Supper, the Incarnation of
Christ, and Matrimony; and here though he defended himself with obstinacy
enough, yet they pressed him so hard with Testimonies of Scripture, that though
he did not yield in every thing, yet they made him bend and let go his hold,
insomuch that at last he gave up the greatest part of the Cause, which some
think he did only to save his life. For when they came to him again, he
promised, upon condition of being pardoned, that he would engage to oblige the
Anabaptists, who were very numerous in Holland, Brabant, England, and
Friezland, to give over Preaching, and to obey the Magistrates in every thing.
Afterward these Divines argued with his Companions both by word of mouth and
writing, concerning Mortification, the Baptism of Infants, Community of Goods,
and the Kingdom of Christ. When they were brought to Telget, the Bishop demands
of the King, by what Authority he could justify the liberty he had taken in
his Town, and with his Subjects? To whom he replies in a question, Who gave him
the Jurisdiction over the City? When the Bishop made answer, That he was chosen
into this Government by the consent of the Chapter and the People: 1536.
The other replies, That he was called to this Office by God. Upon the 19th of
Jan. they are brought back to Munster, and committed to distinct Prisons; upon
the same day likewise the Bishop came to Town, with the Archbishop of Cologn,
and the Ambassadors of the Duke of Cleve. The two following days were spent in
pious Exhortations, to bring them off from their Error: Now the King did own
his fault, and prayed to our Savior, but the other two would not acknowledge
that they had done any thing amiss, but obstinately defended their Opinions.
The next day the King was brought out into a place whose situation was higher
than ordinary, The King of the Anabaptists is executed.
and tied to a Stake, there were two Executioners by him with red-hot Pincers:
He was silent for the three first snatches, but afterward he did nothing but
cry out to God for Mercy; when he had been torn in this manner above the space
of an hour, he was run through the Body with a Sword, and so died: His
Companions had the same punishment. When they were dead, they were each of them
fastened to an Iron-Cage, and hung at the top of the Tower in the City; the
King hangs in the middle, and about a Man's height higher than the other two.
In January this year Catherine of Spain died, War between Denmark and Lubeck.
who Henry King of England had divorced above three years since, as I observed
before. In the Fourth Book I gave an account how Frederick Duke of Holstein was
made King of Denmark by the assistance of the Lubeckers: When he was dead,
there happened to be a very troublesome War between his Son and Successor
Christian and the Lubeckers; but by the mediation of the Elector of Saxony, of
the Lantgrave, and Earnest Duke of Luenburgh, of the Towns of Bremen, Hamburgh,
Magdeburgh, Brunswick, Lunenburgh, and Hildesheim; the Quarrel was at last
taken up this year in February. At that time the Duke of Savoy was engaged in a
War with Geneva, being assisted in it, A War between the Duke of Savoy and
Geneva.
or rather provoked to it, by the Bishop of that City, partly because the
Reformed Religion was introduced there, partly for other reasons. Now the
Citizens of Geneva were Allies of the Canton of Bern, who assisting them at
last with their whole Forces, the Enemy was beaten off, and obliged to retreat,
and the Caenton-men of Bern pursuing them as far as the Lake Leman, seized upon
as much of the Dukes Country as lay convenient for their Frontiers; the same
thing was done by the rest of the Switzers which join upon Savoy. During this
Action the French King who long before intended to make War in Italy, The
French King makes War upon the Duke of Savoy.
especially after the death of Francis Sforza, whom we mentioned before, levies
an Army in the beginning of the Spring, and falls upon the Duke of Savoy, who
was his Uncle: He grounded his Quarrel upon his Claim to an Inheritance which
he said belonged to him, but was seized on by the other. The Duke of Savoy
being weakened before, and unable to Match so powerful an Enemy, was outed of
most of his Dominions in a short time. For the King passing over the Alps,
invades Piedmont; and, besides other Conquests, takes Turin the Capital City of
that Country, and fortifies it with new Works, and a Garrison; the Command of
the Army, in this Action, being given to Philip Chabot Admiral of France. The
Duke of Savoy was married to Beatrix, Daughter to Emanuel late King of
Portugal, and the Emperor to Isabella Sister to John who now Reigns; and
whereas formerly he had kept himself Neuter, now by seeming to incline to the
Emperor's side, he provoked the French King to break with him, who was his
Nephew by his own Sister Louise. Some say Pope Clement when he was at
Marseilles, of which I gave account in the last Book, gave the King this
Council, That if ever he intended to recover Millain, his way was first to
possess himself of Savoy and Turen: However this was, the next year the King
sets a new Custom on foot, and raises a standing Army of Foot, to the number
of about forty thousand, which being quartered in several Provinces, were to be
kept in Discipline, and always to be ready for Service upon occasion. And as
the French Kings had formerly been very considerable for their Cavalry, which
they always kept in pay; He was resolved to add a well-disciplined Infantry to
them, that he might not always be obliged to hire foreign Soldiers. The King's
design was to March his Army into the Neighboring State of Millain, to recover
that Duchy which he had formerly been possessed of for six years together, and
claimed it as the Inheritance of him and his Children, in the right of
Valentina his great Grandmother, who was Daughter to Philip Visconti the last
Duke of Millain of that Family. The Pedigree runs thus, The Family of the
Visconti of Millain.
The Family of the Visconties is remarkably Noble in the Duchy, Otho is
reckoned the first of this Line, who was Archbishop of Millain, and in the
Reign of Rodolph the Emperor expelled the Turiani, who were a Noble and
Illustrious Family. After his death the Command of the Town fell to Matthew his
Nephew by his Brother Theobald; The next in Succession were Galeaze, Actio,
Luchino, John, Matthew the Second, Galeaze the Second, Barnabas, John Galeaze
who was made first Duke of Millain by Wenceslaus the Emperor: This Galeaze had
two Sons, John and Philip (who died without lawful Issue) and a Daughter
Valentina: Francis Sforza who was a Man of a Military Profession, and base Son
of James, marries the natural Daughter of Philip, and under that color seizes
upon the Duchy of Millain, and bars Valentina the Sister of Philip, who was
married to Lewis Duke of Orleance, Brother to Charles the Sixth of France.
Sforza had Issue Galeaze, Lodowick and Ascanio. Lodowick made himself Master of
the Government by Violence, and had Issue Maximilian and Francis: The Duke of
Orleance had Charles, Philip and John, by Valentina. Charles was the Father of
Lewis Duke of Orleance, who was afterward King of France, and the Twelfth of
that Name. Philip left no Children, John Duke of Angoulesme begot Charles who
was Father to King Francis, who took Maximilian Sforza Prisoner, and possessed
himself of the Duchy of Millain: But Leo the Tenth and the Emperor beat him
out, and restored Francis Sforza who was banished; after whose death King
Francis, to recover and vindicate his Right, begins a new War, because as soon
as Sforza was dead, the Emperor possessed himself of the Duchy of Millain by
the Conduct of Antonio Leva, whom he made his Lieutenant, and left him there
for the Security of the Country, when he set sail for Africa, which we
mentioned before. Therefore as soon as he understood the King's design, he
raised as considerable an Army in Germany, and other places as he could, and
orders it to March into Italy: And coming from Naples* to Rome a few days
after, he desires he might have a Consistory called, where in a full Assembly
of Cardinals, the Pope being present, and the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes,
The Emperor makes a Speech against the French King.
he makes a smart and violent Speech against the French King, by whose
inveterate Malice and treacherous breakings of his League, he was hindered and
opposed in his most excellent and religious Designs: The conclusion of his
Harangue was, that he was ready to fight him in a Duel, being desirous that the
War might rather be ended with the private inconvenience of that King or
himself, The Venetinns make a League with the Emperor.
than continued to Plague the whole World. Before he left Naples the Venetians
made a League with him against the Turk, which they were the more inclinable to
do, because they hoped he would resign the Duchy of Millain to some Person or
other: For the rest of the Princes of Italy, and especially themselves were
unwilling, that the French or the Emperor should be enriched with so large a
Principality. For this reason of late years they had often combined together
sometimes against the French King, and sometimes against the Emperor, that
Francis Sforza might be restored, because they apprehended less danger from
him. For the motive, why Pope Clement and the Venetians ten years before entered
into a League against the Emperor, was, because upon the Expulsion of Sforza
they suspected he would challenge the whole State of Millain for himself; which
they conceived would be very prejudicial to their Interest, and about seven
years before when he restored Sforza at Bologna, at the Intercession of
Clement, he gained wonderfully upon the Affections of Italy. The Emperor also
at Naples married his natural Daughter to Alexander de Medice, whom he had made
Duke of Florence, as was related in the Seventh Book. This Alexander was the
natural Son of Laurence de Medices, whose Father was Peter, whom in the former
Book was mentioned to have been drowned at the mouth of the River Garigliano.
In the former Book I gave an account why Vergerius was sent into Germany. Now
when the Emperor was come to Naples, the Pope recalls him, upon which he
returns to Rome with all speed, and makes a Report of his Embassy, viz. That
the Protestants demanded a free and Christian Council, and that in a convenient
place within the Territories of the Empire, which the Emperor had promised they
should have. Concerning Luther and his Party, there was no hopes of doing any
good upon them, but by suppressing them: To that motion relating to the King of
England, the Protestants would by no means agree; and the rest of the Princes
were very cold: Indeed George Duke of Saxony did say, That their greatest
danger was from the Protestants, which was no ways to be avoided, unless the
Emperor and Pope joined in a War against them as soon as was possible. When the
Pope understood this, Vergerius is sent away to the Emperor.
he dispatcheth away Vergerius for Naples with all speed, that he might relate
these things to the Emperor, especially that about making War upon the
Lutherans. When the Emperor came to Rome, which was in the Month of April, as
was observed before, he very much insisted upon the intimation of the Council,
and desired he might carry away a Bull with him to that purpose: The Pope told
him, That he was not against a Council, but then he would have the choice of
some Town in Italy, and prescribe those Conditions which were necessary for the
Roman-Church. The Emperor replied, That provided he would hold a Council, he
should not value any other Dispute, for he would oblige the greatest part of
Germany to comply with him in the rest. The Pope therefore chooses nine out of
the Consistory to draw up the Bull. Who were Campegio, Cesio, Simoneta,
Ginuccio, Contareni, and Pool, Cardinals. The Archbishop of Brundisi, the
Bishop of Rheggio, and Vergerius, just then made Bishop of Modrusch, and not
long after of Capo d'Istria. All these Persons draw up a Form for the
intimating the Council, first in the Popes presence, afterward by themselves,
as will be observed afterward.

I have already made mention of the English Ambassadors, The Articles of the
League between the King of England and the Protestants.
with whom there was a Treaty on foot at Smalcalde upon these following
Conditions, That the King should propagate the Doctrine of the Gospel in its
Purity, as it was proposed at Ausburgh, and afterward explained, and join with
them in the defense of it, in a lawful Council, if any such was called: That
neither Party should allow of the Intimation, or place of the Council, but by
common consent. However if it appeared by good and unquestionable Reasons, that
there would be such a Council held, as Paul Peter Vergerius had offered to
demonstrate, then it should not be refused: But if the Pope notwithstanding
would go on in his old way, then his design should be opposed and remonstrated
against by a public Protestation. As his Majesty had united himself to them in
Doctrine, so he should be desirous to come into their League, and be styled the
Patron and Defender of it: That the common opinion of the Pope's Supremacy
should be for ever disowned. If there was War made upon either of them upon the
score of Religion, or for any other reason, then the Aggressor was to have no
assistance: The King should pay an hundred thousand Crowns toward the defense
of the League; the moiety of which Sum the Confederates may lay out whenever
their occasions shall require it, but shall be obliged to defray the rest of
the Charge out of their own Contributions. And if the War happens to be of any
long continuance, and the Forces of the Enemy make it necessary, the King shall
assist them with two hundred thousand Crowns; since when things come to that
extremity, they have obliged themselves, not only to spend their Fortunes, but
their Lives too. This latter sum should be managed the same way with the
former, and not be turned to any other use than their own Defense; and when the
War was ended the remainder should be returned: The Ambassadors should write
the King their Master an account of these Articles, and when they understood
his Resolution, they should acquaint the Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave
with it; to the end, that afterward an Embassy, in the Name of all the
Confederates, might be sent to him: As soon as the Ambassadors had sent away
these Proposals to the King, they remove to Wittemburgh, The English
Ambassadors Winter at Wittemburgh.
where they spent the rest of the Winter, during which time they argued with
the Town-Divines concerning the Doctrins then controverted: The main of their
Disputation was about the Celibacy of the Clergy, the Lord's Supper, the
Popish-Mass, and the Vows of the Religious; particularly they desired the
Divines would give their Approbation of the King's Divorce; but they answered,
That the Scripture would not allow them to do this, when the other offered
several Arguments to persuade them; particularly that Pope Clement had been of
different Opinions in this matter, and had declared his Sentiments in a private
Conference with the French King: The Divines replied, That if the case stood
thus, the King had great cause to do what he did; but when they were urged to
say he had most just cause, The King of England's Letter to the Protestants.
they refused it. As soon as the Ambassadors had received the King's Letters
out of England, in which he explained his mind upon the Point; they acquaint
the Elector with it. And upon the 12th day of March at Wittemburgh, whither the
Duke was then come, they enlarge themselves very much upon the King's good
Inclinations to the Cause, and that he was satisfied with most of the Articles,
if some few things were amended in them; and notwithstanding all things were
quiet in England, and the King had no reason to fear any Person, for if there
were formerly any grounds for such apprehensions, they were now removed by the
death of his Wife which was divorced; yet to recover, and settle the true
Doctrine, if the Alliance went on, he was not unwilling to furnish them with
that Sum of Money which they desired, and intended to discourse this Point
farther by word of mouth with their Ambassadors: As for the Honor which they
offered him, of being Defender and Patron of their League; he acknowledged
their kindness, and returned them many thanks for it; and though he was
sensible what an invidious and disobliging Title this was, yet for the sake of
the Common Good he would not decline it, provided the first and the second
Article were accommodated. For unless there was an agreement in Doctrine between
them, he was of opinion, that this Undertaking would not be consistent with his
Honor: That he was extremely desirous that the Learned of his own, and their
Dominions, might be brought to a Uniformity of Opinion: And since he saw this
could not be done unless some Points of Doctrine in their Confession and Apology
were first qualified in a private Conference, therefore he earnestly desired
they would send their Ambassadors to him, and, among the rest, some one
eminently Learned, with power to debate and determine the whole Doctrine and
Ceremonies. And in regard he has been so liberal in his concessions, he desires
by way of return; First, If any one makes War upon him, that they would supply
him for four Months, either with five hundred Horse, or ten Ships well
equipped. Secondly, That they would procure him at his own charge two thousand
Horse, and five thousand Foot. Lastly, That they themselves would publicly
approve the Opinion of the Divines of Wittemburgh concerning the Divorce, and
defend it in the Council which was to be called. The Elector of Saxony
answered, That this Affair concerned all the Allies, and therefore he must
consult them; soon after they all agree to meet at Frankford upon the twenty
fourth of April, both about this and other business. When they came thither
they answered the Ambassadors, The Protestants meet at Frankford.
that notwithstanding some were just then received into the League, and others
upon the account of their distance from home, had no power to determine,
because they could not report the matter to their Principals; yet they would
take care that the Embassy to the King should be settled and regulated in this
Meeting; and that those who were not empowred to conclude any thing now, should
declare their mind to the Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave within a Month;
which should be immediately communicated to their Excellencies, at what place
they should please to appoint; neither did they question but that this part of
their Allies would approve the Embassy, and be willing to be concluded by the
Majority. Afterward they drew up the Commission of their Ambassadors who were
to go for England; in which, among other things, it was provided, that when
they were arrived, and came to Treat about the League, they should in every
point they agreed to, expressly except the Empire and Emperor, to whom they were
bound to be subject both by their Oaths and Allegiance. James Sturmius was
designed to represent the Cities in this Embassy: The Divines were Melancthon,
Bucer, and George Draco. At this Meeting there were admitted into the League
Vlrick Duke of Wirtemburgh, Bernin and Philip his Brother, Dukes of Pomeren,
George and Joachim his Brother, Earls of Anhalt; as also Ausburgh, Frank furt,
Campodune, Hamburgh, and Hannover. Other things were likewise debated relating
to the League, the method of their defense, and the proceedings of the Imperial
Chamber. They also decreed to send some Persons to wait upon the Emperor, with
an Answer in writing to his Letter, which was dated at Naples, which I
mentioned in the former Book. I have frequently related already how violently
averse George Duke of Saxony was to Luther's Doctrine. Now this being the
occasion of a great many Disputes between him and his Uncle the Elector of
Saxony, the Father of this present Elector; at last the matter was thus
compromis'd, That there should be no misunderstanding between them upon the
account of Religion, but that they should proceed in that Affait in such a
manner as they thought was accountable before God Almighty; and that their
Vassals, who held of either or both Princes, should enjoy their Property as
formerly, notwithstanding any difference of Religion. For we are to observe,
that both these Princes have their Territories intermixed; which was so
contrived on purpose by their Ancestors, that they might be the better disposed
to live peaceably together; in regard neither of them could make War upon the
other without prejudice to his own Country and Subjects. But the Duke not
minding this Agreement, deprived some Ecclesiastics, belonging to the
Elector's Jurisdiction, of the Revenue of their Lands which they were possessed
of in his Country, because they had turned Lutherans. And for the same reason
disseiz'd those who held both of his Consin and himself of their Estates,
contrary to all former Usage and Custom. After the Electors death, John
Frederick his Son wrote to him, and put him in mind of his Agreement; but he
returned him a disobliging Answer, and besides other Objections, reflected
severely upon him for his falling off from the Church, the Pope, and the
Emperor. Now after the Treaty which was set on Foot this year to take up the
Quarrel, proved ineffectual, as several had done before. The Elector lays the
whole matter before his Allies in the Assembly, and in case the Duke and his
Adherents should offer him any Violence, he desires they would assist him with
their Advice and Fortunes; afterward upon the Tenth of May the Convention was
dismissed. In the beginning of June, Anne of Bullein Queen of England is
beheaded.
Anne of Bullein by whom the King of England had one Daughter Elizabeth, was
beheaded, being condemned of Adultery and Incest: This accident broke off the
Embassy which was designed for England. After the War was grown hot between the
Emperor and the French King, Pope Paul the Third published a Bull of the
following Contents; A Bull of Paul the Third for the Convocation of a Council.
From the time that God had pleased to promote him to the Honor of his present
Station; he desired nothing more earnestly than that by his own Vigilance, and
the assistance of the Holy Spirit, the Church which was committed to his Care,
might be purged from those Heresies and Errors which some while since have
sprung up and spread themselves in it; and also by a Reformation in Manners and
Discipline, it might recover its former Condition: For now to his great grief
it was miserably rent in pieces by Civil Wars, and the Artifices of wicked Men;
and being very solicitous how to find out a Remedy for this great Evil, he
could think of no other way more commodious than that which had been always
used by the Church in such cases, that is, a general Council; this was the
method which he always formerly approved, and since he was raised to his
present Dignity, he still continued of the same mind, with which he had by
Letters acquainted the Emperor and other Princes several times; and now at last
had fully resolved upon this Expedient, hoping it would prove effectual not
only to clear the Lord's Field of Heresies, but also to remove the
Misunderstandings of Princes, and settle a lasting Peace among them, that so
being at leisure to fight the common Enemy of our Faith, Christendom might
recover its own; those who were taken Captives might be released from a
miserable Slavery, Infidels converted to our Religion, and all People brought
within the Pale of the Church: For these Considerations, by virtue of the Power
he was entrusted with, and by the consent of his Brethren the Cardinals, he
does intimate a general Council of all Christendom to be held upon 23d day of
May next ensuing, at Mantua, a rich and commodious place, that all Persons
repairing thither against that time, the Council may be opened. Therefore he
commands all Bishops and Prelates of what place soever, under the Penalties
decreed by the Canon, to be present there at the time appointed. As for the
Emperor and other Kings and Princes, who either by right or custom have the
Privilege of being present at Councils; he does both advertize and conjure
them by Christ, that for the sake of the common Interest they would be there
themselves; or if their affairs would not give them leave, to send an
honorable Embassy thither with large Commissions; and in as much as all Orders
and Degrees are concerned in their being present, he hopes that the Emperor and
the French King especially will not absent themselves: As touching the Emperor
he had sufficiently expressed his religious forwardness already, and several
times solicited Clement the Seventh about a Council, both in his own name, and
in the name of his Brother Ferdinand, and of the Princes of the Empire. But
this Design being interrupted by Wars, and other accidents intervening,
especially by the death of Clement himself, he at the very beginning of his
Popedom, had acquainted the Emperor with his Intentions, to whom they were very
acceptable: He had also written to the French King, who returned him a friendly
and obliging Answer, having before sent a very religious Letter to Clement and
the Conclave of Cardinals, in which he declared what his Inclinations and
Opinion was in this matter: However if they could not come themselves, he
desires that they would command those of their own Subjects who might be
present, to repair thither; or if for good reasons they were obliged to absent
themselves (the sufficiency of which excuses ought to be made apparent) then
they were to depute Proxies, who were to stay at Mantua till the whole Debate
was ended; to the end that by the Decrees made in that Assembly, the Church
might be reformed, and recover her ancient Splendour, Heresies wholly
extirpated, and a War made upon the Enemies of our Religion. And because some
Persons are concerned in this writing, to whom it cannot be published without
danger, therefore that none may pretend ignorance, he has thought fit to have
it openly recited in the Church of St. Peter and the Lateran, and afterward to
be affixed to such places in the Town as are proper and usual upon such
occasions. Ferdinand sends an Ambassador to the Switzers.
This Bull was subscribed by six and twenty Cardinals. Upon the 7th of June,
Ferdinand King of the Romans sends James Sturcell a Laywer from Inspruck upon
an Embassy to the Switzers. I understand, says, he, the French King has
solicited you for Supplies, but obtained nothing; which I was extremely glad to
hear, and have acquainted the Emperor with it; indeed it was very reasonable he
should be so served, for the Emperor gave no manner of occasion to this War;
and was fully resolved to fight the Barbarians and Enemies of our Religion this
Summer: But the French King immediately upon the death of Francis Sforza Duke
of Millain (though he has no right to that Principality, though he had agreed
the whole matter some few years since,) begun to project a War, and broke his
Articles, demanding the Restitution of the Duchy, and threatening if he had not
satisfaction; and at the same time hiring Forces from several places, passes
over the Alps, and invades the Duke of Savoy, a Prince of the Empire; that so
by conquering that Province, he might make his way for farther Victory; which
proceedings forced the Emperor to raise an Army for the defense of that
Country. And though he was very desirous of Peace, not only at first, but after
he had been at great Charges in fortifying and defending his own Dominions, not
refusing to deliver up the Duchy to the other, upon certain Conditions, as
appears by his late Declaration made at Rome before the Pope and Conclave of
Cardinals, and several Ambassadors of Princes; yet the French King rejecting
all these Proposals, persisted in his former Resolution. And now I understand
he is perpetually soliciting you for Supplies, pretending you ought to assist
him, by virtue of a League made between you, in regard the Emperor sets upon
him in his own Country, and pursues him in his retreat: But the case in clearly
misrepresented, for it is He, not the Emperor, who began this War, and forced
his Imperial Majesty to take up Arms against his Will. And though now he
chooses rather to fall back than stand the Charge of the Emperors Army, though
the Emperor presses upon him as he retreats; yet the Emperor cannot be said to
begin the War upon this account, for by pursuing the Enemy he does nothing but
what is justifiable and prudent, that he may receive satisfaction for the
damage he has sustained, and restore a general Peace to Christendom: And
therefore the reason drawn from the Alliance with which the French King
flourishes so much, ought not to be insisted on. Now this being the true state
of the matter, and since he has broken his Faith, and begun the War again
himself, I desire you would not suffer any Forces to be sent to him, which will
be very acceptable to the Emperor and my self, and will very much import the
Peace and Security of your State. The Protestants Embassy to the Emperor.
In the mean time the Protestants sent Ambassadors into Italy to the Emperor,
who complained of the Mal-administration of Justice in the Chamber of Spire,
and excused their seizing upon the Goods of the Ecclesiastics, which the
Emperor had before expostulated with them in a Letter. The Emperor writes to
the Protestants.
But before the Ambassadors came thither, the Emperor had dispatched Letters to
the Protestants from Savigliano upon the seventh of July, viz. Notwithstanding
he had often told them both by Writing, and by his Ambassadors, that his
Inclinations were wholly bent to settle the Peace of Germany, that all
Differences, especially those of Religion, might be amicably accommodated, and
that no Man might have any disturbance upon that account; notwithstanding he
had hitherto actually performed what he had written; yet because the French
King whose unjust Designs he was forced to oppose with an Army, had falsely
suggested to them as if he would break the Peace at the first convenient
opportunity. Therefore he was willing to write to them, and to caution them
again not to give any credit to such a Report; but to assure themselves, that
he would always stand to his Articles, and not make War upon any Persons upon
the score of Religion, nor raise any Commotions in Germany. As for this present
preparation for War, it is only designed for the maintaining his just Right and
Authority; therefore he desires them that they would rest satisfied, and not
grow apprehensive and suspicious upon any Disturbance that may happen: Such
management as this will both be very acceptable to him, and beneficial to
themselves. And now the Emperor having gathered his Forces, passes through the
midst of Italy, and Invades Provence with a powerful Army. The King encamped at
Avignion, between the Rivers Rhone and la Durance, and by wasting that part of
the Country which he saw the Emperor would make his descent into, and
afterward declining a battle, he reduced him to great streights: For a
scarcity of all sorts of Provisions happening in the Emperor's Camp, after he
had lost Antonio Leva, and a great many thousands of his Soldiers were
destroyed by Famine and contagious Diseases, he was obliged to dismiss the
remainder of his Forces, and return to Genoa. Another Army of his was employed
the same Summer in the Country of Vermandois, Perone is besieged.
and besieged Perone, Henry Nassaw being the General; but he was forced to
retire without Success, much about the same time that the Emperor left
Provence; the News of both which accidents being brought to Paris the same day,
occasioned great rejoicing in that City. For they were in a great
Consternation, and the People were harangued with bitter Invectives against the
Emperor. The King's Lieutenants in the mean time giving order to fortify the
Town with Ramparts and Ditches, and to Garrison all the Gates. William of
Furstenburgh a German served the French King in this War, about the beginning
of which Francis the French King's eldest Son died, Francis the Dolphin dies.
being eighteen years of Age: The report was that he was poisoned, and one
Sebastian Montecuculi an Italian being suspected, and put to the question, was
quartered with Horses at Lions. And the King writing afterward to the Princes
of Germany, among other things, complained severely of this matter, laying all
the Scandal and Infamy of the Fact upon Antonio Leva and Ferrand Gonzaga the
Emperor's Servants.

At this time Herman Archbishop of Cologne, A Provincial Council at Cologne.
who had long since projected a Reformation of the Church, held a Provincial
Council at the desire of his People; and, according to custom, summoned all the
Bishops belonging to his Jurisdiction thither, viz. The Bishops of Liege,
Vtretch, Munster, Osnaburgh, and Minden. This Council made several Canons
concerning Doctrine and Ceremonies, which were afterward compiled into a Book
by John Gropper, Professor of the Canon Law, in which almost all the Popish
Tenants are palliated and colored with new Interpretations: But this Book,
when it was published, did not give satisfaction, and some few years after the
Archbishop himself was not pleased with it, Erasmus dies.
as I shall show hereafter. This year in July Erasmus of Rotterdam died, being
about seventy years of age; he was buried at Basil, whither he returned from
Friburgh. How great a Person he was, what a Master of Style, and how much all
learned Men are obliged to him, his Works sufficiently testify. About this
time there was a great Insurrection in England; A rising in England.
occasioned by the rejecting the Popes Supremacy, declaring the Lady Mary, who
was generally beloved, illegitimate, and punishing some Persons for not obeying
the King's Injunctions. Now this Rebellion increased so fast in a short time,
that the King thought it proper to draw his Forces together and March against
them. And when they were encamped near each other, they came to a Parley, where
after some of the Rebels were mollified, and had satisfaction given them, the
rest of the Rabble laid down their Arms and went off. Most of the Authors of
this Disturbance were executed after the heat of it was once over. The
Protestants answer the Emperors Letter.
That Letter which I mentioned the Emperor to have wrote in July, was answered
by the Protestants upon the 9th of September. In which they acquaint him, that
his writing so courteously and frankly was matter of great pleasure and
satisfaction to them: For notwithstanding they did believe he would make good
his Promises, yet both because they had heard several Reports of his being
displeased, and because the Imperial-Chamber, and other Courts of Justice, had
practiced many ways against them, without any regard to the Peace, they had
some reason to be a little doubtful and solicitous; but now since he had
declared his Mind in such an open obliging manner, they did not in the least
question but that he would perform every thing to the full, and take away all
occasions of Calumny from ill disposed minds, which they for their parts should
likewise endeavor to do; and not give any farther credit to those who went
about to possess them with other thoughts of his Majesty; and in all other
things they would take care to do that which became their Duty. And
notwithstanding the News of the Council which the Pope has summoned to Mantua
upon the 23th of May following, is publicly known, and called at his Majesty's
Solicitation, as the Bull intimates, which is so obcurely drawn, that they
cannot collect what the Conditions or Form of the Council will be; yet since
they have always earnestly desired there might be a free and religious Council
convened in Germany; since this Request of theirs was made a Decree, both in
the Imperial Diets, and at the Pacification at Nuremburgh; and since they had
expressly and largely insisted upon this Point before his Majesty's and Pope
Clement's Ambassadors about three years agon, they were entirely confident,
that he would manage this Affair in a legal unexceptionable way. This month the
Pope published another Bull, The Bull for Reformation of the City of Rome.
in which he professes, that in the mean time while the Council was convening,
it was his intention to reform the holy City of Rome, the Head of all the
Christian World, and the Mistress of Doctrine, Manners and Discipline; that he
would make a clear riddance of all her Vices and Uncleanliness; that his own
House being first put into order, he might the more easily cleanse the rest.
Now the weakness of Humane Nature being such, that it was impossible for him to
dispatch this Affair wholly by himself, and at the same time to manage other
Concerns relating to the Commonwealth of Christendom; therefore he had chosen a
certain number of Cardinals whom God Almighty had made his Assistants and
Coparteners in the Offices and Care of his Station, to perform this necessary
and profitable Work, The King of Scotland is married.
viz. the Cardinals of Ostia, St. Severino, Ginuccio, Simoneta, together with
the Bishop of Cassano, Nusco and Aix: To these Commissioners all Persons are
commanded to be Obedient under severe Penalties. In October the Emperor set
Sail from Genoa, and returned into Spain. And soon after the French King came
to Paris, 1537.
and upon the first of January married his eldest Daughter Magdalene to James
the First King of Scotland, who came into France the last Autumn: The Duke of
Florence is murdered.
Much about the same time Laurence de Medices treacherously murdered Alexander
de Medices Duke of Florence, his Kinsman and near Relation, after he had drawn
him into his House in the night, under pretense that he would help him to the
enjoyment of a Noble Matron, and Neighbor of his, who was the most remarkable
Lady of the whole Town for the reputation of her Beauty and Chastity. After he
was taken off, the Government fell into the hands of Cosmus de Medices, who
afterward, with the Emperor's leave, married Eleonora Daughter of Peter of
Toledo, Viceroy of Naples. Upon the sixth of January the French King came into
the Court where the Parliament of Paris was held, The French King complains of
the Emperor.
which he used to do but seldom, and in a very full Assembly made a very sharp
Complaint of the Emperor, and gave his Reasons, why the Provinces of Flanders
and Artois, which the Emperor and his Ancestors held as Homagers under the
French Kings, ought to be recovered to the Crown of France. The Speech was made
by Capel the King's Advocate, who called him Charles of Austria instead of
Emperor.

In the mean time the Cantons of Zurick, Bern, Basil, and the Strasburgers
Intercede with the French King for those who were Imprisoned for their
Religion, and desired him, that he would recall those whom he had banished. Now
the King had given those who were in Exile leave to return, and those in Prison
their Liberty, with this Proviso, That they would abjure the Crimes charged
upon them before the Bishops or their Vicars; and give Security for their
Behavior for the future. But this Condition the Switzers Ambassadors desired
might be wholly remitted; something of the rigor of which was relaxed at their
instance, however the King did not give them satisfaction in the answer which
he sent them Feb. 24. by Anne Momorency Lord High Steward of his Household; whom
they suspected to have persuaded the King to be less king in this Point than
otherwise he would have been: The Ambassadors made their Interest by the Queen
of Navar, who was the King's Sister, a most incomparable Lady, and very well
affected to the true Religion. In the mean time the King was making his Levies,
and in the beginning of March leads his Army into Artois, and besieges the
Town and Castle of Hesdin which was very well fortified; and within a month it
was surrendered to him.

About this time Reginald Poole an Englishman, Cardinal Poole sent Nuncio to
the French King.
lately made a Cardinal, and of a very Noble Family, was sent from the Pope to
the King in Quality of Nuncio. The occasion of his coming was supposed to be
the forming of some new Design against the King of England. When the King of
Scotland married the French King's Daughter, the Pope sent him a fine Sword of
great value, and tried to whet him up against the King of England. Now the
Popes have a custom upon Christmas-Eve, to Consecrate (as they call it) a great
many things, with a certain Form of Ceremonies, and amongst the rest a Sword,
which as a mark of Friendship and Respect, they either deliver themselves, or
send to any Person they have a mind to* Sixtus quartus is said to be the
beginner of this Custom, as their Book of Ceremonies has it.

Afterward Poole wrote a Book, which he called A Defense of Ecclesiastical
Unity. He addresseth himself in it to King Henry, and reprimands him very
sharply for making himself Head of the Church: For that Office (he told him)
belonged to none but the Pope of Rome, who is the Vicar of Christ, and the
Successor of Peter; whom Christ constituted Prince of the Apostles. For it was
he alone who answered, That Christ was the Son of God. Upon this Apostle, as
upon a Rock, Christ builded his Church: It was for his Faith that Christ
prayed, That when he was converted, he would also convert his Brethren: He said
that St. John was always obedient to St. Peter after the death of Christ; and
when they both ran to the Sepulcher he would not go in first, but gave the
precedence to the other: To him Christ gave the Charge of feeding his Sheep in
a more especial manner; besides, when the Net was full of Fishes, and a great
many of them could not stir it, Peter alone drew it a shore. Then he proceeds
to the business of the Divorce, where he tells the King, That it was not the
terrors of Conscience and the dread of the Divine Displeasure, as he pretended;
but Lust and an ungovernable Appetite, which made him part with his Wife
Catherine, whom his Brother Arthur, an infirm Youth of fourteen years of age,
had left a Virgin: That it was not lawful for him to marry Anne Bullein, whose
Sister he had kept as his Miss before: That Catherine was a Maid, himself had
confessed to several Persons, particularly to the Emperor. But he falls
violently upon him for writing to so many Universities for their Opinion
concerning his first Marriage, and for being pleased with the sense of his
former uncleanness, when some told him, That Match was Incestuous: That it was
a most scandalous thing for him to prefer the Daughter of a Strumpet before a
most excellent young Lady lawfully begotten. Then he goes on to the Execution
of the Bishop of Rochester and Sir Thomas Moore, where he enlarges himself,
and declaims very tragically against the cruelty of it. From whence he proceeds
to tell the King how he had oppressed and impoverished all degrees of Men, and
made a most flourishing Kingdom miserable, and what danger he was in from the
Emperor for divorcing his Aunt, and subverting Religion; and what little reason
he had to expect any Foreign or Domestic Assistance, who had behaved himself
so ill toward the Commonwealth: Then he applies himself to the Emperor, and
makes use of a great many words to provoke him to revenge such a notorious
Affront put upon his Family, and says, That the Seeds of Turcism are scattered
about England and Germany, meaning the Antipapal Doctrine. At last after he had
charged his Prince with a great many Crimes, and almost called him all to
naught, he exhorts him to repent; and tells him, There was no other remedy to
be had, but by returning to the bosom of the Church, which he had formerly
defended in print, and therein given a most admirable example. This Book was
published without any date at Rome, and lay concealed a long time; at last a
great many years after, one or two in Germany got it. The occasion of his
writing he says was, because the King formerly desired it. And though a great
many learned Men in England who had done the same thing, had lost there Lives;
yet he was so much obliged by his Highness, that he could not persuade himself
to dissemble his thoughts; for both his temper and way of living had made him
very averse to that Vice, and therefore what he had said ought not to be
attributed to passion or ill will; on the contrary, since he endeavored to
bring him into his way again, and to rescue him from those Flatterers who had
run him upon such gross Mistakes, he thought he did him very great service. Now
King Henry had taken care to breed this Gentleman to Learning, and had been
kind to him in many respects: But when that alteration, which I mentioned,
happened in England, and was disapproved by Pool, Paul the Third, by the advice
and recommendation of Contareni, makes him a Cardinal, and invited him to Rome.
Those who were intimately acquainted with him say, That he understood the
reformed Religion very well; and imagine that the reason of his writing against
King Henry was, to avoid the suspicion of Lutheranism. They say he printed his
Book at Rome at his own Charge, and ordering all the Copies to be brought to
him, gave them out only to the Pope and Cardinals, and to his special Friends;
for he was willing to stand fair in their Opinion, and was likewise afraid,
it is probable, of falling under the Censure of those who had several times
heard him discourse very differently upon that Subject.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XI.
The CONTENTS.
The Protestants send their Ambassadors to the Emperor, with whom they were
principally to insist upon three things: Eldo the Emperor's Ambassador gives
them a large Answer at Smalcalde; To which all the Confederates reply, and
particularly they reflect smartly upon the Council they were invited to: Eldo
rejoyns upon them ex tempore. In the mean time the Pope dispatcheth away the
Bishop of Aix into Germany. The Prosestants give their Reasons why they refuse
the Council, and write to the French King about it. The Queen of Scotland dies.
The King of England and his Nobility publish a Manifesto against the Council
which the Pope had called. The Town and Castle of St. Paul in Artois is taken.
Terouenna is besisg'd by the Imperialists, but without Success.

IN the Ninth Book I had occasion to mention the Ausburghers: Now when these
Men had made an Alteration in Religion, and the Ecclesiastics, most of which
were descended of good Families, leaving the Town in a disgust upon this
account; The Ausburghers publish a Book against the Ecclesiastics.
The Senate addressed themselves to the Emperor, to King Ferdinand, and to all
the States of the Empire, and acquaint them with the Reasons of their
proceedings in writing, in which they let them understand, how kindly they had
used these Gentlemen, how many things they had born from them; and on the
contrary, how provokingly they had behaved themselves, attempting several times
to raise an Insurrection in the Town. Not long after Christopher their Bishop
publishes an Answer to this Book, in the name of himself and his Party; and
after a great many Complaints, he desires the Emperor and the Princes, in
regard the danger touches them no less than himself, to make some Provision
for the common Safety. In the last Book I mentioned the Protestants Embassy to
the Emperor in Italy; The Persons sent were Joachim, Papenheim, Lewis, Bambach,
and Claudius Peutinger a Lawyer; They had three things in their Commission, in
which they were more especially to concern themselves. To confute the Report
which was spread, as if they were entering into an Alliance with the Kings of
England and France: That the Emperor would Check the Proceedings of the Chamber
of Spire: And that those who were admitted into the League after the
Pacification at Nuremburgh, might enjoy the benefit of that Treaty. The Emperor
admitted them to Audience, but being busied in Military affairs, he told them
he would send an Ambassador into Germany with his Answer. Therefore when he was
about to return into Spain by the way of Genoa, he sent Mathias Eldo his
Vice Chancellor into Germany. When the Protestants understood this by their
Ambassadors at their return, A Convention of the Protestants at Smalcalde.
they appoint the Seventh of February for a general Meeting at Smalcalde; and
because the time for the Council drew near, and being well assured that the
Emperor's Ambassador would speak to that Point, they thought it convenient to
take some of the most considerable Divines along with them. Therefore at the
day prefixed Luther, Melancthon, Osiander, Bucer, and several others, came
thither, besides the Princes of the Empire and Ambassadors of the Cities. In
January Eldo parts from Ferdinand King of the Romans at Vienna, and being
acquainted upon his Journey by the Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave that
they were convened, he comes on to Smalcalde, Eldo his Speech.
and upon the 15th of February makes a Speech when the Convention was full: In
which he tells them, That the Emperor enjoined him to open his Commission only
to the Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave; but since it was their opinion,
that their Confederates should be acquainted with it also, he would comply with
them in this Point. For his part he did not know all the Agents of the
Confederates, therefore if any of them who were present, were unconcerned in
this Answer of the Emperors, he would not have them imagine that any thing was
already concluded with their Principals, especially those of Ausburgh, who both
in Spain and Italy have often privately made their Application to the Emperor
about Religion, which they also did lately at Genoa by an Agent, who was told
by the Emperor that he would send them an Answer into Germany by one of his
Ministers; but they would not stay for his coming, but have made an alteration
in Religion without him, which can be construed no less than mockery and
contempt of the Emperor. Therefore when he came to Ausburgh he was obliged to
alter his measures, and not to treat with them upon any Point, but to write an
impartial account of the whole affair to the the Emperor. When he had said
this, he produces his Credentials, and greeting them in the name of the
Emperor, continues his Harangue. And tells them, That it was matter of great
satisfaction to the Emperor, to hear that they had taken so much care to purge
themselves from all suspicions of making an Alliance with England or France;
That he did not question the sincerity of their Apology, and applauded them for
their Virtue and Loyalty, in being so wisely cautious as not to be imposed upon
by the insinuations and insidious pretenses of the French. Then he goes on to
speak concerning the War of Savoy and the French King, where he is very
copious, saying, That this Prince did not only hinder the Emperor from fighting
the Turk with his whole Forces, but likewise held Correspondence with him, and
instigated this common Enemy to invade Christendom: That it was his constant
business to create Misunderstandings among the Germans, and to heighten their
discontents into a Civil War, and at this time he is doing his best to persuade
them that the Emperor will not perform his Engagements, but he desires they
would give no credit to such designing Reports; for his Imperial Majesty was a
Person of that Honor and Integrity, that they need not fear he would recede
from his Articles in any point, especially since he had given them several
Instances already of his punctual Performance: As touching the Proceedings of
the Chamber of Spire, the Emperor had ordered, That no Causes relating to
Religion should be tried there; when the Judges had received this Order, they
wrote back to the Emperor, that there were frequent Disputes concerning the
nature of the Causes, whether they belonged to Religion or not; upon which the
Emperor commanded them to try all those Causes which they believed foreign to
Religion without any regard to the Persuasion of the Parties; for he was very
sorry the course of Justice should be stopped, and how difficult a matter it
was to settle this Point, appears sufficiently at the Pacification at
Nuremburgh. Now since that time a great many Causes have been brought before
the Chamber, and when the Judges would have proceeded to a determination, they
(the Protestants) demurred to their Jurisdiction, and gave them unbecoming
Language, of which Complaints have been made to the Emperor by the respective
Plaintiffs, who allege, That they are barred from recovering their Right by
Law; which Carriage the Emperor was very much troubled to hear, especially
since most of the Judges were chosen out of the Provinces of the Empire, and
can very rarely be suspected of Partiality; besides the Emperor himself, after
a full Examination of the Case, does believe that several Causes which they
tell him belong to Religion, ought not to be referred to that Head; but his
Opinion is, when any Controversy arises concerning the nature and ranging of
the Cause, that this Point ought not be decided by the Parties, but by the
Judges: For their parts they ought to be satisfied if the Chamber does not
intermeddle in the Causes of Religion. And if the Judges do any thing contrary
to the Emperor's Edicts, they shall certainly hear of it, and be punished
according to the Law made at Ratisbone for that purpose. But then on the other
side, the Emperor thought fit to give them warning against being influenced by
any private Malcontents, and not to do any thing rashly, nor prescribe to the
Chamber; such Practices as these would be unlawful and turbulent, throw a
particular Contempt upon the Emperor's Authority, and would tend likewise to
the dishonor of the Judges, some of which are descended of Noble Families, and
others are considerable for their Probity and Learning; therefore he desires
they would not obstruct the Proceedings of Justice. As concerning their third
Request, That those who were not comprehended in the Treaty at Nuremburgh might
enjoy the benefit of that Pacification; the Emperor was so much employed about
giving Directions for the War, when their Ambassadors came to his Camp, that he
had no leizure to examine that matter; who though he understood that there was
a change of Religion introduced in some places, yet he heard nothing of any new
Admissions into the League: But if the meaning of their Request be this, That
it may be lawful for all other People of the Empire, who are under quite
different promises already, who have approved the Decrees of the Diets, and
obliged themselves to stand by the old Religion; to recede from their Solemn
Promises and Engagements, revolt from the ancient Religion, and set up a new
one at their Pleasure, and to this purpose make an Alliance with the
Confederates; such a Liberty as this was both out of the Emperors Power, and
very much against his Conscience to grant, as his Majesty had commanded him to
acquaint them; and if the Emperor should grant this thing, or if the States of
the Empire should do it of their own accord, and his Majesty afterward confirm
it, how ill this would agree with the Pacification at Nuremburgh, it is obvious
for them to understand. For if every one may go back from his promise, and
follow whatever Religion he has a mind to; what can be expected less than that
the Peace must be broken, the securing of which was the principal Aim of the
Treaty at Nuremburgh? Therefore the Emperor as soon as he was better acquainted
with the Intentions of the rest of the States, would do that which he conceived
reasonable: In the mean time he desires, that they would keep the Truce
themselves, and take care that it might not be broken by others; which he was
confident they would not fail to perform, especially now the Council drew near,
in which it was to be hoped all sorts of Controversies would be ended. Now they
themselves had written to the Emperor concerning a Council, which was the
fourth Head of his Instructions he was to acquaint them with; that after they
understood the Emperors mind in this point, they might the more easily come to
a Resolution. First, They very well knew what pains the Emperor and his
Ambassadors had taken in several Diets of the Empire, to find out an Expedient
to compose the Differences in Religion, and at last there was a Decree passed
for the holding of a Council: After which the Emperor never gave over his
pursuit, till he had procured the Intimation of it; indeed he came out of
Africa on purpose that he might reside in some part of the Empire, till all
Differences were decided by the Council; and therefore he was very much
troubled that he was obliged to sail into Spain the last Winter.
Notwithstanding he was resolved to be in Italy at the beginning of the Spring,
neither should any business hinder him from being present at the Council,
unless a more formidable War should break out upon him, and require the
conjunction of all his Forces; and supposing the War should prevent his being
present, yet he would take care that nothing should be wanting on his part in
this Affair: And though the French King had broke his Faith from point to
point, and brought him under the necessity of War, yet he would omit nothing
which was reasonable to be done, in order to the making a Peace with him: And
since they have always appeared very desirous of an Agreement, for the
procuring of which a Council seems to be the most proper method, and to which
themselves have appealed; the Emperor is willing to believe that they will not
desert the Commonwealth, nor change their resolution at the suggestion of any
Persons, nor give any occasion to greater Distractions, especially in regard
other Nations bend their Inclinations and Endeavors to promote this Expedient;
there being great hopes not only that all Disputes and Misunderstanding will be
taken up and removed; but also that the Churches will be reformed into a well
regulated Constitution: Therefore the Emperor desires they would plainly
declare what their Intentions are in this matter; for if they refuse to be
governed by these Measures, and throw in Exceptions and delays, the Emperor is
of opinion, that it must cause a disappointment of a most excellent Design,
after so fair an advance; and which is more, Foreigners would grow suspicious
of them, as if they rather loved to embroil, than to promote the Peace and
Tranquillity of Christendom. And since the Emperor had no other Aim, but to
promote the Glory of God, and provide for the Salvation of Men's Souls; he does
earnestly exhort and entreat them, that they would comply with that which
himself and the Commonwealth requested of them: Besides he told them, he had
Instructions to accommodate all Differences that should happen to arise about
this matter; That he was very ready to perform his Duty in so good an Office;
and likewise if they were desirous he should explain himself upon any part of
his Speech, he was willing to do it. The next day after he had a private
Conference with the Elector of Saxony, whom he acquaints, That the Emperor had
a very great respect for him, and that he had been hindered hitherto from
showing it by reason of the difference in Religion which is between them: And
now since the Intimation of the Council gave him great hopes that this whole
Affair might be adjusted; His earnest request to him was, That he would either
be present at the Council himself, or send his Ambassadors thither, that so all
Differences being reconciled, it might be in his Power to give him
unexceptionable Testimonies of his good Affection; but if he demurred, and made
Objections, he might easily foresee what inconvenience would follow: Farther,
in regard the Turk was now making great Preparations for War, to invade
Germany; he desires that he would send him in those Supplies against the Turk,
which were decreed for him at Ratisbone; and if it shall so happen that the
Turk does not make an Impression upon Germany, that then the same Forces may be
employed under him against the French King, who has seized upon Savoy, which
is a Province of the Empire. Lastly, because the Emperor had for some time
defrayed the whole Charge of the Chamber of Spire, and had spent a vast Sum of
Money upon the War, he desires, that according to the ancient custom of the
Empire, he would supply him with some Money for this Occasion, which was no more
than the rest of the Princes had promised. The Elector told him, These
Propositions related to his Allies as well as himself, and therefore he must
have time to deliver in his opinion. Now upon the the 24th of February all the
Confederates returned their answer together, The Confederates Answer to the
Emperor's Ambassador.
where after some Preliminaries of respect, and wishing the Emperor all
happiness, they acquaint his Excellency, that as to what relates to the
Ausburghers, they had received a full account of that Affair from their Agents,
which was so far satisfactory, that they could not disengage themselves from
the interest of that Town: They were very sorry to hear that the War between
the Emperor and the French King continued, because they saw the Turk, their
common Enemy, would make a great advantage of it. But the Emperor receiving
their Apology, and showing himself inclinable to maintain the Pacification at
Nuremburgh, was matter of great Satisfaction to them, and they returned his
Majesty thanks for it. As to what he mentioned concerning the Jurisdiction of
the Chamber of Spire, and how much the Emperor was dissatisfied that the course
of Justice should be stopped; the difficulty of adjusting this Affair, they
told him, was perceived, when the Elector of Mentz and the Palsgrave interceded
for a Reconciliation; and when the matter was debated, at length it was
concluded that the most likely way to settle the Commonwealth, was to give no
Person any disturbance about Religion, or for any thing relating to it, till a
general Council of Europe, or a Provincial one of Germany was called; and
unless such a Liberty be allowed, and all Causes depending upon Religion
comprehended in it, it was then foreseen, and may be easily understood at
present, what a little matter will unhinge the State, and how much it will be
exposed to Misunderstandings and Tumults; of the truth of this Allegation the
Emperor's Edict, which was then published, is a sufficient proof: It was never
their intention to plead in bar to the Jurisdiction of the Chamber in any
Causes, but those of Religion, and they believed that Court could not prove the
contrary upon them: But they were very much troubled to hear from his
Excellency, that the Emperor had given the Chamber Authority to determine the
quality of the Cause; for they did believe all those Causes to be of a
religious Nature, and they were really such, which could not be decided till
the Extent of the word Religion was defined in a lawful Council; which thing
both by Letter, and their Ambassadors, they had several times acquainted the
Emperor and King Ferdinand with. For this Dispute concerning the meaning and
latitude of Religion, is a preliminary Question, and ought to be settled by the
Council before other matters, which relate to it, are determined: And in regard
Benefices ought to be bestowed in consideration of Merit and Function, They
said, they could not allow that those in their Dominions who were of a
different Religion from themselves, should enjoy the Revenues of the Church, to
which they had no manner of right, because they were either unwilling to
discharge their Office, or wanted abilities to do it; and since Conscience is
more than ordinarily concerned in the present case, the usual Pleas of Law
founded upon the right of Possession or Restitution, ought not to be urged.
Moreover, when the Treaty of Nuremburgh was on foot they particularly mentioned
all those Suits and Difference which were then depending in the Chamber, and in
other Courts; and represented them under the notion of Ecclesiastical Causes,
to the Princes of the Mediation, who promised that they would endeavor to
persuade the Emperor, that they should be all exempted from the Jurisdiction of
the Courts, which was also promised by King Ferdinand at the Convention at
Cadan; besides it is plain from that Clause in the Emperor's Edict, which stops
all Prosecutions of this nature, that the Chamber of Spire has no Authority to
determine the Quality of Causes. And to say nothing more severe, they could not
choose but observe that the apparent Inclination of that Court, to give
Judgment against them, had made a great many Persons much bolder and more
contentious than they had formerly been, which they were able to prove more
than one way: For when those of their Party moved that Court in any Cause,
their Suit was not only rejected, but they were sent away with reproachful
Language: And lately the Hamburghers were commanded by them not only to restore
the Clergy of their City their Goods and Estates, but also to return them their
old Religion and Jurisdiction back again; and because they could not do this
with a good Conscience, they were amerced in a great Sum of Money; and therefore
there needs no more Instances to let the Emperor understand what the Design of
that Court is; for if any Cause relates to Religion, this certainly does. But
if the Judges are allowed to proceed in this manner, the Truce serves to no
purpose: If the Rites and Ceremonies which were abolished, may be lawfully
restored by such Methods as these, there will be no need of Council; and yet
the Emperor is pleased to grant, that all Differences of this nature ought to
be determined there; and since their Exceptions against the Proceedings of the
Court were not considered, they were forced to decline the Jurisdiction of it:
As concerning the Persons of the Chamber, there was not above one or two of the
whole Bench of their Religion; what Provision was made at Ratisbone for this
Affair, was well known; it being apparent, that those who were most violent
against the Reformed, were most acceptable to the Chamber; nay a man may
plainly discover how they stand affected, by observing the air of their
Countenances when they are trying of Causes; and therefore they hope his
Imperial Majesty will send them a positive Order to desist: As for the Penalty
which his Excellency mentioned was decreed at Ratisbone against
Mal-administration, that was no advantage to them. Indeed if the Cause had
related to Property and secular Affairs, they might have had a compensation
this way; but matters of Religion were too weighty to be satisfied with Costs
and Damages: However, if the Emperor is of opinion that they have intermixed
any civil Causes in their request, they are willing this matter should be
tried, provided there may be a stop put to the Proceedings of the Chamber in
the mean time. Now as concerning those who came over to their Religion since
the Pacification of Nuremburgh, they confessed that some few years since the
Princes of the Mediation did insist at Schweenfurt, that no more might be
admitted into their Association, which Proposition they then rejected, and
afterward at the Convention at Nuremburgh they persisted in the same Opinion:
As to what his Excellency objects in reference to the Promises and Articles, by
which several of the States had engaged themselves not to make any alteration
in Religion; To this the parties answer, That some of them promised nothing,
others in private Treaties reserved this Liberty for themselves; a third sort,
it is true, did engage themselves, but it was upon the assurance which the
Emperor gave them, that a Council should be intimated within six Months, and
opened the year after: But since this Assembly was delayed beyond their
expectation, and God had been pleased to give them a fuller apprehension of the
true Religion; they could not defer so good a Work any longer, but thought it
their Duty to make an open profession of that Doctrine which they were assured
had both Truth and Piety to recommend it. This the Canon Law it self would
justify them in, for from thence they had learned, that if any Person had
sworn to do a wicked Action, this Oath did not oblige. Besides, as their
Adversaries would not refuse any one who offered himself for a Convert, so
neither did they think it lawful to bar any person from coming over to
themselves. Therefore their earnest request to the Emperor was, That the Judges
might be checked, and that not only themselves, but those who joined them
afterward might be comprehended in the Peace: For if matters should be
otherwise carried, and any violence should be offered, they could not desert
those they were allied to both by Virtue of their League and Religion: This had
been already declared to King Ferdinand at Vienna, and that with a great deal
of reason, for the Cause of these later Confederates, no less than their own,
belongs to the Cognizance of the Council. But if the Judges of the Chamber will
fore-stall the Hearing, and hale in the business of the Council to their Court;
this is no less than downright Force and Injustice, against which, by the Laws
of Nature they are bound to defend themselves; now how unfortunate such Methods
will be, and what will be the end of them, so wise a Person as the Emperor must
needs foresee: As for them they desired nothing more than Peace, and were
willing to gratify the Emperor in every thing which lay in their power, but
with this condition, That every one might have the liberty to profess the true
Religion; which request being granted, they should be more ready to comply with
the Emperor's and King Ferdinand's Demands, in reference to the Turks and the
Imperial-Chamber. As touching the Council, to which they were invited by the
Emperor, they had seen a Copy of the Bull which was published by Paul the Third
upon this occasion, by which they perceived, that the Pope's Designs and the
Emperor's were not the same: For notwithstanding Adrian the Sixth had frankly
confessed by his Nuncio at the Diet at Nurembergh, that almost all things were
very much out of order of Rome, and promised to use his endeavors that these
Irregularities should be rectified in the first place; yet his Successor
Clement the Seventh, who sent this Nuncio to another Diet in Germany two years
after, went a quite different way to work, insomuch that the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, and the rest of the Princes, made a Decree there, for the calling of a
free Council in Germany, that the Church might be cleared of all Errors and
Corruptions in practice, which had insensibly crept into it: This Decree was
afterward approved by the Emperor at the Mediation of the Elector of Mentz and
the Palsgrave. But a year after Pope Clement proposed a Council of a very
different Form from that which was agreed on in the Diet, and appointed Italy
for the place, which they then refused to consent to; which Proposition was
afterward renewed by Paul the Third his Nuncio, to whom they returned the same
answer as before; that the Pope is now carrying on the same Design, appears by
his Bull, though he does not think it proper to speak out so much as Clement
did: For where he speaks of Heresies which are lately sprung up, they have
reason to believe he means their Doctrine, which he has, as it were, condemned
beforehand under that notion; for what a severe opinion he has of their
Religion, intending no less than the utter Extirpation of it, is plain by those
Punishments with which he Percutes innocent People only for the profession of
it; and yet at the same time he has the Impudence to pretend, as if he only
designed to purge the Church of those gross Errors and Corruptions which have
been so long and so sharply complained of by so many Men of Piety and Learning:
With these Subtilties he had prevailed upon the Emperor to call upon them to
attend the Council, which his Majesty would never have done, if he had
understood his Holiness's Tricks: With the same flattering Pretenses he
solicits Kings and Princes, and themselves, among the rest, to admit the
Council, that by this means he may hook them in to applaud and defend his
wicked Project; and by their approbation of the Council condemn their own
Doctrine themselves, which Artifice Julian the Apostate formerly made use of, to
circumvent the Christians in his Army. And notwithstanding the Pope gives such
apparent signs of being their Adversary, yet he continues to arrogate the
authority of a Judge to himself, which is contrary to all right and reason, and
is backed in this usurpation by the rest of the Prelates who are tied to him by
Oaths, and several other Obligations: Now how unreasonable such a Claim is, and
how dangerous to be granted, the Emperor and other Princes they presume may
easily understand. For by the blessing of God their Divines had abundantly
showed that the Popes had broached several Errors in the Church, and maintained
Tenants not only contrary to the Word of God, but to the ancient Councils and
Fathers; That they had made a great many Laws without any Warrant from God
Almighty, by which the true notion of Religion was quite stifled and
suppressed; therefore they intended when they had the opportunity of a lawful
Assembly, to accuse the Pope and his Adherents of these high Misdemeanors, and
to prove the Crimes charged upon them: Besides by what wicked Practices, by
what uncreditable and indirect Methods of force and deceit they raise
themselves to these Dignities; what a lewd life they lead, what a scandalous
example they set, how perfectly they abandon their Function, how they neglect
the people committed to their care, and riot in all manner of immorality, is so
notorious a Truth, that to talk any further of it would be superfluous.
Therefore neither for these reasons can the Pope have any Authority, no not by
his own Canon Law to intimate a Council, much less to preside in it; neither
ought his sworn Adherents take upon them the Office of a Judge, since they have
not so much as a right to Vote in a lawful Council. Farther they said, That
Italy was made the Seat of the Council, in direct opposition and contempt of
what was decreed by the Emperor and the State of Germany: Neither as yet had
they any assurance that other Christian Princes would like the place; and
moreover, they had great reason to suspect it was not safe for them and their
Party to come thither. For notwithstanding they may have a safe Conduct drawn
up in ample and satisfactory manner; yet because those places are most
possessed by the Popes Vassals, who mortally hate the Reformed Doctrine; they
must lie exposed to Treachery and secret Practices, which are very formidable
dangers in that Country; and since this Debate is of the most important nature
imaginable, it being impossible for the World to produce a greater, for the
eternal happiness or misery of Men is concerned in it; and since the
weightiness of the Affair obliges them to appear there in considerable
numbers, with their Divines and Pastors of their Churches, and not trust a
matter of such Consequence with their Ambassadors and Proxies; it would be very
inconvenient for them to be forced to travel out of the Empire, and go into
Italy, and leave their Country and Subjects without a Guard, and their Churches
without Pastors for any considerable time; especially at this juncture when
there are such Misunderstandings and Animosities among the Germans; therefore
they earnestly beseech the Emperor, that he would please to allow the Reasons
they had laid before him a full and distinct consideration; and since he was
the chief Magistrate to whom the support of the true Religion did more
especially belong, that he would make it his principal Endeavor, that the
right way of Worshipping God might be taught under the Countenance of Law, and
spread into a farther extent: As for themselves they embraced no Doctrine that
was wicked, nor aimed at any thing but the Glory of God. This Answer of theirs,
concerning the Council, was approved by the Ambassadors of George Duke of
Brandenburgh, and of the Cities of Nuremburgh, Hall and Hailbrun; but being not
Confederates, they did not concern themselves in the other points. When the
Protestants had delivered themselves to this effect, Eldo his answer to the
Protestants.
Eldo returned them an Answer ex tempore; where after he had enlarged himself
again upon the Emperor's kind Inclinations toward them, and concerning the
French King his conspiring with the Turk to ruin Christendom; he came to the
business of the Chamber, That no Man was to be prosecuted there for any thing
relating to Religion, he granted was undeniable. But then the Pinch of the
Controversy was, what matters ought to be comprehended under this notion, and
what not; for those Causes which they called Religious, others believed to be
of a civil and secular nature, and it was very unjust in them to be unwilling
to have the Point argued, and not to hear the reasons and defense of the other
side. It Is possible they might mention some Causes to the Princes of the
Mediation at Nuremburgh, and threw them into the Classis of Religion; but then
the Emperor did not receive them as such, because he did not perfectly
understand under what denomination they were to pass. Nay possibly those very
Princes had not then any exact knowledge of the nature of the Causes, nor have
at present, but only as they are informed by those who are concerned in the
Dispute, who will be sure to say nothing to their own disadvantage. Now it is
agreeable to the Municipal Laws, to Equity, and the holy Scriptures, that in
all Disputes both Parties should have a sufficient Hearing, and that no
Sentence should be pronounced upon the Information of one side, though the
Allegations should be never so true: Therefore the Emperor in referring this
Debate to the Imperial Chamber, had done nothing but what became a Person in
his place; His Majesty being of opinion, that if the Reasons of the Protestants
Proceedings were so weighty as they pretended, they ought to be brought into
view, and made public: This was the way to clear the Controversy about the
Preliminary Points, and to satisfy all Parties what Causes were to be referred
to the Council, and what not: And also whether those who had lost their Goods
and Estates were to have Restitution made them; neither did the Emperor believe
the Judges would do any thing in this matter contrary to their Duty and solemn
Obligations; of this they had given his Majesty an assurance in their Letters,
intimating that they had not in the least concerned themselves with any Causes
relating to Religion; which account they also wrote to himself, and added
particularly concerning the Hamburgers, that all the while the Suit was
depending between them and their Ecclesiastics, they did not so much as make
the least mention of Religion; but when Judgment was given against them, and
was ready to be executed, then they began to insist upon it; besides the Judges
are willing to give an account of their Proceedings, which ought to content
them, especially since he so lately acquainted them, that the Emperor intends
to give them Satisfaction, as soon as he is assured that the Chamber has done
them any Injury: For his Majesty resolves not only to make good the Damages
they have sustained, but all Causes which appear to have been illegally
decided, shall be heard over again, and all unjust Verdicts set aside and
reversed; and for his part he declares, he cannot apprehend what the Emperor
can or ought to do more than this. And whereas they allege, that those who
refuse to be of their Religion ought not to be repossess'd of their Estates, he
does not see any manner of Equity in that Plea; for we are not to pronounce in
these cases, till both Parties have had a Hearing in a legal way. For they
could not be ignorant that no Law gives any Man the liberty to rob another for
the sake of Religion, or upon any other account; therefore he could not admire
this method of proceeding, let the Practisers of it be who they would. Now to
prevent such arbitrary and unaccountable Courses as these, there was a Treaty
concluded at Nuremburgh upon certain conditions; and afterward, by the
Emperor's Edict, there was a general Peace settled, and proclaimed through the
whole Empire. And to speak truth, it was his opinion, that the business of
Religion might be much more easily accommodated, if they did not graspe so
eagerly at the Temporalties. Now these secular Advantages ought not to be so
highly valued in the present Affair; especially considering the Gospel
prescribes us other Measures, and teaches us to set our thoughts and
inclinations upon other designs. Their saying that either the dispute of the
Hamburgers related to Religion, or none can, was very surprising to him, when
there are a great many other Causes which the Chamber has a right to take
Cognizance of, both by the Constitution of the Laws, and by Virtue of that
Edict which the Emperor set forth at Worms; but his Majesty out of a singular
kindness to them, had ordered the Process of them all to be stopped. And since
the Emperor will do nothing contrary to what he has agreed to, and expects the
same exactness from them; he desires they would give him a Categorical answer
to this question. As to their personal Objections against the Chamber, he
lately told them, those Judges were chosen out of the heart of Germany; and
though there were very few of the Bench of their Persuasion, yet it was not
probable Justice would be less impartially administered upon that account;
because the Judges had no power to act Arbitrarily, but were tied up to Rule,
and bound by Oath to give Sentence according to the Laws and Customs of the
Empire; which method was constantly observed, when he was one of their number.
But let this matter be as it will, if they have offended, they will be sure to
be punished; neither does he pretend to justify or excuse them; indeed they
did not desire he should, but are willing to submit their whole Proceedings to
Examination. Now concerning those who came into their League and Religion
afterward, he had lately acquainted them, that the Emperor had yet received no
certain account of that matter; and his Majesty conceived, that those who were
not expressly comprehended in the Pacification at Nuremburgh, were bound to
observe the precedent Laws of the Empire, and wait for the determination of the
Council. And whereas they say, that some of their late Confederates made no
promises at all; some reserved themselves a liberty in this point by private
Treaties, and others thought they did engage, it was upon an assurance that a
Council would be called in a short time; whatever the truth of these
Allegations may be, he does not intend to examine at present; but yet as to
those who pretend a private Agreement, he dares adventure to give them an
answer on the Emperors's behalf, if they can produce an Instance of any such
thing: For he could not believe that the Emperor had ever concluded any private
Treaty with any Person about this matter, excepting at Nuremburgh; besides he
thought it proper that those who assigned this reason in excuse of what they
had done, should prove their Plea to be matter of Fact; which proof he would
take care to convey to the Emperor, and possibly carry it himself. And since
the Emperor's Inclinations are so apparently disposed for Peace, and for the
settling a good understanding amongst the States; he cannot but renew his former
Request to them; that they would contribute their Assistance toward the
carrying on the Turkish-War, and defray the Expense of the Imperial-Chamber,
both which Provisions had a very considerable Influence upon the welfare of
Germany. And if it so happens that the Turk does not come into the Field, that
then they would send his Majesty the same Supply for some months against the
French King: If they gratify his Majesty in this, they will never have any
reason to repent of their Compliance; therefore he desires they would let him
know their Resolution in this Point, that he may give the Emperor an account of
it forthwith. Touching the Council, they very well knew what care and pains the
Emperor had taken to procure its Intimation, designing by this means to give
the fairest opportunity to adjust the differences in Religion in a peaceable
way, and to promote the Glory of God and the Salvation of Men by the
Reformation of Christendom: And now when the undertaking is so well advanced,
and the time for the opening the Council almost at hand, his Majesty little
suspected that they would have put in their Exceptions against it; which
Resolution, if they persist in it, will be very unacceptable to him. Now this
being an Affair of the greatest concern, he is ordered in his Commission to
dispatch it fully with them; therefore he earnestly beseeches them, that they
would oblige the Emperor, and not make a separation from the rest of the
States; for it never was the Emperor's intention to defend any Doctrine or
Practice in the Council, which was lewd, wicked, and contrary to the Word of
God, nor to excuse any thing which was scandalous and immoral; but would take
particular care that Debates should not be swayed by favor and partiality. And
since it is agreeable to reason, that the holy Scriptures, and the approved
Interpretations of them, should have the greatest Authority; the Emperor cannot
imagine what should hinder them from coming to the Council either themselves,
or sending their Ambassadors. For when fraud and indirect Practices are once
barred, which the Emperor will undertake to effect, there can be no manner of
ground to suspect the Council: Those Reasons therefore which they assigned for
their refusal, had not weight enough in them, and were apt to create jealousies
and apprehensions not only in the Emperor, but in other Nations also.
Concerning that which they objected about the Inclinations and Intentions of
the Pope, though their Expressions were somewhat too smart; yet if what they
said was true, no Man can commend his Holiness upon this account. But the
Emperor was so far from knowing any thing of this nature, that he did not so
much as suspect it; nay his Majesty did not question but that the Pope would
behave himself like a Christian in his Office, and as it became one who was the
chief Head of the Clergy. However if they had any thing to say against his
Holiness, or any others of his Order, they might prefer their Complaints
against them in the Council, and argue the matter out, provided they did it
modestly, and without any signs of hatred and ill will. There also they may
propose what their Opinion is concerning the proper form and modelling of the
Council, and whatever else they have a mind to in any other Circumstance. But
for them to prescribe the methods of Management and Debate to all Christendom,
was neither fair nor commendable. This was more than the Emperor and all the
rest of the States could do; for the determination of those Points did not
belong to a small Party, but were to be settled by the whole Assembly; where
they would find a great many Persons eminent for their Learning and Probity;
for they must not suppose that their Divines are the only knowing and inspired
Men, for there are other places in which neither the abilities nor virtuous
Conversation of the Churchmen can be questioned: Now as to what they object
against Mantua, its being made the Seat of the Council; he grants that the
Princes of Germany, and more particularly themselves, did earnestly desire that
some place in Germany might be pitched upon for this purpose; neither was the
Emperor against it; but then we should consider what is suitable and convenient
for other Nations. Now the reason why the Pope chose this Town before any
other, was, in his opinion, because it lay near to Germany, was a plentiful
place of it self, and so situated that Provisions might be conveyed to it at an
easy Charge; besides it was remarkable for a healthy Climate, and under the
Jurisdiction of the Empire, so that the Pope could have no advantage of them
there. For the Duke of that Town was a Homager and Vassal of the Empire;
however if they are still suspicious and apprehensive of danger, the Emperor,
out of the great desire he has for the calling of a Council, will take care
that they shall have sufficient Security; therefore if they think it requisite
they may address to him about this Point, and he does not question but that
they will receive a very fair Answer from his Majesty: Therefore he desires
they would debate this matter over again, return him a clear and positive
answer, and comply with the Emperor, which would be very honorable and
advantageous to themselves, and most acceptable to God Almighty. When he had
done his Speech, he desired the Names of those might be delivered to him in
writing, who came in after the Pacification at Nuremburgh. In this List there
was George Duke of Brandenburgh, Nuremburgh, Weissemburgh, Hailbrun, Wintzeim
and Hall, mentioned to be of the same Religion, but not engaged in the League:
Then he desired them, in the Emperor's Name, to explain their League to him,
The Pope sends to Ambassador to the Elector of Saxony.
and upon what conditions it was made. The same day that this was done, the
Bishop of Aix, the Pope's Legate, came thither charged with Letters to the
Elector of Saxony, in which his Holiness invited him to the Council. For the
last year, when Vergerius gave an account of his German Embassy (which I
mentioned in the former Book) the Pope was not at all pleased with it, and
therefore orders the Bishop to go thither under the same Character, to try if
he could gain any advantage by sending a new Ambassador. But he lost his labor
as well as the other, neither was there much notice taken of him. One day when
he desired to be admitted to Audience by the Lantgrave, he sent him word, that
he was not at leizure, and almost the same minute went and made Luther a visit,
who lay very ill of the Stone; which disrespect the Ambassador might see, if he
pleased, out of his own Lodgings. Before the Bishop of Aix went upon his
Employ, Vergerius, by the Popes Command, acquainted him with the State of
Germany, and how he was to make his Court, The Protestants answer to Eldo.
and salute every Person. The fourth day after, being the last of February, the
Protestants gave in their answer to Eldo: That they did not question but that
the Emperor would stand to the Pacification, which he had engaged himself to do
several times both in his public and private Letters; but the Chamber of
Spire, and himself also in his Speech had advanced such an Interpretation,
which would not only render that Treaty less intelligible, but perfectly void
it, and make it insignificant. For the drift of his Discourse is to prove, that
only those Matters and Disputes are to be referred to Religion, which are
comprehended in the Edict at Worms, and in some other Decrees of the Empire;
and not those which are risen since, and concern private Persons, though they
were expressly mentioned at Nuremburgh to the Princes of the Mediation; but the
Design of this Treaty was quite different from what his Excellency pretends:
For notwithstanding, by the Instigation of Pope Leo the 10th, the Emperor
happened to publish his Edict at Worms, at a time when the true Faith was
understood but by a very few; yet afterward that Edict, as far as it related
to them, was suspended by several Decrees of the Empire, more particularly in
the Diet at Spire, about eleven years since; where it was agreed, That the
whole Controversy should be referred to a Council, with the addition of this
remarkable Clause, that in the mean time all Magistrates, in their respective
Jurisdictions, should discharge their Office in such a manner, as they might be
able to give a good account of their actions to God and the Emperor; from
whence it plainly appears, that the forementioned Edict was laid asleep, so
that they had no occasion to insist upon a new suspension of it at Nuremburgh:
For why were all Debates remitted to a lawful Council, if the Edict of Worms
was always to be in force, or if their Religion had always been accounted
condemned? But there was a wide difference between the Matter of that Edict,
and the Pacification at Nuremburgh; for the former considered nothing but
matter of Fact, and was designed for Prosecution; the question at that time
being only, Whether the Edict was violated or not? If a breach was proved, then
it is likely the Chamber, if the Decree of the Diet at Spire had not interposed,
might have exercised their Jurisdiction, as in a secular affair. But those
things which were the occasion of that Convention and Treaty at Nuremburgh
relate to Faith and Religion, which, beside other Proofs, appears plainly from
the Emperor's Letters Patents: For though the Chamber had no Authority to try
any Causes of this nature before, yet to prevent Disturbance there was a more
comprehensive Provision signed at Nuremburgh to make them forbear. Besides it
appears from the very words of the Emperor's Letters Patents, that not only
those Disputes which relate to matters of mere Religion, were comprehended in
the Treaty at Nuremburgh, but all others also which are occasioned by the
Change of Rites and Ceremonies, and arise from Causes of a resembling nature.
Farther, all Agreements are to be interpreted with respect to the circumstances
of the thing, which was the ground of the Controversy. Now from the time of
the Decree at Spire, till the Treaty at Nuremburgh, they do not remember that
any of their Partty have been prosecuted, or have had the least Disturbance
given them by any particular Courts under the Emperor or Princes: It Is true,
the Chamber had usurped an Authority in these Matters, and commenced a Suit
against some Persons for changing Religion, together with the Rites and
Ceremonies; as also concerning Property and Estate: And when there was a
misunderstanding about these things, they made express mention of them to the
Princes of the Mediation. Therefore that Treaty is to be understood to extend
not only to those Points which result from the Edict of Worms, but to those
also which were controverted at the very time of the Convention. For otherwise
what made them labor and trouble themselves at the rate they had done? why
were they at such Expenses to remove a Grievance which was already mortified by
a solemn Decree of the Empire, and from which they had no reason to apprehend
the least inconvenience? But being afraid the Chamber would occasion a Disorder
in the State by commencing of Suits; they agreed to a Cessation, which can
relate to no other Debates but those which were then the Principal Subject of
the Controversy, and explained to the Princes of the Mediation as such: And
whereas he alleges, that the Emperor did not know under what Classis those
Disputes were to be ranged; this seems improbable, because that Convention
was ordered on purpose to take up those Differences, which unless they had been
accommodated, it was thought some public Disturbances would have immediately
followed: Neither indeed it is credible that the Princes of the Mediation
omitted the sending the Emperor an account of these things, or that his
Majesty, if he disapproved any part of them, should dissemble his dislike: That
the Emperor may allow this Liberty for the preservation of Peace is beyond all
question; and that the Peace cannot continue, unless these Terms are granted,
they have lately proved. And since by the Laws of the Empire no Man may take
away his Neighbors Property, therefore they explained themselves upon this
Point to the Princes of the Mediation at Nuremburgh; and declared, That if the
Chamber gave them any trouble for seizing upon the Fortunes of their Monks and
Priests, who had rejected the Doctrine and Worship of the true Religion, they
would look upon it as a Force and an Injury. And whereas his Excellency thinks
it unjust for them not to allow the Chamber to determine the nature of the
Cause, Whether it is Religious or Secular; adding likewise, That the more
Reasons they had to support their Resolution, the more public they ought to
make them; They said they had given a sufficient Answer to this Objection
before, and thought it would have been urged no more upon them: For though they
are not afraid to make their Defense in open Court; nay they are very desirous
the whole Cause might be tried before equal Judges, yet they could not depart
from that Order which the Emperor had made in the present Case; by which they
were not remitted to the Judgment of the Chamber, but all Process was stopped
by his Imperial Prohibition, with this Proviso, That if any Person acted to the
contrary, his Majesty, or his Ambassador, was to be acquainted with it. As
touching the Chamber, it was easy for them to answer, why they could not admit
it; namely because most of that Court were Roman Catholics, who are bound by
Oath, in giving of Sentence, to observe the Canon Law, as well as the
Constitutions of the Empire; and that the Methods of these Judges were very
singular, was known to many others in Germany besides themselves: To say they
are tied up by Oaths does not clear them from suspicion; notwithstanding this
Allegation they may be lawfully refused, which themselves were under a
necessity of doing: For what could they expect from those of a contrary
Persuasion, who condemn the Protestant Religion as impious? Neither is it at
all material that some few of them are delegated by his Majesty, and most of
them chosen out of the Provinces of the Empire; for the main stress of the
Cause lies in the Question of their Religion; but how they ought to be
qualified in these respects, the Decree made in the Diet at Ratisbone
sufficiently shows: Besides most of them are made by the Bishops, or by others
of their way and Interest: Now when these Clergymen call all those
Ecclesiastical Causes, which relate to Rites and Ceremonies, to the Pastoral
Office, and the Revenues of the Church; why does not the Chamber put all those
Debates which are of the same kind under the same denomination? Therefore what
they told him before was no more than truth; that if they submit themselves to
the Jurisdiction of the Chamber, there will be no occasion for a Council, (and
yet the Points contested ought to be decided there.) For those Gentlemen make
no distinction of Causes, but try all which are brought before them, and are
willing that their Ecclesiastics should have not only their pretended Estates,
but their wicked Ceremonies restored them: Now if such proceedings as these
stand good, all the Protestant Doctrine must be condemned. They said likewise,
that their Lawyers were so much overaw'd, and apprehensive of danger, that they
durst not defend their Right, much less make any Exception against the Judges;
who if they were challenged, kept the Bench notwithstanding, and had lately
sent back the Hamburgers their Letters of Recusation. The reason why they
instanced in the Monks, and such sort of People, was, to let his Excellency
understand, that the Goods and Estates which he mentioned, did not belong them,
but to the Ministers of the Church, and were partly to be spent upon pious
Uses. Therefore in charging them with Rapine, and detaining other Men's Goods,
he did them wrong; neither was any thing of this nature ever objected to them
before, not only by one of his Quality, but not by the Emperor himself: They
wonder he should say it was Violence, to take away the Revenues of the Church
from the Monks and Priests, who contemn the true Religion, and obstinately
defend plain and notorious Errors: For to these Estates which were most of them
given by their Ancestors, the Clergy, had no other right than as they were
formerly Ministers of the Church in their Dominions. Now when they understood
the true Doctrine, and their Apprehensions were better informed; they could not
with a safe Conscience tolerate known Errors any longer; and being obliged to
remove these Corruptions, they did not think it fit to let those Men enjoy the
Profits of the Church, who positively refused to reform their Religion. Now if
any are of opinion that they ought notwithstanding to have been tolerated in
their Persuasion, they are mistaken; for they could not grant them such an
Indulgence, without being involved in their guilt; for we may deny Christ and
the Truth, not only in our words, but in our actions; therefore his Excellency
had charged them wrongfully in this Point. For what a strange piece of
imprudence would it be to endanger all their Fortunes, their Reputation, their
Lives, their Wives and Children, and whatever was dear to them, for the gaining
such little and invidious Advantages? They did not desire to possess other Men's
Estates, and which were not under their own Jurisdiction; and if they were put
upon it, they could demonstrate by the Canon Law, that the Revenues of the
Church did not belong to those who broached and maintained false Doctrine;
neither was worldly Interest proposed by them in this case; but their principal
and only aim was, That God might not be dishonored in their Territories, and
therefore those who professed the true Religion had been deprived of nothing:
Neither did they question but that they should give a better account of what
they had taken from the Ecclesiastics; than those who assume the name of the
Church to themselves, and possess the Revenues of it without any right, and
spend them without any reason. Now if they insist upon the right of Possession,
that is nothing to the purpose; for to go no farther than the Canon Law, when
Truth begins to display its light, all Claims by virtue of Possession,
Prescription and Custom, are to disappear, and give place, like so many
shadows. Therefore their Practices are contrary neither to Law, nor Equity, but
are honest, pious, and consonant to the holy Scriptures: That Objection
likewise which his Excellency urges, that he cannot approve that Men should be
outed of their Estates, is properly applicable to their Adversaries; for when
any of their Flock happens to turn to the true Religion, he has not only his
Fortune, but his life too taken from him: That this is no Calumny, they appeal
to his Excellency, who very well knows what Cruelties have been exercised, and
how much Blood has been shed upon this one account; for banishment, and the
ruin of their whole Families, is the gentlest punishment such Converts are
favored with. And whereas he insists farther, that an Accommodation would be
very feasible if the point of Property was waved; they grant the truth of this
Allegation, but then the strength of it ought to be turned upon their
Adversaries; who unless they valued their Wealth, their Honor, and their
Luxury, that dissolute and scandalous Life which they lead, above any regard to
Truth, all Differences might be easily reconciled; but though they are sensible
of the Excesses and Prodigality of their Expenses, yet they will not endure a
Reformation, which is of so absolute necessity. Now what truth there is in the
Gentlemen of the Chambers Affirmation, where they say they have done nothing
contrary to their Office, his Excellency may understand by what they have
delivered to him already: For their parts they desire nothing more than a legal
Trial, and have formerly moved, that the reasons of their demurring to the
Jurisdiction of the Chamber, might be examined by Referees: Now that the Causes
which the Chamber have unjustly decided, should be brought about again by the
Emperor, as his Excellency suggesteth, this will be a very difficult matter to
effect, neither will the Parties who have had Judgment given on their side,
allow it. And because he is desirous to know their Resolution in the present
case; They declare, that they value nothing more than Peace, that they have not
done any thing to disturb it, and have given their Reasons why they refuse to
submit to the Chamber: But if those Judges will go on at their old rate, they
are resolved not to take any notice of their Sentence; and if any violence was
offered, the Law of Nature allowed all Persons to defend themselves; and
therefore they could not desert their Confederates when they were in danger,
especially since they knew that when they were suppressed, the same Fate must
be undergone by themselves. As concerning their Allies who came over to their
League and Religion since the Pacification at Nuremburgh; they are sorry the
Emperor should know nothing of it; for when they sent their Ambassadors into
Italy, they gave them their Names in writing, that they might deliver them upon
demand; and whereas they told him, that some of their Confederates had made a
particular Agreement for their Liberty in Religion, this was be to understood
of the Treaty at Cadan, and concerning the Duke of Wirtenburgh, to whom this
Freedom was allowed; and since the Emperor may know this already, they need not
produce any farther proof: As for the rest, when they had gained a better
notion of Religion, and saw the Council was delayed, they concluded their
Conscience was much to be preferred to a State-Obligation: They did not
question what his Excellency told them concerning the good Intentions of the
Emperor; yet they heard their Adversaries were forming Designs quite contrary
to such Inclinations, and endeavored to exasperate his Majesty against them,
which, beside other proofs, they had reason to believe from the practices of
the Chamber. Therefore their request is, That their Case may be considered, and
that such a Peace may be granted in which they may lawfully acquiesce. If they
have satisfaction in this Point, they shall not be backward in complying with
his Demands in reference to the Turks and the Imperial Chamber. Lastly, They
said they were something surpised at his requesting them to explain their
League; for the Emperor understood it already, and desired them, by the Princes
of the Mediation at Nuremburgh, that they would recede from it; but they then
gave such an Answer that it was urged no more to them. They may thank their
Adversaries for forcing them upon these measures; For it is no secret what sort
of Design they are carrying on, and have been contriving for these many years:
As for their League it is made only for defense, and formed upon such
conditions, that if it was requisite, they need not be ashamed to show it, not
only to the Emperor, but to all the World. What he had related concerning the
Council, and his Majesty's kind Inclinations toward the Empire, was very
acceptable to them; and they believed his Majesty was unacquainted with the
Popes Designs, which made him so earnestly promote the calling of a Council:
Now what opinion his Majesty had of the Pope they would not dispute; but since
his Bull was ensnaringly worded, and quite contrary to the Intentions of the
Emperor, they could not dissemble their Sentiments of it. For before the
Council was opened, he has been so forward as to condemn their Doctrine not
only by his Pen, but by his Practice: Besides it is very well known how himself
and his Predecessors, though they cannot choose but see the Scripture makes
against them, have usurped and appropriated the Authority of determining to
themselves in all Assemblies where there are any Disputes about Religion: And
though they intend when there is a Council lawfully convened and constituted,
to Impeach the Pope and his Adherents of false Doctrine, Heresy, and Impiety;
yet they do not question but that he will pretend to be Umpire and Judge,
according to his old custom. That he aims at such an Usurpation, is apparent by
his Bull, which if they should once approve, it will be to no purpose for them
to talk afterward about methodizing the Debate of the Controversy. Now
whether this be such a Council as his Majesty and the States of the Empire
resolved upon in several Diets, they leave to all indifferent Persons to
determine. For those words, A Free and Christian Council were always added on
purpose, and for very good reasons. Neither was the former part of the Clause
to be so taken, as if no more was meant by it, than that every one should have
the liberty to propound his Opinion: But to prevent the Pope and his
Associates, who were engaged to each other upon the account of persuasion and
dependencies, from being Judges in their own Cause; nor was the word Christian
to be so interpreted, as if none but Turks and Infidels were prohibited the
Council; but that all the points of Doctrine might be examined and decided by
the holy Scriptures. For they were assured, that there were pious and learned
Men, not only in one Country, but all the World over. And it is a very
entertaining Speculation to them to consider, that if the Pope's Exorbitant
Power was retrenched, and all things were not under the command of one Man,
then there was reason to hope, that not only their Divines, but a great many
good Men of diverse Countries, who are now kept under by his Holinesses Tyranny,
and forced either to conceal, or but to whisper their Grievances, would
contribute their utmost-Endeavours toward the Reformation of the Church. Now
as to the Seat of the Council (they said) they could not imagine any place
could be more proper than Germany; for notwithstanding other Nations ought to
have a share in the Council, the Germans, and particularly themselves were
chiefly concerned in it, for they were obliged to be there in Person, and to
bring the Ministers of their Churches along with them; whereas other King's and
Princes might dispatch their business by their Ambassadors, according to the
ancient and usual custom: Concerning the situation and convenience of Mantua,
they had no mind to dispute; but at this time there was War in Italy; and
though there was none, yet they had lately given him the reasons why they ought
to suspect that Country. How the Duke of Mantua stood affected, they would not
examine at present, but it was certain his own Brother was a Cardinal of great
Note; which circumstances increased their suspicion. Therefore when foreign
Countries understand their reasons why they refuse the place, and way of
proceeding in the Council, they do not question but that they will approve
them; nay if they had done otherwise, other Nations, they believe, would have
had an ill opinion of them for it; besides his Majesty knows there are many
Cities in Germany no less commodious than Mantua, and which is more especially
to be considered, they are celebrated for their Justice and Fair-dealing. For
those Clandestine ways of dispatching Men are not so much known and practiced
in Germany as in some other places. Now their insisting so much upon the
Decrees of the Empire, and being so unalterably resolved to stand by them,
ought not to seem strange or unpresidented to the Emperor. For formerly
Liberius, Bishop of Rome, a Friend and Favourer of Athanasius, desired the
Emperor Constantine to call a Council at Alexandria, because the Accused and
Prosecutors lived there; and notwithstanding that place was inconvenient for
the Eastern Churches; notwithstanding the Emperor ( Constantius) declared, That
Athanasius had been condemned by the Suffrages of the whole World, and that his
Adherents were banished; notwithstanding he protested, That Liberius was the
great Disturber of the Peace of Christendom; yet the Bishop did not desist in
his Application, and the Emperor continuing as much resolved in his denial, was
the occasion of making the Arian Heresy prevail for a long time; but at last
Athanasius his Cause proved Victorious, and will continue so to the Worlds end;
now how many Christians lost their Lives in the defense of that Doctrine, is
impossible to recount: They expect that their Religion will have the same
Success, Whether there is a fit place assigned them to argue in or not: For
such reasons as these the Fathers of Basil refused to meet at Ferrara, where
the Pope Eugenius had ordered the Council to convene: So likewise when the
Emperor Henry the Seventh had a Dispute of great consequence with Robert King
of Sicily, and cited him to appear at Pisa, Pope Clement the Fifth looked upon
this proceeding as unjust, and thereupon undertook the King's Defense, and
informed the Emperor why he was not bound to come thither, though his reasons
were much less considerable than those which they had produced; therefore their
refusing such a Council as this, is none of their fault, but the Popes. For
whenever they cast the Issue of their Cause upon a Council, they meant such a
one as his Majesty and the States had decreed; being sensible that if the whole
Affair was left to the management of Popes, they would regard nothing but their
private Advantage, suppress the true Religion, and establish their own
Corruptions and Impieties; notwithstanding this, Paul the Third has so
varnished over the matter to the Emperor, as if he proceed with the greatest
fairness and sincerity imaginable, when he intends the direct contrary.
Moreover what sort of Council it is which they demand, they have already
declared in writing, not only to Clement's Legate, but to Peter Paul Vergerius,
who was sent by Paul the Third. And whereas his Excellency informs them that
the Emperor's design is, That Error and Immorality may be rectified, and
reformed; they profess they cannot see the least intimation of any such matter
in the Pope's Bull; for if he had designed a real and effectual Reformation, he
would never have condemned their Doctrine before it had been publicly examined.
And though they do not doubt of the Emperor's Candor and Justice, and
therefore they are the more concerned that it is not in their power to gratify
him; yet this they must say, that his Majesty's kindness and forwardness in
this Affair cannot turn to any advantage to them: For admitting the Emperor
should be present at the Council himself, yet it is well known what a slender
Authority the Popes allow his Majesty, and other Princes in such cases. Now
supposing the Pope and his Clergy should show themselves very frank, and let
them be present at the Debates; yet they never permit them to Vote; that
Privilege they reserve for their own Order; so that if the Emperor and the
Civil Magistrate happen to carry on the Dispute farther than is acceptable to
the other, they have this check upon them, and at last determine the
Controversy according to their own good liking. And since their caution is
only to avoid falling into the Pope's Ambuscadoes, they desire his Majesty
would please not to take it ill, for it is natural to Brutes to shun those
places in which they know Snares and Traps are set for them. Besides it is
sufficiently known how the Emperor Sigismund was served at the Council of
Constance: For notwithstanding he had granted John Husse a safe Conduct in due
form, yet the Fathers there clipped his Prerogative to purpose, when they told
him, That neither his Majesty, nor any Person else, ought to prescribe to the
Council in that matter. In short, the Emperor gave up the Point, and yielded to
their Claim and Authority; and though they believe his Majesty did not do this
without great regret, yet that was little comfort to the other miserable
Person, who was surpised into so great a Calamity, and forced to suffer a
cruel death, for being over-credulous in depending upon the safe Conduct. From
which matter of Fact, it plainly appears, what a slender Assistance the
Emperor, though he was never so willing, is able to afford those whom they have
taken in their Toyls, and, as it were, cag'd up: Therefore they are obliged to
be circumspect in their motions; however that no blame may be charged upon
them, they declare, That they are not only willing to submit to a fair Trial,
but also they earnestly entreat the Emperor, that he would please fully to
examine the weight of their Reasons, and call a lawful Council in Germany,
where the Pope, and his Party, may not engross the Office of Judges: And if it
shall so happen that the Pope hinders the Emperor in the execution of this
Design, and will not suffer an honest Council to be called in Germany; they
solemnly profess to the World, That it is none of their fault which prevents the
proper Measures for Agreement from being resolved on; and all the
inconveniences which follow from these misunderstandings must be attributed to
the Pope. Lastly, They desire him that he would make an exact Report of what
they have said to the Emperor, and let his Majesty understand their
Inclinations to serve him. The Decrees of the Protestants at Smalcalde.
After these Speeches were over, and Eldo had promised that he would give the
Emperor an account of what had past between them; the Protestants proceeded to
make a Provision for several other Matters, viz. for the Maintenance of the
Clergy, for the Founding of Schools, that there might be a constant supply of
fit Persons for the Service both of Church and State; and when they had done
this, they decreed what was requisite concerning their League and mutual
Defense. I have already mentioned what answer they gave Eldo in reference to
the Turk; and besides there was a rumor spreads as if Ferdinand was making
Preparations for a War against John Vaivod of Transylvania, and therefore
desired Supplies to carry on that design. And lest they should be guilty of an
Omission in respect of the Commonwealth, for want of right information in the
case, they decreed after Eldo was gone, That the Elector of Saxony and the
Lantgrave should send away their Agents at the Common charge, that they might
have certain Intelligence concerning this matter; and if the Turk did invade
Germany they would then convene themselves again, A Paper containing the
Protestants Reasons for their refusal of the Council.
to consult what was proper for every Man to do. Moreover, that all Men might
understand the reasonableness of their Proceedings, and the Grounds upon which
they refused the Council; they thought it convenient to set them down in
writing, which Paper they afterward published in Print, where they address
themselves to foreign Princes and Nations to this effect; Paul the Third, say
they, has lately published a Bull, in which he has intimated a Council at
Mantua, which will be opened upon the 23th of May, and has offered some
Reasons why these Measures were pitched upon: Besides, he has dispatched his
Nuncios to foreign Kings and Princes, both Germans and others, to acquaint them
with the Council, and invite them either to come thither themselves, or send
their Ambassadors; and in regard we have been solicited by him, and by the
Emperor upon this account, we think our selves obliged to demonstrate how
dangerous and disadvantageous a Compliance with him in this Point will be, not
only to us, but to all Christendom. And though we proceed upon none but
justifiable grounds, yet when we consider the temper of our Adversaries, we
have reason to believe they will censure our actions, and interpret them in the
worst sense. For it is likely, in order to the bringing us and the whole Cause
under their Jurisdiction, they will not stick to affirm, that we will not abide
by any Trial, nor submit to any Judge: That we contemn other Nations which have
been often remarkable for a great many Men of Learning: They will say also,
that it is a wicked thing to refuse Submission to the determinations of a
Council, which is the highest Tribunal of the Church, and ought to be obeyed by
all Persons. They will likewise pretend as if we were ashamed of our Tenants,
and durst not bring them into view; or that we watched an opportunity to make
an unnecessary Breach, and could not reconcile our selves to the Peace of
Christendom. Now if this Charge against us were true, it were not only wicked
in it self, but it would be a kind of a Calamity to hear it: For these reasons
we are under a necessity of publishing our own Justification, and we hope the
consequence of it will be, that all honest Men both in Germany, and other
places, will not only forbear believing any thing of this nature of us; but
that they will make it their business, that this most important Affair may be
rightly managed; and that it may not be in the Pope's Power to Tyrannize over
apparent Truth, and suppress it under the pretended and venerable Authority of
a Council. For we will not only make it appear, that we hold no Opinions in
Religion but what are sound and Orthodox, but likewise that we aim at nothing
but the Glory of God, and the good of the Commonwealth, and that no Man can
justly charge us with obstinancy and perverseness. And in the first place how
far we are from contemning the Judgment of other Nations, and of the Church, is
evident by our endeavoring to prevent the Pope and his Party from setting up
for Judges; and that all things may be debated by proper and unsuspected
Persons, which they believe is the unanimous desire of all good Men: For in
regard in some Countries there are now extant several ancient Books complaining
of false Doctrine, Immorality, wicked Ceremonies and Practices which were then
crept into the Church; they do not question but that in those very places there
are at this day several Persons of Learning and Piety, who understand the true
Doctrine, though at present they are brow-beaten, and overaw'd into silence by
the Pope's Tyranny. Now these are the Men who ought to appear in Councils, that
they may speak their mind freely; for that is not to be accounted a lawful
Council which is governed by the Pope and his Party, who maintain their
unorthodox Tenants by dint of Violence and Power, and, according to their old
custom, make Canons contrary to the Word of God. For our Savior when he
erected his Supreme Tribunal upon Earth, ordered, That whatever required
Reformation should be brought before the Church; in which very words all manner
of Tyranny and Dominion is excluded. Farther, they asperse us falsely, if they
say we are afraid to make our public Appearance, and will not endure the
Light. For in the Diet at Ausburgh we made an open Profession of our Doctrine in
the Presence of the Emperor, and all the States of the Empire: Besides, this
very Religion is publicly taught in our Dominions; several of our Subjects
have written Books of it, and owned it in Print; and many of our Adversaries
confess, that our Writers have recovered a great number of ancient Tenants,
which before were quite smothered and suppressed: For now the true Doctrine is
come to Light again, which gives us the right notion of Repentance, of Faith in
Christ, of Remission of Sins, of good Works, Religious Worship, the use of the
Sacraments, the Power of the Keys, of Magistracy, Humane Traditions, and such
like. Neither, to speak in St. Paul's Language, are we ashamed of the Gospel,
but wish above all things that we had an opportunity to declare our sense of
these Points in the most public Audience. And whereas it is objected to our
Party, as if they had revived old condemned Heresies, and therefore there is no
need of any farther Dispute or Examination of the Cause, this Suggestion is
false, and those who have read our Confession, and the Defense annexed to it,
will not require much Apology from us: For the Doctrine which we Profess is no
new one, but was approved by the Primitive Church, as may be made good to a
demonstration. Neither have we received any Heresy or wicked Opinion, but on
the contrary our Divines have regained the Doctrine of the Ancients in several
Points, which the Popes and Monks had suppressed. It is another Calumny to say,
that we are pleased with public Animosities and Divisions, for we are sorry at
our very Souls that Christendom is so miserably distracted, and earnestly
desire a Council, in order to a Reconciliation. And since the Pope and his
Adherents have condemned that Doctrine which is both true and necessary to be
believed, since they punish and persecute the Professors of it, and excite
others to follow their Example; we could do no less than reprove them for their
Cruelty and Insolence. For God requires us to Honor him by an open
Confession; and to hold any farther Correspondence with the Pope, when he rages
at such a barbarous rate, would be a very wicked Alliance. Besides, it cannot
be denied but we perform all Offices, and undergo all Burdens which the
Commonwealth requires, as well as the rest of the States; from whence it
appears, that we would willingly comply with others in Religion too, if our
Consciences would give us leave; especially when we understand what danger
hangs over our Heads upon this account. For the Popes for many years last
past have told us pretty plainly what they would be at, and how busy they have
been in exasperating the Passions of Princes against us: Now to run all these
hazards, and be at all this Expense to no purpose, is perfect distraction. But
we are convin'd this is a Duty which God requires of us; whose Commands ought
to be preferred to all Secular Interest; and we protest before God Almighty,
That we design nothing but his Service. And now having confuted their
Accusations, we shall proceed to another branch of our Apology. Possibly most
People of foreign Countries may think that we have been too nice in quarrelling
with those things which have no great malignity in them, and which might have
passed without notice for Peace-sake, especially when the nature of Humane
Affairs in such, that there will always be some Imperfections in Church and
State, which must be connived at. But the case is quite otherwise; for first we
are not to conceal our dislike of Errors and wrong Opinions in Religion, being
commanded by Christ to beware of false Teachers: Besides, the Contest is not
about little Mistakes, but concerning the Doctrine of Faith, and right
Apprehensions of God, upon which the due performance of a Christians Duty, and
of Divine Worship does principally depend; now these are points which cannot be
passed over in silence, but are to be maintained in their Purity, and
diligently taught in the Church: But that this part of Truth was perfectly
extinct, cannot be denied, and a new Doctrine introduced in its room, to the
great dishonor of our Savior. We likewise disapprove many other Errors and
ungodly Practices in their Worship, which some Persons, who lived long before
our time, have discovered, and thereupon wished for a Council, that those
things which were amiss might be rectified, and the Peace of the Church
established. But now there is more need of a Council than ever, because the
same Corruptions remain and have spread their Infection further, because they
have occasioned Broils and Divisions in Christendom, insomuch that many
innocent Persons run the hazard of losing their Lives upon this account. For
these weighty reasons, not only our selves, but the Emperor, and the rest of
the States and Bishops of the Empire, voted a Council very necessary for the
preservation of the true Religion in the Church; for unless such an Expedient
was made use of, they foresaw the Distractions of Christendom would increase:
And while we were big with the expectation of such a Council as this, out comes
the Pope's Bull with Contents directly contrary to the Decrees of the Empire.
And because we are not concerned alone, but the whole Christian Church is
interessed in it, we thought it necessary to set forth a public Declaration of
our Reasons in this Paper, why we refuse this Council of the Pope's calling.
For the right of Voting does not belong solely to the Pope and Bishops, but to
the Church; in which signification Kings and other degrees of Men and Secular
Magistrates are included. Therefore though the Pope was no Party in the present
Debate, yet there was no reason to allow him and his Adherents the whole Power
of Determining, and exclude the other Ministers of the Church: But since he is
apparently one of the Litigants himself, the yielding him such a Privilege is
still more unaccountable, and no less than a contradiction to the Laws of God
and Nature. Now we do not accuse the Pope of small Misdemeanors, neither do we
quarrel with him only for his Luxury and Lording it over the Church; but the
main of our charge lies against his Doctrine, his Canons, and abominable
Worship; that is, we arraign him for Idolatry and Heresy; and when he is
impeached of such Crimes as these, the Church, and not himself, is to examine
and give Sentence in the Cause; according to the Provision which the old
Canon Law it self has made for this purpose. Besides, the Pope has made
himself the more suspected, not only by being a Party; but because he has
condemned our Doctrine long beforehand; now the case standing thus, it is easy
to imagine what sort of Censure will be past upon our Doctrine in a Council of
his own packing: For we are not to suppose that he will give a liberty of
Voting to any Persons contrary to the old customs of his Church. And in regard
the Bull does not mention in what order and method Debates are to be managed,
we have reason to suspect every thing. For he only summoneth and Mustereth
those who are engaged to him upon many accounts, and of whose Trustiness he is
sufficiently assured. He likewise professes that the reason of his calling a
Council is, That those Heresies which have lately sprung up, may be extirpated:
And notwithstanding these words will bear a large signification, yet there is
no doubt, but that he meant them of our Doctrine; for we have no reason to
believe that he would tax his own Errors: Nay afterward he published another
Bull concerning the Reformation of the Court of Rome, where he owneth in
express words, That the Council was called that the pestilent Lutheran Heresy
might be suppressed. At first, it is true, he cunningly dissembled his
Intentions, that he might make the Bull appear plausible; but afterward he
discovered himself. It Is plain therefore, that he aims only at the subversion
of our Religion. Now what a madness would it be for us to approve of such a
Design as this? For this is the thing which he drives at, namely to draw a
Confession from those who admit his Bull, that our Doctrine is wicked and
heretical; and when Kings and Princes have owned this, they may be obliged to
contribute their good wishes and endeavors to the Cause. And because the
common Interest of Christendom is concerned in this Affair, we entreat all
People, that they would seriously consider the designing subtilty of this Man;
for his couching the Bull in such Terms is somewhat admirable, and it is a
question, Whether he intended to fright us from the Council this way, or else
to ensnare us by approving the Instrument: That the Emperor intends the welfare
and security of the Commonwealth, we do not in the least question, and believe
that his Majesty does not approve the form of the Bull. But as for the Pope he
has not so much intimated a Council, as publicly given Sentence against us.
Neither will he allow the Scriptures to determine the Dispute; but his own
Canons and Customs, and the Opinions of some modern Councils, must overrule all
other Pleas; whereas it is one of our principal Assertions, That Humane
Traditions are to be rejected when they are repugnant to the Word of God. That
which is really the Doctrine of the Church, we willingly receive; but then the
Errors and Tyranny of the Pope ought not to be flourished over with that
reverend Name. For first the ancient Church never admitted of any Constitutions
which were contrary to Scripture; nor yet gave the Pope that unlimited power
which he now assumes to himself. And secondly, These Men who condemn and
persecute the Doctrine of the Gospel, are none of the Church, but Parricides and
Sons of Cain. In the Primitive times godly Bishops have often refused to
concern themselves in Councils, when they saw they were not called for the
Defense of Truth, but either to establish false Doctrine, or to countenance some
Persons in their Ambition. Thus when Constantine the Emperor summoned a Council
to Antioch, Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem, though he was not very far distant
from the place, would not come thither, because he understood the Emperor's
Inclinations, and what the Arian Bishops were contriving. So Athanasius though
he came to the Council at Tire, yet he stayed not long there, because he
perceived the Principal Persons of the Council took upon them to be
Complainants and Judges too; and was also well assured that there were
Witnesses suborned against him. In like manner at Sirmium in Hungary there was
formerly convened a very numerous Council against Photinus, for the Debate was
of great Consequence; and notwithstanding the Emperor commanded the Bishops to
repair thither, yet those of the Western-Church did not obey him, when they
understood the Arian-Faction was increased; for they suspected some false
Doctrine would be decreed there: At this time Hosius a Person of great
Reputation was Bishop of Corduba, whom the Emperor, by the advice of the
Arians, commanded to go out of Spain to the Council, who when he came there, he
consented to that ensnaring Creed at Sirmium, which was afterward the occasion
of horrible Disorders in the Church; and Hilary who was not present at this
Assembly reproves Hosius for his compliance. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem would
never assist at their Meetings, who denied Christ to be of the same substance
with the Father; and is said to be the first Man who appealed in writing from
the Authority of their Councils. There was a Council begun at Millain, and the
Bishops were called thither by the Emperor's order. But when Paulinus Bishop of
Triers, and some few others, perceived that Auxentius Bishop of Millain and his
Party were projecting things which were not fair, They went off, and so
occasioned the breaking up of the Council. Thus those great Men declined, going
to all suspected Synods, that they might not be involved in their guilt: And
since the Pope gives pretty plain intimations, that this Council is designed
to establish his Power and Greatness, we desire all People that they would not
blame our refusal of it. Moreover we have great reason to dislike the place of
the Council, for it is very fit for Mischief, and in all respects, such as if it
was contrived to hinder the freedom of Debates: To which we may add, that the
Calumnies of our Adversaries have given Strangers a very ill opinion of us, as
if all Probity and Religion was banished our Country: Now to have Men's minds
prepossessed with such a notion as this, may be exceeding dangerous for us.
Therefore if it was only upon this account, it was very proper to have the
Council convened in Germany, that those of foreign Nations might see the
customs and regularity of our Churches and Towns, and so disengage themselves
from their prejudice against the true Doctrine. The importance of the Affair
likewise obliges most of us to be in Person at the Council; but to go out of
our own Country in such numbers, would be a great inconvenience to us. And
since it was decreed in a Diet of the Empire upon such weighty considerations,
that a Council should be held in Germany, we see no reason to depart from what
was then resolved upon. And in regard the welfare of all Christendom is
concerned in this business, we entreat all Kings and Princes not to give any
credit to our Adversaries; but rather use their Endeavors that the true
knowledge of God may be recovered, which is the most glorious Action they can
possily engage in. As for the Pope it is his Design to run them upon Injustice
and Cruelty, but they are obliged to abhor such Practices above all things: For
they are places on purpose on that elevated Station, that they might promote
the Honor of God with greater advantage; show a good Example to their
Inferiors, and rescue innocent Persons from Injury and Oppression. And if ever
a lawful Council happens to be called, we will give such a satisfactory
account of our Proceedings there, as shall be sufficient to convince all
People, that we have aimed at and attempted nothing, but what was for the real
advantage of Christendom. In this Convention there was the Elector of Saxony,
Ernest and Francis his Brother, Dukes of L^^enburgh, Vlrick Duke of
Wirtemburgh, the Lantgrave, Philip Duke of Pomern, three Earls of Anhalt, and
Albert Count Mansfield; there were also the Agents of a great many Cities, who
were sent thither with very large Commissions, their Principals being
pre-acquainted with the subject of the Debate. Before they broke up their
Assembly, which was done upon the 6th of March, they wrote to the French King,
where in the first place they excuse themselves for not giving his Ambassador
satisfaction at the last Convention; and also gave him their Reasons why they
omitted sending an Embassy to him now: Then they desired him to continue them
his Friendship; and since they had made all imaginable Overtures for the
composing the Differences in Religion, though they had been unsuccessful in
their Endeavors, yet they hoped he would oblige them with his Favor for their
good Intentions. Lastly, They acquaint him with their Resolutions concerning
the Council, and desire to know how his Majesty intends to act in this Affair.
Upon the 22th of May the King returns them an Answer, in which he lets them
understand, that he was satisfied with their Reasons, and makes them large
assurances of the constancy of his Friendship, and sends them a Paper which he
had published to confute the Misrepresentations of their Adversaries: And as to
the Council he told them, That he was still of the same mind of which he had
always been, that unless it was lawful in its Constitution and Method, and
coven'd in a place of Security, he would never approve it; neither did he
question but that the King of Scotland his Son in law would be wholly
influenced by him: This Prince some few days before in the beginning of May
returned into Scotland with his Queen, who died there about the middle of June
following. The Pope prorogeth the Council.
In the mean time the Pope prorogeth the Council till the first of November;
the occasion of which delay he charged upon the Duke of Mantua, who insisted
upon a Garrison to secure the Town, and demanded a Supply of Moneys for that
purpose. These Terms the Pope said were unexpected and surprising to him, and
he was very much afraid lest the greatest part of the Bishops, in compliance
with his Bull, were already arrived at Mantua, and being denied admittance into
the Town, might be forced to return home: This he was extremely troubled at,
but should bear it with the more patience, because it was not his fault, but
another. Not long after the King of England published a Manifesto in the name
of himself and his Nobility, to this effect, That the Pope had called a Council
without any Authority to do it: That it was convened at an improper time, The
King of England publishes a Paper against the Council which was called by the
Pope.
when the Emperor and French King were deeply engaged in War against each
other: That Mantua was an exceptionable place, as being neither commodious nor
safe for all Persons. For his part he heartily desired a Christian Council, but
he would neither come nor send his Ambassadors to this of the Pope's packing.
For it has been their way in these Synods to betray Christ and the Truth for
their own advantage. He had nothing to say to the Bishop of Rome, and was no
more concerned in his Bulls, than in the Orders of any other Bishop: Councils
(he said) used to be called by the Emperor and other Princes, which Custom
ought to be retrieved, especially at this time, when there are such severe
Complaints to be made against the Pope; and yet no Man without danger of his
life, could publicly accuse and reprove him, unless the Council was rightly
constituted. Besides, neither himself nor any of his Subjects had a safe
Conduct granted them, and though they had, yet there would remain dangers
apparent enough to make him decline coming. For it is no new thing with the
Popes to break their Promises, and imbrue themselves in the blood of the
Innocent. And granting it might be safe for other Persons to come thither, yet
there were very good reasons why it could not be so for him; when the Pope
endeavors to draw him into an Ambuscado, hates him mortally, and does his
utmost to make him as odious to other Princes as is possible; and all for no
other reason, but because he took the liberty to free his own Dominions from
his Holiness's Tyranny, and stopped the return of his Peter Pence; and some
other pretended Revenues. This thing he is sensible the Pope takes extremely
ill at his hands, and so much the more, because he is afraid other Princes may
follow his example: And now the Council forsooth is deferred till the first of
November, yet we are not told where it will be held at last, and the blame of
this disappointment is laid upon the Duke of Mantua; now what is all this but
abusing the World? The Duke of Mantua was certainly in the right, in refusing
to admit such a body of Men into his Town without a Garrison, and therefore all
the fault must lie at his door, who never acts with any sincerity, but has
always something of circumvention and design at the bottom; and if he happens
to change the Seat of the Council, we must expect the Town he pitches upon will
either belong to some Prince he holds as it were under Vassalage, or else it
must be in his own Jurisdiction: The truth is, he has a very large Dominion,
and fine Towns in it; which his Predecessors made themselves Masters of by
violence and fraud, neither has he much mended his Title to them since. And in
regard most Men of sense despair of an honest Council, the best way in his
judgment is for all Magistrates to reform Religion themselves in their
respective Territories. Now if the Pope pretends Custom to the contrary, his
Argument will not hold; for St. Cyprian will vouch for us in the case, that
Custom, when it is not founded upon Truth, is no more than ancient Error. This
expedient therefore which he has mentioned already, is in his opinion the most
proper; but if any person can propose a better, he is ready to comply with it.

The Emperor spent all this year in Spain; The Imperialists take St. Paul by
storm.
but in June his Army in Flanders, under Florus Count of Bures, took the Town
and Castle of St. Paul in Artois by Storm, They besiege Therouenne without
effect.
and put all the Garrison to the Sword; from thence he marched to Therouenne,
and set down before it, but without success* At last they came to a Truce there
for ten months, which was to take place only in that Country. For in Peidmont
the War went on as vigorously as before; where the Imperialists recovered the
Town of Quiers by Assault, They carry Quiers by assault.
and made a great slaughter among the besieged, both Soldiers and Townsmen. And
afterward when the Garrison of Turin was straightened for want of Provisions, and
all the Passes and Avenues possessed by the Enemy; Turin is supplied with
Provisions.
The French King levied an Army in Autumn, and marched it thither under the
Command of the Dolphin and Anne Momorency, who cut through the Blockade with
their Swords, and victualled the Town.

In October King Ferdinand his Army consisting of Saxon Horse, Ferdinand his
Army beaten by the Turks.
Meisseners, Francovians, Austrians, Carinthians, Bohemians, and those
Hungarians which the Germans call Hussars, besieged Exechium or Essek, situate
upon the Drove, which the Turks had put a strong Garrison into. Now when they
had thrown away a great deal of time upon this Place, and were forced to draw
off at last for want of Provisions, they were enclosed by the Enemy in their
retreat, who had posted themselves in all the Woods and Passes they were to
retire though; when they were reduc' to these straits, first some few Captains
and other Officers, and the Body of the Hungarians ran away, and it was not
long before Cazzianer the General followed them. But the rest, especially the
German Horse, who scorned such a dishonorable Flight, encouraged one another
to Resolution, and stood the Charge of the Enemy; but being overpowered with
numbers, they were most of them cut off, and many of the Officers were taken
Prisoners, and carried to Constantinople, where they were forced to submit to a
miserable Slavery.

October the 12th the King of England had a Son born named Edward, Edward the
Sixth of England is born.
by Jane Seimour, whom he married after the death of Anne of Bolein. In the
mean time the Pope understanding there was a Truce in Flanders, made it his
business to procure a Cessation in Italy and in other places, that he might
have the better opportunity to finish the grand Affair. First, therefore the
Truce was agreed upon for a certain Term; The reason why the Pope would
reconcile the Emperor and French King.
when that was expired, it was continued for another, till at last a Peace was
made, as I shall show afterward. Now the Popes design in reconciling these
Princes, was, to persuade them to join their Forces against his mortal Enemy
the King of England, and against the Lutherans. About this time Christiana of
Denmark, the Emperor's Neice by his Sister and Dowager of Millain, Christiana
of Denmark returns into Flanders.
left Italy, and returned into Flanders through Germany; there was a Match
treated of between this Lady and the Duke of Cleve, but it came to nothing. Now
also the People of Gelderland began to rebel against their Prince Charles Count
Egmond, who was all along of the French-Faction, having a violent aversion to
the Burgundians: The Gelderlanders rebel.
And it was thought he was then attempting to bring his Province under the
Jurisdiction of the French; but his Subjects making a general Insurrection
against him; he was outed of almost all, so that he had not above one or two
Towns left him to retreat to. He was always a zealous Roman Catholic, and
punished those who professed the Reformed Religion. Paul the Third in the
beginning of his Popedom made two of his Grandchildren Cardinals, and being
sensible that he had lost some Reputation upon this account, he promoted
several others who were eminent for their Quality and Learning, to this Honor,
partly that he might make the promotion of his young Relations less invidious
and disobliging, partly that he might be furnished with Friends able to defend
his Cause with their Rhetoric and Writings. Those who were created, were
Gasper Contareno, Reginald Poole, John Bellay, Frederick Fregosi; to which were
afterward added Sadolet, Alexander, Bembo. Besides, Erasmus was also thought
on, as he himself relates in a Letter of his to a Friend. There are extant
likewise several Letters of Sadolets to Erasmus, in which he tells him, in a
great many words, what a singular esteem the Pope had for him, and that he
intended to raise him very shortly to the highest Dignity. Contareno was of a
noble Family, and a Senator of Venice; a Man of great Reputation for his
Learning, and was said to be preferred to this eminent Station altogether
beyond his expectation, and when he made no manner of Interest for it.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XII.
The CONTENTS.
Pope Paul strictly charges his Commissioners for the Reformation, diligently
to enquire into the numerous Corruptions of the Church, and provide ^ffectual
Remedies. Erasmus his Colloquies are prohibited. The Protestants meet at
Brunswick, and receive the King of Denmark into their League. The Persecution
of Lutheranism revived in France. The Pope goes on Progress to Nice de
Provence: Whither the Emperor and the French King also come. The French King
and several of his Nobility kiss the Pope's Right-foot. The French of the
Reformed Religion have a Church assigned them at Strasburg. The King of England
burns Thomas of Canterbury's Bones. The Elector of Brandenburg gives the
Elector of Saxony notice of the Preparation which the Turks made for a War. The
Rise of the Antinomians. Eldo's and the Duke of Brunswick's Designs discovered,
by the Lantgrave's intercepting the Duke's Letters. A Convention is held at
Frankfort, where at last a Conference is decreed, in order to an Accommodation;
which Henry Duke of Brunswick endeavors to prevent, and raises Forces for hat
Purpose. George Duke of Saxony, a most violent Enemy to the Reformation, dies,
and Henry his Brother succeeds him. The King of England publishes another
Paper against the Council appointed at Vicenza; and makes several Laws touching
Religion. An Insurrection at Ghent, to suppress which the Emperor takes a
Journey th^^her through France. The Venetians make a Peace with the Turk, who
had secret Intelligence what their Senate had decreed touching this Matter.

I Have already mentioned the Prorogueing of the Council till November, which
was still delayed after that Term was expired: However, that the Pope might
keep up the Expectation of the World, and seem to do something, A Draught of
the Reformation of the Church.
he had some time since pitched upon a select Number out of the whole Body of
his Clergy, whom he strictly charged to make a diligent Enquiry into the Abuses
of the Church, and lay them before him impartially, without any manner of
Flattery. He likewise discharged them from their Oath, that they might speak
their Minds freely; and ordered them to manage the Affair with great Secrecy.
The Delegates were, Jaspar Contarino, Peter Theatino, James Sadolet, Reginald
Poole, Cardinals; Frederick, Archbishop of Salerno; Hierome Al^ander,
Archbishop of Brindisi; John Matthew, Bishop of Verona; George Vener, Abbot;
and Thomas, Master of the Holy Palace. These Persons, after they had debated
the Point among themselves, set down their Reformation in Writing; and
addressing themselves to the Pope, they begin with a high Commendation of his
Zeal for the promoting of Truth; which was not prevalent enough to gain the
Ears of several of his Predecessors; indeed the Fault was chiefly in their
Flatterers, who stretched their Prerogative, too far, and told their
Holinesses, That they were absolute Lords of all things; and might do whatever
they pleased. From this Fountain it was that so many Disorders flowed in upon
the Church, which had brought her into that very ill Condition she was in at
present. Therefore his beginning his Cure in the first Principles and Original
of the Distemper, was an Argument of great Prudence and Virtue in his Holiness;
who, according to St. Paul's Doctrine, Chose rather to be a Minister and
Steward than a Lord. And since he was pleased to lay this Task upon them, they,
in obedience to his Commands, had, according to the best of their
Understandings, digested the Matter into several distinct Heads, relating to
himself, the Bishops, and the Church. Now, because he bore a double Character,
being not only Bishop of the Universal Church, but a Monarch of diverse Towns
and Countries; they would only consider the Ecclesiastical part of his
Jurisdiction, for the State was well already, and governed very prudently and
unexceptionably by him. And first; May it please your Holiness, (say they) We
are of Aristotle's Opinion, That the Laws of a Country ought not to be changed
upon a slight Occasion; and apply his Maxim to the Canons of the Church, which
ought to be strictly kept up, and not dispensed with but when the Case is very
weighty and important: For there can no greater Mischief happen to the
Commonwealth, than the weakening the Force and Authority of the Laws, which
were esteemed Sacred and almost Divine by our Forefathers. The next Expedient
is, That the Pope of Rome, who is the Vicar of Christ, should refuse to receive
Money for the granting any spiritual Privilege by virtue of the Power derived
to him from Christ: For since all these Advantages were freely bestowed upon
him, our Savior expects he should communicate them in the same manner.

This Foundation of Regularity being once laid, there must be a Provision made,
that your Holiness may be always furnished with a considerable Number of
Clergymen, well qualified, to take care of the Church: Among these the Bishops
are the chief. But there is a great Miscarriage in this Point; for all Persons
are admitted into this Order without any Distinction or Difficulty, when they
have neither Learning nor Probity to recommend them; and oftentimes when they
are Boys: Hence it is that so much Scandal arises; that such Disrespect and
Contempt is shown to Religion. We therefore believe it most advisable for your
Holiness, to appoint, in the first place, some Persons at Rome to examine those
who offer themselves to Holy Orders; and then enjoin the Bishops the same
Diligence in their respective Diocesses: And that you would take care that none
should be received without the Approbation of his Triers or Bishop; and let
those young People who are designed for Churchmen, have a Master set over them
by particular Order, that so their Learning and Morals may be fit for their
Emploiment. And here we cannot but take notice that there are a great many
Abuses in the bestowing of Benefices and Ecclesiastical Dignities, especially
of those which were intended to make a Provision for the Salvation of the
People: For in such Cases the Advantage of the Incumbent is chiefly considered,
without taking any Care of the Flock: Therefore when any Office of this Nature,
especially the Episcopal, is conferred, there ought to be good Assurance given
of the Virtue and Capacity of the Persons chosen, that they may be able and
willing to govern their Churches themselves, as they are in Duty obliged: And
for this Reason an Italian ought not to be preferred in Spain or great Britain;
nor a Spaniard or Englishman in Italy. There is likewise a great deal of Deceit
used in Resignations; for the Incumbents, when they resign to another, have a
Custom of reserving a Rentcharge, and sometimes the whole Revenue to
themselves. Now no Rentcharge ought to be reserved, except for the Relief of
the Poor, and such other pious Uses; for the Profits are annexed to the
Benefice, and should no more be separated from it than the Body from the Soul.
So that he who has that, ought to enjoy the Revenues belonging to it; and make
a discreet Use of it as far as his Occasions shall require; spending the
Overplus in those Instances of Charity before mentioned. Notwithstanding, when
the Pope thinks it convenient, it shall still remain in his Power to lay such
an Encumbrance as this upon the beneficed Person, and oblige him to pay a
yearly Pension to some poor Body, especially an Ecclesiastic, that he may live
more decently and commodiously by such a Provision: It is therefore a manifest
Corruption for the Incumbent to reserve the whole Profits, or for a Pension to
be secured to those who have no need. The Practice of Permutation is also very
faulty, and managed altogether for Advantage; and notwithstanding it is against
Law to bequeath a Benefice by Will, yet Men of Parts have found out a cunning
Contrivance to evade the Law: Their Way is to part with their Preferments to
another; but with this Condition, That it shall be lawful for them to re-enter
upon the full Profits and Jurisdiction: Hence it comes to pass, that one Man
bears the Name of a Bishop, who has no Power or Authority in his Character; and
another, who has all the Episcopal Right and Jurisdiction in the Diocese,
wants the Title of his Office: Now what is this less than a Bequest and
making another Man ones Heir? It Is the same sort of Fault for Bishops to desire
Coadjutors, especially since they often make use of Persons much worse
qualified for Government than themselves. Pope Clement reinforced that ancient
Canon which forbids the Children of Priests to possess their Fathers Benefices,
but this Canon is likewise dispensed with; though such Practices are very
disobliging and unexemplary: For it cannot be denied but that the greatest part
of the Peoples Disgust proceeds from their observing the Church Revenues to
be thus misemployed, and converted to private Uses. Hitherto indeed most Men
have had some Hopes to see this Disorder rectified, but now they despair of
receiving any Satisfaction, which makes them both think and speak very hardly
of us. And here we may range that other Contrivance, to dispose of the next
Avoidance of a Benefice, which certainly makes Men apt to wish for, and expect
the Death of another; besides, those who are possibly more deserving are barred
from Preferment this way; and an Occasion is likewise given to many Contentions
and Disputes. But what shall we say of those Benefices, which because they
could not be lodged in one Person, were commonly called incompetible? By which
Word our Predecessors gave us to understand, That they were not to be conferred
upon any one Man: But here also the ancient Discipline is extinct, and one
Person is allowed to hold several Bishoprics together; which, in our Opinion,
ought by all Means to be rectified. To this Classis of Faults we may add those
which they call Unions; where several Benefices are souldered into Joints and
Members, to make up a Body of Preferment: But what is this but mocking and
ridiculing of the Canons? There is another Abuse likewise which has gained upon
us very much by Custom, and that is the bestowing Bishoprics upon Cardinals;
and sometimes several upon one Person: Now this is such an Irregularity, as we
believe carries a great Weight in it, and ought more especially to be reformed;
for the Office of a Cardinal and Bishop are distinct, and inconsistent with the
same Person. Cardinals were made on purpose, that they might constantly attend
your Holiness, and assist you in the Government of the Universal Church: But
the Duty of Bishops is to feed the Flock which God has committed to their
Charge; which cannot be done without being resident among them, no more than a
Shepherd can take care of his Sheep at a Distance: Besides this Practice does
us great Mischief in the Example; for with what Confidence, with what Face can
we pretend to correct those Vices in others, which are most apparent and
notorious in our own Society? Neither let them imagine that their Quality gives
them a greater Liberty than other Men: They should rather consider that
Reservedness and Moderation, is more particularly required of them, because
they ought to be exemplary in their Lives to others. For we are not to imitate
the Pharisees, who made Laws without any Regard to keep them; but to follow our
Savior his Example, who was mighty both in Word and Deed. We are likewise to
consider that such a Liberty as this has an ill effect upon their
Consultations, for a Man is neither fit to give nor take good Advice, when his
Mind is prepossessed with Ambition and Covetousness. To this we may add that
many of the Cardinals run after Princes Courts to get Bishoprics, which makes
them obnoxious and servile; so that they dare not speak their Minds freely upon
Occasion. Now it were to be wished this Custom were broken, and that the
Cardinals were provided some other way with a decent Support for themselves and
their Families: In which Appointment an Equality ought to be observed, and all
their yearly Revenues brought to the same Value: Which Expedient is easily made
practicable, if we would but disengage our selves from Secular Interest, and
conform to the Pattern our Savior has set us. And when these Corruptions are
removed, and the Church furnished with Pastors of sufficient Ability; there
must be particular Care taken that the Bishops, and those of a resembling
Function, may be obliged to live among their People; for they are as it were
the Churches Husbands. For what more deplorable Sight can there be, than to see
the Churches almost every where destitute, the Flocks abandoned by their own
Shepherds, and left in the Hands of Mercenaries? Those therefore who desert
their People ought to be severely punished: Neither should they be proceeded
against only by Ecclesiastical Censures and Proscriptions; but be likewise
deprived of their yearly Rents and Profits, unless they have procured a
Dispensation from your Holiness for some little time. For it is decreed by the
ancient Canons, that no Bishops shall be absent from his Church and People
above Three Weeks.

We may observe likewise that the greatest part of the Cardinals live out of
Rome, and perform nothing of that which is properly their Office. It Is true we
confess it proper enough, that some of them should reside in their respective
Countries: For like the Roots and Branches of Trees, they carry both Support
and Ornament to Religion along with them, and their being spread all over
Christendom, helps to keep People in order, and makes them more observant and
dutiful to the Holy See: Yet it would be much better if your Holiness would
recall most of them to Rome; for this would give them an Opportunity of
discharging their Office; and their Presence would be both creditable and
useful to the Court. A due Severity of Discipline is also very much wanting in
the inflicting of Penalties and Censures: For those who have transgressed, and
deserve to be punished, find out a way to get themselves exempted from the
Jurisdiction of their Bishop or other Ordinary; or if they cannot do this, they
apply themselves to the Penitentiary, and buy off their Punishment: Which is
done most frequently by those in Holy Orders, and is a very scandalous and
offensive Practice. And therefore we beseech your Holiness, by the Blood of
Christ, who has redeemed, washed, and sanctified his Church, That there may be
an effectual Course taken to prevent the granting such licencious Favors as
these. For if no State can continue in being without suppressing of Wickedness
and Vice, how much stricter Provision ought we to make against all such
Disorders in the Church? There are likewise a great many ill Examples among the
Religious; and therefore we think it advisable that those Monks who are called
Conventuals, should have their Society dissolved, not by any sudden Violence,
but by degrees; refusing to admit any Person into that Order for the future. By
this Means they will decay by little and little, and others of more approved
Conversations may be placed in their Rooms: And for present Remedy, all those
Youths who are not professed and under Vow, should be immediately removed from
them. Moreover great Care ought to be taken in the Choice of Confessors: And
here the Bishops ought to be very circumspect, especially that no
Ecclesiastical Affairs may be swayed by Money: For as we observed before, the
Spiritual Power ought to be communicated gratis; which Duty relates not only
to your self, but to all those who are preferred to any Cures under your
Holiness. In Nunneries also, were Confessions and other Religious Offices are
left to the Conduct of the Monks, a great deal of open and notorious Lewdness
is committed, and a scandalous Example given for the Encouragement of Vice; The
Monks therefore must be trusted with the Care of these Houses no longer, but
others placed in their stead, of less dangerous and suspicious Conversation.
Farther, in many Places, especially in Italy, ^everal ungodly Questions are
freely bandied and disputed, not only in Universities, but in Churches too;
which Custom is very much to be blamed. Therefore where there are public
Schools and Places of Education, the Bishops should be enjoined to give the
Preachers warning, not to controvert any thing of this nature for the future,
but to form the Minds of young People to a sense of Piety and the Fear of God;
and not to dispute about Divinity before the People, but privately among
themselves. The same Care is to be taken of Printers and Booksellers; and
Princes and other Magistrates must be cautioned not to suffer all sorts of
Books to be published: There is a Book commonly read in Schools, called Erasmus
his Colloquies, in which there are many things which may make a dangerous
Impression upon the Understandings of young and unwary People, and are apt to
pervert a floating and unsettled Age, which wants a sufficient Balast of
Principles and Gravity to keep it steady. This Book therefore, and others of
the same Tendency must be prohibited all Schools. The Liberty also which is
allowed professed Monks, to lay aside their proper Habits, and appear in
another, is, as we conceive, very unaccountable: For their Habit is a
symbolical Representation of their Religious Vow. Therefore if they refuse to
wear such a Badge, let them not be permitted to perform the Offices of
Clergymen, nor enjoy the Advantages of their Profession. And to enlarge this
Head of Abuses farther; Those Religious, who go strowling about with the
Relics of St. Anthony and other Saints, ought, in our Opinion to be cashiered:
For they draw the ignorant Vulgar into infinite Superstitions and Mistakes:
And, in plain Terms, cheat them in to the Bargain. We observe likewise that
those who are in Holy Orders are frequently allowed to Marry: Now this ought to
be granted to no body, except where the Reasons for such a Liberty are very
weighty; namely, when a whole Family, and the Security of a Country depends
upon the Issue of one particular Person. And here we are to insist the more
upon Rigor and Restraint, because the Lutherans allow Marriage to all Persons
without Distinction. Neither ought those to be permitted to marry (except the
Motives to dispense are very urgent) who are related, either by Consanguinity
or Affinity in the second prohibited Degree; but where the Kindred is somewhat
more remote there may be a greater Latitude given. Now all these Relaxations
most be granted for nothing, except when the Marriage is first consummated; for
then it may be lawful to fine the Parties in a sum of Money, to be immediately
spent upon good Uses.

To proceed, That Sin which has its Name from Simon Magus is now grown so
customary and reigning in the Church, that most People are not ashamed of it;
for they transgress without any manner of Modesty, and then endeavor to purge
away their Guilt by giving the Court Money; and yet hold their Livings
notwithstanding, which they have so wickedly procured for themselves. Indeed we
do not deny but that your Holiness may remit the Penalty they have deserved;
yet, to prevent the Occasion of Sinning, we think Severity necessary, and that
the Punishment ought to be exacted; for what is more infamous, more pernicious
in the Consequence, than bartering at this rate for Church Preferments? Father,
Care must be taken, That Clergymen may not give away any thing in Legacies,
which is raised out of the Revenues of the Church, except upon great Occasions;
that those who have no need may not be supplied (at the Disadvantage of the
Poor) with Materials for Extravagance and Luxury. Every one likewise has the
Liberty to have Divine Service in their private Houses, and to choose what
Priest they please to perform it: Now this ought not to be granted frequently,
nor without particular Reasons, for fear of making the Solemnities of Religion
grow Contemptible, and more especially the principal part of them, the
Sacrament. Those they call Indulgences, or Pardons of Sins, ought not to come
about so often, but be distributed only once a year, and in great Towns. Vows
should not be altered inconsiderately, nor discharged in any other
Performances, but those which agree with the Design of such a Religious
Obligation. We observe likewise, That the last Will and Testament of those
Persons who have happened to give a sum of Money for pious Uses, is sometimes
unfulfilled, upon pretense of the Poverty of the Heirs or Legatees: But it is
requisite this Practice should be narrowly enquired into, and not permitted but
when this Poverty happens in such a manner after the Death of the Testator,
that in all probability, if he had been living, he would have altered his Will
himself: For otherwise it is Wickedness to alter that which a Man is supposed to
will, the last thing which he does in this World.

And now, having given an Account as far as our Memories would serve us, of
what concerns the Church in general, we shall add some few things more, which
relate particularly to the Pope and Bishop of Rome. And in regard this City and
Church of Rome is the Parent and Mistress of all Churches, She has an
extraordinary Obligation upon her to exceed all others in Religion and Decency
of Living: But notwithstanding, there are a great many ignorant and slovenly
Priests belonging to the Cathedral of St. Peter, who are so meanly and
scandalously habited, both in respect of their own Cloths, and the Vestments of
their Office, that it would be a very ill Sight for them to appear in that
manner, if it were only in ordinary and private Houses. And in this indecent
Garb they perform Divine Service, to the great Dissatisfaction of those who are
present. Therefore Order must be given to the Archpriest, or to the
Penitentiary, That all such offensive Negligence may be removed out of the way,
first in this Town, and afterward in other places. But then what Complaint is
sharp enough against those shameless Strumpets, who are suffered to appear in
the same Dress and Figure with other Women of Virtue and Condition; who ride
upon Mules through the most public places of the Town at noon Day, and have
part of the Retinue of Cardinals of the first Quality, and such extraordinary
Attendance to wait upon them. Truly we must needs say we never saw such Marks
of Dissoluteness and Debauchery in any other Town but in that which ought to
be, as it were, the Pattern and Original for all the World to draw after and
imitate: And to make their Grandeur Uniform, these lewd Women are permitted to
dwell in stately Houses, to the great Scandal of the place. There are likewise
in this Town very great Feuds and Factions: Now it is your Holiness's Concern to
make up all these Breaches, and it would be very proper for you to put the
Management of this Affair into the Hands of a certain number of Cardinals, who
are likely to be most successful; to the End that all Differences may be
composed, and the Townsmen reconciled to one another. Lastly, The Maintenance
and Protection of the Poor and Widows, does in a more particular Manner belong
to you.

These, may it please your Holiness, are the Disorders which we conceive ought
to be corrected: And though we were not sufficiently qualified to perform the
Task you have laid upon us; yet because we have done our best, we are satisfied
with the Discharge of our Consciences, and your Government gives us great Hopes
of an Effectual Reformation, and that we shall have the Satisfaction to see the
Church regular in the Conversation of her Members, decent in her
Administrations, and undisturbed in her Communion; and your Holiness's Memory
immortalized upon this Account. You have taken the Name of Paul upon you, and
therefore we hope you will endeavor the Welfare of the Church, with the fame
generous Affection which he did. God chose St. Paul, that he might make him a
remarkable and extraordinary Instrument in publishing his Kingdom to the
Gentiles. So also we hope you are chosen to recover the ancient Luster of
Christianity, which is somewhat Eclipsed at present; to heal the public
Distempers, to bring the Flock of Christ into one Fold, and to avert the Wrath
of God, which hangs over us for our Sins.

Thus this Reformation was drawn into a Scheme, but it was neither put in
practice nor made public. 1538.
The Pope at last prorogued the Council again, from the first of November till
the first of May following; The Pope prorogues the Council again.
and appoints Vicenza for the place, (which is a large City, and well served
with Provisions, in the Territory of the Venetians) and dispatched away three
Cardinals, who were to open the Council, and receive those who came thither.

The Pope, as was before observed, had a mind to carry the Business of the
Reformation privately; but it was not long before it came to light: And as soon
as an Account of it was brought into Germany Luther wrote against it in High
Dutch, and John Sturmius in Latin, and addressed themselves in their Answer to
the Reformers. In Luther's Book a Man needs only look upon the Cut in the
Frontispiece to understand his Argument: Luther writes a Book against the
Reformation of the Papists.
For the Pope is represented fitting upon a high Throne, and several of the
Cardinals placed about him, who, with Foxes Tails tied at the End of Poles,
brush down all the Cobwebs both above and below.

Nicholas, Cardinal and Archbishop of Capua; one who was violent against all
Reformation, was in the Consistory when this Matter was farther debated: This
Man, who was certainly believed to be sent thither on purpose by the Pope,
bestirred him mightily that nothing might be reformed; and among other
Arguments urged, That if his Advice was not taken, the Lutherans would brag,
that they had, as it were, forced them to put things into better Order. This
Cardinal was so prevalent, that the Pope and the Fathers were persuaded at last
not to make any Alterations: And yet this very Man, who hindered the
Reformation, is said to have sent a Copy of it privately into Germany, to a
Friend of his; which most People thought he did to expose the Pope and his
Reformers. Others are of Opinion the Pope was not unwilling to let this Book
come out, because he might imagine it might show him inclinable to correct the
Abuses in the Church, and this Men were to understand by the bye; as if he
would have given them a larger Draught of Amendments if he had thought any
thing of this nature would have been published.

Now concerning Erasmus his Colloquies, which the Cardinals found fault with,
the case stands thus: This Author amongst many other Works, with which he
wonderfully promoted the Advancement of Learning, wrote a little Book by way of
Dialogue, for the use of young People; and when he understood it was very
kindly received he afterward enlarged it. And being a person of incomparable
Sense and Elocution, he diverts his Reader with variety of Arguments drawn from
Conversation, and such familiar Subjects as all people are acquainted with:
Where, with admirable Address, and a most entertaining Style, he intermixes
moral and pious Discourses; and sometimes upon Occasion, reflects upon the old
overgrown Errors and Corruptions of the Church; which was the reason the
Cardinals complained against him.

In February the French King makes Anne Montmorency, who was Lord Steward of
his Household, Montmorency made Constable of France.
Master of the Horse; they call it Constable of France, which is the highest
Honor the Subject is capable of. This Office had been kept void about fifteen
Years, ever since Charles Duke of Bourbon enjoyed it: For the King was so
extremely offended with his Revolt, that he would not trust any other Person
with it till now. Besides this Station has been unfortunate to several others
before, who by their irregular Management of so great a Power, have either
provoked the King or the Nobility.

In the mean time, The Protestants meet at Brunswick.
about the latter end of May, the Protestants meet at Brunswick, there they
treat of Matters relating to the League, and receive Christian, King of
Denmark, into it. He was Son to Frederick, and was converted to the Reformed
Religion; and committed the Modelling and Government of his Churches to John of
Pomeren, whom he had sent for from Wittenb^rg, and was crowned by him. John
Marquess of Brandenburg, Brother to Joachim the Elector, desired the Duke of
Saxony to move the Convention, that he might be admitted into the League: The
Duke therefore had a Commission to treat with him after he came home, upon
certain Conditions, and to receive him in the Name of the whole Party. The same
thing was desired by Albert, Duke of Prussia, who was Six Years since outlawed
by the Imperial Chamber, which was the principal Reason why the Protestants did
not admit him into their Society; however they all promised to be kind to him.
When the Elector of Saxony, the Lantgrave, and their Friends, were upon their
Journey to this Convention, Henry Duke of Brunswick denied to give them a safe
Conduct through his Territories: For now he was contriving a War against them,
as will appear afterward. In the Retinue of the Elector of Saxony, there was
one Maurice, a young Gentleman of Seventeen Years of Age, Nephew to George Duke
of Saxony, by Henry his Brother. This Henry was a Protestant, therefore the
Elector took his Son Maurice, who was his Kinsman into his own Tuition. The
King of Denmark also came himself to Brunswick.

In the Ninth Book I mentioned the Persecution of the Lutherans in France, A
young Gentleman of Toulouse is burnt at Paris.
the Particulars of which will be tedious to relate; but this Year upon the
Fifteenth Day of April, which was Nine Days before Easter, a young Gentleman of
Toulouse, about Twenty Years of Age, and a studious Person, was burnt at Paris
for eating Flesh: It Is true he was not burned perfectly alive, but hanged over
a Fire; where the Gallows was so contrived, that he must in some measure feel
the Flames which were kindled under him; which way of Execution was granted him
as a customary Favor of that place, because, before he came out of Prison, he
confessed he had done a wicked and irreligious Action; into which Confession he
was overawed by Judge Morin, who took some Pains with him to fright him: But
this was all he got by his Submission; for Repentance goes for no more there,
than only to procure a Man some abatements of Torture in dying: But those who
continue firm, are executed with the utmost Severity, as has been shown
already. There was likewise Three Low Country Men in the same Danger, and upon
the same Occasion; but having notice of it given them by a Gentleman of the
Parliament, a Man of great Sense and Learning, they secured themselves by
Flight.

In May the Pope takes a Journey to Nice de Provence, a Port Town belonging to
the Duke of Savoy, whether the Emperor and the French King came also, chiefly
at his Request. The Emperor sailed with his Fleet from Spain; but the King took
his Progress up the Continent, having a Body of Germans among the rest of his
Attendance, commanded by William of Furstenburg. After a long Debate, though
they could not agree in the main, yet in June they concluded a Truce for Ten
Years. And here Margaret, the Emperor's natural Daughter, was contracted to
Octavius, the Pope's Grandchild, by his Son. This Lady was courted before by
Cosmo, Duke of Florence, after the Death of Alexander di Medici. The Kings had
not their Interview at this place, though the Pope desired it very much: But
some few days after he went away they met at Aigues Mortes, An Enterview of the
Emperor and the French King at Aigues Mortes.
a Town in Languedoc, situate at the Mouth of the Rhone; the Ancients called it
Marius his Ditch: Here the Emperor landed with his Fleet upon the Seventeenth
Day of July, in his Return to Spain: But before he reached the Port, the French
King sent Velius, his Admiral, with several Galleys, to attend his Imperial
Majesty; who, when he had sailed almost up to Aigues, the Constable of France
came, and entreated him, That he would let his Fleet come to an Anchor in the
Haven, for the King would be there within Two Hours, and wait upon him in his
Galley. Accordingly the Emperor made the Port as soon as those Ships came up
which had lost the Body of the Fleet, by reason of a Mist which fell the Day
before. Not long after the King came, and went in a Shallop to the Fleet,
having in his Train Anthony, Duke of Lorrain, and the Cardinal his Brother. The
Emperor came as far as the Ladder of the Galley to meet him, and there handed
him in: Where it is not to be expressed what Embracings and Ceremony passed
between them. After they were seated in the Stern, those Noblemen who attended
the Emperor, made very low and respectful Reverences to the French King: There
the Emperor ordered Granvell to bring Andrew Doria, Prince of Melfi, his
Admiral, into their Presence, to pay his Respects to the French King, from whom
he had revolted Ten Years since, as was observed in the Sixth Book: When he
came the King saluted him by his Title, and told him, since he was a Friend and
Servant of the Emperor's, and that it was his Pleasure he should see him, he
would gratify his Majesty in that point, whom he esteemed as a Brother. After
they had conversed about an Hour, in a familiar and obliging way, the King took
his Leave. The next day, early in the Morning, the Emperor orders public
Notice to be given to all the Galleys, That no Man should go ashore; but
himself, attended with several Noblemen, makes up to Land, in order to dine
with the King: As soon as he came to the Key, the King and Queen, and their two
Sons receive him with all the Civility imaginable, and conduct him to their
Palace^ When it was Evening the Emperor sent word to Andrew Doria, who stayed
on Board, That the King, and Queen his Sister, had prevailed with him to lodge
in Town that Night; and that he would return to his Galley the next Day, after
Dinner: Which Notice he gave him, that he might not suspect any foul Play: And
accordingly the next Day the Emperor put to Sea again, being accompanied
thither by the King and the whole Court: And after they had drank together for
some time in the Galley, they took their Leaves, with all possible
Demonstrations of Friendship. When this Entertainment was known in Paris, and
in other places of France, they went in Procession to the Churches of the
Saints, according to the usual Custom, and made public Bonefires. The Pope had
endeavored to persuade them at Nice de Provence, That now, since a Truce was
concluded, they would go in Person to the Council at Vicenza, and send those
Prelates they had in their Train thither, and summon in those who were absent:
But when they excused themselves, and told him they could do neither; The Pope
prorogues the Council.
and his Cardinal Legates, whom he had sent to Vicenza had acquainted him that
there was no Company come thither, he prorogueth the Council again, till Easter
following, and gives public Notice of it by his Bulls upon the Nineteenth of
June, when he was at Genua, in order to his Return to Rome. At their first
Meeting the French King kissed the Pope's right Foot as he sat in his Chair:
Which Respect was likewise paid by most of the rest of his Nobles; yet there
were some in the King's Train who refused to submit to this Ceremony, though
the Constable put them in mind of it. These Refusers were Christopher Duke of
Wirtenberg, William Count Furstenburg, Germans; Marshall la March, a French
Man; and George Gluck, Ambassador of the King of Denmark.

Just about this time Charles Count Egmond, Charles Count Egmond dies.
Duke of Guelderland died. How he was outed of almost all his Dominions, I gave
an Account in the last Book: And being reduced to this Extremity, when he fell
sick, he treated with the Duke of Cleves, his near Relation, and with the
consent of his Nobility and People bequeathed the Duchy of Guelderland to him;
with the Acceptance of which the Emperor was very much offended, as shall be
shown in its proper place. Erard Bishop of Liege his Death.
A little before this time Erard Count Mark, Cardinal and Bishop of Liege,
departed this Life; than whom, none was more severe against the Reformers. He
ordered a very rich Tomb to be made for him a great many years before, in the
Cathedral at Liege, and had those funeral Dirges and Ceremonies which the
Papists use for the Dead, performed anniversarily for him; imagining that those
Services of the Priests, which they account Meritorious, and believe Eternal
Life is due to them, would do him most Good when he was alive. But those who
pretended to know the Man more intimately, said he did all this out of a Spirit
of Vanity, because his ambitious Humor was pleased with the Solemnity of the
Office.

About this time there was an English Bible printed at Paris, which the King
had ordered to be sent to all the Churches in England: But when it was known it
was prohibited, and the Printer was in some Danger about it. In France the Holy
Scriptures are not commonly to be met with in the Language of the Country: It Is
enough there to make a man suspected, if he happens to read the New Testament,
or any thing of that Nature in French: For none but Divines, and such sort of
People, are allowed so much as to meddle with, or enquire into the Scriptures:
As for the generality of the Laity, they are altogether Ignorant: The Citizens
Wives, when they go to Mass, carry Latin Prayers to Church with them, and
patter them over at their rate, but understand nothing of the matter; being
verily persuaded that this Way is much more acceptable to God than if they
should pray in French. This Notion those Priests have insinuated into them, who
make their Advantage of the Ignorance of the People.

In the beginning of August the Pope returned to Rome, where the Citizens
received him in the most triumphant and respectful Manner imaginable; for their
Streets were hung and made sine every where, and there was plenty of
panegyrical Papers and Inscriptions to be seen, in which they magnified him at
a very extraordinary rate, for settling Peace in the World again, and
reconciling the Two great Monarchs.

This Year there was a College or School for young People opened at Strasburg;
James Sturmius, a Senator of considerable Note, being the principal Contriver
and Promoter of this Design; which, by the Care of those who were appointed to
govern and teach, gained such a Reputation in a short time, that not only the
most remote Germans, but Foreigners also came thither in great Numbers. But the
Management of the Students, the throwing them, as it were, into distinct
Classes, and the whole Method of Teaching, was first reported to the Senate by
John Sturmius, and afterward published more at large by him in Print. And when
a great many People were forced, to leave France, and the Netherlands, upon the
account of Religion, the Senate of Strasburg assigned a Church to those who
came thither, and gave them Leave to incorporate themselves in a distinct Body:
John Calvin of Noyon was Pastor of this Church for some Years, and was
succeeded by Peter Brulius, of whose Death I shall speak afterward.

Now to go for England a little while: Thomas of Canterbury.
Thomas of Canterbury had a mighty Veneration paid him by that Nation, which
had continued for some Ages: His Body was laid in a magnificent Tomb,
inestimably enriched with Gold and Jewels; but King Henry fetched him out this
Year, and burned his Bones: This Thomas, Surnamed Beckett, was formerly
Archbishop of Canterbury; who, when by defending the Privileges of the Clergy
with too much vehemence, had very much displesed King Henry II. and was
commanded to depart the Kingdom; he addressed himself to Pope Alexander III.
who was then in France, upon the account of the Difference there was between
him and Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor. At last, by the Intercession of this
Pope, and the French King, Lewis VII. the King of England was reconciled to
him, and permitted him to return home, after he had been banished Seven Years.
But upon his growing troublesome to some of the Bishops, and interdicting them
for being of the King's Side in the Dispute; the King was provoked again, and
said with some Passion, That he looked upon himself as a miserable Person,
otherwise it would not have been in the Power of one single Priest to give him
such perpetual Disturbance; and seemed to bewail the Unfortunateness of his
Condition, that he had never a Subject that would rid him of this Plague. These
Words made a singular Impression upon some of his Courtiers, who imagining it
would not be unacceptable to the King, set forward to Canterbury, where they
murdered Thomas, and plundered his Houses. But the King, when he heard of it,
pretended to be extraordinary sorry, and dispatched away Ambassadors to Rome,
to purge himself, who at last prevailed with the Pope to send some Persons over
into England, to enquire into the Murder: And when the Pope had sent over Two
Cardinals, with Authority to act in this Affair, and no Person upon Examination
could be proved Guilty, the King clears himself by Oath; but because of his
former Displeasure against the Archbishop, and some extraordinary Expressions
let fall by him, it was thought he was to be a little suspected and blamed,
therefore his Peace was at last made upon these Terms, viz. That he should show
the Clergy all manner of Favor for the future; that within Three Years he
should go in Person against the Saracens, and march his Army into Syria. This
Murder was committed in the Year 1171. Not long after, Thomas (as they say)
begun to work Miracles, and grew famous upon it; which when the Pope understood
by his Legates, he had him Canonized.

At the time of the Interview at Nice de Provence, The Elector of Brandenburg
sends an Ambassador to the Elector of Saxony.
Joachim Elector of Brandenburg, and Son of Joachim, sends Eustachius Sclebius
his Ambassador, to the Elector of Saxony in the beginning of June, with these
Instructions: That Sigismund King of Poland, and John Vaivod King of Hungary,
had acquainted him that the Turk was making very formidable Preparations to
take in Buda and fortify it, that he may make another Descent upon Germany with
the better Advantage; That the Sultan had signified thus much to the Vaivod.
Now, in regard his Father was enjoined in the Diet of the Empire, to acquaint
the rest of the States with whatever he could learn concerning the Motions of
the Turks, therefore he thought himself obliged in Duty to the Commonwealth, to
give this Notice, and was very much troubled at the News, because he was afraid
it would prove a general Calamity to Germany. For this and other Reasons he
lately took a Journey into Lusace, to King Ferdinand, whom he found
preacquainted with this Invasion; and while he was there, his Majesty received
fresh Accounts of it, both by Letters and Expresses. Therefore if these
Encroachments were not checked, they might be assured. That they who were in
the Neighborhood of the War, should shortly see the barbarous Enemy in their
own Country: For all the way from Buda to his Electoral Highness his
Territories, and his own, there was neither Castle nor fortified Town, which
was able to hold out against so great an Army; no River, no mountainous
Marches, no Defiles or straight Passages, to stop his Progress, excepting
Breslaw and Lignite: And what an open and fruitful Country Moravia and Silesia
is, his Highness knows too well to need any Information concerning the Quality
and Situation of them. And notwithstanding the Prospect of the common Danger
had made him promise his Assistance to King Ferdinand upon his Request, yet it
was plain such a Supply as that would signify nothing: For the Opposition and
Consequences they have reason to expect, are so considerable, that they require
no less than the united Forces and Contributions of the whole Empire. Now
because this cannot be had but in a public Diet, and by bringing all the
Germans to a good Understanding between themselves; and the Danger is so far
advanced upon us, that it will not bear any long Delay to Debate its
Prevention; therefore he had importuned the King in his last Conference with
him, that he would use his utmost Endeavors, that the Peace of the Empire
might be established within it self upon a firm and legal Foundation. To this
Request King Ferdinand, who tenders the Good of the Commonwealth, and has an
Esteem for his Electoral Highness, gave an obliging Answer, and promised him
his Interest; and that he would recommend the Proposal to the Emperor, as soon
as he understood what his Highness and the rest of the Confederates desired:
And since the Case stands thus he entreats him to consider it, and to acquaint
him freely with those Terms which he thinks it proper to insist upon in the
Treaty of Peace: And then he will undertake that Ferdinand shall intercede with
the Emperor in his own Name; and does not question but that those Proceedings
will be of great Advantage to the Commonwealth: Moreover at this time it was
much easier to repel the Turkish Invasion than formerly, because the Difference
between the Vaivod and Ferdinand was adjusted; this the King had acquainted him
with as a Secret, not being willing such a Report should be made public, least
the Sultan should know it. Hitherto a great part of Hungary has been embroiled
by the Christians engaging in a civil War with each other; but now, seeing they
stand upon good Terms, and all Discontents are removed, a very fair Opportunity
for Action presents it self, which makes him the more importunate in his
Entreaties with his Highness, whom he once again desires that he would join in
the common Cause of the Empire. This Joachim was married to Sigismund, the King
of Poland his Daughter, who was John Vaivod his Niece, by his Sister. This
Alliance was the occasion of that intimate Friendship and Familiarity between
them. The Elector also was of the Lutheran Religion, and published a Book
concerning it; but he refused to come into the League, and was in other
Respects entirely devoted to the Emperor and Ferdinand. In his Reformation he
retained some thing more than ordinary of the Ceremonies, The Answer of the
Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave to the Elector of Brandenburg.
and was of a reconciling Temper. The Elector of Saxony immediately gives the
Lantgrave an account of this whole Matter in a Letter; and afterward upon the
Twelfth of June, they both of them write an Answer to the Brandenburger, to
this effect; Although the present Affair is of such importance that it ought to
be communicated to their Confederates, yet they are very sensible of the
Inconvenience of Delays, especially seeing the Turk is as Enterprizing as ever;
and that they have spent too much time already in debating the Measures for the
Settlement of Germany, and opposing the Infidels with the whole strength of the
Empire. For as to their preparation for a Defense against so Savage an Enemy,
which his Electoral Highness pressed by his Ambassador, he was certainly in the
right, the Interest of the State requiring no less: But their Circumstances
were such, that a Peace among themselves was absolutely necessary for them; a
Peace that was fair and honorable, likely to hold, and not drawn up in
ambiguous Terms: For His Highness could not but see how unsafe and imprudent it
must be for them to exhaust themselves upon the Turkish War, when their
Neighbors had not laid down their Quarrels and Animosities against them. As
for them, they were very desirous of Peace, but if they could not obtain it,
and therefore did not detach any of their Forces for Foreign Service, while
things looked so suspiciously at Home, and the Empire should receive any
prejudice by such a Conduct, the Fault could not in any measure be charged upon
them, but wholly upon those who refused to hearken to an Accommodation.
Besides, in their Opinion, its the Interest of King Ferdinand and those other
Princes who lie nearest the Turks, to have these Proposals reported to all the
States. Neither is it for the Advantage of the Commonwealth that Diets should
be discontinued thus long; for though sometimes a supply must be so suddenly
raised, that a public Decree cannot intervene, so that it is necessary to
solicit for Contributions and Aid, in a private way; yet the Turk is so
powerful a Prince, that he is able to carry on the War for many Years, and it is
probable, will not desist till he has either gained his Point, or received
some signal Defeat; therefore they conceive a Diet of the Empire is clearly
necessary, both to settle the Peace of Germany, and make a standing Provision
for the Turkish War; which last Point is of such Consequence, that though all
things were quiet in Germany, yet there ought to be a general Convention held.
Neither is it any material Obstruction, supposing King Ferdinand's Affairs will
not permit him to represent the Emperor at the Diet, provided proper
Ambassadors are sent thither with sufficient power to Treat. Now if he can
secure this Point, the Emperor and all Germany will be very much advantaged by
it. Nevertheless, that they may not be behind hand in their Service to the
Commonwealth, nor any ways obstruct his Highness's Interest, they would take
care to have their usual proportion of supplies in a readiness for this
Occasion. Neither did they doubt but that their Confederates would do the same,
provided King Ferdinand would procure them a firm and unquestionable Peace with
the Emperor, Signed by the rest of the Princes of the Empire of the Roman
Catholic Religion. If this was once done, and the process of the Imperial
Chamber stopped, their Contributions would be ready in a short time. And if the
Emperor has not leisure enough at present to persuade all those Princes to
acquiesce in this proposal, then let him bring these following at least over to
his own Opinion, viz. William and Lewis Dukes of Bavaria, George Duke of
Saxony, the Bishops of Mentz, Cologne, Triers, Saltzburg, Magdeburg, Bremen,
Bamberg, Wurtzburg, Munster, Ausburg and Aichstet. And if it should happen that
these could not be prevailed on neither, that then the Emperor and Ferdinand
should ratify the Peace in their own Names, and conclude all their Subjects,
promising likewise to use their endeavors to gain the assent of the other
Princes; and if they refuse to engage, yet their Majesty's shall be obliged to
stand to their Articles, and Assemble a Diet at the first Opportunity, for the
adjusting of this and other Affairs. If this Satisfaction be granted, they hope
their Allies will contribute their proportion to the War, as themselves have
resolved to do, provided their Confederates are of the same Opinion; and that
both those who came into the League after the Treaty at Nuremberg, and those
who desire to be admitted for the time to come, may be comprehended in the
Pacification; and lastly, that this Peace may not be limited to the Princes of
the Empire, but extend also to the King of Denmark. And to show how inclinable
they were to Peace, in regard a Diet could not meet suddenly, they would
appoint a Convention of their Confederates in the mean time, and give them
notice to repair to Eysenach upon the Twenty-fourth of July, with full power to
Treat. Therefore his Highness will do very well, to endeavor that the
Emperor's, King Ferdinand's, and the Palsgrave's Ambassadors may be sent
thither together with his own. When they had sent this Answer, they writ to
their Confederates and desire them to be upon the place at Eysenach, a Town in
Thuringia, at the time before mentioned. The Elector of Brandenburg had
acquainted them by his Ambassador, that if they were willing to come upon a
Treaty, he would take care that the Palsgrave, who was heartily concerned for
the Public, should do them the best Service he could. When they wrote to the
Elector of Brandenburg, they sent him likewise the whole Debate which passed
between Eldo and the Protestants at Smalcald, that he might have a perfect
understanding of the matter. The Brandenburger as soon as he had received this
Answer, entreats Ferdinand that he would expedite this Affair with the Emperor
before he returned out of Italy into Spain. Afterward he desires the Palsgrave
to join with him in the promoting this Accommodation: The Palsgrave answered,
that he was not unwilling to assist in this Business, though none of the
Protestants had desired him to appear in it. But now those persons whom he used
to consult upon such Occasions were not at hand; however he puts his Highness
in mind to send some of his Council thither by all means, A Convention at
Eysenach.
and if there was any need of his being there, he promised not to be wanting to
the Occasion. Now as soon as they were convened, the Elector of Brandenburg
ordered his Agents (for neither he nor the Palsgrave were present) to acquaint
the Elector of Saxony first, then the Lantgrave, and afterward all the rest,
with what he had heard and done: He also desired that they would entreat the
Palsgrave to take the Trouble of this Affair upon him, and assign a Day for
another Meeting; and in the mean time the Emperor might be prevailed upon to
assent to the expedient of a Treaty, and to order it to begin. Moreover he
prayed them that they would show themselves fair and tractable, and yield as
much as possibly they could with a safe Conscience. As for Ferdinand he would
omit nothing which might promote the Accommodation, neither did he question,
but that the Emperor's Inclinations also tended very much the same way. To this
the Protestants at Eysenach gave their Answer the Fifth of August, in which
they acquaint him, That they were very desirous to conferr about the
establishing a Peace, upon condition they had an Order from the Emperor to
authorize and support their Debate: They tell him likewise, That though they do
not conceive it necessary to solicit the Palsgrave in this Case, who is
already inclinable to assist them, and because if the Emperor commands him to
interpose, they are assured he will not deny his Majesty, yet they are resolved
to write to him, and when they have received the Emperor's Order, the Day of
the Convention for the managing of the Treaty shall be set, by the direction of
the Palsgrave and his Electoral Highness. In this Convention Elizabeth the
Lantgrave's Sister, being a Widow, was received into the League, Hall and
Hailbrun likewise desired to be admitted; the dispatching of which Affair was
referred to the Agents of Ausburg and Vlme. Here every ones Complaints were
heard and examined, particularly the Cause of the Burghers of Gostar, who were
very hardly used by Henry Duke of Brunswick; therefore it was Decreed, That the
Elector of Brandenburg should be solicited, that Ferdinand, amongst his other
Requests to the Emperor, might procure his Order to oblige the Duke of
Brunswick to appear in Court and stand a Trial; for unless this was done, the
Case of the Goslarians would be so very ill, and their usage was so
unreasonable, that they could not desert them in such an Extremity. At this
place they received an account of the Truce between the Emperor and the French
King, and upon the Ninth of August the Assembly broke up.

This Year the Sect of the Antinomians began. The Rise of the Antinomians.
Their Opinion is, That Repentance ought not to be urged from the consideration
of the breach of the Decalogue, and dispute against those who maintained that
Men are not to have the Gospel preached to them till their Minds are alarmed
and worked into Compunction by the Doctrine of the Law. But they assert on the
contrary, That let a Man's Life be never so Scandalous and Debauched, yet if he
does but believe the promises of the Gospel he shall be justified. Johannes
Islebius Agricola was their Leading-Man; but this Heresy was soon confuted at
large by Luther, where he shows, That the Law was not given that we might be
justified by it, but to discover the nature and malignity of Sin, and to
terrify the Conscience; and therefore it is to be pressed in the first place;
afterward the Gospel is to be explained, which represents the Son of God to us
as a Mediator, and Propitation for the whole World. At last Islebius was better
informed, and came over to Luther's Opinion; having first received some private
Instruction by him, and compared one place of Scripture with another: And after
he had recovered himself, he made a public Confession of his Error in Print.

In the last Book I mentioned the Emperor's sending Eldo his Ambassador into
Germany: This Gentleman not being pleased with the Answer he received at
Smalcald, applied himself to most of the Princes; where, after he had reflected
upon the Protestants (as if they would not be governed by any Rules of Justice
or Law, and had refused a Peace which he offered them upon the most reasonable
Terms) he began to solicit them to enter into a League, which, he told them,
was the Proposal of the Emperor and Ferdinand; neither did he give over
tampering till he had effected his Design with some of them: Those who engaged
were the Archbishops of Mentz and Saltzburg, William and Lewis Dukes of
Bavaria, The Papists Holy League.
George Duke of Saxony, Ericus and Henry Dukes of Brunswick. For the settling of
this Affair, there was a Convention at Nuremberg, where the League was
concluded, with this Condition in the Head of it, That if any Person was
molested for professing the Roman, or as they called it, the Old Religion,
there should be Supplies ready to assist him: Therefore they called it a Holy
League, as if it had been made only for the Glory of God, and the Protection of
the Church: They decreed likewise, it should continue Eleven Years.

The French King in his Return from Nice de Provence, 1539.
had a Conference with Mary the Emperor's Sister, at Compiegne, a Town in Le
Soissonois. Some thought this Lady contrived her self in his Way on purpose, An
Interview between the French King and Mary Regent of Flanders.
that she might take an Opportunity, now the Truce and friendly Interview at
Aigues Mortes was just over, to alienate the King from William Duke of Cleves,
who was possessed of Guelderland; and that the Color of so great a Friendship
gained by the Emperor, might make the Duke very fearful and concerned about his
own Security.

I have often mentioned the Proceedings of the Chamber of Spire. Now these
Gentlemen were constant to their Humor, and would not make the lest Abatement
of the Rigor or Extent of their Court, of which they gave a late Instance, in
Proscribing (or Outlawing) Minden, Minden is proscribed by the Chamber.
for a Suit which the Clergy of that Town had commenced against the Burghers;
which Sentence was publicly proclaimed abroad in open Air, according to the
usual Solemnity of that place. When this was known, the Elector of Saxony, and
the Lantgrave, published a Remonstrance in the Name of themselves, and their
Confederates, dated November the Fifteenth: In which they set forth, in order,
what Regulations the Chamber had been under for some Years past (as I have
already shown in several places.) But since they will not endure to be quiet,
but go on at their old rate of Obstinacy, notwithstanding their Jurisdiction
has been unexceptionably demurred to, and have Proscribed the Confederates of
Minden in this manner; therefore they desire all Princes and States to look
upon their Sentence as unjust, and not suffer themselves to be transported into
any Act of Violence: For if things were otherwise carried, and there should
happen to be any Executions of the Sentence, they could not put up such
Injuries done to their Allies.

In the mean time the Emperor, at the Solicitation of King Ferdinand, writes
into Germany, to give them fresh Assurances of his Affection to the Empire, and
how willing he was to take up the present Differences about Religion: And
acquaints them that the French King had the same Inclinations; for he had
lately treated with him concerning the common Interests of Christendom: And
receiving Advice some few Days since, That the Protestants are peaceably
inclined, and very desirous of a Treaty, provided they have his Order and
Consent to begin it: He therefore, who values nothing more than the public
Tranquillity, cannot but approve this Method; and accordingly has constituted
the Archbishop of Lunden, and Matthias Eldo, or either of them, his
Ambassadors, and given them full Power, acting in Conjunction with the Agents
of his Brother, King Ferdinand, and the other Princes of the Mediation, to
debate and conclude the whole Matter, and will oblige himself to ratify their
Agreement. This Letter was dated at Toledo, November the Twenty fifth, and when
it was delivered in Germany, the Twelfth of February was appointed for a
general Convention at Frankfort.

I have already mentioned the League concluded at Nuremberg, in which, Lewis
Duke of Bavaria, and Henry Duke of Brunswick, were the leading Men; which
latter was very active to disturb the Peace of the Empire, and made it his
Business to get the War begun upon the Protestants. Now he having received a
Letter lately from the Archbishop of Mentz, returned him a short Answer upon
St. Stephen's Day, The Lantgrave intercepts the Duke of Brunswick's Letters.
entrusting Stephen Faber his Secretary with the rest, whom he sent to him with
Instructions: But upon the Thirtieth of December the Lantgrave, as he was going
a Hunting near Cassell, lights upon him having none but a Young Man of Mentz
with him, who carried his Letters. The Lantgrave, according to the Custom of
Germany, asks the Young Man, who met him first, on purpose, Who he was? he
told him he was a Servant to the Elector of Brandenburg. Who is the other? He
is so too. When Stephen came up, the Lantgrave asked him who he was? He gave
him the same Answer with the Young Man; Whither he was going? To Spire. How did
the Duke do? Very well. Afterward being asked whether he would vouch the Truth
of what he had said upon the word of an Honest Man? He told him Yes, and so was
dismissed: But the Lantgrave had rid but a very little way before one of his
Servants comes and tells him, that this person was Secretary to Henry of
Brunswick, which being confirmed by another who had an Opportunity of knowing
him, the Lantgrave orders the Man to be fetched back and carried to Cassell
till he came from Hunting. In the mean time Stephen, who was secured in a
Stove, pulls out a Leathern Bag from under his Coat, and snatches some Letters
out of it, and makes out of Doors as fast as he could; this one of the Servants
taking notice of, immediately gives a private hint of it to the
Lord-Chamberlain of the Household, who was there by chance, and looked down into
the Court out of a Chamber-Window. Stephen therefore being examined about his
Letters produced them, upon which the Lord Chamberlain took them into his
Custody, and delivered them to the Lantgrave at his return. Now there were two
Letters taken from him; one for the Elector of Mentz, and the other for
Matthias Eldo; these Letters had Notes or little Table Books tacked to them, in
which he had set down the Heads of his Instructions. These Circumstances
therefore raising a violent suspicion of something more than ordinary,
especially because of the Notes, made the Lantgrave open them both; the
Contents of that to the Elector of Mentz was, That he had received his
Highnesses Letter, and was glad that he was pleased to remember him upon all
accounts; for his part he was entirely at his Highness's Service, and had now
sent his Secretary Stephen, a Person of approved Fidelity, to acquaint him with
every thing material, particularly with the News out of Bavaria; therefore he
desires that he would give credit to him. Afterward he gives the Elector and
his Friends his good Wishes, but sends the other party to the Devil. The Tenor
of his Letter to Eldo was much the same, he told him, He had sent Stephen to
him again with ^nstructions, and desired he would receive him kindly and
believe him as much as if he had spoke in Person, That he was resolved to stick
to the Emperor's Interest as long as he lived, not doubting but that his
Majesty's Conduct would be unexceptionable in all respects. The Purport of his
private Instructions to the Elector of Mentz was to this Effect, That the
Lantgrave was disordered to that degree, that he could not sleep, and so
immoderately given to Hunting that he was almost crazed; for this reason their
Business might be the more opportunely dispatched, and that part of it was
finished already. As for the Lantgrave's Designs they were not carried so
privately but that the Bavarians understood them, and it was certainly
reported, that he intended either to invade his Electoral Highness or Himself.
Therefore he desires him that he would persuade his Chapter to come into the
League; that it is likewise advisable for his Highness to resign himself wholly
to this Alliance, without any farther regard to those who will desert him one
time or other to his great disadvantage. The Duke of Bavaria and himself intend
to conferr together shortly, and fix upon something by common advice. The
States of Schwaben had also been solicited to enter into the League, which
Negotiation was now almost brought to a Point. His Notes to Eldo were these,
viz. He hoped the Emperor would shortly return hither from Spain; and if his
Majesty continued firm to his Resolution, all things were like to go well; for
then he both hoped and believed that other Princes who had not yet declared
themselves would not be averse to this Undertaking. If all the Confederates
were as hearty and vigorous as himself they should be sufficiently prepared.
But let them behave themselves as they please, he is resolved to stand to his
present Engagement, and to be always at the Emperor's Service: Farther he
thinks it proper that the Chamber should command the Lantgrave to disband his
Army; in the mean time the Duke of Bavaria and himself will be ready, and in
case the other refuses to obey, then he would have the Chamber order him and
Bavaria to take care there be no harm done; enjoining likewise the rest of the
Princes to send in their Supplies according to the Tenor of the Decree.

The Lantgrave understanding these things, and seeing himself in great danger,
and that they were contriving a pretense for a Rupture; he immediately writes
to his Father-in-law, George Duke of Saxony, and gives him an account of the
whole matter of Fact upon which they grounded their suspicion, and showed how
he had been misrepresented, and that he intended no such thing as a War. At the
same time Matthias Eldo posted through France into Spain to the Emperor.
Afterward the Lantgrave wrote to King Ferdinand and his Sister Mary, Regent of
Flanders, to the Princes Electors, and the Dukes of Bavaria, in the same
Apologizing way that he did before to his Father-in-law, George Duke of Saxony.

When the Duke of Brunswick understood his Mystery was discovered, and that the
Lant grave had wrote Letters in his own Vindication, he answered him, That his
taking his Secretary Prisoner was not the only Affront he had received from
that Party; for he was ill used by the Elector of Saxony the last Year, when
King Ferdinand commanded him in the Emperor's Name to make a visit to George
Duke of Saxony; The Duke of Brunswick and the Elector of Saxony write against
one another.
and afterward when he returned from concluding the League at Nuremberg, for
then the Elector attempted to intercept him. To this the Elector of Saxony
answered, That seeing himself and his Friends had been denied a safe Conduct by
him (contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Empire) when they went to
Brunswick, he could thing him no less than an Enemy: Formerly he may remember
that he has often passed through his own and his Brother's Dominions,
incognito, with a small Attendance, and disguised in the Habit of a Servant;
and though he had notice of all this, yet he never gave him any disturbance:
But afterward when himself and his Allies were refused the Civility of
Traveling through his Country, he does not understand why his Highness should
expect a greater Liberty from oaths than he is willing to grant. This gave them
an occasion to keep their Pens drawn upon one another, till at last they fell
to downright railing, which singular Humor unpractised before by Princes was
begun by Brunswick, who charged the Elector with almost all imaginable Crimes
in the most opprobrious Language, as the printed Papers sufficiently show.

About this time John Duke of Cleves departed this Life, and was succeeded by
his Son William, who from his Childhood had been bred to Learning and Virtue,
by Conrade Heresbach.

When the States were come to Frankfort in February according to appointment, A
Diet held at Frankford.
they had a long dispute upon several Points with vehemence enough; but at last
upon the Nineteenth of April they concluded these following Articles, viz. The
Emperor grants those who are now Confederates of the Ausburg Confession a Truce
for Fifteen Months, that there may be a Conference of learned Men concerning
Religion, and during that time commands all Persons to forbear giving them any
disturbance, upon the account of their Persuasion. The Pacification at
Nuremberg, and the Emperor's Edict at Ratisbone are still to continue in force.
And if the differences about Religion are not adjusted before the Truce
expires, the Peace made at Nuremberg shall continue notwithstanding till the
next Diet; and if there happens to be a Meeting of the Empire within the Term
of the Truce, the former Pacification shall hold good notwithstanding till a
second Diet is convened. While the Truce lasts the Emperor will put a stop to
all Suits commenced against the Protestants, particularly to the Proscription
of Minden, and commands all Prosecutions to the contrary to be void and null.
The Protestants shall have no occasion to make their usual Objection for the
future, as if they could not have a fair Hearing in the Court upon the account
of their Religion, for they shall have Right and Justice done them without any
manner of Exception. On the other side the Protestants are to molest no Body,
nor admit any person into their League during the Cessation, neither shall any
of their Party have any Violence offered them upon the score of their Religion.
The Emperor will likewise undertake that none shall be received into the
Counter-League during this interval. The Protestants shall suffer the
Ecclesiastics, wheresoever they live, to enjoy those Revenues they are at
present possessed of. The First of August shall (if the Emperor consents) be
appointed for a Meeting of the Roman Catholics and Protestants, whither candid
and peaceable Men shall be sent, who have nothing of Quarrelsomness or
Obstinacy in their Disposition. These Persons shall choose a certain Number of
Divines to argue the Case of Religion in a dispassionate and amicable Way.
These Divines shall have others joined with them in the Conference, who, though
they are not Clergymen by Profession, shall yet be Persons of Understanding
and Temper. The Emperor also, and King Ferdinand, shall, if they please, have
their Ambassadors present at this Debate; and whatever is decreed there by
common Consent, shall be reported to the States who are absent, after whose
Approbation, the Emperor's Ambassadors shall confirm it: Or else the Emperor
himself shall ratify it in the next Diet, and Pronounce it unalterable and
inviolable. All Warlike Preparations shall cease on both sides; and whosoever
shall appear to attempt any thing of this Nature, shall give a public Account
in Court why he does so; yet with this Proviso, That necessary Defense shall be
denied to no Man: In all other Cases the Laws of the Empire shall be observed
on both Sides. The Anabaptists are not to be comprehended in this Truce, nor
any others, whose Religion is different from the Confession of Ausburg. The
Protestants shall be obliged to have their Supplies for the Turkish War in a
readiness, that there may be no time lost: And when the Electors, and some
others of the most considerable Princes and States shall, by the Emperor's
Order send their Ambassadors to Worms, upon the Eighteenth of May, the
Protestants shall likewise send their Agents thither, to conclude upon a Method
for the Raising Forces against the Turk upon a sudden Occasion: And whatever is
there decreed by the Majority, shall be signed by the Protestants. And if the
Turk happens to make War upon the Empire while the Truce lasts, they shall be
obliged to fight him with the rest. All which Articles are to stand good, upon
Condition the Emperor gives his Approbation within Six Months, computing from
the beginning of May. And in the mean time, that which they have concluded
about the Truce, and against enlarging the League, shall continue in Force: But
if the Emperor does not declare his Mind within Six Months, yet the
Pacification at Nuremberg shall be observed as formerly. John Archbishop of
Lunden was the Emperor's Ambassador at this Diet; for Eldo was gone into Spain,
as I observed before: Ferdinand also sent his Ambassadors hither: There was
likewise a great Appearance of the Protestants: The Elector of Saxony and the
Lantgrave came in Person, and brought several Divines along with them: The
Palsgrave and the Brandenburger mediated an Accommodation: The Elector of
Saxony, among other remarkable things, made his Protest against Ferdinand's
Title of King of the Romans, and declared he would abide by the Articles of
Cadan and Vienna. This Archbishop of Lunden, whom I mentioned, was a German by
Birth, and Privy Councellor to the King of Denmark, but when that Prince was
forced to fly his Country, the Archbishop was banished, and deprived of his
Jurisdiction; upon which he returned into Germany, and applied himself to the
Emperor, and was afterward made Bishop of Conscance.

Now while they were treating about an Accommodation at Francfort, a Party of
Soldiers were got together in Saxony, and ordered by their Commanders to march
into the Territories of the State of Bremen, of the Duke of Lunenburg, and of
others of the reformed Religion, and to stay there till the Camp should move:
Who gave them their Commission was kept very private at first, but afterward
it was certainly known that they were raised by Henry Duke of Brunswick, and
his Brother the Archbishop of Bremen. Those who were damnified by these
Soldiers applied themselves to the Chamber for Justice, but to no purpose: The
Protestants therefore, to prevent farther Mischief, managed their Business so,
as to gain them over to themselves; though when they had them they did not
employ them to give their Neighbors any Disturbance. Stephen Faber, whom I
mentioned before, was dismissed by the Lantgrave, at the Entreaty of the
Princes of the Mediation, after he had given a convenient Security about his
Behavior: He promised of his own accord, not to return to his Master, because
he believed he would not trust him any more; but after he was at Liberty he
went directly to him. In this Convention William Duke of Cleve gave in a
Memorial to the Protestants, by his Ambassadors, in which he explained his
Title to Guelderland, and also desired them to intercede with the Emperor on
his Behalf, and to recommend his Cause to his Imperial Majesty's Ambassador
there present.

The French King had by his Ambassador acquainted Vlrich Duke of Wirtemberg,
That he heard he intended, at the Instance of the Confederates, to make War
upon some of the Bishops in Germany. Now this was an Undertaking which he did
not understand, and therefore out of Friendship and Respect to him, desired him
to forbear; for otherwise the Consequence would be, that the Emperor and King
Ferdinand, with whom he had concluded an Agreement some few Years since, would
be disobliged, which would make him run a great Hazard in his whole Fortune.
Duke Vlrich gave his Majesty Thanks for his Caution, and told him, That he was
wronged in this Relation; and believed the Dukes of Bavaria were the Authors of
this Calumny, who had falsely spread such a Report as this of him in Germany;
therefore he desires his Majesty, that he would not give any Credit to it; for
neither himself, nor any of his Allies intended to raise any Disturbance, or do
any Act of Hostility, unless they were forced to it in their own Defense; and
he did not question, but that they, when they heard of it, would purge
themselves. The Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave write to the French King.
As soon therefore as the Protestants at Francfort had received an Account of
this Complaint from the Duke, the Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave wrote an
Answer to the French King, in the Name of all the Confederates, dated April the
Nineteenth, in which they acquaint him, That they understood by the Duke of
Wirtemberg what Reports had been made to his Majesty concerning them; but all
these Accusations were nothing but Calumnies raised by Enmity and Ill Will, for
they were not about making any Preparations for War, but were very desirous of
Peace, as the Princes of the Mediation could testify: For though they had
received several Provocations, though a confederate Town of theirs had been
proscribed, and a League claped up, by some of the other Party, to back their
unjust Decrees; notwithstanding their Adversaries had raised Forces, and given
them extraordinary Pay, who were now making hostile Depredations in the
Territories of their Allies; yet they were contented to sit still all this
while, without the least Motion toward an Opposition; for the Love they had
for their Country made them willing to forgive all manner of Injuries for the
Sake of the Commonwealth: But their Adversaries were of a violent and
implacable Temper, and would not harken to any moderate Proposals, nor submit
the Differences between them to a legal Determination, but were wholly bent to
fill the Empire with the Blood and Slaughter of its own Subjects: And seeing
the Case stands thus, they entreat his Majesty not to believe any false
Suggestions, but endeavor to promote the Interest of the Church, by Religious
and defensible Methods; for the Protection of Truth and Innocence is a Duty
peculiarly incumbent upon Kings. As for their standing up in the Defense of
Religion, it was only to discharge their Conscience, and not out of any
sinister and secular Design; neither did they question but that their Doctrine
was agreeable to the Word of God, which they had not the Liberty to depart from
upon any Consideration whatever.

Upon the Twenty Fourth of April, The Death of George Duke of Saxony.
at the breaking up of the Diet, George Duke of Saxony departed this Life,
leaving no Issue behind him; for his Two Sons were already deceased without
Children; one of which was married to Elizabeth the Lantgrave's Sister, and the
other to a Daughter of the House of Mansfield: George therefore made his
Brother Henry and his Sons Morice and Augustus, his Heirs by Will, upon
Condition, That they should not make any Alteration in the State of Religion:
If this Condition was Unperformed, then he bequeaths all his Dominions to the
Emperor and King Ferdinand, till his Brother or his Nephews, or the next of the
male Line of the Blood, should fulfill what was enjoined. Now after he was grown
old, and had but an ill Health, he acquainted the Nobilility and Commonalty
with his Will; and desired them, That they would ratify it, and swear to stand
by the Contents. But they being afraid that this would occasion a War in the
Family, prayed him to send to his Brother Henry, and treat with him about it,
for they did not question but that he would agree that no Change should be made
in Religion. Upon this Ambassadors are sent, who, besides several other
Arguments to persuade him, insisted principally, That there was a great deal of
Money in the Exchequer, abundance of rich Furniture and Plate; all which would
be his own, provided he complied with his Brother: To which he made this
remarkable Answer immediately; Truly (says he) your Ambassy puts me in mind of
that Passage in the new Testament, where the Devil promised our Savior all the
Kingdoms of the World, upon Condition he would fall down and worship him: Do
you think that any Temptation of Riches has such an ascendant over me, as to
make me forsake a Religion which I know to be pure and Orthodox? I assure you
you are much mistaken in your Expectations. Now having received this Answer and
had their Audience of Leave without effecting any part of their Negotiation. It
so happened, That George their Master was dead before they returned Home, which
when his Brother Henry understood, he immediately went to Dres^en and to the
other great Towns, and made the People swear Allegiance to him, which they were
the more inclinable to do, because he was supported with the Interest of the
League at Smalcald. The Elector of Saxony also, who knew how George's Will
stood, and what his designs were, as soon as he heard of his Death, made haste
Home, that he might be ready to assist Henry if need were.

This was a very considerable Addition to the Protestant Interest, and a great
and unexpected disappointment of the Roman Catholic Princes, who were
extremely troubled at it, especially the Elector of Mentz, and Henry Duke of
Brunswick, as I shall have occasion to mention afterward. Thus George had an
Heir and Successor quite contrary to his Inclinations; and Luther, whom he
hated above all Men living, Luther preaches at Leipsick.
was invited to Leipsick, by the New Prince; where he preached several Sermons,
and began to enter upon a Reformation. This Year in May a Comet was seen, The
Death of Isabella the Empress.
and just about the same time Isabella the Emperor Charles's Wife died; the
French King, as soon as he heard of it, solemnized her Funeral at Paris,
according to the usual Ceremony among Princes. I have already mentioned the
Council of Vicenza, which the Pope had Prorogued till Easter this Year; but the
Company not appearing at the time upon the Tenth of June, he published another
Bull, in which he did not Prorogue it to a certain day, but suspended it during
the pleasure of the Conclave and himself.

Some few Months since the King of England published another Paper concerning
the Council of Vicenza, The King of England publishes another Paper about the
Council of Vicenza.
showing how the Pope abused the World* for his laying the Fault upon the Duke
of Mantua is a ridiculous Excuse. For if he has so great a Power as he
pretends, why does he not force him to his Pleasure; If he cannot do this, why
does he summon people upon uncertainties to a place which he has not the
command of? And now though he has pitched upon Vicenza for the same purpose,
yet there is no question but so wise a State as that of Venice is, will be of
the Duke's Opinion, and not let their Town be filled with so great a multitude,
without a Garrison to secure it; so that upon this account, there will be as
few people to open the Council as there was at Mantua. And since whatever he
has done is no better than Mockery, it is not fit he should have such an
unreasonable Liberty allowed him any longer. It Is true, Councils rightly
constituted and managed, are the most proper and useful Expedients which can be
tried; but when they are packed for private Interest and Advantage, and to
establish the Usurpations of a Party, they are inconceivable mischievous to the
State of Christendom. And now when the Name of a Council and the Church made so
great a noise in the World, Luther writes a Book about Councils.
Luther undertook to write a Book in High Dutch upon both Arguments; where, in
the first place, he treats of the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem, which
is mentioned in the Fifteenth of the Acts. Then he shows how the Fathers
contradicted one another, more particularly St. Augustine and St. Cyprian about
Baptism; where he takes occasion to mention those Ecclesiastical Constitutions
which are commonly called the Apostles Canons, and proves them spurious by
unquestionable Arguments, and that those ought to be hanged who give them that
name. From thence he proceeds to the first four General Councils which are of
the most considerable Authority, and recites them in Order, the Nicene, the
Constantinopolitan, the Ephesine, and that at Chalcedon; and gives an account
of the Occasion of their Meeting and what was Decreed there; afterward he
comes up to the main Question, and shows how far the Power of a Council
reaches: And here he maintains that a Council ought not to make any Article
of Faith, nor enjoin any new Duty, nor tie the Consciences of Men to Ceremonies
which were not practiced from the beginning, neither is it lawful for such an
Assembly to intermeddle in Civil Government, nor to make any Canons to found
their private Grandeur and Dominion upon. On the contrary their Office is to
see that all Innovations in Doctrine repugnant to the Holy Scriptures, that
superstitious or unprofitable Ceremonies may be condemned and removed, and
always to make the Scripture their Rule to determine Controversies by. Then he
goes on to define the Church, and lays down the Notes to know her by, and
running a Parellel between Christ and his Apostles, and the Pope; and showing
what a different Doctrine his Holiness had settled in the Church, and at what a
wicked Rate he had plundered Christendom; he concludes, he ought to be
Excommunicated, and obliged to Restitution. Besides many other Instances by
which he demonstrates in that Book what gross Ignorance there was in the times
of Popery, how much Religion was corrupted and debauched; he tell us, Things
were come to that pass, that even the bare Habit of a Monk was thought to
contribute considerably toward the obtaining eternal Life, insomuch, that not
only the Vulgar, but many persons of Quality would be buried in it. After-Ages
possibly will not believe this Relation, but yet it is very true, and is
chiefly practiced in Italy, and in my time Francis the Second Marquess of
Mantua, made express Provision in his Will to be buried in the Habit of a
Franciscan, or Seraphick, as they call it. The same thing was done by Albertus
Pius, Prince of Carpi, who died at Paris; and by Christopher Longolius, a Low
Country Man, who lies at Padua. He was a very Learned Person, and a great
Admirer of Tully. There is an Oration of his Extant against the Lutherans, as
there is also one of Albert's against Erasmus of Rotterdam. After the Death of
George Duke of Saxony, Henry of Brunswick immediately set forward through
France into Spain, to wait upon the Emperor.

Much about this time Henry King of England called a Parliament, A Parliament
in England.
where, besides other secular Matters, he Enacts these following Articles
concerning Religion, That the true and natural Body and Blood of Christ were
under the Appearance of Bread and Wine, and that the Substance of Bread and
Wine does not remain after Consecration; That the receiving all the Lord's
Supper is not necessary to Salvation, Christ being entirely contained under
each kind; That it is not lawful for Priests to Marry; Vows of Chastity ought
to be kept, and private Masses continued; Auricular and private Confession of
Sins is both profitable and necessary; Those who teach and do any thing
contrary to this Act are to suffer as Heretics. And at the same time when this
Law was made the King courted Ann, Sister to William Duke of Cleve, a beautiful
Maiden-Lady, who when she was contracted to him, sailed over into England, some
few Months after. Some thought the Bishops influenced the King to sign this Act
touching these Points, that they might have an Opportunity to ruin the
Authority and Interest of Thomas Cranmer. Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas
Cromwell, who were both of them Well-wishers to the Reformation.

This Year in August the Turkish Admiral, The Turk takes Castle-novo.
Barbarossa, took Castle-novo, a Town in Dalmatia, in the Gulf of Cataro, by
Storm, where all the Garrison was put to the Sword, and some of the Burghers
carried away into Slavery. The Emperor and his Confederates, the Venetians,
took this place a Year before in October, but the Emperor garrisoned it himself
with Four thousand Spaniards, and made Francis Sarmiento the Governor. This was
a surprise to the Venetians, who said, a Town situated upon that Coast did
rather belong to themselves: Thus being disgusted with the Emperor, and
likewise foreseeing that an Alliance with him would prove dangerous to their
State; they apply themselves not long after to the Turk, and upon their request
obtain a Truce of him.

At this time there happened an Insurrection at Ghent, An Insurrection at Ghent.
the most considerable City for Strength and Interest in all those Parts, and
which has often contested very warmly for Liberty with the Earls of Flanders,
under whose Jurisdiction it is. When the Emperor heard of this Commotion, he
changed his design of going into Germany by the way of Italy, and resolved to
Travel through France, being earnestly invited thither by the French King, who
made him very obliging proffers of Security and Accommodation for his Journey.

In the mean time the Palsgrave and the Elector of Brandenburg being Princes of
the Mediation, wrote to the Emperor concerning the Pacification at Francfort,
and desired him to give leave there might be a Conference of Learned Men at
Nuremberg. But his Imperial Majesty told them, That the Death of his Empress,
and some other Occurrences intervening, had hindered him from being at leisure
to attend that Affair. When the Princes of the Mediation had sent a Copy of
this Letter to the Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave, without signifying
whether the Emperor had confirmed the Truce for Fifteen Months; A Convention at
Arnstet.
the Protestants appointed a Convention on the Nineteenth of November at
Arnstet, a Town in Thuringia. Here they consulted about strengthening their
League with new Alliances, and how to prepare for a necessary defense, in case
the Emperor would not allow the Treaty at Francfort. They likewise debated how
the Church (...) might be best disposed of as also concerning the sending an
Ambassy into England, to molli^le the King upon the Point of the late Act of
Parliament made in Relation to Religion; they resolved likewise upon an Address
to the French King to entreat him not to Persecute Innocent People for the sake
of Opinion, and also about dispatching away their Ambassadors to the Emperor as
soon as they had any certainty of his being in Flanders; for there was a report
as if he were come thither already. And because some of the Confederates were
absent, and others had no Authority to treat in several Cases, they agreed to
meet at Smalcald upon the First of March, to conclude the remaining Business.
At this Convention the Burghers of Riga a City of Livonia were received into
the League: They had a difference with their Archbishop, which was the Case of
a great many Towns in Germany, they were concerned in the Alliance no farther
than to be defended by the common Advocates of the Protestants in the Chamber
of Spire; and upon this account they paid the Confederates a Thousand five
hundred Crowns. Henry Duke of Saxony, Brother of George, was admitted into the
League Two Years without any Encumbrance charged upon him, because his Fortune
was but small; but with this Proviso, That whenever his Circumstances were
enlarged, he should submit to the same Condition with the rest: Therefore since
he had now such a noble Inheritance fallen to him, they assessed him his
proportion of the Charge in his Meeting, which ended upon the Tenth of
December. The Princes were not here in person, but sent their Agents. The
Elector had also lately sent John Dulcius and Francis Burcart his
Vice Chancellor into England, The Emperor passes through France.
to be present at the Solemnity of the King's Marriage with Ann of Cleve, whose
Sister Sibill was his own Duchess, as I observed in the Sixth Book. These
Ambassadors therefore having this occasion were enjoined at Arnstet to treat
with the King in the Name of the Confederates, as was lately mentioned.

The Emperor having received a safe Conduct, set forward in November with a
very small Train; when he came to the Frontiers of France next to Spain, he
found Henry and Charles, the King's Sons, there, who had Horses laid to meet
him the sooner: The Constable likewise, who went a great way before the
Princes, was there to wait on him with a great Attendance of Nobility. Being
thus received, he was conveyed through the middle of France, and through the
fairest Cities; and when he came to Loches in the Dukedom of Berry, the King
met him, who was scarce then recovered of a late Distemper: From thence he
traveled to Orleans and came to Paris upon the First of January, 1540.
which he entered, being placed in the middle, between the King's Sons, the
Constable carrying the Sword before them: Neither was there any sort of
festival Solemnity, or Respect omitted, with which its possible for the Mind of
Man to be entertained. There came thither also Cardinal Alexander Farnese the
Pope's Legate, who with Cardinal Bellay the Archbishop of the Town, received
the Emperor in Nostre-Dame. His Imperial Majesty, after a weeks stay, went for
Flanders; the King accompanying him to St. Quintins, and his Sons, as far as
Valenciennes, a Town in Hanault. The King at this time was almost sure of
recovering Milan, but it fell out quite otherwise, as will be shown afterward.
When the Emperor was with the French King, they both of them sent a very
splendid Ambassy to the Venetians; the Emperor sent Alphonso Davalo, Governor
of the Duchy of Milan, and the French King, Claude Hanebald, Governor of
Piedmont. These Ambassadors made a long Harangue to the Senate, to persuade
them to concur with these Two powerful Monarchs, who were now united, and to
bend all their Forces against the Turk. But the Venetians, after they had
parted with the Ambassadors in a very respectful Manner, concluded upon a full
Consideration of the Case, That it was absolutely their Interest to get the
Turk, with whom they had a Truce already, thoroughly reconciled to them: At last
therefore they came to a Treaty with him, and bought their Peace by the
Delivery of Napoli di Romania, and Malvasia, into his Hands. Some say the
French, though in public they pressed the same Opinion with the Emperor's
Ambassadors, yet they gave them private Caution to take care of their State;
and not run themselves upon so great Danger, to which they were more exposed
than others. Indeed the French King himself, in a certain Apology of his,
charge the Emperor with ruining the State of Venice, which, he says, he had
supported by his Assistance, and recovered by his Mediation. The Venetian
Ambassador, Aloisius Baduarius, who was sent to the Port, to treat about a
Peace with the Turk, was commanded to offer all his other Conditions first,
reserving the Two Towns for the last Necessity. But the Sultan, who had the
Resolution of the Senate betrayed to him, The Turk makes a Peace with the
Venetians.
reprimanded the Ambassador for not sufficiently explaining his Instructions,
and would not conclude anything except those Places were consigned to him.
Baduarius was amazed to see the Secrets of the State betrayed; but since the
thing was out, he agreed to the Proposition, though with regret; which possibly
he must have made at last, of his own accord. When he came home, he gave an
Account of the whole Matter: The Senate being wonderfully surprised at it,
after a most diligent Enquiry, apprehended some Persons, and upon their being
found guilty beheaded them: One of the Criminals took Sanctuary as it were, in
the Bishop of Montpellier's Lodgings, the French Ambassador, upon which
Officers are sent to search the House, but being denied Entrance, the Senate
ordered some Engines to be brought out of the Arsenal, to batter down the
House: But the French, when they saw what Danger they were in, delivered up the
Person. The Senate afterward gave the King an Account of their Proceedings in
a Letter, that he might not think his Ambassador affronted.

When the Emperor was come into Flanders, The Protestants send Ambassadors to
the Emperor.
King Ferdinand took a Journey from Austria to meet him: And afterward the
Protestant Ambassadors came thither, as they had agreed it at Arnstet: These
Gentlemen, after they had, in the beginning of their Speech, wished the Emperor
all Happiness, and congratulated his Return into Germany, told him, They heard
how they had been blackened by their Adversaries, who charged them with
Obstinacy, and an Aversion to the supreme Magistrate; that they were of a
restless and turbulent Spirit, and delighted in disturbing the Commonwealth:
They had often wished (they said) for an Opportunity to purge themselves of
these Crimes before his Majesty, and were very glad it was now in their Power
to do it. And first, since God was pleased to enlighten this Age, in a
particular manner, with the Knowledge of his Gospel, they were bound to submit
to the Discovery; which they did not with an Intention of disobliging him, or
any other Mortal whatever, but only that they might go to Heaven, and be made
Happy for ever: For in all other things they had de facto, shown themselves
obedient to his Majesty; and now their Inclinations are still the same, as is
evident from the last Treaty at Francfort: But about a Year since the Secretary
of Henry of Brunswick happening to fall into the Lantgrave's Company near
Cassell, and being detained by him upon a violent Suspicion, was the Occasion
of discovering some Men's Intrigues, whose Business it is to provoke their own
Party to take up Arms, by persuading them that the Protestants are preparing to
begin with them already. Now this Report being brought to his Majesty, was
without question the reason of his suffering the Counter-League to be made: And
after their Adversaries had concerted this League, they fell to raising of
Forces, which at last themselves were likewise obliged to do in their own
Defense; insomuch that a great deal of Danger would have followed if the
Secretary had not been taken up by chance; and unless the Palsgrave and the
Elector of Brandenburg had interposed with singular Integrity and Application.
And now since the Disloyalty and Odium of this Disturbance is laid upon them
without any manner of Ground, and that they abundantly justified themselves in
Print from such Calumnies as these; they conceive, if his Majesty had been
thoroughly acquainted with the whole Matter, he would not have engaged in this
new League, which is so much talked of at present: Therefore they humbly
entreat his Majesty not to give any Credit to those Complaints which have been
preferred against them; and if they happen to be accused of any Misdemeanor for
the future, that he would please to let them know it, that they may answer for
themselves. They also entreat his Majesty to enquire into the Designs and
Actions of Henry Duke of Brunswick, and to concern himself so far, as to secure
them from all such Apprehensions for the future. And whereas they are
represented as if they were not sollicitous about Religion and a just
Reformation, this is nothing but Aspersion and Untruth; for Religion is the
main thing which they appear for, neither have they ever refused to referr
their Cause to a fair Hearing: Of this reasonable Proposal they are able to
make good proof, particularly it appears from the last Treaty at Francfort, and
from the Lantgrave's Letter to King Ferdinand after that Diet was ended. In
this Letter his Imperial Majesty was desired to order a Conference of Learned
Men. This request they now humbly renew to his Majesty, desiring him not to
deal any otherwise with them, than with those who are affectionately desirous
of Unity and Agreement in Religion, and of the Welfare of the Empire, and are
likewise willing to serve his Majesty in every thing as far as Conscience and
Equity will give them leave. About Four Years ago his Majesty was pleased to
declare when he wrote from Italy, that he would not make use of Arms and
Violence, but of Arguments and Truth, to compose the Differences in Religion.
His Majesty had likewise lately expressed himself to the same Sense in his
Letters to the Palsgrave and the Elector of Brandenburg, in which he gave his
Reasons why he could not then attend to the Affairs of Religion; this account
was extremely satisfactory to them, and their Prayers to God were, That he
would fortify his Majesty in this Resolution. Now at the late Diet at
Francfort there were a great many things agreed upon, and a Truce concluded,
provided his Majesty approved it within Six Months; this he had not been
pleased to do as yet, though the half Year had been expired a great while
since; and besides the Judges of the Chamber gave Sentence against them in
Causes which were purely Spiritual, and executed the Proscription of Minden,
perfectly contrary to his own and King Ferdinand's Order. Now how prejudicial
this is to the Empire his Majesty is certainly very sensible; therefore they
beseech him that he would interpose his Authority, for otherwise the measures
for prosecuting the Turkish War cannot be adjusted, nor the Conference of
Learned Men begun, which has been so often wished for; for in order to the
right fettlement of the Government, a firm and lasting Peace ratified by all
the States of the Empire, is absolutely necessary. This Undertaking will be
both very Honorable for his Majesty who has already gained the Title of a
Pacifick Emperor, and also mightily for the Interest of all Germany.

They had their Audience of the Emperor upon the Twenty-fourth of February at
Ghent, Granvell being present, where his Majesty told them, He would take some
time to consider and then give them an Answer. Much about the same time that
the Protestants sent an Ambassy to the Emperor, The Protestants write to the
French King.
they wrote likewise to the French King, acquainting him, That for some Years
last past his Majesty had declared his good Affection to them both in his
Letters and by his Ambassadors, and had also a right Notion of a Council,
namely, That Controversies in Religion are not to be determined by Blows and
Fighting, but by Reason and Truth. This his Majesty's Inclination and Sense of
things, was extremely satisfactory to them, because they saw he was in Love
with Equity, and resolved to protect it. And therefore by way of return they
have always to their power endeavored to show their gratitude and respect,
which makes them believe that he still continues his kind Intentions and
Opinion of them. Moreover that Friendship and good Understanding which was now
between his Majesty and their Emperor, was a blessing they were exceeding glad
of; and congratulated the good Fortune of Christendom upon several accounts;
but more especially, because they hoped it would be remarkably instrumental in
reconciling the Differences in the Church. Indeed the Death of the Empress has
hitherto prevented his Imperial Majesty from executing the Decree which was
made the last Year at Francfort. But now since both their Majesty's are upon
such good Terms, they conceive the matter may be easily adjusted, if he
pleases to second the Emperor's Endeavors in it, and lends as it were his
helping hand to the Cause, which they earnestly desire he would be pleased to
do, that so the Church may have the advantage of those Expedients which were
agreed upon at Francfort. They confessed they were fully satisfied concerning
the Emperor's Intentions, and excellent Temper, and had also sent an Ambassy to
him, of which they hoped to be able to give a good account. But their
Adversaries are almost always contriving one Design or other to hinder these
public Measures from taking effect; for the distrust they have of their Cause
makes them that they will not endure to have the Merits of it examined in a
Regular way. Now the reason why they themselves are so desirous to have the
matter Legally debated, is not because they are afraid their Adversaries would
be too powerful for them in the Field; for as they design to hurt no Body, so
if they are threatened with any Violence, they are, God be thanked, sufficiently
prepared to defend themselves and their Right. Besides they hope that he upon
whose account they Engage will afford them his Assistance and Protection.
Indeed, their Cause is so Honorable and Religious, that they ought to maintain
it at their utmost Peril: But they are very much concerned for the ill
Consequences which will happen to the State this way. For though they deserve
to be corrected by God Almighty, yet because a Civil War will occasion a
horrible desolation in Germany, they desire nothing more earnestly than that
the whole difference may be amicably accommodated, and that all future Ages may
have a remarkable Instance of their good Inclinations and Honesty transmitted
to them; but their Adversaries are implacably exasperated and will not be
brought to any reasonable Terms, neither did they foresee any other Issue of
this Contest, than that it would occasion the strength of the Empire, which
ought to be employed against the common Enemy the Turk; to be perfectly wasted
and torn in pieces by the mutual Slaughter of its own Subjects; but these
Consequences ought not to be charged upon them. And whatever the Event may be
there will come a time when the other Party, will be obliged to admit of those
Conditions which they now reject with so much Obstinacy, for God will appear in
the Vindication of his own Honor.

Upon the First of March the Ambassadors of the Protestant Princes and Cities
came to Smalcald according to appointment. A Convention at Smalcald.
There came also several Divines along with them, viz. Jonas, Pomeran,
Melancthon, Cruciger and Bucer, who were required to draw up a Scheme of
Doctrine, upon which they were to treat with their Adversaries about an
Accommodation. In this Convention they debated those Points which were left
unconcluded at Arnstet, as has been mentioned already. In the mean time
Dulcius and Burcartus returned from their Ambassy in England, and upon the
Seventh of March they make a Report of the State of Religion in that Country,
viz. That the Act of Parliament made the last Year was not Executed very
strictly; but yet Hugh Latimer and the Bishop of Salisbury, who where
Imprisoned upon the account of Religion were not yet set at Liberty; that
Cromwell the first Minister of State endeavored to mollify the King, and
abate the Rigor of his Opinion: And the King himself had in private
Conversation told them his thoughts upon the Point, which were these, He
conceived the Protestant Divines were not Orthodox in their Doctrine concerning
the Marriage of Priests, the receiving the Lord's Supper, as they call it, in
both Kinds, nor in that concerning private Masses; and therefore he desires
that they would write to him at large about these and other necessary Points,
and set down the Reasons of their Opinions, and he would take care that some
Learned Persons in his Kingdom should give them an Answer, that so the way to
Truth might be discovered. It was likewise the Opinion of Cromwell and of some
others, that it would be proper for them to send an Honorable Ambassy to the
King, and Melancthon with the rest; for if they could come to a tolerable
Agreement in their Doctrine, the King would furnish them with a vast Sum of
Money toward the supporting the League; which he intended to make with them,
not only in the Case of Religion, but for defense in general. Indeed his
Majesty very much wondered why they confined their Alliance to Religion, seeing
it was likely they would be invaded upon a quite different account. Some few
days after the Divines gave in a Writing to the Ambassadors. The sum of it was
this, That they ought not to depart from the Contents of the Ausburg
Confession, nor of the Apology which was afterward annexed to it. This Opinion
all the Divines who were absent afterward approved by their Letters to the
Convention. About this time Henry Duke of Brunswick came to Ghent. The
Emperor's Answer to the Protestant Ambassadors.
Upon the Sixteenth of March the Emperor gave the Protestant Ambassadors his
Answer by Cornelius Scepperus; the Substance was courteous enough, but withal
so Ambiguously worded, that they could not tell whether he would secure them
the Pacification or not. The Ambassadors therefore, with the Emperor's
permission, withdraw, and returning presently after, they entreat him that he
would command the Chamber to cease their Prosecutions, and grant them a Peace:
The Emperor replied, That at present he had nothing more to say to these
Requests, but he would consider the matter farther. This Answer was Reported at
Smalcald Ten Days after; and upon Easter Monday, Eldo is removed from his
Places and retires from Court.
which was then the Twenty-ninth of March, the Princes came thither themselves.
There was at that time a great Emulation and misunderstanding between Granvell
and Eldo, which at last occasioned Eldo's being removed from his Place; upon
which he retired from Court and lived privately: For the other having the
better Interest charged Eldo with Misdemeanors, and rendered him odious,
because he had been too violent in his Councils and Treaties, and had like to
have run the Emperor upon a War against his Will, when he thought nothing of
it. Now Granvell giving pretty plain signs of his being desirous to accommodate
Matters, and to settle a good Correspondence in the Empire, invited the
Protestants to address to him, and at their request disposed the Emperors
Inclinations for Peace. Ambassadors sent to Smalcald to mediate a Peace.
And immediately after, and as it were in his own Name, he dispatcheth away Two
Ambassadors to Smalcald to mediate an Accommodation, viz. Theodorick
Manderschitt, William Nuenarius, Counts, Persons of great Sense and Quality;
though the first of these was seized with a dangerous Distemper, and forced to
stop by the way. There demands were indeed moderate enough, but then they
intimated that the Emperor was almost assured, that Religion was not the
Protestants design, neither did they heartily desire a Peace, but were wholly
intent upon enriching themselves with the Revenues of the Church: That his
Majesty had reason to suspect they were glad to see the Empire embroiled; That
they were disaffected to him, and rather inclinable to side with those who were
his open Enemies. This Information against them the Emperor received partly by
their Adversaries, and partly by the French as it is certainly reported. For
when the Emperor traveled through France and all things seemed to promise a
most intimate Alliance and Endearment, they say there were some Letters
discovered to him which were written from the Convention at Smalcald to the
French King. Some say this was done by the King himself, but others lay it upon
the Constable, who was then the Chief Minister, and earnestly desirous to bring
the Two Monarchs to a good Understanding, and besides not very well affected to
the Protestants, because of their Religion.

The End of the Twelfth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XIII.
The CONTENTS.
The Protestants make Answer to the Emperor's Demands, and by many Arguments
prove that they aim more at Piety and Religion in their Actions, than at
appropriating to themselves Church Lands and Possessions. They also refute the
Arguments of the King of England. The Emperor having punished the City of
Ghent, orders a Meeting of the Protestants, who answer his Letters. The Pope
sends his Legate Farnese, the same who went with the Emperor from Paris to the
Netherlands. He makes a long invective Speech against the Protestants. In the
mean time the French King makes a League with the Duke of Cleve, to whom he
gives his Sisters Daughter in Marriage. At this time the Pope was making War
against the People of Perusia. The King of England turns away Ann the Sister of
the Duke of Cleve. Some Points of Religion are accommodated in the Assembly of
Haguenaw: The rest are reprieved to the Convention at Worms, appointed by King
Ferdinand; whither Granvell came, and made a Speech. Campeggio the Pope Legate
came after, who also makes a Speech. The Conference is broken off, and all the
Negotiation put off till the Diet of Ratisbone. Luther makes a smart Answer to
the Book of Henry Duke of Brunswick, wherein Mention is made of the dear Pall
which the Pope of Rome sells. The Treaty commences at Ratisbone. The Emperor
passes over into Barbary. Granvell presents the Book called the Interim to the
Conferrers. The Duke of Cleve marries the King of Navarr's Daughter.

TO these things the Protestants, April the Eleventh, make Answer; and in the
first place, say they, we return our hearty Thanks to the Here Granvell, The
Protestants answer the Commissioners for Pacification.
who has always advised the Emperor to Moderation in this Affair; a Virtue
which deserves the highest Commendation: And we pray God to confirm him in this
so laudable a Resolution; for what can be more glorious, than to allay public
Grievances by prudent and moderate Counsels, without Slaughter and Bloodshed.
Now we pray all Men in general, not to think that we delight in the Clashings
and Dissensions of Churches, that we propose to our selves any private
Advantage, or that it is out of Frowardness that we have separated from other
Nations, contrary to the inveterate Custom of many Ages. It was not out of
Wantonness, Rashness or Unadvisedness, that we have exposed our selves to the
implacable Hatred of our Adversaries, that we have undergone so much Trouble
and Toil, so great Charges and Losses, and the continual Dangers of so many
Years: No, but when Division in Doctrine broke out in the Church (which has
happened oftener than once of old) we could not in Conscience resist the Truth,
for the Favor of Men, and far less approve the Actions of those, who with
great Cruelty persecute the Innocent. Nay, on the contrary, for so many weighty
Reasons, for such true and holy Causes, we are constrained to oppose them, and
separate from them: For it is manifestly known that they defend gross and
intolerable Errors, not only in Word, but by Violence and Force of Arms: Now it
is the Duty of the Magistrate to protect his Subjects from unjust Force. And
because we hear, that we lie under Suspicion, as if we only minded our own
Profit and Advantage, and not the Glory of God, nor Reformation of the Church;
we beseech the Here Granvell, that he would justify us in that Matter to the
Emperor. We are sensible enough of the Calumnies of that Nature, which are
dispersed far and near by our Adversaries, with intent to bring our Persons and
the true Religion we profess, into contempt and hatred: But in the Emperors
honorable Council, whom God has placed in so eminent a Sphere, Truth only
should be enquired into and regarded, and all false Informations
discountenanced: For the Reason why they hunt about for Pretexts to load us
with that Aspersion, and publicly traduce us, is, because they maintain a weak
and unjust Cause, because they see their own Errors blamed and condemned by all
Men, and cannot withstand the pure Light of the Gospel. But it suits ill with
the Character and Duty of Bishops, so to urge and importune the Emperor about
Lands and Revenues, as if the Christian Religion stood or fell with them, when,
in the mean time, they take not the least Notice of those many and enormous
Errors and Vices, which they themselves cannot dissemble. It ought indeed, to
be their first care, to see Religion and the purer Doctrine preserved in their
Churches: But now their Thoughts are wholly taken up, how they may defend their
Wealth and Power, their Luxury and Splendour. They know well enough, that the
Contest is not about Church Lands and Possessions; they themselves know, that
these are not the things we aim at; but they use that as a Cloak and Veil to
cover their own wicked Counsels in resisting the Truth, that they may inflame
the Minds of Kings and Princes to the Destruction of this Religion: For no Man
of our Profession has invaded any part of Church Possessions, within the
Territories and Dominion of another, nor deprived any Bishop of ought that was
his: but the Bishops themselves have slighted their Jurisdiction, when the
Profits thereof began to fall; and, indeed, they know not how to administer the
same. Again, The Colleges of the Canons Regular, still enjoy all they had; but
they, on the other hand, have appropriated to themselves the Revenues of many
of our Churches, and discharge their People from paying us any yearly Rent: And
whereas they were wont formerly to allow somewhat of their yearly Revenues to
the Ministers of the Church and Schoolmasters; they are now so far from
contributing anything that way, that the Cities are necessitated to be at all
the Charges. And it is not like that these Cities, which both lie under heavy
Burdens, and are exposed to great Dangers, do espouse and maintain this Cause,
merely for Covetousness sake: But our Enemies, especially such of them as hunt
after Church Preferments, maliciously accuse us so to the Emperor. We could
heartily wish, that the Emperor were rightly informed of the present State of
Monasteries, why monastic Institutions have been change, and how these Goods
are employed, partly for maintaining the Ministers of the Church and Teachers
of the People, and partly for other pious Uses. We would the Emperor also
understood, how our Adversaries hook in to themselves all Profits, and rob and
spoil, not only Monasteries, but other Churches also; so that within their
Precincts many Churches are wholly slighted, and the People degenerate into
Paganism. But before we speak any more of that Matter, we beseech Granvell,
that in his own excellent Judgment, he would weigh these things with himself.
For, grant we might from hence reap some Advantage, yet it may easily be
imagined, that the Controversy proceeds not from this, but from a far
different and more considerable Cause, and that for so small a Matter we would
not expose our selves to so bitter Hatred, to so much Labor, Care and Danger.
Besides, waving all Dangers; if the daily Charges we are at in maintaining this
Cause, were compared with the Rents of these Monasteries, it will soon appear,
how far the one comes short of the other; and yet these Charges we have now
born above Fifteen Years, whilst our Dangers daily increase with our Expenses.
Let any Man also but consider the restless Endeavors, and implacable Hatred of
our Adversaries, and then what Prince in the World can be thought so silly and
inconsiderate, as to put his whole Fortune to the risk for Goods of so small a
value? Wherefore we humbly beseech the Emperor, not to entertain any such
Suspicion of us; for we prefer his Friendship, and the public Peace before
all worldly Enjoyments. Those of our Adversaries, in like manner, who are
acquainted with the State of our Dominions and Affairs, without doubt entertain
no such Suspicion of us; for they know that the least part of these Revenues
accrue to us. Now the chief and only Cause, why, with so much Burden and
Danger, we profess this Doctrine, is, because God requires it of us, that we
should profess the Name and Gospel of his Son: For he commands us to fly from
all false and idolatrous Worship, and by no means to approve the Cruelty of
those, who persecute the true Religion. Now will we speak of the Possessions of
Monasteries; Answer the Complaints of our Adversaries, and give the Reason why
the Houses and Rents of Monks and Friars are converted into another Use. When
the Light of the Gospel began to shine in Germany, and the Vices and Errors of
Men were detected and condemned, many, and especially the more learned, of
their own Accord, forsook that Pharisaical kind of Life; and some of them, that
they might prosecute their Studies, and follow some other honest Course of
Life, demanded some Allowance in Money. Now this Change happening not only
amongst us, but also in the Monasteries of our Adversaries; in all places where
Monks and Friars remained we appointed good Men to inspect and censure false
Doctrine and Worship: For those also, who chose rather to stay than to remove,
we provided necessary Sustenance; and took particular Care, that the Aged and
Sick should want for nothing; there being still some of these Monasteries
within our Territories. It was a Duty incumbent upon us, indeed, as
Magistrates, when once we knew the Truth, to abolish false Religion, and to
take care that these Revenues should not be dissipated, especially when the
Monks in all places fell away, and some of them had thoughts of appropriating
the same to their own private Uses. Besides, there were none to be found in
Monasteries fit to labor the Land, or to mind domestic Affairs: So then,
their State was changed, for we thought it not fit to send for Monks and Friars
from other places, to put in their room, least that might disturb our Churches;
and therefore we converted good part of their Revenues to pious Uses; for
maintenance of the Ministers of the Church, free Schools, and those that are
afflicted with Poverty or Sickness. And upon these Accounts the Revenues of
Monasteries are somewhat impared; but what is over and above, is kept, to be
distributed amongst Priests, whose Living are too small, and poor young
Scholars. For the state of the Time is such now, that by all means, Ways ought
to be thought on, for educating Youth, who may prove hereafter fit Instruments
to serve both in Church and State. What more remains of these Goods, we are
ready to assign them to pious and public Uses, according to the Determination
of a lawful Council, when such shall be, or of an Assembly of the Empire. For
to this Use ought the Goods of the Church to be applied, as both the Holy
Scripture, and the Ancient Canons and Councils do testify. Which being so, we
reciprocally do desire, That our Adversaries will suffer those Goods to be
applied to the like Uses. For now, in most Cities, the Stipends of the
Ministers of Parishes, are either none at all, or at least, very
inconsiderable; and yet, in the mean time, the Bishops and other Prelates, who
enjoy these Possessions, discharge no Office, neither in Churches nor Schools:
Wherefore to the great Prejudice of the State, public Schools run daily more
and more into Decay. Therefore, as we said before, some Remedy must be found to
heal this Wound. God made Mankind, and appointed Magistrates for that end, that
in such Assemblies, Men should learn the true Knowledge of himself: And
therefore it is the part of Kings and Princes to take care that so necessary
Duties should be performed. We, for our parts, are ready to give Security, that
within our Territories, these Possessions shall be applied to a right and
lawful Use, provided our Adversaries do the same; and that is but reason, since
we see idle and debauched Men, that are of no use, but, indeed, a Burden to
the State, squandering away those Revenues in Luxury and Riot. And would to God
the Emperor knew all of our Adversaries, how that in those places within their
Territories, where our Churches have yearly Revenues they receive them, and
keep them for their own Use: And when we demand what belongs to us, and give
them mutually Leave to receive the Rents of their Churches within our Bounds,
they reject the Offer, and are therein supported by the Imperial Chamber:
However it is a common Proverb, That Equality is the Nurse of Peace; and if
they laid to Heart the Peace and Tranquillity of Germany, they would not,
certainly, act in the manner they do. But the Truth is, they spare not their
own Churches, imposing and demanding new Dues of them: And because they banish
learned Preachers out of their Countries, many Parishes are destitute and
solitary, and the Church Revenues squandered away. Again, they so exhaust the
Monasteries, that in some places, it is a Proverb amongst the Monks, That there
is nothing at all left to them but the Bells to Ring, and the Choire to Sing
in; which gives occasion to Licentiousness, and threatens Religion sometime or
other with a fatal blow. It would be really very acceptable to us, if the
Emperor would examine the whole matter, and dilligently inquire, Where it is
that the Ministers of the Church are most civilly and kindly used, Schools best
ordered, the Functions and Ministry of the Church most decently performed,
whether in our Territories or amongst our Adversaries? If the Emperor would
give himself this trouble, we needed not make any Apology to justify and
defend the matter of Fact; for the thing it self would speak in our behalf, and
move him to set about a true Reformation of the Church. But now that Cruelty is
practiced, that harmless Priests are put to Death, and that there are no limits
set to Severity, it will come to pass, that fit Men being removed out of the
way, gross Barbarity will ensue, and be propagated to posterity. It is manifest
then, that Covetousness and desire of Lucre is not to be Objected to us; when,
besides Trouble and Dangers, there comes nothing to our share; and our
Adversaries, in the mean time, without any regard to the Pope, whom they
usually magnify so much, make what booty they please of the Church Revenues;
and besides, bestow great Rewards and Gifts upon some, that they may
obstinately Persecute the true Religion. That we also submit the rest of
Church-Possessions to the Determination of a Council, we hope will be
sufficient to justify us in the Opinions of all Good Men. But that it should
be imputed to us by our Adversaries, That we do but dissemble and play the
Hypocrites, as often as we speak of Reconciliation, and as if that were only
done that we may put a stop to the Emperor's Designs, pervert the matters, and
hinder a lawful Trial, as a thing that does very much trouble and afflict us;
for what can be more wicked and base, than to make a blind pretext of Piety and
Religion? We therefore desire, seeing that is a very heinous Accusation, that
the Emperor would patiently and attentively examine those things which we are
to say in our own defense. When Ten Years ago our Enemies made a great
complaint to the Emperor in the Diet of Ausburg, concerning our Churches, and
that we were enjoined to give an account of our Doctrine, Religion and
Ceremonies, we acted nothing craftily, nor in hugger-mugger, but in plain Terms
gave an open profession of our Doctrine, that all might be convinced, that it
agreed with the Doctrines of the Apostles; and we make no doubt but that was a
means of bringing many to embrace our Religion, when they saw that we taught
nothing contrary to the From of the Ancient Church, but only showed and
detected the Errors which had slipped into the Church. For it cannot be denied,
but that many and grievous Errors had crope in; the Doctrine of Repentance was
frigid and perplexed; not a word preached of Grace received by Christ, and the
Remission of Sins; the Lord's Supper was in a horrid manner, and wholly
corrupted and contaminated by the Popish Mass; for it is known, that private
Mass is but a new thing, introduced partly through Ignorance, and partly out of
Covetousness; because Marriage was denied to Priests, there was nothing to be
heard but Instances of the foulest Incontinence; the Doctrine of the Keys and
Power of the Church, was altogether slighted, and the Pope arrogated all that
Power to himself, only for the Confirmation of his own Dominion and Rule, and
loaded the minds of Men with almost infinite numbers of Precepts and Laws,
which learned and judicious Men often bewailed; but no care was had of setting
able Men over the Churches. What our Opinion was of those many and necessary
matters, we declared before the Emperor at Ausburg, and Books on that Subject,
written by Men of our Profession, are publicly extant. Many learned Men also
of other Nations confess, That they had the Knowledge of the true Doctrine from
these Books, so that then we shun not the Light. And when a Reconciliation was
attempted at Ausburg, we acted not Fraudulently nor Craftily, but showed our
selves to be desirous of agreement: and that if our Adversaries would have
received the Principal Doctrines, we should not have been very scrupulous nor
contentious about indifferent Things. And though the Ways then proposed by us
were moderate, yet our Treatment was neither too Friendly nor Impartial. Nay,
would to God the Emperor knew how our Adversaries, that were Commissionated,
then behaved themselves; for they often protested in the beginning of all
Treaties, that they would not depart a Hairs breadth from their own Opinion and
Doctrine, but that all they did was only to bring us over to their Judgment.
Wherefore they began to speak of Doctrines, of the Invocation of Saints, of
Private Mass and Satisfaction, affirming that there was no Error in them. That
was not then a Conference, wherein the Truth was sifted by solid Arguments, and
testimonies of Scripture; but it was a kind of haughty and pompous Confirmation
of manifest Errors. And because we did not then acquiesce to them, they now
construe that, as if we had only made a show of Treating about Accommodation,
not with any real and sincere design of Success, but only to shuffle with the
Emperor, and elude a Trial: For so they understand the word Reconciliation, as
if we should abandon the Truth and approve their Cause. But after the
Conference at Ausburg these things were no more debated, which nevertheless was
not our fault; for it is our chief desire that good and learned Men may conferr
of all these matters, and freely give their Judgment concerning them. Wherefore
we pray all Men not to give credit to this their Accusation; for if we shunned
the Light, or were ashamed of our Cause, we might easily forsake it, and
ingratiate our selves with them; but seeing we are convinced, that of all
Causes this is the most pious and necessary, therefore we undergo all this
Labor, submit to all Losses and Dangers, and profess the Doctrine of Christ,
which we desire to retain and propagate, longing for a Reformation of the
Church with Peace and Concord; and what a Year since we protested at Francfort,
we now also profess, that we will not decline a Conference, nor treaty of
Reconciliation, Which, that no Man may be mistaken, we so understand, that
following the Scripture as our Guide, Truth may be sought after, Error
abolished, and true Doctrine take place in Churches. For otherwise all Labor
and Pains will be in vain. Christ the Son of God made known to us his Will and
Doctrine from the Bosom of the Father: He is to be heard, and only to
acknowledged for our Judge. Now all the Emperor's Edicts and Proclamations
sufficiently show also, that this Affair ought to be orderly and lawfully
debated; but we do not think that our Adversaries method of proceeding at the
Diet of Ausburg, has been made known unto him. But now what our mind is, and
upon what Grounds we proceed, may be seen in the public and printed Confession
of our Faith, which we are certain does agree with Holy Scripture, and
therefore we cannot forsake it. Besides this Doctrine, which is the chief and
Foundation of all the rest, there are some other mean, and, as it were,
indifferent things; as concerning Ceremonies, Ordination of Priests,
Jurisdiction, Visiters, Church-Goods, matrimonial Causes, etc. all
Controversies, as to these, may, in our Judgment, be reconciled, if first there
were an Agreement about those necessary Points. For so long as our Adversaries
impugn the chief Matters, and go on in a way of Cruelty, the difference cannot
be removed. How in that some endeavor to persuade the Emperor, that our
Doctrine is blended with many Heresies and Errors, they do us an Injury; for if
they have any thing of that nature to Object unto us, they may do it publicly,
and they shall be answered: And if, perhaps, there be any thing in our Apology
too briefly or not plainly enough expressed, we will explain it. Again, if it
be convenient to alter any thing that has been Printed and Published, we will
not be Obstinate, when once the Fault is detected. We know also that the weak
and unlearned are offended, that the same Laws are not every where observed in
all our Churches. And though there is no necessity of retaining the same Form
every where, provided the Doctrine be the same; yet we do not refuse but that
may also be handled in some Assembly. Since therefore we have laid open our
Thoughts and Intentions, we beseech the Here Granvell that he would advise and
persuade the Emperor to reform and settle Peace in the Church. For though
manifest Vices and Errors may be defended by Power and Force, yet God will
always stir up those that shall confute and reprove them. How unjust and
contrary to the Law of Nature it is also, to attempt by Force and Arms the
Suppression of the true Religion, is obvious enough to be understood. The
Emperor Constantine gave the Donatists twice a public Hearing, though they
taught Doctrines manifestly false; and he himself was present at a Third
Hearing they had, that nothing might be Decreed against them, till he had been
exactly informed of the whole matter; a most excellent Example which ought to
admonish us of Meekness and Moderation. And since at this time also, there are
many most weighty Matters under debate, we hope the Emperor will attempt
nothing by Arms, before a fair Hearing and Trial; and therefore we humbly
Petition his Imperial Majesty, that he would appoint a Conference, which by his
Deputy he promised us at Francfort. For it properly belongs to his Charge, to
consult the Salvation of Men, especially when Popes are inflamed with most
bitter hatred, and have no other aim, than to incease Kings and Princes against
Innocent People, that they may be dragged away to the Slaughter. The Emperor
also deserves high Applause and Commendation, which will be celebrated by
Posterity, that hitherto he has not given way to those sanguinary Councils:
And indeed, it is the Will and Command of God, That all Good Will and
Protection should be shown to the Ministers of his Church. Now the Report that
is spread Abroad, as if we inclined to the Emperor's Enemies, is a Calumny of
the same nature, as the former. For it can be made out, that in time of the
War, we supplied the Emperor's Generals both with Workmen and Powder; and that
we enjoined our People to gratify them in every thing they could. Conditions,
it is true, were at that time offerred unto us, and those neither inconsiderable
nor inconvenient; but we rejected them all, upon no other consideration, than
that we might demonstrate our Loyalty and Affection toward the Emperor. And if
any one should be informed against, as to that particular, and the thing done
openly, we are of Opinion, that the Emperor would be satisfied with his
Justification. Now it is our desire that Granvell would weigh all these things
with himself, and also represent them to the Emperor, recommending to his
Majesty, at the same time, our Duty and Services, with a public
Reconciliation. For unless a stop be put to that Persecution of Holy Men, and
such extraordinary Cruelty, a horrid Desolation in all Churches will certainly
ensue; since the Popes and Bishops had rather have no Religion at all, than
admit of a Reformation. We also desire, that he would present to the Emperor
our Grievance concerning the Imperial Chamber: for many of our Associates are
most unjustly oppressed by them, contrary to Law, and the Emperor's Edicts, and
for the smallest matters most grievous Suits are commenced against them, as is
notoriously manifest in the Case of Minden: The Action was only for Threescore
Florins, which the Senate applied to the use of a Parish; to which they really
belonged, and had of ancient time been applied; but our Adversaries had rather
that thet small Revenue should be filthily spent by useless and idle Drones.
And though the Clergy of that City wallow in Riches, yet by no means will they
suffer that small Pittance of Money to be taken from them, and employed as it
ought to be, in the Service of the Church. For this so inconsiderable a Trifle,
the Judges of the Imperial Chamber have prosecuted the City of Minden with the
utmost Rigor, and outlawed them. Now it is our Desire, that this so great
Insolence of theirs may be in general restrained, and all those Suits laid
aside, as it was agreed upon with the Mediators at Francfort; for this must of
necessity be done, if the Emperor would see Peace in Germany. And, indeed, what
else are these Sentences and Condemnations of theirs, but Alarms to make us
prepare for War? Against which the very Law of Nature warrants us to defend our
selves: For if the Emperor repress them not, and others in the mean time raise
Forces, what can we judge, but they are designed against us? Which may give
occasion to a great Combustion, though sore against our Wills. We therefore
pray the Here Granvell, that he would supplicate the Emperor, in our Names, to
grant us that Peace which has been so often begged and desired.

When they had thus answered, What besides was done in the Assembly of Smalcald.
on the Thirteenth of April, they put an end to their Deliberations, having
enjoined their Divines to refute the Arguments of the King of England,
concerning the Points of Doctrine we mentioned, and that the Book should be
afterward sent thither: To which, if the English Divines should answer, and
any Hopes appeared of a future Agreement, it was resolved not to refuse a
Conference, but that they should make a League with him upon any other account
than that of Religion, no Man thought it convenient. A Decree was also made for
making Intercession to the French King, for those that suffered for Religion in
France; but so, That first they should be informed of the State of France, and
of the King's Mind, and whether or not their Mediation would be well taken.
Afterward Decrees were made concerning Church Lands, and the several
Grievances. Those of Hailbrun were also advised, to abolish the Popish Mass in
some Churches, which they had not as yet done, promising them Aid, if they
should chance to incur any Danger thereby. Lastly, They enact what was to be
done, if the Emperor should either reject a Peace, or answer ambiguously; or if
the Imperial Chamber should proceed in their wonted way, or Forces should be
secretly raised.

During these Transactions the Emperor punished the Men of Ghent, The Emperor
punishes the Rebels of Ghent.
putting the Authors of the Sedition to Death, and disarming the rest: But that
was not all, for he deprived them of their Privileges and Immunities, built a
Castle, and put therein a Garrison to curb them. It has been a common thing for
that City to resist their Princes, as we have observed before. Thus they served
Charles Duke of Burgundy, the Emperor's great Grandfather, Philip the
Grandfather of Charles, Lowis Earl of Flanders, Philip's Grandfather by the
Mother side, all whom the Emperor seemed now to have revenged; nor were they
ever brought so under as at this time. Afterward, on the Eighteenth of April,
the Emperor wrote to the Elector of Saxony and Lantgrave, The Emperor's Letters
to the Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave.
That he had discoursed his Brother Ferdinand, King of the Romans, amongst
other things, about the State of Germany, but especially the Difference
concerning Religion, which he wished were composed: For as he had omitted
nothing in time past that might have effected that, so was he still in the same
Mind, provided they acknowledged this his Zeal, and abused it not; but made
that desire of Peace which they had long pretended in Words and Promises,
appear now at length in Reality and Effect: That for many Years past he had had
frequent, and very condescending Treaties with them; but hitherto without any
Success: That all things now seemed to tend to the dissolution of the
Government, and great Disturbance of all the States of the Empire, if some
healing Course were not speedily taken: That however, though this was the
present Case, yet of his wonted Goodness, he was willing to assign them another
Diet, The Diet of Spire called.
to be held at Spire the Sixth of June: Or if the Plague or Contagion did not
allow it, at such place as his Brother King Ferdinand should appoint; there to
treat of the Means how so great Danger as hung over Germany, might be prevented
and wholly avoided: That, in the mean time, he hoped they and their
Confederates would prize this Lenity of his somewhat more than hitherto they
had done; and that they would so carry themselves in all Consultations and
Debates, that he himself, his Brother King Ferdinand, and the other obedient
Princes, might plainly see, that they were more inclined to Peace and Quietness
than to Strife and Dissension. That therefore they should come in Person to the
place appointed, by the Day prefixed, and let nothing but Sickness hinder them;
in which case they should send some of their intimate Counselors, Men that
loved Peace, were fit for Business, and fully acquainted with their Minds: That
they should intimate the same to their Confederates, that they also might be
present at the Day: That his Brother King Ferdinand would be there, from whom
they might expect a more ample Declaration of his Will and Pleasure; and of the
Effect of the Ambassy they sent to him: That therefore they should so frame
themselves for the Preservation both of themselves and Country, that all matter
of Dissension being removed, they might to better Purpose consult of the other
Affairs of the Empire: That, after all, they needed not to fear any Danger; for
that he assured them upon his Royal Word, and gave them the benefit of the
Peace of Nurimberg; nor would he suffer any Man to act to the contrary, yet so,
that they reciprocally should not offend others. To these Letters they answer
May the Ninth; That they return his Majesty their hearty Thanks, for his good
Inclinations to follow peaceful Counsels: That as to the Admonition he gives
them that they should acknowledge his Zeal, and not abuse it; there was no
Cause, said they, that he should entertain any other Thoughts of them or their
Confederates, Saxony and the Lantgrave's Answer to the Emperor.
for that there was nothing dearer to them than Peace; but why no
Reconciliation had been hitherto made, it was not to be imputed to them, but to
the greatness of the Cause, and their Adversaries, who would admit of no
Explanation of their Doctrine: That now they were very willing to obey his
Majesty, and be present at the Day appointed: But because they would not tire
out the King with needless Labor and Toil, they thought fit to send their Mind
in Writing; Which was, That his Majesty knew, that from the very first Rise of
this Dissension, after much Debate in the Diets of the Empire, it was looked
upon by all, to be the only proper Expedient, that a lawful General Council
should be called, or a National Synod of Germany. But when, because of the
shortness of time, that way seemed not so convenient to others, a future
Conference was moved at Francfort, and accordingly a Decree made, That since
this Matter was difficult and weighty, whereon Men's Salvation did depend, it
would not be soon dispatched, if they would effectually set about it; and that
therefore it would prove a hard Task, not only to King Ferdinand, but also to
them and their Associates, to attempt the Matter before a Conference were first
had, and the way prepared for it: That upon this Consideration, they thought it
the best Course at present, which was liked of by all at Francfort, That if a
National Council of Germany could not be had, a Conference should be appointed;
for that in their Judgment, a better way then that could not be found; as they
had also signified to the Count of Nuenar: But that for themselves to come
without the Advice and Consent of their Confederates, they would not: That,
again, the time assigned betwixt and that Day, was so short, that hardly could
their Confederates be called together, and consult of the Matter: That those
who lived more remote could hardly, with much ado be present, which therefore
they acquainted him with, that he might know their Thoughts: That, though it
was so, yet since his Majesty assured them that King Ferdinand would be there,
they would send thither their Deputies, and write to their Confederates to do
the like: But on this Condition still, that if nothing were done, That then
they might be free to take their other Courses; from which they could not
depart without the Consent of their Confederates: That they would also give
Instructions to their Deputies, to direct all their Consultations to a
peaceable Reconciliation, as much as they could, without offending God and
their own Consciences, and to prepare the Way, as far as in them lay, to an
entire Agreement: But that they hoped, his Majesty would command that the Holy
Scripture should bear the greatest Sway in all the Proceedings, and that when
their Adversaries deviated therefrom, they should be made to stick to their
Rule: That when Matters were brought under Agitation, if any Hopes of Success
appeared, they would not fail to come in Person: That, after all, they prayed
that the safe Conduct his Majesty promised, might be extended to their Divines
as well as Deputies, since they were the Parties chiefly concerned in the
Causes, and that he would be pleased to let them know what his Pleasure was
therein.

We mentioned Cardinal Farnese before: Cardinal Farnese's Speech against the
Protestants, before the Emperor.
He waited on the Emperor from Paris to Flanders, being a Youth hardly of Man's
Years; and it was said that the Emperor was displeased that the Pope had not
sent a grave Man of Age and Experience. When therefore the matter of Religion,
and of the Turkish War, came under Deliberation, and Granvell had spoken his
Mind; Farnese, at length, in Presence of the Emperor and King Ferdinand, spoke
to this purpose; That the Pope was very desirous of Peace, and of the Concord
of Germany; but of such a Peace and Concord as might not be displeasing to God:
That it was his Desire also, that all their Force might be employed against the
Turk: But that as to Religion and the Protestants, there had been many Treaties
with them in order to a Reconciliation, especially in the Diet of Ausburg,
where they then presented their Confession of Faith; in which Writing, though
there were many Errors to be found, yet they had in the mean time deviated from
it: So that seeing they had nothing fixed or certain to which they adhered, but
were like slippery Eeles, there was no more treating with them: That, in like
manner, the King had last Year, at the desire of the Elector of Brandenburg,
appointed another Treaty with them; but that they had stumbled at the very
Threshold, as is commonly said, and given Intimation plain enough, how far they
were from any purpose of Agreement; for that having once shaken off their Duty
and Obedience, they were now come to that, That it was not the Reformation of
the Pope they aimed at, but his total Suppression; not the removing of Faults,
but the overturning of the Apostolical See, that so all ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction might fall to the Ground: And if they durst do so the Year before,
when the State of Europe was somewhat more peaceable and quiet, what would they
not do in all probability, when Peace was not yet concluded with France, and
the Turk again preparing to Invade Hungary? What, but even grow more froward by
the Adversity of the times; and it was in vain to think, that there could be
any way of reclaiming them from their Designs for that, they did only
controvert about a few things, but brought many chief Doctrines under debate:
That again, it was, in a manner, uncertain how to come to any Agreement with
them, since they differed among themselves. That Luther taught one kind of
Doctrine, and Zuinglius another; not to mention any thing of the other Sects:
And that, granting there might be some hopes of an Accommodation, yet they
would not obey the Church of Rome, unless they had many things allowed them, as
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in both Kinds, the Marriage of the Clergy,
and the like, which are not to be altered without a public Decree of Council.
That now, if it should be said, that for public Peace sake, these things might
be granted them, and the consent either of the Pope or Council be afterward
obtained, that would not be ill said, indeed; but then they would presently lay
hold on that Privilege, and never want for a public confirmation thereof. And
that if so, then would they lay aside all care of a Council, which would
occasion great Divisions all over Christendom; when France, Spain, Italy, and
other Provinces would differ from Germany in Rites and Customs. That, moreover,
should the Council, perhaps, condemn the Alteration made, and indulged for a
time, and Decree the contrary, then would all hopes be lost of reclaiming
Germany, now hardened in their Opinions, and there would be danger, least the
Protestants, (the thing they chiefly drive at) should move the rest of the
States to make Defection also. That the Emperor himself was not ignorant, how
in former Years they had made a Decree in the Diet of the Empire, about calling
a Council, without his consent; and that therefore care was to be had that they
should not do the like hereafter: That he represented these things unto them
both, that they might see what was to be expected from these private Treaties
and Conferences: That a Peace had been treated with them at Schweinfurt, and a
Truce afterward made at Nurimberg under Penalty: But that they, without any
regard to so great a Favor, had broken their Articles, and strengthened their
own League by the Accession of many Cities and Princes, and especially of the
King of Denmark, and Duke of Wirtemberg, and had in many places changed the
Religion contrary to their Oaths and Promises, so that it easily appeared what
farther hopes were to be had of them, who by diverse ways, partly by Favors,
and partly by Force, drew Men over to their side. That the Heat and Zeal of
Religion was now grown cold, and that Men were naturally prone to forsake the
Rules of Austerity, and to list themselves under a more easy and laxe
Discipline: But that they did not confine themselves within those bounds
neither, nor was it enough for them to mislead Men into Error, unless they
committed Sacrilege also, cast out Bishops, and profaned all Religion with
Impunity: Nay, that they were now advanced to that pitch of Licenciousness,
that they would overturn that most upright Judicature of the Imperial Chamber,
to the intent, that it being removed, the Emperor's Authority in Germany might
be weakened, and that they, without any Resistance, might prey upon the Lives
and Fortunes of all Men, after their own Pleasure. That therefore no firm nor
lasting Peace was to be expected from those private Treaties: And that if any
such should be, there was no doubt to be made, but that it would invalidate the
Dignity of the Apostolical See, and all Ecclesiastical Polity: That many other
things could be alleged in this place, but that for brevities sake he waved
them: That the next thing now was, to consider how with the safety of Religion,
Provisions might be made for a Turkish War. That the most commodious way indeed
would be, if the Protestants and other States did jointly contribute
Assistances. But that since, perhaps, that could not be obtained, unless
Religion were settled, and that the handling of religious Matters belonged not
to private Assemblies, but to a General Council; it would be well done to have
a Council called with all Expedition, and the whole cause of Religion referred
to it; for that so he, the Emperor, would satisfy all others, and overawe the
Protestants; who when they saw the matter seriously set about, would become
much more Obedient and Tractable, as perceiving a course taken to reduce them
again into the right way, and to root all Heresies out of Germany: For that
since the Christian Religion belonged to all Men in General, there was nothing
to be altered or reformed therein, but with the common consent of all, and that
regard was not to be had to Germany alone, but to France, Spain, Italy, and
other Nations also. For that if any Innovation should be made in Germany,
without consulting them, it would expose many to censure, and be of pernicious
Example: That, in like manner it would be a monstrous like thing, if the
Members of the Church answered not in proportion to their own Body: That it was
an ancient Custom, even as old as the Apostles themselves, that all
Controversies should be determined by the Authority of a Council: And that,
seeing all were very sollicitous for a Council, and that Sigismund King of
Poland had lately sent an Ambassador to the Pope to intercede for it; it would
not be difficult to begin the same, especially since they themselves, in a
League lately made, had promised upon Oath to use all their Endeavors to
procure the calling of a Council: That now was the fit time for it, when there
was a treaty of Peace with France on Foot, and many signs of mutual Benevolence
appeared; so that the Bishops of their Dominions might without danger repair to
it. That, besides, it would much conduce to the Peace of their own Minds and
Consciences, if they referred all things to a Council, and not make Decrees in
private Conventions, which might offend God; for, that so, they would have
nothing to answer for: That moreover, it would be useful also unto them, since
all the Care being referred to the Council, they would have time and leisure to
mind other Affairs, as they should think fit, and to enlarge their League also;
which would produce this Effect, that the Protestants should either submit to
the Decree of the Council, or be by the Catholic Confederates reduced to Duty;
and so much for that. That now, as to the Turk, He did earnestly exhort and
beseech, as he had often done already, that the Emperor would make Peace with
the King of France; for that such a Peace would be so Advantageous to
Christendom, that without it, it was to be doubted, whether the Turk would be
resisted: That he had many times before shown the Benefits of that Peace, so
that it was not needful now to repeat them; that the other States of the Empire
might in the mean time be solicited for aid; and that, if after the League
should be enlarged and the Council Commenced, the Protestants might be
persuaded, upon Security given them, to come to the Council, it would not be
difficult to obtain Assistance also from them against the Turk. But that, if
there was no obtaining of that, but upon bad Conditions, pernicious to
Religion; it was to be considered, of two Evils which was to be chosen, and
whether it would be better to offend God, by betraying Religion, or to want the
Subsidies of one Province against the Turk. That the Truth was, it could not
easily be determined, which withstood Christ most, the Protestants or the
Turks; for that these exercised their Cruelty only upon the Bodies of Men, but
that these drew their Souls into eternal Damnation: That therefore he thought
it most expedient that a Council should be speedily called, to Commence this
Year; and that no Matters of Religion should be handled in any Diets or
Assemblies of Germany, but that the League should be enlarged, were it only for
this, that thereby the Protestants might be the more invited to concord. That
Peace was also to be made with the French King, and in the mean time Assistance
procured on all Hands against the Turkish Power, that next Year he might be
attacked with all the Force that could be made. Cardinal Farnese had joined
with him Marcello Cervino Bishop of Necastro to moderate his Councils, who in
this same Legation was made Cardinal. When some Months after this Counsel of
Farnese's came abroad; John Calvin clothed it in a short Commentary, least any
Man should mistake it, and therewith it was printed and published.

About this time the Duke of Cleve, now in possession of G^elderland, came to
the Emperor to make up the difference he had with him, but that proved in vain;
wherefore returning Home, he began to join Counsels with the French King; who
since he had left all Hopes of Recovering Milan, the Emperor having offered
such Conditions, The French King secretly displeased.
as he little expected, he fell quite off from the Emperor's Friendship, though
covertly, complaining that he had been abused; insomuch, that the Constable,
who had been his great Favorite before, began now to fall into his Disgrace,
because he had advised him to let the Emperor pass through France, and had
thereupon filled him with great Hopes. Seeing then the King was casting about
underhand, how he might by any means annoy the Emperor, and that the Duke of
Cleve was not able alone to stand it out against so powerful a Competitor, they
began to think of mutual Engagements of Friendship. The Duke of Cleve's
Alliance with the French King.
The French King had a Niece, Jane the Daughter of his Sister Margaret, Queen
of Navarr, a Young Lady of about Eleven Years of Age, the richest Fortune in
France, and of singular Beauty both of Body and Mind; the King designed her in
Marriage for the Duke of Cleve, and therefore solicited her Relations, and
especially the Queen his Sister, for their Consent, which at length he
obtained; as shall be said in its proper place.

At this time the Pope made War against the Perugians who refused to pay an
additional Custom imposed by him upon Salt and other Commodities, The Pope's
War with those of Perugia.
and so reduced the City under his Obedience; having for the like Cause driven
Asconio Colonna, a very powerful Man, out of all his Territories.

Cardinal Farnese finding no likelihood of any Success in the Peace betwixt the
Emperor and French King; which according to his Instructions he had proposed,
and that, unknown to him, a Day was assigned the Protestants to meet, and treat
at Haguenaw, he departed, and about the Fifteenth of May came to Paris, where
on Whitsunday in the Cathedral Church, he invested Anthony Uncle to Madam
d'Estampes the King's Darling, Cardinal of Mendon, by the ceremony of putting a
purple Hat lately sent from Rome, upon his Head, and then having saluted the
King in passing, he made all speed back again to Rome.

King Ferdinand afterward leaving Flanders, set out upon his Journey to the
Diet at Haguenaw; The Diet of Haguenaw.
for because of the Plague it could not be kept at Spire. The French King also,
by the Emperor's Advice, sent his Ambassador Lazarus Baif to that Diet; for
both of them disguised their Discontent, and as yet gave fair words to one
another. The French King's Edict against the Lutherans.
The King likewise the First Day of June, emitted a most severe Edict against
the Broachers of the Heresies and false Doctrine of Luther and his Followers,
which Twelve Days after was proclaimed at Paris, and Printed according to
Custom.

Much about this time the King of England struck off the Head of Thomas
Cromwell Earl of Essex, Cromwell Earl of Essex beheaded.
whom from a very low Degree he had raised to great Honor. He also put away
his Queen Ann of Cleve, and married the Lady Catharine Howard, The King of
England having put away Ann of Cleve, marries the Lady Catharine Howard.
the Duke of Norfolk's Brother's Daugther. Cromwell had advised the King to the
Match of Cleve; but he falling afterward in Love with the Lady Howard, was
thought to have been prevailed with by her, to cut off Cromwell, whom she
looked upon as her Adversary. Besides, he was not very acceptable to the
Nobility, and had fallen into a suspicion of designing the Ruin of the Roman
Catholics.

In the mean time Henry Duke of Brunswick accused all the Protestants to the
Emperor, The Duke of Brunswick Accuses the Protestants.
and in particular Henry Duke of Saxony, in that contrary to the Will of his
Brother George, and the Condition expressed in his Testament, he had made an
alteration in Religion; that he obstructed the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Mersburg and Misen, and that he kept to himself the sum of Threescore thousand
Florins left by his Brother for the use of the League. Wherefore he moved the
Emperor to reduce him to Duty, and if he refused, to foreclose him from his
Brother's Succession, according to the tenor of his last Will and Testament.
However he did not thus alone, but some others of the League joined with him,
though he was the chief.

It is now time to speak of the Assembly at Haguenaw. The Acts of the Assembly
of Haguenaw.
It was opened June the Twenty-fifth, King Ferdinand having been there a Month
before. Some days before the Commencement the Protestants had made their
Applications to the Electors Palatines, Cologne and Treves, to Erick Duke of
Brunswick, and the Bishops of Ausburg and Spire, to all privately in their
several Lodgings, that they would promote a Peace. King Ferdinand therefore
having on the Day abovementioned, called the Protestants before him, declared
unto them the Cause of the Assembly. And because the Princes came not in
Person, which the Emperor fully expected from them, he required their Deputies
to show him their Commissions and Instructions. After that he nominated
Commissioners, Lowis Prince Palatine, John Archbishop of Treves, Lowis Duke of
Bavaria, and William Bishop of Strasburg, who being accepted by the
Protestants, the Treaty began. A great many Protestant Divines came thither
also, as Justus Menius, Pistorius, Vrbanus Regius, Bucer, Brentius, Blaurerus,
Osiander, Schnepsius, and many more; but Melancthon fell dangerously sick upon
the Rode. Every one of these preached privately in their own Lodgings, as it
was their Custom, but then, especially when all the Deputies met together to
consult about any matter. But this coming to King Ferdinand's Knowledge he
discharged them to preach any more; though, on the other hand the Deputies
alleged, that they preached not publicly but privately, and that his Majesty
had no cause to be offended thereat. When the Conference should begin, the
Lantgrave and Duke of Saxony intended to be present, and were already on their
own Frontiers, expecting the News of it, that so they might set out upon their
Journey. The Commissioners Pacificators afterward required the Protestants to
deliver unto them the Heads of the controverted Doctrines drawn up in short:
They make answer to this, That the Confession of their Faith and Apology had
been presented at Ausburg Ten Years before, to which they still adhered, being
ready to satisfy any that found fault with it; and since they knew not what it
was that their Adversaries chiefly censured in that Book, they had nothing to
propound, but rather were to demand of them, what the Doctrines were that they
thought contrary to the Word of God. That if they would do so, and bring the
matter to a Conference, as had been thought fit at Francfort, they were ready
to come to any fair Agreement. Some Days after the Commissioners make Report,
That seeing they stuck to the Confession of Ausburg, they had in the mean time
read over that Book and all the Treaty of Ausburg, and find that some Points of
Doctrine had been agreed upon there, and some not: That therefore they were
ready to use all their Endeavors to accommodate these, and desired them to
tell them their Thoughts therein. To this the Protestants reply, That some
Articles had been discoursed on, indeed, but nothing concluded therein, nor any
Conciliation made there. The matter being thus tossed to and fro; when the
Protestants urged a Conference, and the others alleged, that they had Commands
from the Emperor and King, to proceed according to the Treaty of Ausburg; King
Ferdinand calling them all together on the Sixteenth of July, King Ferdinand's
Proposals to the Protestants.
told them, That since nothing could be then determined, and especially because
the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave were absent, another Day was to be
appointed, when the Deputies of both Parties and learned Men should meet in an
equal number, and conferr among themselves about the Points of the Augustane
Confession; but so, that it should be no derogation to the Decree of Ausburg:
And that the Pope also, if he pleased, might send Commissioners thither. That
again, since some complained, that the Protestants had turned them out of their
Possessions, it was but just and reasonable, that in the mean time whilst the
Controversy about Religion depended, those who were rejected, should be
restored to the Possession of their Church Livings, or else be allowed to bring
their Actions for them at Law. That, moreover, for avoiding all Commotions, a
longer Truce should be made, wherein those should be now comprehended, who were
of the Augustane Confession before the Transaction of Nurimberg, so that the
Protestants should not reckon those of their Number who had joined with them
since, nor admit of any others neither for the future. The Protestants Answer.
Five days after, the Protestants declared what they had to expect against in
these Proposals, That they highly approved of a Conference, and wished that the
Emperor himself in Person, and not his Deputies only, might be present at it;
but that, as to the Pope's sending Commissioners thither, they should not
prescribe Laws to the Emperor. As to the Restitution of Church Lands, and the
Judicature of the Imperial Chamber, they made a long Answer as has been several
times mentioned before, alleging that the Controversy about Religion ought
first to be determined; but that they should exclude those who had associated
with them since the Peace of Nurimberg, and admit of no others for the future,
it was a thing, they said, they could not do, and that they had no Instructions
as to that particular. On the other hand King Ferdinand and the Commissioners
Pacificators urge the Restitution of Church Livings, or at least, that they
should be put under sequestration until the Cause were determined: Besides,
King Ferdinand told them that he would not grant them Liberty to admit of more
into their Society, and therefore advised them, to comply with the Condditions
proposed by him; for that though they did refuse, A Convention appointed to be
at Worms.
yet by Authority from the Emperor he would make a Decree, and at the same time
he appointed the next Convention to be held at Worms the Twenty-eighth Day of
October. They return an Answer to him, that they were satisfied with the time
and place of the Conference, but that they had robbed no Man, and that the
Question it self belonged to the Conference and future Treaty; that besides no
sequestration could be made without great prejudice to the State and
Constitution of the Church within their Dominions, and to the Schools and Poor:
And that, since it was not long to the Time of the Conference, they craved that
the whole matter might be put off till then; that there they would make it
appear how much more sollicitous they were for the Glory of God, and the
Reformation of the Church, than for Church Lands and Revenues; and that though
they could presently prove how some of their Adverse Party appropriated to
themselves such Possessions, yet they would deferr it till then: At which time,
when the matter should come to be sifted, it would plainly appear, which of the
two converted those Possessions more to their own private use, than to the
Honor of God. Concerning their Associates they answered as they did before,
praying that it might also be put off till the next Conference, and that Peace
might in the mean time be preserved.

King Ferdinand thereupon made a Decree July the Twenty-eighth, The Decree of
Haguenaw.
wherein having recited the whole Proceedings, he appointed a Conference at
Worms, as we said before, but conditionally, if it pleased the Emperor. The
Princes, Electors, as also the Bishops of Magdeburg, Saltsburg, and Strasburg,
William and Lowis Dukes of Bavaria, the Duke of Cleve, and the Protestants, are
enjoined to send their Commissioners thither, so that there should be Eleven on
each side; the same number of Clerks were also appointed to be there, carefully
to set down in Writing all the Proceedings in the Conference, which was decreed
to be about the Doctrines proposed at Ausburg, and the Emperor was prayed to
call a Diet of the Empire. In the mean time, by Command and Authority from the
Emperor, he charges all, under severe Penalties, to live in Peace, and abstain
from Violence: And whereas it was urged by the Protestants that the Imperial
Chamber had no power to judge of the Peace of Nurimberg, he referred that to
the Emperor's Cognizance. The Decree being read, the Protestants desired a Copy
of it: And because the Emperor having written to him from Brussels June the
Fifteenth, told him, That he would declare his Thoughts, as to the Imperial
Chamber, they begged to know what he had been pleased to signify in that
matter, since there was no mention at all of that in the Decrce; so that they
knew not whether the Judges of the Chamber were discharged to proceed or not.
To this King Ferdinand made Answer, That he had, indeed, Orders from the
Emperor to acquaint them with his Resolution, but it was upon Condition, That
all Church Lands and Goods were restored, or put under sequestration, for that
then all Proceedings were discharged; but since they refused both, he had no
more to say, but would make a Report of all to the Emperor. Besides the Princes
whom I named, the Bishop of Trent was present, and also Henry Duke of
Brunswick, but he went Home before the conclusion of the Assembly. The
Electors, Palatine and Cologne, and the Bishop of Strasburg were very
Instrumental here for continuing the Peace; for the rest hatched far different
Counsels, and urged the Decree of Ausburg, saying, That matters should not be
put off with Conferences and Debates, but that it ought to be taken into
deliberation, Vayvode King of Hungary dies, leaving a young Son Stephen.
how the Protestants attempts might be quashed and restrained. During this
Assembly, John the Vayvode King of Hungary died, leaving behind him an Infant
Son Stephen, of whom Isabell the Daughter of Sigismund King of Poland had been
lately brought to Bed. This was the Cause also that King Ferdinand, having
notice sent him of it, hastened Home.

About this time also many Fires happened in Saxony, and in Places about
belonging to the Protestants for most part, which burnt down some Towns and
Villages. The Duke of Brunswick was reported to have been the Author of this
horrid Villainy, Robert Barnes burnt at London.
as shall be said hereafter. July the Fifthteenth, one Robert Barnes Doctor of
Divinity was burnt at London. He had been for sometime banished England for the
Protestant Religion, but being afterward informed that King Henry applied
himself to Piety and the Knowledge of the Truth, he returned Home; and was
afterward employed in that Ambassy which was sent to Germany, and was one of
those who, amongst other things, treated with the Divines of Wittemberg, about
the King's Divorce, as we told you in the Tenth Book. But the King changing his
Mind, and in most things retaining the Popish Doctrine, this Man who continued
constant to the last was this Day Executed, Papists and Protestants burnt at
the same time.
having at the Stake made a public Profession of his Faith. Other two of the
same Religion were burnt with him; and the same Day Three others were burnt for
maintaining the Pope's Supremacy, and the Validity of Queen Catharine's
Marriage.

In the Month of August died at Paris William Budey, William Budey dies.
Master of the Requests, a Man of extraordinary Learning, and worthy to be
Honored by all Posterity; were it only for this, that he and Cardinal du
Bellay, Bishop of Paris, were the Advisers of King Francis to that Noble and
Generous Act of settling competent Salaries on the Professors of Languages, and
liberal Arts at Paris; for it is hardly to be believed what plentiful Streams
have flowed from this Fountain, A most Hot and Dry Year.
and watered not only France but other Countries also. The French King commands
Prayers and Supplications to be made.
He ordered his Funeral to be made without any Pomp. This Year was memorable
for extraordinary Heat and Drought, however the Wine was excellently good. The
French King, in the mean time, about Autumn, sent circulatory Letters to all
his Bishops, ordering Prayers and Supplications to be made in all Churches. For
though he was at Peace with the Emperor, The Emperor confirms the Decree of
Haguenaw, and exhorts the Protestants to come to the Assembly at Worms.
which he would not rashly break; yet he was much afraid, that the old Enemy of
Mankind, and hater of Peace, might by his Engines and Instruments lay a Train
for kindling a new War. The Emperor being informed of all that passed by
Letters from his Brother King Ferdinand and the Commissioners Pacisicators,
comfirmed the Decree of Haguenaw, and by Letters dated at Vtrecht, the
Thirteenth of August, exhorted the Protestants that against the Day appointed
they would send their Deputies and Divines to Worms, to all whom he granted a
safe Conduct; and assured them, That since his Affairs would not suffer him to
be there in Person, he would send in his place some person of eminent Quality
about him; not doubting but that the Pope would send thither also for
Reconciliation sake. He promised likewise to call a Diet of the Empire, where
he intended to be personally present, and to which Diet also the result of the
Conference ought to be referred. By other Letters afterward dated at Brussels
the Fifteenth of October, he gives Granvell Commission to act, and appoints him
his Deputy at the future Conference. Granvell was at that time at Besanzon, a
Town in the Franche Comte, where he was Born; and being so taken up with
Business, that he could not be there at the Day appointed, he wrote to the
Elector of Mentz and the other Princes designed for the Conference, sending
before, on the Second of November, John Naves of Luxemburg, to excuse his
Delay, and crave their Patience. For after he had, upon some grudge, wormed out
Matthias Eldo, as we said before, he employed this Man in his place, as being
more obsequious and agreeable to his Humor. In the mean time the Emperor
called a Diet of the Empire to meet at Ratisbone in the Month of January, A
Diet of the Empire called at Ratisbone.
where all should be present. Afterward Granvell himself came to Worms,
accompanied by the Bishop of Arras, his Son, and some Spanish Divines, Muscosa,
Malvenda and Carobello, where having produced his Commission, and the Emperor's
Instructions in the Assembly, he made a Speech on the Five and Twentieth Day of
November. Granvell's Speech in the Assembly at Worms.
And excusing the Emperor and King Ferdinand, that they could not be present,
he enlarged upon the paternal Care and Affection that the Emperor had for the
public; who desired nothing more earnestly, than that long and inveterate
Dissension might be removed, which was very pernicious both to Church and
State: That he made no doubt, but they themselves were sensible of the present
Calamity; and thought it necessary that there should be a Reformation in the
Church: That nothing therefore, would more concern them in Duty, than to
prevent the spreading of this Evil by their sound and pious Counsels: For that,
as when a Fire broke out in a City, it is the Inhabitants part to quench it;
even so were they now to do, that Peace and Concord might be re-established:
That moreover they should ponder with themselves, and set before their Eyes
what an Inundation of Evils had by this Dissension broke in upon Germany: For
that, not to mention the Blood and Slaughter, Religion was banished, Charity
quite exstinguished in the Hearts and Minds of Men, all the Beauty and Ornament
of the ancient Catholic Church defaced; and that in short, the Eloquence of no
Man's Tongue was able to express the greatness and extent of the misery: That
Germany had heretofore flourished in Zeal for Religion, and in all kinds of
Virtue; but that now it was sadly degenerated, and looked upon as the Head and
Source of all the Disorders of Christendom: That unless then a Remedy were
applied to this Distemper, all things would grow worse and worse, and run to
ruin: And that as the Emperor had appointed this Conference for examining the
Truth, and advancing the Glory of God, so were they to bring along with them no
ambitious nor covetous Minds, but pious and moderate Dispositions, and look up
only to Christ, who now with outstretched Arms desired the same of all of
them: That that was also the chief desire and wish of the Pope, the most August
Emperor, and King Ferdinand; that therefore he adjured them by the Death and
Sufferings of Christ, and all that was Holy and Sacred, that they would mend
and make whole again the seamless Coat of our Lord, which was rent and torn all
over; being therein mindful of the Name of Christians, which they took upon
them in their Holy Baptism, and being mindful also of the renowned Province of
Germany, their common and native Country. For that unless they would be
reconciled, all the Evils that might afterward ensue from that Obstinacy and
Frowardness of Mind, would be imputed to them; but, and if they managed that
weighty Affair with Soberness and Modesty, they would do God most acceptable
Service, and extremely oblige the Emperor, who would make it his Endeavors
that the whole matter should be accomplished in the next Diet of the Empire.
The Son of the Vayvode is put under the Protection of the Turk.


After the Death of the Vayvode, the Guardians and other Nobles sent
Ambassadors to the Grand Seignior, and recommended the Child to his Protection.
The Turk promised to defend him, and sent him Presents. King Ferdinand also,
understanding this, Ferdinand prepares to Invade Hungary.
sent Jerome a Laski, who some Years before had Revolted from the Vayvode, from
Haguenaw to Constantinople, as a fit person to make the Turk his Friend:
Returning afterward Home, he thought it best to begin a War before the Queen
Dowager and the Guardians of the Child should be in a readiness: Alaski
committed to Prison by Solomon.
Which being known at Constantinople, Solomon committed Alaski to Prison, as
most privy to Ferdinand's Designs, and at the same time sent Aid, which being
hindered by the Winter Weather came a little too late.

Next Day after Granvell had spoken, they began to treat of Clerks and
Notaries, and on each Side Two were chosen, carefully to take Notes of all that
passed, and keep them. The Protestants appointed on their part, Caspar Cruciger
and Wolfgang Musculus, The Speech of the Legate Campeggio in the Assembly of
Worms.
both Divines. On the Eighth of December after, Thomas Campeggio, Bishop of
Feltri, the Popes Legate, made a Speech, and having promised some things
concerning Peace, which Christ so much recommended to us, and lamented also the
Condition of Germany; some Popes, said he, and especially Paul III. had already
essayed all Means to have delivered it from this Calamity, and had therefore
called a Council lately at Vicenza: But that when after some Months
Expectation, none came to it, it had been, of necessity, put off to another
time: That now the Emperor, the eldest and most obedient Son of the Church; the
Protector also and Advocate of the same, had appointed this Conference, as a
certain preparatory Prelude to the Proceedings of the future Diet at Ratisbone:
And that with his Will and Consent, and by Command of the Pope, he was come
thither, and earnestly entreated them, that they would direct all their
Counsels to Unity and Concord: For that the Pope would do any thing in order
thereunto, The Conditions of the Conference at Worms.
that he could with Safety to Religion. The Presidents and Moderators of the
Assembly, made this Law at first, That the Acts of the Conference should not be
communicated to any Man, unless he were appointed to be one of the Number; and
that they should not be made public neither, before a full Report of all were
made to the Emperor. Then they required the Protestants to produce in Writing
those Heads of Doctrine which they were fully resolved to stick to. There was a
long Debate betwixt them about these things; as also concerning the Form of the
Oath, the Number of the Co^^ocutors, and the way of giving their Voices: For
when the Catholics perceived that the Deputies of the Elector Palatine, the
Elector of Brandenburg, and Duke of Cleve favored the Protestants, they were
afraid they should be out-voted, and therefore purposely drove off the Time
from Day to Day, until they should have other Orders from the Emperor, as shall
be said hereafter. So then, on the Second of January they propounded new and
strange Conditions, as that Two Divines should be chosen out of the whole
Number, 1541.
to reason about the Question proposed: That their Arguments and Discourse
being taken by the Clerks, should be carried to the Presidents: That the lesser
Number should not be obliged to follow the Opinion of the greater, unless the
Emperor and States of the Empire decreed it should be so: That the Clerks
should not write down all the Discourse of the Conferrers, but only their bare
Opinions, whether reconciled or controverted: And that nevertheless the Decree
of Ausburg and the like should still continue in Force. On the contrary, The
Protestants demanded, that since on both sides there were Twenty two appointed
for the Conference, every one might have Leave to speak their Minds: And that
not only the bare Opinions, but also the Arguments and Reasons, with the
Explanations of the same, should be taken in Writing: Affirming it to be an
unreasonable thing, in this most holy Cause, to follow the Opinion of any
Party, and not rather the Rule of God's Word; or to force any Man to think or
speak contrary to it. Whilst Time was in this manner spun out, the Protestants
often complained of it, craving that the Augustane Confession of Faith being
laid before them, they might, according to the Decree of Haguenaw fall
presently to Business, especially since it was to be a friendly, no captious
and ensnaring Conference, to clear only the Way to Concord and Agreement. The
Divines also urged the same, who were there in great Number, as Melancthon,
Capito, Bucer, Osiander, Brentius, Calvin, Alese a Scot, sent from the Elector
of Brandenburg, and many others; to whom were added Simon Griney, and John
Sturmey. At length, about the Thirteenth of January, the Catholics chose John
Eckius, and the others Philip Melancthon to begin the Conference: And in the
first place, that they might proceed in order, Original Sin was the first
Subject, of which they spoke by Turns in the public Assembly: The Emperor
dissolves the Conference.
But when all were intent on this, came Letters from the Emperor on the Third
Day of the Conference, directed to Granvell and the other Deputies, whereby he
put off all further Proceedings till the Diet of Ratisbone, whither he ordered
the Protestants chiefly to repair, and recalled Granvell with all speed. These
Letters being read in the Session, which was January the Eighteenth, Granvell
exhorted them to obey the Emperor, and come to Ratisbone: For that his Majesty
was most desirous of Peace; and that if any rough Word had perhaps escaped him
in the heat of Conference, he prayed them not to take it ill from him, who was
ready to do all Services to the Public. Hereunto the Protestants made Answer;
That they were very sorry, that the Conference had not begun much sooner, and
that they could not now proceed any further therein: But that since the Emperor
so commanded, it behooved them to obey: So that now they would return home,
that they might make Report of all that had passed, and doubted not but their
Principals would be ready to gratify the Emperor: That nevertheless, if
perhaps, they should come or send their Deputies somewhat too late, it must be
excused, because of the shortness of Time. At this Assembly was also Petro
Paulo Vergerio, Bishop of Cabo d'Istria, in outward Appearance as for the
French King, but in reality sent from the Pope, who thought he might do him
better Service there, if he went by the Character of another. Vergerius's
Speech concerning the unity of the Church.
He made a Speech here, of the Unity and Peace of the Church, which he printed
and gave about, and therein insisted chiefly to show that there was no Thoughts
to be had of a National Council; for that Assembly looked somewhat like such a
thing, and seemed to make way for it. Now of all things the Pope could not
endure that, and Vergerio was fully acquainted with his Thoughts. By the Means
of this Man then, and other such Instruments, the Conference was impeded, and
at length dissolved; for by drilling on the time, and raising Delays, they
sought to themselves Starting-Holes and Evasions. In the beginning of January
the Emperor left Flanders and came to Metz, the chief City of Lorrain; from
thence he took his Journey by Spire to Ratisbone, and wrote the Letter to
Granvell we mentioned, upon the Rode: He then took his Way by Nurimberg, a City
he had not seen before, and was there magnificently received.

February the Eleventh, Philip de Chabot-Brion Admiral of France, a Man of
great Honor, The Admiral of France condemned.
being brought into Suspicion with the King, of Miscarriages in the War of
Savoy, which we mentioned before, was after a long and brisk Trial found Guilty
of Bribery and Treason; and being deprived of all his great Honors and
Dignities, without any Hope of Restitution, he was committed to Prison in the
Castle of Vincennes, not far from Paris. William Poiet Chancellor of France,
pronounced this Sentence against him at Melun, all the chief Men, Judges and
Lawyers of France being called to this Trial. And though Sentences so passed
were usually most firm and inviolable, yet not long after he was absolved by
the King's Authority, as shall be related hereafter. At this time also Maurice
son of Henry Duke of Saxony married Agnes, Duke Maurice's Marriage with the
Lantgrave's Daughter.
Daughter to the Lantgrave. In the Month of March most of the Princes and
States came to Ratisbone, where the Emperor had sometime expected them. The
Lantgrave came also toward the latter End of the Month, with a great Train,
and the next Day went with his Guards to wait on the Emperor, The Diet of
Ratisbone.
who received him very graciously. The Duke of Saxony sent thither a splendid
Ambassy and Divines, amongst whom was Melancthon. From the Pope came also
Casparo Contarini, a Cardinal of great Reputation: There were present also the
Elector of Brandenburg, Frederick and Otho Henry Princes Palatine, William and
Lowis Dukes of Bavaria, Henry Duke of Brunswick, Charles Duke of Savoy, George
Marquess of Brandeburg, Philip Duke of Pomerania, the Bishops of Mentz,
Saltzburg, Bremen, Bamberg, Spire, Ausburg, Aichstadt, Constance, Heildesseim,
Brixen and Passaw. About this time was published and brought to Ratisbone,
Luther's Book against the Duke of Brunswick.
Martin Luther's very invective Book, written in High Dutch, against Henry Duke
of Brunswick. In the former Book we took notice of Duke Henry's railing Papers
against the Elector of Saxony and the Lantgrave: And seeing, in a Libel lately
published, he called the Duke of Saxony Heretic, Seditious, Cain, Monster,
Aesop, endued with no Virtue, neither of Body nor Mind; whom Luther himself
(though he was his Idol, and, in a manner Second God) did but laugh at and
despise: Luther, who thought his Reputation herein concerned, wrote a most
bitter Answer, and affirmed it to be a Calumny: And because the Adversaries
challenged to themselves the Title of the Church, he proved by many Arguments
that they had made Defection from the true Church; and having stated a
Comparison, maintained that the Roman Papacy, which had corrupted and defiled
the true Doctrine of Christ, was the Antichrist, foretold by Daniel and the
Apostles so many Ages before: Which being so, that the Revenues of the Church
belonged not to them, and that it was a wicked thing in them to demand the
Restitution of the same. Then he objected to them, That they shunned the Light.
And why, says he, do you now desire, now promise, now put off, and now refuse
a Council? If your Church be so holy, why is it so much afraid of a Council?
What need it be reformed? But if it need it, How came ye to call it Holy? Would
you even reform your own Holiness? For our Parts, never demanded a Council for
reforming our Churches; for God has already sanctified them by his Word,
purged out of them all Popish Uncleanness, and restored to us his pure
Doctrine: Our Lives, it is true, come not up to this our Profession, nor do we
perform so much indeed, as we ought and wish we did: But the same was also the
Complaint of the Prophets and Apostles, whilst they were in the Flesh; and we
shall enjoy that Happiness at length, when being delivered from this sinful
Body as out of a Prison, we shall be advanced to a State equal to the Angels.
The thing we demand a Council for, is that our Churches Plea may be heard
openly; that your Doctrine, contrary to Christ's Doctrine, may be condemned,
and that Men being reclaimed from it, may know and embrace the true Worship of
God. Now that you object to us the Crime of Sedition and Disobedience, it is
false, even by the Testimony of the States of the Empire: For our Princes have
been both obedient to the Emperor, and ready also when called, to go either to
War, or to the Diets of the Empire. But if you reproach us with that, because
we submit not to the Emperor's Edicts, which condemn our Religion; we rejoice,
and give God also Thanks, that therein we are not Obedient: For what belongs to
God alone, is not to be given to Caesar, who ought, and does hold all of God.
God has indeed, set the Emperor over Kingdoms and Provinces, but he alone will
govern his Church by his own Word; nor does he allow any to share with him in
that Honor. The Emperor has more than enough to do in governing the State,
which is the Office God has allotted him, and confined him within those
Limits: But if he stretches his Authority farther, he then invades God's
Property and Jurisdiction. Amongst other things, Henry Duke of Brunswick
alleged in his invective Papers, That Luther had raised this Tragedy of
Religion at the Instigation of Duke Frederick, who was vexed that Albert the
Archbishop of Mentz, should have the Bishopric of Magdeburg. Luther therefore
answering that; This Calumny, says he, was by the Archbishop of Mentz
suggested to Duke Henry; and because he pretends not to know, what no Man
knows better, I Will now lay open the Cause and Original of these Revolutions: In
the Year of our Lord 1517. John Tetzel, a Dominican, carried about Indulgences
to sell in Germany: The first Cause of the Troubles in Germany.
Now this same Tetzel, the Emperor Maximilian had once condemned to die, and at
Inspruck ordered him to be thrown into the River; but at the Intercession of
Duke Frederick, who happened to be there at that time, he escaped. This Man, I
say, amongst other things, taught, that he had so great Power from the Pope,
That if a Man had even defloured the Virgin Mary, and got her with Child, he
could pardon the Crime for Money: Besides, he pardoned not only Sins already
committed, but such also as should be committed in time to come: And not long
after came forth a Book, with the Arms of the Archbishop Albert, wherein the
Collectors were enjoined most carefully to preach up to the People the Virtue
and Efficacy of Indulgences; wherefore it came to be known, that Tetzel was
hired by Archbishop Albert, to make such Declamations; for he had been lately
created Archbishop of Mentz, on Condition that he himself should be at the
Charges of procuring his Pall from Rome: For Three Bishops of that City had
died within a short space of Time, The Price of the Pall of the Archbishop of
Mentz.
Bertolde, James, and Vriel, and it was too heavy a Burden for the Chapter to
be at so vast a Charge and so often: For that Pall is said to cost almost
Thirty Thousand Florins before it be brought Home, so well knows the Pope how
to sell his Cloth; For what end the Indulgences granted.
and this Money was advanced by the Merchants of Ausburg: So that for
Reimbursment of the same, Albert bethought himself of this Device, which was
allowed by the Pope, on Condition that one half of the Money raised should be
sent to Rome, for the building of St. Peter's Church. But I was ignorant of all
these things at that time, and therefore wrote a very submissive Letter to the
Archbishop of Mentz, exhorting him to restrain those Preachers; but he made no
Answer: Having made Application also to the Bishop of Brandenburg, he advised
me to desist, and not to run my self into Danger. Afterward I emitted some
Positions contrary to the Tetzelian Doctrine, which within few Days slew all
over Germany, and were greedily read by most Men: For the Indulgences were a
common grievance, especially those that Tetzel taught. And Because there was no
Bishop nor Doctor neither, that offered to oppose this Abuse, since Tetzel
frightened them with the Thunder of Rome: My Name began to be talked of, that
there was one Man, at length, to be found in the World who durst speak against
it. But I had rather have been without that Applause; nor, indeed, did I
rightly understand at that time what the Name of Indulgences meant. This is the
Original and first Cause of the Troubles which Duke Frederick did not raise,
but the Archbishop of Mentz, by means of Tetzel his Emissary and Hucster.
Wherefore he must even thank himself, if any thing grate him now. Another cause
of the Commotions was given by the Holy Father Leo X. when he thundered out
Curses and Excommunication against me, and in all places Men so crowed over me,
that the unlearnedest Dunce of 'em all was for whetting his Pen upon me. The
truth is, I thought at first that the Pope would have absolved me, and
condemned Tetzel, because the Canon Law was on my side, which plainly teaches,
That Souls are not delivered out of Purgatory by Indulgences: But, Good God!
whilst I expected glad Tidings from Rome, I was struck down with a Thunderbolt,
and condemned as the wickedest of all Men living. Then I thought it time to
defend what I had done, and publish several Books for that purpose; so that at
long run the Matter came to be stated in the Diet of the Empire. Thus ye see
how a single Thread of an Archiepiscopal Cloak has drawn after it so much
Disturbance, and is now grown so great and twisted so hard, that his Holiness
is in danger to be hanged with it. Which being so, let them even lay their Hand
upon their Breast and blame themselves, who have acted so impudently and
saucily; for my part, I sit still and laugh in my sleeve. For he that dwells
in Heaven has smitten them, and had them in derision, being unwilling that
Ungodliness should reign any longer, but that his People should be brought out
of that Egyptian Darkness into the clear Light, The Way and Ceremony of making
the Archiepiscopal Pall.
and joyful sight of the Sun. Now this Pall that has been once and again
mentioned, is given only to Archbishops, and as a singular Favor to some few
Bishops, as to the Bishop of Bamberg in Germany for one. This is the Ceremony
of making it; On the day of the Virgin St. Agnes, which is the One and
twentieth of January, when in the Mass that is said in St. Agnes Church in
Rome, they come to the words, Agnus Dei qui tollis, etc. Two white Lambs are
laid upon the Altar, which are afterward given to Two Subdeacons of St.
Peter's Church, who put them out to Grass, and in due time shear them; the Wool
that comes from them being mingled with other Wool, is spun, and afterward
woven into these Palls, which are Three Fingers broad, and hang down from the
Shoulders to the middle breast before, and to the Reins behind; at the end are
thin Plates of Lead of the same breadth: When they are thus woven, they are
carried to the Bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul, and after some Prayers said,
are left there all night; next day after the Subdeacons receive them again, and
decently lay them up and keep them, until an Archbishop that needs one of them,
or his Proctor, come to demand it: Now it is delivered with many Ceremonies,
and they who carry it are charged not to rest above one night in a place, if
possibly they can. This is neither a curious nor costly Commodity, and yet the
Archbishops pay dear for it to the Pope. Nor is it lawful for any one to make
use of his Predecessors Pall, but every one is obliged to purchase himself a
new one at Rome: Besides, if by exchange or any other way, a Patriarch or
Metropolitan is removed to another Church, though he had purchased a Pall
before, yet he must needs be at the charge of a new one. This kind of Fleecing
gave occasion at all times of murmuring and complaining, as has been said in
the Fourth Book, especially in Germany: And when, in the Year of our Lord One
thousand five hundred and eighteen, Leo X. sent Cardinal Cajetan to the Diet of
Ausburg, to exhort the Emperor Maximilian and the Princes to a War against the
Turk, and moved that all the States, and the Clergy too, should contribute
Money: The Answer that was given him, was, That there was no Hopes of obtaining
that from the Priests, whose Rights and Revenues were by so many old and new
Tricks and Divices, clogged and diverted by the Court of Rome; and that, as for
the People, when any such thing was imposed upon them, they cried, That Money
had been so often given upon that account, that they wondered how it was spent,
or what became of those vast Sums that were yearly raised in Germany from the
Annats alone.

We told you before of several Fires that happened in Saxony: Now many of the
Malefactors being take in diverse Places, and examined, they all generally
confessed, Incendiaries hired by the Party of the Duke of Brunswick.
even with their last Breath, That they had been suborned and hired by the
Officers and familiar Friends of Henry Duke of Brunswick, and got Money from
them to do that. Upon this account therefore, as for other things also, the
Lantgrave and Deputies of Saxony accused the Duke of Brunswick to the Emperor
at Ratisbone, Who is accused thereof before Emperor.
and exhibited in writing the several Confessions of these Incendiaries. With
these joined Duke William of Brunswick, who also grievously Accused his own
Brother Duke Henry, that had kept him many Years in Prison. When most of those
who were expected to be at the Diet were now come, The Acts of the Diet at
Ratisbone.
it was opened on the Fifth Day of April by an Harangue made to them in the
Emperor's Name, according to Custom; the Effect whereof was, That they all knew
how Studious and Laborious he had always been, in endeavoring a right
Constitution and Establishment of all public Affairs: But that when he
perceived how Religion had torn and rent asunder the Empire, and given occasion
to the Turk to pierce almost into the Bowels of Germany; it had been a great
grief to him, and therefore for many Years past he had with their own consents,
been essaying ways of Pacification; and that all had judged a General Council
to be the most proper and expedient remedy, which had been the Sense and
Resolution of the last Diet at Ratisbone; but that seeing the Turk had at the
same time Invaded first Hungary, and then Austria, with a design to fall upon
Germany next with all the Force he could make: He had made Head against him
with an Army consisting of his own Forces, those of his Brother King Ferdinand,
and of the whole Empire; and not only so, but had sent out a Fleet to Sea
against him, which having advanced a great way toward Constantinople, had
taken from him some Passes, Castles and Towns, that so his Force might be
broken and diverted: So that when the Turk had retreated Home, he took a
Progress into Italy, treated earnestly with Pope Clement for a Council, and
pacified Italy, that no Obstacle might arise from thene: That he had afterward
returned to Spain, that having ordered all things there also, he might himself
be present at the Council. That in his Opinion they were not ignorant of the
Reason why the Council was not called, which the Pope had promised to open the
Year after: But that seeing not long after the Turk had sent his Admiral
Barbarossa, who put to flight the King of Tunis; for preventing the public
danger he had crossed over into Barbary, where, by God's Blessing, he had been
Victorious, and driven him out of all that Country: That afterward he had come
to Sicily, Naples, and to Rome also, where he had treated with Paul III. about
a Council, who was fully inclined to it; and that being resolved to draw nearer
to Germany to settle Affairs there. At the same time a War broke out against
the Duke of Savoy, his Ally, and a Vassal of the Empire, who had a great part
of his Country taken from him by force; so that he was obliged, as in Duty, to
undertake his Defense at that time: That since that War had continued almost
till Winter, and that there was no great Hopes of a Council, he had proposed
some Conditions proper for Peace, and so returned into Spain: That afterward
he came back again to the Country about Genoa, whither the Pope and French King
came also: And that having made a Truce there, he went with his Fleet to Aigues
Mortes, where he had had a Conference with the French King, as with the Pope
before, about the Peace of Christendom and the Turkish War: That having
returned from thence into Spain, he had employed all his Thoughts about healing
the Divisions of Religion, and removing the Impediments of a Council; and that
being resolved afterward to return into Germany through Italy, he had been
moved and entreated by the French King to take his Journey through France,
merely to confirm their Friendship: That he came next to Flanders, where he
found Affairs in a troublesome State, but that he had applied a Remedy to the
Distemper; and that though his weighty Affairs would not then suffer him to
proceed into Germany, he had nevertheless appointed an Assembly at Haguenaw,
where his Brother King Ferdinand was present: That it was fresh in the minds of
all what had been done there, and also at the Conference of Worms; and that he
now mentioned these things, that they might see the Care and Zeal he had for
the public, and understand also the Reasons why he came not sooner into
Germany; that what trouble, pains and charges he was at in supporting the
Government of the Empire, he would in due time make it so plain to them, that
all should be convinced, that nothing was dearer unto him than the Welfare of
Germany; nor would he mention neither what vast Expenses he was put to daily,
in maintaining a Fleet at Sea, to withstand the Encroachments of the Turks:
That he was come, and in great haste too, to this Diet, though his Health and
other Affairs had been a great hindrance unto him: That, besides, he had moved
the Pope to send a Legate hither; and that accordingly Cardinal Contarini was
come, a Man of great Virtue, and a Lover of Peace: That therefore, since this
Diet was called chiefly for settling the Affairs of Religion, and that nothing
was yet determined therein, though it might be of dangerous consequence, if an
end were not put to these Divisions; it was his earnest desire that a
Reconciliation might be made, and that he would willingly contribute thereunto
whatever lay in his Power: That he expected the like Will and Inclinations from
them, and therefore was importunate with them, that they would consult about
measures for accommodating the Controversies, and the manner of proceeding
therein; and that they might perceive how much he loved Concord, it was his
Advice (provided they knew of no better Expedient) that of the whole number a
few good and learned Men, that were desirous of Peace, and Germans Born, should
be chosen, to conferr amicably about the matters in Controversy, and how they
might be adjusted, and then to make their Report to him, and their own States,
that the thing being afterward deliberated amongst them, and communicated to
the Popes Legate, a Decree might accordingly pass: That this course had been
looked upon as the most convenient, both at Ausburg heretofore, and lately at
Worms, but with this proviso, That it be no derogation to the Decree of
Ausburg.

To these things the Protestants answered April the Ninth, The Protestants
Answer to the Emperor's Proposals.
and having praised and extolled the Virtues and Goodness of the Emperor, they
craved that the Conference of Worms might be continued, as being transferred
to this place: That to what his Majesty offered of commissionating some new,
they would give their Answer, they said, when they should learn from him who
the Persons were. But the other Princes and States having given their Answer
April the Twelfth, thoroughly approve his Council, and mainly urge, That the
Decree of Ausburg may continue in Force and Authority. Afterward the Emperor
demanded of both, especially of the Protestants, that they would referr the
choice of the Persons to him, Persons chosen by the Emperor for the Conference.
and confide in him as to that particular, who would do nothing but what should
tend to the Peace and Welfare of the Country. When that was granted him, on the
Thirteenth of April he caused Frederick Prince Palatine in his Name to appoint
for the Conference, Julius Pflug, John Eckius, John Gropper, Philip Melancthon,
Martin Bucer, and John Pistorius, that they should handle the controverted
Points of Doctrine, and then make a Report thereof to him and the Princes. He
afterward called them before him, April the Two and twentieth, and gave them a
long and serious Admonition, His Exhortation to them.
that in handling of this matter they should not be swayed by Passion nor
Affection; but have regard only to the Glory of God. They all modestly excused
themselves, desiring that other fitter persons might be appointed, except
Eckius, who said, that he was prepared and ready; but when the Emperor urged it
upon them, they submitted, and at the same time entreated him, The Presidents
and Witnesses of the Conference at Ratisbone.
to add some more to their number who might be present, partly as presidents
and Moderators, and partly as Witnesses and Hearers of the Proceedings. He
therefore named Frederick Prince Palatine and Granvell for Presidents; and
Theodorick Count Manderschitt, Eberhard Ruden, Henry Haseu, Francis Burcart,
John Fig, and James Sturmey for Witnesses. Now when they all met April the
Twenty seventh, Frederick Prince Palatine made a Speech, and advised the
Conferrers seriously to set about the matter, and conferr amicably. Then
Granvell presented to them a Book in Writing, which he said had been delivered
to the Emperor by some good and learned Men, as a proper means for a future
Reconciliation: That it was therefore the Emperor's Pleasure that they should
peruse and weigh that Book as a lawful Argument and Matter to treat on, commend
what all of them approved therein, and correct what was amiss. That Book
contained these Heads of Doctrine, Of the Creation of Man, and of the
Uprightness of Nature before the Fall; Of free Will; Of the cause of Sin; Of
original Sin; Of Man's Justification; Of the Church and the Marks and Authority
thereof; Of the Mark of the Word; Of Repentance after the Fall; Of the
Authority of the Church in discerning and interpreting Scripture; Of the
Sacraments; Of Orders, Baptism, Confirmation, the Lord's Supper, Penance and
Absolution, Matrimony, Extreme Unction; Of the Bond of Charity; Of the
Hierarchy of the Church, and its Authority in settling Discipline and
Government; Of Images; Of the Mass; Of the Administration of the Sacraments,
and of the Discipline of the Church, both as to Ministers and People.

In the Month of May the Protestants wrote from Ratisbone to the French King,
The Protestants write to the French King, and intercede for their Suffering
Brethren in Provence.
interceding for those of the Protestant Religion in Provence, who were partly
in Prison, partly banished, and partly forced to abscond and lead a miserable
Life for their Profession; and because some were received into Favor, if they
would renounce their Religion; they desired he would release them from that
condition, showing what a grievous thing it was to force Men's Consciences. This
Persecution proceeded from a Sentence pronounced the Year before against the
Inhabitants of Merindole, a Village of Provence, by the Parliament of Aix,
which being exceeding terrible and cruel, put the poor people into extreme
Terror and Apprehension: However the full Execution of it was put off to
another time, and this Year's Persecution was but a Play, in respect of that
which followed four Years after, as shall be said in the proper place.

Whilst these things are in agitation at Ratisbone, The Duke of Cleve's Treaty
with the French King.
William Duke of Cleve, whose implacable Enemy the Emperor was, because of his
Possession of Guelderland, went privily into France, having appointed a day and
place for those whom he designed to have with him, to come to him by several
ways. When, about the end of April he arrived at Paris, he was received by the
King's Officers, and being conducted by Orleans, on the Sixth of May he came to
the King, who was then at Amboise a Town in Turin upon the Loire. The King
embracing him as a Father would a Son, sends presently word to the King of
Navarre and his Sister, that they should come to him as soon as possibly they
could, and bring their Daughter with them; for they were at that time in
Guienne. Upon their coming they began to treat of a Marriage; and though the
Parents at that time were not altogether for it, and that the Young Lady was
more averse, not so much of her own Judgment, or that she slighted the Person
of the Man, as through the Whispers and Tattles of some who despised Germany as
a wild and rude Country, in respect of the Pleasantness and Deliciousness of
France; yet being overruled by the King's Authority, who looked on that
affinity as very advantageous to him, they yielded. Wherefore on the Fifteenth
of June the Marriage was solemnized, The Marriage of the Duke of Cleve with the
Daughter of Navarre.
the King leading the Bride his Niece to Church. The Cardinal of Tournon said
Mass, and the King gave a most magnificent Wedding Feast; whereat were present
the Pope's Nuncio, the Ambassadors of England, Portugal, Venice and Saxony; for
the Emperor's Ambassador had excused himself. Some Days after the Duke of Cleve
returned home, leaving his Young Wife in France, whom her Mother would have to
be with her, until she were grown up to maturity. Before the Duke of Cleve came
into France, the King ordered the Admiral, The Admiral restored.
whom we mentioned before, to be set at Liberty, to go Home; and then in the
Month of May to come to his Majesty, who most graciously received him, and
restored him to his former Honor and Dignity; raised him, as it were, from
Death to Life, and by a new and unprecedented Example, annulled the Sentence
passed against him by the Select and Chief Judges of the Kingdom; partly in
spite of the Constable, as it was believed, and partly at the intercession of
Madam d'Estampes, who had contracted a new Relation by Affinity with the
Admiral. The Constable of France in disgrace.
Wherefore the Constable Montmorency, who loved not the Admiral his equal, and
was fallen much in the King's Favor, because of the Emperor's Passage through
France, as has been said, being besides altogether slighted and despised at
Court, went Home, and in an uncertain Condition led a private Life; whereas
before he had had the King wholly to himself.

The End of the Thirteenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XIV.
The CONTENTS.
In the Conference of Ratisbone they treat of reforming the Ecclesiastical
State, and Means are proposed for accomplishing of that: Diverse Opinions and
Answers are here related. Eckius loathing the Book offered by the Protestants,
accuses his Colleagues. Upon the Report of the Approach of the Turk, the Emperor
commands the Conference to be put off till the meeting of the Council. Fregoso
and Rink, the Ambassadors sent from the French King to the Turk are taken and
slain; and therefore the Bastard Son of Maximilian is arrested at Lions, and
committed to Prison. The Turk makes his Entry into Buda. The Emperor comes to
Algiers. The Plague rages in Germany. Austria sorely afflicted. The Peers of
Austria desire Leave to profess and exercise the Protestant Religion; and are
eluded by King Ferdinand. The Christians being worsted in Hungary, the Emperor
calls a Diet of the States of the Empire to meet at Spire; where Oliver, the
French King's Ambassador, made a long Speech. The King of England cuts off his
Queens Head, and marries a Sixth Wife. Morono the Pope's Legate, being sent to
Spire, declares the calling of a Council at Trent. Luther publishes a little
Book, a Military or Camp-Sermon, wherein he compares the Papacy with the Turks.
War breaking out again betwixt the Emperor and French King. Longueville and
Martin van Rossem, invade Brabant. Perpignon is besieged. Edicts against the
Lutherans are published at Paris. Farel preaches at Metz. Locusts overspread
Germany and Italy. An Imperial Diet held at Nurimberg. Poiet apprehended in the
Night time, and committed to Prison. Otho, Prince Palatine, embraces the
Protestant Religion.

THE Conference commenced about the end of April, as we said before: But Eckius
grew impatient and morose; for he was sick of the Book, disliked his Colleagues,
and not long after fell into a Fever, The Acts of the Conference at Ratisbone.
so that he could not be present: However his Associates went and consulted him
about all Matters. Some Places of the Book, indeed were by common Consent
corrected in the Conference, and some others they could not agree upon; as
about the Church, and the Power thereof; the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
Christ; the Confession of Sins; Satisfaction; the Unity and Order of the
Ministers of the Church; Saints; the Mass; the Sacrament to be received in both
Kinds, and the single Life of the Clergy. So the Book, as it was corrected, was
delivered to the Emperor, and therewith the Sentiments of the Protestant
Divines in Writing, concerning the controverted Points of Doctrine now
mentioned; this was on the last Day of May. The Emperor commended their Zeal,
and took it kindly, entreating them to show the like Diligence and good
Inclination, if at any time after the Case did so require. On the Eighth of
June after, he made a Report of what was done, and how far they had proceeded
in the Session of the Princes and States: That the Conferrers had carefully
handled the Matter, and reconciled many weighty Points of Doctrine; and that
the Protestant Divines had declared their Thoughts touching the rest, which
were not as yet accommodated: Then he showed them both the Writings, desiring
they would take them speedily into Consideration, give their Judgment of the
same, and think of a way how both Church and State might be reformed: That for
his part, he would not omit anything that might contribute thereunto, and
doubted not, but that the Pope's Legate inclined that way too. The Senate of
Princes consists for most part of Bishops; and therefore they who were for
rejecting the Book offered by the Emperor, and all proceeding by Conference,
carried it by majority of Voices, and gave their Resolution accordingly in
Writing, though in Terms somewhat too harsh: But seeing the Electors, and some
other Princes, who tendered the Welfare of the Public, did not consent to it,
there was another Writing drawn up, and on the Second of July presented to the
Emperor; whom therein they advised, that as Advocate and Defender of the
Church, he would communicate the whole Affair to the Pope's Legate, according
to the Decree of Haguenaw; but particularly those Heads which the Conferrers
had agreed upon, that they might be carefully weighed, if there were any thing
to be found in them, in Sense or Words, inconsistent, either with the Doctrine
of Holy Interpreters, or the Custom and Practice of the Church: That, in the
next place, what was said more obscurely might be explained, and that he
himself would be pleased afterward to acquaint the States with his Thoughts
and Resolution, as to the whole, and to deal with the Protestants, that they
would suffer themselves to be instructed in the remaining Points in
Controversy; or, if that could not be obtained, that then a General or
National Council of Germany should be called to determine all Matters in
debate. Some of the States who disliked a Reformation procured all to be
referred to the Pope's Legate.
Among the States there were some who made it their Business to obstruct the
Reformation of Religion; and they were the Instruments, as it was thought, of
procuring the whole matter to be referred to the Pope's Legate. The Emperor
gave his Answer to this on the Seventh of July; That he had thought they would
have more fully and clearly declared their Opinion, especially since for many
Days they had had the Book in their Hands: But that since they persisted in it,
he would do as they had advised, and know the mind of the Pope's Legate as to
the whole matter; that he might not seem to neglect any thing that Duty
required of him. The Protestants Address to the Emperor.
The Protestants also presented an Address to the Emperor in Writing, wherein
they declare their own Thoughts and more fully explain the Points Reconciled;
showing that it would be no difficult matter to adjust all the rest also; and
declaring that they still adhered to the Confession of Ausburg: Then for the
third thing contained in the Emperor's Demands, the Reformation of the Civil
Government, they gave their Opinion, That those Laws which Eleven Years before
had been made at Ausburg, should be revived and put in Execution: That as to
the Spiritual Government, it might, in their Judgment, be restored, if the
Gospel were purely taught; if according to the ancient Canons Pastors were
chosen with consent of the People; if the Bishops retained the Civil
Administration, and entertained others to supply their Cures; since by an
ancient and prevailing Custom, they neither could nor would do it themselves;
if the Ministers of the Church had free leave granted them to Marry; if that
filthy Chaffering and Bargaining, which is of diverse Kinds, and has its Name
from Simon Magus, were utterly abolished; if Ecclesiastical Revenues were so
distributed, as the Canons made long since did prescribe; if Youth were brought
up in Piety and Virtue, and in their tender Years taught the Principles of the
Christian Religion; if scandalous Offenders were excommunicated until they
reformed their Lives, and the Civil Magistrate did his Duty therein, and
abolished all false Worship; and if Ecclesiastical Judicatures, and, as it
were, public Censors were appointed, to make diligent Enquiry into the
Behavior of the Ministers and People, and into their Manners and Vices. The
Emperor, The Answer of the Pope's Legate.
as we said before, consulted the Pope's Legate about the whole matter, and
urged a public Reformation, but especially of the Church. The Legate's Answer
to all was, That since the Protestants did in some Tenets differ from the
common consent of the Church, and that yet there was Hopes that some time or
other they would return into the right Way; upon serious consideration of the
whole matter, he thought it would be expedient to desist from any farther
determination of controverted Points, and to referr all to the Pope, who either
by a General Council, or some other means suitable to the time, would certainly
bring the Controversy to such an issue, as should tend to the Benefit and
advantage of the Public, and especially of Germany. In the next place, that he
might also seem desirous of a Reformation, he sent for all the Bishops to come
to his House, where he exhorted them so to behave themselves, His Exhortation
to the Bishops.
that they might not occasion the least suspicion of any Covetousness or
Ambition; that they should avoid Luxury, and all things that gave a bad
Example; that they should govern their own Families well, and accustom them to
Modesty and Temperance; that they should take care of the Flock committed to
their Charge, and live in the more populous Places, to prevent the contagion
which already raged in Germany, from spreading farther by degrees, and to apply
a timely Remedy to the growing Evil: That it would be very proper also, said
he, if in those places where the Bishops did not reside, they entertained
Faithful Officers and Emissaries, that might inform them of all things, and be
ready to withstand the Devil, if he should attempt in any place to break in
upon the Flock. He also admonished them to visit their several Provinces,
imitating therein the Commanders of Armies, when any place is beset or
streightened by the Enemy: Moreover that they should rightly and duly perform
Divine Service, and conferr Benefices upon fit and deserving Men; that they
should likewise distribute the Revenues of the Church amongst the Poor, and not
squander them away riotously, or in superfluous and immoderate Splendour; in
like manner that they should appoint good and learned Men to teach the People,
not given to Contention or Brawling, but such as might so rebuke their
Adversaries, as they might not seem to hate their Persons, but to be desirous
of the Salvation of their Souls; for that the too great severity and sharpness
of reprehension, did but harden them in their Obstinacy: That they should make
it their care also to have the Youth rightly Educated in the Languages, and
liberal Arts and Sciences; wherein the Protestants, for their parts, omitted no
diligence; who made it their chief Study to employ learned Men to teach in
their Schools; whereby it came to pass, that Children flocked to them from all
Parts, especially the Sons of Persons of Quality, who with their Learning drank
in also their Errors, and being therewith corrupted, propagated afterward the
Contagion to others: That therefore Schools were to be erected, and able
Masters, who were sound in Religion, invited by honest Rewards. That it was
likewise the Duty of the Bishops to admonish Parents not to send their Children
to those places where they might be in danger of being infected with pernicious
Doctrine; and that these were the matters which he had Instructions from the
Pope to lay before them. The Legate's Speech being given to the Emperor, was
afterward communicated to the States.
This Speech he afterward gave in Writing to the Bishops who desired it, as he
did also to the Emperor; who on the Twelfth of July made a Report thereof to
all the States, as being the Answer which the Legate had made. And because
there was no Appearance that any thing more could be done, as to Religion, in
that Diet; and then again, seeing the Turk was making very great Preparations
both by Sea and Land, to Invade Christendom; he told them, That it seemed to
him very necessary, that things should be brought to a Conclusion, and that
Decrees should be made concerning Religion and Peace, and for sudden and
constant supplies against the Turk: That it had been his wish, indeed, that
they would have declared their Minds as to all these things; but that seeing
they had not given any positive Answer as yet, that the Affairs did not admit
of longer delay, and that in the mean time there was a necessity of preparing
to make defense against the Turks; he had thought it fit to propose this as the
most proper subject of their Deliberations; and therefore he put the Question
to them, Whether or not they judged it expedient that those Points which had
been agreed upon in the Conference, should be received until the meeting of a
General Council, or another Diet of the Empire, that thereby the Controversy
about Religion, which for so many Years had occasioned so much Labor and Toil,
might be in some part lessened, and the rest, which were not as yet adjusted,
the more easily handled afterward? For that he intended to go straight to the
Pope, that he might know for a certain what was to be expected, and as soon as
he could afterward come back into Germany, and mind the Affairs of the
Government: That, in the mean time, all these things were to be understood,
without prejudice to the Decree of Ausburg. The Answer of the Protestant
Divines to the Papers of Contarini.
When the Protestant Divines had read Contarim's Two Papers before mentioned,
with unanimous consent they published an Answer; wherein they complained that
they had injury done unto them; declaring withal, that considering his
Learning, they had expected far better things at his Hands: And whereas he
excited the Princes to severe and cruel Courses; they extremely blamed him for
it, assuring him, that he needed not to imagine, that they would ever approve
those Errors which they then condemned, or ever return to that Church which
defended such notorious Vices.

Contarini, The Legate's Third Paper to the States.
in the mean time, hearing that that Answer of his, we mentioned, was variously
taken; by the persuasion of some, sent a third Paper to the States, telling
them that he did not at all assent that some Doctrines should be looked upon as
accorded, and be tolerated until the sitting of the Council; but that all
indifferently should be referred to the Pope. The Elector's Answer to the
Emperor.
July the Fourteenth, the Princes Electors, in Answer to that which the Emperor
had desired their Judgment of, told his Majesty, That they were content that
the Articles agreed upon should be received until the time of the Council; for
that it would be a means to prevent Quarrellings for the future, and contribute
very much to a farther Reconciliation: That if there were any Hopes that the
rest also might be accommodated in the same Diet, they prayed him graciously to
promote it: But that if the exigency of the time would not allow of that, that
then, he would be pleased, according to his own voluntary promise, to deal with
the Pope and other Kings, that a General Council might with all Expedition be
called and meet in some convenient place within Germany, or else a National
Council to which his Holiness should consent and send his Legate: And that if
neither of the two could be obtained, according to their Hopes, that he himself
would return into Germany, and show the same care for the Country, which till
then he had done, The Protestants Answer.
by settling Peace and Quietness therein. But the Protestants Petitioned the
Emperor, that he would confirm the Heads of Doctrine already accorded, by a
Law, and command them to be taught; for that so Truth would be more and more
discovered, and a way made to the healing of the Wounds of the Church. That he
would also utterly abolish, or, at least, supersede the Decree of Ausburg, as
not at all conducing to Concord: That they had formerly declared their
thoughts, as to the Council, how it ought to be constituted, and that neither
the Pope, nor any that depended on him, should have the Power of judging
therein; and that they persisted in the same Opinion still. But that if such a
Council could not be had, and that he ordered a Convention of States to be held
in Germany, they would therein propose and maintain their Doctrine. The rest of
the Princes, amongst whom the Bishops held the chief Rank, and with them the
Brothers Dukes of Bavaria, The Opinion of the Catholic Princes.
and Henry Duke of Brimswick, gave the Emperor their Opinion separately; to
wit, that there was so great an inundation of Vices, Sects, Heresies and
Dissentions, not only over all Germany, but in other places also, and, in a
manner, all over Christendom, that there was no redressing of them, but by a
General Council: But that they could not give their consent, that any Change or
Alteration should be now made in the Religion and Ceremonies, which had been in
use for so many Years, or had been instituted of old; especially seeing the
Pope, by his Legate, promised a Council, and that his Majesty intended in
person to solicit his Holiness thereunto: That it was their earnest desire
the Pope would make that his Care, that so Errors being at length rooted out,
the Wrath of God might be appeased, and Mankind kept in the right way of
Salvation. That if a General Council could not be had, the next course must be
a National Synod, or a Diet of the States of the Empire: That they however, for
their parts, were resolved to persevere in the Ancient Religion, the Councils,
and Doctrine of the Fathers, handed down from the Apostles to the present Age;
and to obey the Decrees of the Empire, but especially that of Ausburg; hoping
also that they who had commended the Decree that was made at Ausburg would not
recede from it, especially since it had been lately resolved on at Haguenaw,
that if any thing were acted contrary thereunto, they should stand to the
defense of it, and that his Majesty himself had always excepted the same in all
Treaties. Now that the Reconciled Doctrines should be received for a time, they
did not approve on it; for that some of them were superfluous and not
controverted; to wit, the First, Second and Third, and that that of Original
Sin, had been handled in a different manner at Worms: That, besides, the thing
it self required, that there should be a new Conference appointed; for that
there were some words used in the Writings, contrary to the common Acceptance
of the Church and Fathers: That some Sentences also were thrust in which ought
to be qualified and corrected: That, lastly, the things which were accorded,
were of no great moment; but that since the chief Points were not agreed upon,
that is to say, The Lord's Supper; The Adoration of the Host;
Transubstantiation; The Mass; The Marriage of the Clergy; The receiving of the
Sacrament in both Kinds; Confession; Penance; Satisfaction, and other Points of
that Nature; which were so impugned by the Protestants, that there had been no
Hopes of Agreement: Besides, since the Catholic Conferrers went too far, so
that their Opinions deserved a Censure: And that lastly, since it tended to the
Contempt of the Pope, his Majesty himself, and the rest of the States of the
Empire: Upon all these Considerations it seemed most expedient to them, that
the whole Affair of Religion should be deferred till the meeting of a Council;
especially since the Pope's Legate was of the same Opinion. The other free
Cities, The Complaint of the Catholic Cities, that they were excluded from the
Deliberation of the Princes.
which were not of the Number of the Protestants, as Cologne, Metz, Spire,
Worms, Toul, Haguenaw, Ratisbone, Schweinfurt, Colmar, Gemund, Rotenburg, and
many others, finding themselves excluded from Deliberation, and that the
Princes did not communicate to them a Copy of the Answer; complained of it to
the Emperor, as they had done several times before, beseeching his Majesty,
that they might not be baulked in their Right, and assuring him, that most of
them were willing to receive the Doctrines agreed upon.

The Emperor having heard the Opinions of all, The Emperor refers the matter of
Religion to the Council.
made a new Proposition, and recapitulating what had been represented before;
that the Cause could not be finally determined then, that there was present
Danger threatened from the Turk in more Places than one, and that much Time was
already spent, told them, That he would referr the Matter wholly to the
Council, which both the Legate had put him in certain Hopes of, and he himself
would solicit the Pope about: He also promised to return into Germany, and
desired the Protestants, that in the mean time, they would not attempt any
thing more than what had been agreed upon by the Divines. Next he advised the
Bishops and other Prelates, to take such Courses in rectifying the Abuses of
their several Churches, as might prepare the Way for a public Reformation. All
generally praised the Emperor's good Intentions, and were of Opinion that the
Pope's Legate also should seriously enjoin the Bishops to purge and reform
their Churches. The Protestants promised to behave themselves, both as to the
reconciled Doctrines and every thing else, according to their Duty; desiring
that other Princes might have free Leave to propound those Doctrines in their
own Churches also.

We have already told you, that Eckius was sick, both of the Book produced by
the Emperor, Eckius's Letter to the Princes.
and of the Collocutors also: When therefore, after the Conference, it was
returned to the Emperor, as has been mentioned, and the Matter brought into
Debate in the Assembly of the Princes: He being ill of a Fever sent a Letter to
the Princes, to this effect; That he had never liked that insipid Book, wherein
he found so many Errors, and therefore ought not to be admitted; for that the
Use and Custom of the Fathers was therein slighted, and the Phrase and Cant of
Melancthon to be found in it all over; That he had not seen the Book as it was
corrected by his Colleagues, and afterward delivered back to the Emperor, but
that only some of the Lutheran Doctrines had been read over to him as he lay
sick; That far less had he approved that Writing, which was presented to the
Emperor with the Book; nor, indeed, had he ever seen it. Pflug and Gropper
justify themselves from his Aspersions.
When this came to the Knowledge of Julius Pflug and John Gropper, who thought
their Reputation therein concerned, they prayed the Presidents and Auditors of
the Conference, as being Witnesses of all the Proceedings, that they would do
them right, and defend their good Name against the Calumnies of Eckius. These
inform the Emperor of the Matter; who afterward, in a public Paper, gave a
fair and honorable Character of both, declaring that they had acted as it
became good and honest Men.

The Cause of Religion, we told you before, was referred to a general or
provincial Council of Germany: Contarini's Letter to the States against a
National Council.
But when this came to the Knowledge of Contarini, he sent a Letter to all the
States, dated the Twenty sixth of July, desiring that the last might be dashed
out and cancelled; for that Controversies about Religion ought not to be
determined by such Councils, but that they belonged to the Decision of the
universal Church; That whatsoever also was determined privately by any one
Nation, in Matters of that nature, was void and of no effect; That so they
would much gratify the Pope, the Head of the Church and Council, if they would
omit that; whereas it would be very troublesome unto him if they did otherwise;
for that it would give Occasion to more and far greater Scandals, as well in
other Provinces, as chiefly in Germany: And that this was the thing he had to
acquaint them with from the Pope, and in discharge of his own Duty. The Princes
Answer to the Popes Legate,
The Princes made Answer the same Day; That it lay in the Pope's Power to
prevent any Scandals or Troubles upon that Account, by calling of a Council,
which had now for so many Years been promised: That if he did not call it, and
that speedily too, the State of Germany was such, that there was an absolute
Necessity of taking some other Course to make up the Breaches of the Public,
which could not subsist longer with Safety, in so inveterate a Dissension; That
therefore they earnestly desired the Pope would apply some Remedy, and that he
himself, according to his Prudence and Candor, would promote the Matter. And
the Protestants also refute it.
The Protestant Divines also, in a long Writing, refute the Letter of
Contarini, proving it to belong to every particular Province, to establish the
true Religion and Worship of God. These Things done, the Emperor made a Decree,
and caused it to be read on the Eight and twentieth of July, wherein he referrs
the Conference of the Doctors and the whole Affair to a Council, to an Assembly
either of all Germany, or of the States of the Empire. In his Progress into
Italy, he promises to intercede earnestly with the Pope for a Council; The
Decree of the Diet of Ratisbone.
and that if neither a general nor national Council could be obtained, he
assured them of an imperial Diet to be called within Eighteen Months, for
settling the Differences about Religion; and that he would use his Endeavors
to persuade the Pope to send a Legate to it. The Protestants he commanded not
to attempt any new thing besides the Articles accommodated; and the Bishops
also to reform the Vices and Abuses of their Churches. There were other Heads
in the Decree, as, Of not demolishing Religious Houses; Of not misapplying
Church Revenues; Of not tampering with one another to make them change their
Religion; and, Of the Jurisdiction and Members of the Imperial Chamber: A
private Grant made by the Emperor to the Protestants.
But the Protestants being somewhat dissatisfied with these things, the
Emperor, in a private Paper, told them separately what his Intentions therein
were: That he prescribed no Rule to them in the Points not as yet reconciled;
That he would not, indeed, have Religious Houses demolished, but that the Monks
and Friars should be brought to a pious Reformation; That Churchmen should in
all Places be allowed to enjoy their yearly Revenues, without any Respect to
the Diversity of Religion; That no Person of another Jurisdiction should be
allured over to their Religion, and much less be defended upon that account;
but that still they might admit of any Person who should willingly come over
unto them; Moreover, that for Peace and Quietness Sake, he suspended the Decree
of Ausburg, as far as it concerned Religion, and all Processes that were
doubtful, whether they related to Religion or not; in like manner all
Proscriptions, and namely that of Goslar, until the Matter should be determined
in some Council or Diet: That no Man should be excluded from the Imperial
Chamber for differing in Religion, but that Justice should be indifferently
administered to all. When they had obtained this Grant from the Emperor under
Hand and Seal, Aid promised against the Turks.
they promised Assistance against the Turk, of whose Approach there was fresh
News daily brought; besides there were Ambassadors come both from Hungary and
Austria, who earnestly begged for Aid; wherefore there was a present Supply of
Germans sent into Hungary, under the Command of Frederick Count Furstemberg.

In this Diet the Emperor, The Emperors complaint against the Duke of Cleve.
on the Third of July, made a heavy Complaint to all the States assembled, of
William Duke of Cleve, for his seizing of Guelderland; and at the same time
presented unto them a Book, which asserted his Right to that Province; telling
them that he had summoned him to appear there, but that he had taken a Journey
a quite contrary way, meaning thereby, into France, as we said before. There
were Ambassadors from Cleve there present, who excused their Prince, and as
they insisted in proving his Title, the Emperor arose and departed. On the One
and twentieth of July all the Princes and States waited on the Emperor, to make
Intercession for the Duke of Cleve, desiring that he might be taken into the
Protection of the Empire, and the Controversy referred to a friendly
Arbitration, wherein they promised their best Endeavors: But that if the
Matter could not be accommodated, they humbly besought him to prosecute his
Right by Law: Whereunto the Emperor sent this Answer by John Naves; That
whereas in this Diet, which was called for the sake of the Public, that
Differences might be removed, and Peace settled in Germany, much time had been
spent, and to his great Trouble and Prejudice to his other Affairs, nothing
could be concluded because of the clashing of Opinions; he wondered very much
to find them so unanimous in this Cause alone, which was properly his own: And
so he dismissed them not without Displeasure. The Day following Raymond the
French King's Ambassador, made a long Speech, wherein he reckoned up at large
the Reasons why his Master had driven out of his Country Charles Duke of Savoy,
who some days before had accused the French King thereof before the Emperor and
States.

During this Diet the French King sent Caesar Fregoso a Genoese, French
Ambassador's to the Turk slain.
and Anthony Rink a banished Spaniard, Ambassadors to the Grand Seignior, who
falling down the River of Po, on their Way to Venice, were about the First of
July taken and slain. William de Bellay of Langey, a Man of singular Sagacity
and Industry, was then the French King's Lieutenant in Piedmont, who having
Intelligence of the Fact, immediately acquainted the King therewith; and July
the Fifth wrote also from Turin to Alfonso Davalo Marquess of Pescara, Governor
of Milan for the Emperor, that he would procure the Releasement of the King's
Ambassadors, who were made Prisoners, as it was manifestly known by his Men;
for that otherwise the Truce made Three Years before, by the Intercession of
the Pope, would be broken. Now he desired that they might be set at Liberty,
either because at first he knew not, or else pretended not to know what was
become of them. The Marquess, to clear himself from Suspicion, made as if he
knew nothing at all of the Matter, and to purge himself, sent Count Francisco
Ladronio Ambassador to the King. Du Bellay wrote another Letter to Pescara on
the Eleventh of July, wherein he briskly told him; I would not doubt, said he,
to speak of Religious Matters in a general Council of the whole World, and that
as pertinently too, as ever your Kinsman and Friend Thomas Aquinas of old did,
provided I knew as much in Divinity, as some of your familiar Friends know of
this Murder. For you must know that Indico, Alfonso's Grandfather by the
Father side, the Son of Rodorigo as Spaniard, married a vast rich Fortune of
the Family of Aquinas; And this Alfonso was Cousin-Germain to Ferdinando Davalo
of Pescara, a most excellent Soldier and Commander. From de Linieres, a Town in
Berry, the King, on the Twentieth of July, wrote an Answer to Alfonso, telling
him that he should have Respect to his Honor and Reputation, and that he could
not slight the Injury done to his Ambassadors, if they were not restored to
Liberty. Many Letters passed betwixt du Bellay and the Marquess about that
Matter, but nothing else was done; the Marquess protesting, that after diligent
Enquiry he could not discover any thing; and persisting therein, the King
complained also to the Emperor of the Injury, by his Ambassador at Ratisbone; A
Complaint thereof made by the French King to the Emperor.
where having received an Answer not to his Mind, he gave sufficient Intimation
that it would prove the Cause of a War. George of Austria, the natural Son of
Maximilian the Emperor, and Archbishop of Valentia, happened at that time to be
upon his Return from Spain into the Low Countries, who coming to Lions, was
apprehended and committed to Prison, to revenge what had been done to Fregoso
and Rink. Much about this time Francis the Son of Anthony Duke of Lorrain,
Francis of Lorrain married to the Dowager of Sforza.
married Christian the Daughter of Christiern King of Denmark, Dowager of
Milan. The French King was vexed at this; and the more, that the Year before
the Duke of Lorrain's Daughter was married to Renat Prince of Orange, who was
wholly at the Emperor's Devotion.

At the same time that the Emperor held the Diet at Ratisbone, Buda besieged by
King Ferdinand,
King Ferdinand besieged Buda, wherein was the Widow of the Vayvode John, with
her young Son Stephen. Now the Guardians of the Child, and the Nobles of the
Kingdom, had craved Assistance from the Turks; so that the Turk sent a General
with Forces, who in the Month of July came to Buda, whither he himself came
also, not long after, with the rest of the Army. By this means King Ferdinand's
Army, Who received a great Overthrow.
consisting of Germans, Moravians and Bohemians, were forced to raise the
Siege, received a great Overthrow, and lost Pest, a Town overagainst Buda,
those that remained, saving themselves, as well as they could, by Flight. About
the end of August the Grand Seignior sent Presents to the Child Stephen, Vests
of Cloth of Gold, with some stately Horses, acquainting his Mother at the same
time, that he had a desire to see the Boy, and that she should send him out to
him, to the Camp. She being much terrified hereat, but finding no other Course
to be taken, and that the Nobles advised her to it, sent out the poor Babe with
his Nurse, and a great Train of Nobility to accompany him. The Turk received
them very courteously, but afterward caused a Proposal to be made to the
Queen's Counselors, that they would deliver up Buda to him; for that they were
not able to defend it against the Enemy; and for him to come back again with an
Army when occasion required, would be both troublesome and chargeable, By what
means Buda fell into the Hands of the Turks.
and that therefore it would be far better to let him have the keeping of the
place, whilst they being afraid of their own danger, had not a word to say; he
presently gave orders to the Aga of the Janissaries to sieze the Town, and the
Child was not sent back to his Mother before the thing was done. Transylvania
given to the Vayvode and his Mother.
Being then Masters of the Town, and all the Citizens disarmed, they demanded
also the Castle, where the Queen then was. In the mean time the Turk sent
Messengers to com^ (...), her, and bid her be of good Courage, and withal made
over Transylvania to her and her Son. Thus all her Furniture and Goods being in
haste packed up, she departed in a hurry under the Conduct and Convoy of some
Turkish Officers and Soldiers; and then September the Second the Grand
Seignior with his two Sons made his entry into Buda, where in the Cathedral
Church, hallowed after their manner, he gave God Thanks for his good Success,
and then returned into the Camp; from whence, having put Garrisons into Buda
and Pest, he retreated homewards with the rest of his Army, and upon his March
set at Liberty Alaski whom he had left Prisoner at Belgrade, because of the
Apprehension of Fregoso and Rink. For the French King being exceedingly
incensed at that Fact, had by his Ambassador Paulain, acquainted Solomon with
the whole matter.

When the Diet at Ratisbone was over, the Emperor went immediately into Italy,
and had an interview with the Pope at Luke whilst the Army he had raised of
Germans, Italians and Spaniards were putting on Board the Ships. But because
Winter now approached, The Emperors Expedition into Barbary.
the Pope essayed to divert him from the expedition: Nevertheless, though he
had notice of the overthrow in Hungary, he was resolved to go, that he might
give the Turk a Diversion elsewhere; so that setting Sail from Porto Venere, he
took his Course by Corsica, Majorca, and Minorca, and on the Twenty-third of
October arrived before Algiers, a Seaport Town in Barbary. His Army consisted
of Two and twenty thousand Foot, and somewhat more than a Thousand Horse. The
Van consisting of Spaniards, was commanded by Ferrante Gonzaga, Viceroy of
Sicily; the main Body being Germans, by the Emperor himself; and the Reserve
who were Italians and Knights of Rhodes, by Camillo Colonna. That Day the
Emperor arrived, and next Day after, the Weather was fair and the Sea calm; His
Fleet spoiled and dispersed by the Storm.
but on the Third Day a great Storm arising, with continual Rains, hindered all
Action, so that the Emperor having lost many Ships, his Guns and all his
Ammunition and Provisions, besides some Thousands of his Men, was forced to
depart without effecting any thing, and to come again to Spain in the Month of
November. Thus went our Affairs to wrack both by Sea and Land, in Africa as
well as Europe. A Plague in Germany.
This was likewise a fatal Year to Germany, by reason of the Plague, which
raged especially along the Rhine; there died of it, amongst others, at
Strasburg, one Capito, and at Basile, Simon Gryney, both Men of extraordinary
Learning; the former by Profession a Divine, and the other a Philosopher, but a
great Student also in Divinity. The Emperor upon his leaving of Germany
employed Frederick Prince Palatine, to Negotiate the Restitution of Guelderland
with the Duke of Cleve, by the Mediation of the Princes Electors. These sent
Agents to the Duke, The States of the Empire treat with Cleve about the
Restitution of Guelderland to the Emperor.
to admonish him both of his own private danger, and of the public Disorders
he might be the occasion of, by standing it out too stiffly. He, on the other
hand alleged, That he was the next lawful Heir, and that he had entered by
fair means into Possession, but however was willing to submit his Right and
Title to a fair Trial at Law; and that therefore he earnestly begged of them
that they would persuade the Emperor to Equity, and not suffer any Force or
Violence to be used against him. Upon the Emperor's departure out of Italy, he
left Granvell there, that he might both solicit the Pope about a Council, and
settle the State of Siena which was all in fermentation with Factions and
Seditions. When the News of the disaster in Africa was brought into France in
December following, it occasioned open rejoicing; for most Men were vexed at
the Murder of Fregoso and Rink, and said, That now was the time to revenge
them.

King Ferdinand after his bad Success, The Supplication of the Nobility of
Austria to King Ferdinand for obtaining free Exercise of Religion.
called a Convention of his States at Prague, the chief City of Bohemia. There,
at length, amongst other things, the Nobility of Austria, on the Thirteenth of
December, present a Petition to the King; and, in the first place, to insinuate
into his Favor, they offer to employ their Lives and Fortunes in defense of
his Honor and Dignity. Then they deplore the sad State of the public, and
their own Condition, who had the Turk a most cruel Enemy and a Conqueror too,
so near them: Wherefore, said they, it was high time to look out for Remedies,
and especially that the Wrath of God might be appeased, who being offended with
the Sins of Men, plagued them with so great a Judgment. For that in the whole
Body politic, there was nothing pure nor sound; that all Discipline both
public and private was laid aside, which was the Source of their common Evils;
but that the contempt of the Word of God was the chief Cause, why he so
scourged and afflicted them. For both Sacred and Profane Histories inform us,
say they, that God has many times severely punished most flourishing Kingdom
(...) for those lighter Sins which sprug from our Nature and Dispositions; but
for false Worship and the Contempt of his Word. The Jewish Nation was led away
Captive into Assyria and Babylon, for despising the Prophets, and devising a
new Religion and Worship to themselves: At length they were utterly cut off,
and Jerusalem destroyed, for their Crucifying of the Son of God. Those most
flourishing Empires in former times, the Babylonish, Persian and Grecian, now
oppressed by the Turks, have for the same Causes, so lost their Religion, Laws,
Government and Dignity, that hardly any Print of them remains at this day; and
whilst partly they rejected and partly loathed the Blessings of God, they have
fallen into horrible Darkness, and most ignominious Slavery. Nor did all this
change come of a sudden; for the Turks waged War for the space of Six hundred
Years and more, before they subdued Greece; which happened then at length; when
after so many Invitations and Admonitions, they would not mend their Manners,
but added Sin to Sin, and Transgression. Now if a Man should compare those
Kingdoms, formerly so splendid and powerful, wherein so many famous Wits
flourished, with that barbarous and brutish Monarchy of the Turks, he would
find, that since the Flood, a sadder Calamity never happened. But if such
powerful People were not able to resist so weak a Nation, as the Turks were in
the beginning (God being pleased so to punish their Sins:) What are we to
expect who are in the same fault, indeed, but in a far worse condition, since
we have to do with an Enemy much more powerful than we? We see how God plagues
us, especially in these parts, with War, Pestilence, and Famine: The most cruel
Enemy has lately seized Buda, the Capital City of the Realm: Fire has raged
through Bohemia, and what miseries have we not suffered now these Sixteen
Years? How much Blood has there been spilt, and how many Thousand Souls
carried away into Slavery? Now is the Power of the Turk grown to such an
height, that he lifts up his Head above all other Kings and Potentates. And
because he obtains almost continual Victories over us, he looks upon himself
as God's Scourge, and thinks none can escape his Vengeance. Since then our
Transgressions are most grievous, what can we promise our selves, or how shall
we be able to stand out against him? This is, certainly, the only remedy, That
all things are in the Hands of God: It is God that gives and takes away
Empires, that smites and heals again, who invites us to Repentance, by
offering unto us the knowledge of his Word, which he always does before he
afflicts. So sent he before, the Prophet Jonas to the Ninevites, and pardoned
them when they Repented; so was he favorable to Nebuchadnezzar King of
Assyria, when he followed the Counsel of Daniel. We truly know no other
Medicine, most dread Sovereign, than that the Word of God be purely taught, and
the People stirred up to amendment of Life, that in confidence thereof they may
withstand the Violence of the Turks; for in the true worshipping of God all our
safety consists. Many Errors have crept into the Church, (it cannot be denied)
which being in this our time discovered, have occasioned great Dissensions: But
in the late Diet of the Empire, many Points of Religion have been agreed upon,
and for a certain time, Peace given to Religion: Besides, the Bishops have been
enjoined to reform the Abuses of their Churches. Now if that accommodation be
denied to us, and if any one incurr danger for following those Heads of
Doctrine which have been accorded, it is obvious enough to think how grievous a
thing that will be. Wherefore we humbly beseech your Majesty to give command
that the Gospel may be purely taught, especially that Point of Doctrine which
relates to Justification; to wit, That our Sins are pardoned through Christ
alone: In the next place, that Men be exhorted to the practice of Charity and
good Works, which are, as it were, the Fruit and Signs of Faith: Let them also
be made afraid of Sin, and accustomed to give God Thanks, that, through his
Mercy, we are by Jesus Christ delivered from Sin, Death and Hell, and made
Inheriters of the Kingdom of Heaven: In like manner that they who desire it,
may have the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper given them according to the Custom
of the Primitive Church: That Injunctions be also laid upon the Bishops, that
according to the late Decree of the Empire, they reform what is amiss in the
Church; that they appoint able Ministers to instruct the People, and not turn
out sound Preachers, as they have always done hitherto. And though, because of
the inveterate corruption, this Reformation cannot be brought about of a
sudden; yet the pure Administration of Doctrine and the Sacraments, ought to
take place in Churches, because our Salvation depends thereupon, and it is
necessary it should be so, that the People, who are now ignorant and under no
Discipline, and has scarcely any tincture of the knowledge of God, may be
brought again into the right way, for there are very many Churches altogether
destitute; whence it comes to pass that the common sort of People wholly
degenerate into Paganism, so that, with much ado, they can be restrained from
it, which with great grief and sorrow we now mention; and therefore we pray
your Majesty that in so pious and necessary a Mark you would not be wanting to
us. And let not your Majesty think that we so importunately beg this, that we
may thereby have greater Liberty, or that we are given to Changes: For we
acknowledge that our Salvation rests only upon Christ, that the knowledge of
the Gospel is to be adorned by Holiness of Living, and we own our selves to
obey and serve you with our Lives and Fortunes. Now seeing it is so, we humbly
pray, that we may have the benefit of the Decree lately made, and that they who
shall follow the form of Doctrine mentioned by us before, may not be molested
in their Religion; for by that means Ministers will be found for the Churches,
and your People will have greater courage to Fight against that most cruel
Enemy, who for our Impiety and Ingratitude has by God's permission hitherto
been so often Victorious, and has so many times triumphed over us. This
Petition was presented in the Name of the Nobility and States of Austria, by
Four and twenty Noblemen, and Ten Cities, amongst which was Vienna, besides
their Neighbors of Stiria and Carniola, who therein joined with them.

To these things King Ferdinand made Answer, King Ferdinand's Answer.
That he was extremely grieved for the Calamities they mentioned, not doubting
but they were the Judgments of God, for the Sins and Wickedness of the People;
and that he had many times enjoined the Ministers of the Church, diligently to
exhort Men to the Amendment of Life: But that it increased his Sorrow, to find
that his Endeavors had met with so little Fruit; which was the Reason, why
lately, before he departed from Lintz, he had renewed the same Commands, as was
well known unto them: That he never was against it neither, but that the Word
of God should be rightly taught, according to the Tradition of the Apostles and
Interpreters, received and approved by the Church: That he was still in the
same Mind, and never, to the best of his Knowledge, punished any Person for
following this Form: That at present also he would command the Churchmen, that
according to the last Decree of the Empire, they would endeavor to banish
Vice, reform their Churches, and employ able Doctors to teach the People: That
they themselves knew how zealously and painfully he had bestirred himself in
endeavoring to quiet and compose this Difference about Religion: That the same
was now his chief Desire, and that he had good Hopes, that either in a General
or National Council of Germany, or else in a Diet of the Empire, the whole
Matter might be determined and brought to a Period; and that therefore he
promised himself the same thing of them, That they would submissively wait for
that Reconciliation, and without attempting any Change or Innovation, follow
the Footsteps of their Forefathers, walking in the old way of their Religion as
well as of their Duty and Obedience; and that they should not think the Decree
of Ratisbone any way concerned them, the Intent whereof was only, that the
Catholics should continue in the old Religion, and the Protestants in that
which they followed at the time of the Accommodation, until the meeting of
either of the Two Councils, or the Diet of the Empire, to be called within
eighteen Months: That since it was so, he could not allow his People to act any
thing to the contrary. The Austrians renew their Supplications.
They again petition to the same Purpose, but in few Words, praying that the
pure Worship of God may be established, and the true Ministers of the Church
brought into no Danger: For that otherwise it was in vain for them to expect
any Victory or good Success against the Turks.

A little after this died the Bishop of Naumburg, and Julius Pflug, whom we
mentioned, A Quarrel betwixt the Elector of Saxony and Canons of Naumburg about
the Bishop.
was by the Chapter chosen to succeed in his place; but the Elector of Saxony
pretended that the Chapter had no Right to do so, without his Consent; and
therefore, in exclusion to Pflug, he substituted Nicholas Amstorff, a Divine of
Wittemberg, of a noble Family, in his place; whom in the Month of January,
Luther installed; and afterward published a Book in the vulgar Tongue, wherein
he asserted, That the Flock of Christ was not to be committed to Pflug, as
being an Enemy to the pure Doctrine of the Gospel. Pflug being in this manner
rejected, 1542.
made a public Appeal to the States of the Empire, wherein he justified his
Right, and complained of the Wrong that was done him. The Elector on the other
hand, Luther writes against the Bishop.
answered the Writing of Pflug, and having enlarged much upon the Right of the
House of Saxony, which he proved by ancient Precedents, amongst other Reasons,
why he could not admit of him as Bishop, he alleged this also, That he openly
opposed the Augustane Confession. After the Overthrow in Hungary, which we
mentioned before, a Diet was called by King Ferdinand in the Emperor's Name, A
Diet at Spire.
to begin at Spire in the Month of January; wherein the Emperor appointed his
Brother King Ferdinand to preside in his Name, and gave him for Assistants Hugh
Count of Monfort, and John Naves: The Princes who appeared there, were the
Elector of Brandenburg, Frederick Prince Palatine, Albert Duke of Meckleburg,
Ernest Marquess of Baden, the Bishops of Mentz, Worms, Spire, Constance, and
Heildesseim: The rest sent Deputies thither. When they came to a Session, which
was the Ninth Day of February, King Ferdinand, King Ferdinand's Speech in the
Diet.
in the Emperor's Absence, opened the Diet, by a Speech, as is customary;
telling them, That it was known to all, how great Diligence and Care the
Emperor had used, both that Religion might be settled, and the Government
entirely established: But that when Differences would not be wholly adjusted in
the former Diet, his imperial Majesty, for weighty Reasons, went from Germany
into Italy, where having treated with the Pope about a Council and the Turkish
War, he prevailed so far at length, that his Holiness had promised to send a
Legate to this Diet; that he went afterward with a Fleet into Barbary; that
having taken Algiers, which was in the Enemies Hands, and which did great
damage to Spain and his other Provinces, he might obtain a competent aid from
his Subjects against the Turk, after he had removed the Danger, and secured the
Sea Coast; but that being by a Storm prevented from effecting what he had
proposed, he returned to Spain, that he might again prepare himself to make War
against the Turk both by Sea and Land. And that because the Turk had lately
made himself Master of Buda, the chief City of Hungary, and of the Town of Pest
over against it, into which he had put Garrisons; he had called this Diet to
advise what was fitting to be done. That seeing the Turk had left in those two
places all the great Guns which he had either brought with him, or taken from
the Christians; there was no doubt, but he would come back again in the Summer
time, that he might not only take the remaining part of Hungary, but also
invade all the Provinces bordering upon Germany. For that since Buda was taken,
and all other Passes laid open, there was nothing now that could stop or divert
him. That therefore these were weighty and necessary Matters to be now
consulted about; at which Consultations the Emperor would willingly have been
present, but that being hindered by time, he had committed that care to him;
who, though the State of his own Religion did chiefly require his Presence, yet
was resolved not to desert the public at such a Pinch. Having made this
preamble, he declared to them what the Austrians, Hungarians, Bohemians, and
the Neighboring People; nay, and what the Church Men of his Dominions would
contribute to this War; praying and exhorting them to do the like; for that the
Danger stared all Men in the Face; and the condition of Affairs was now such,
that either the Enemy was to be driven out of Hungary, or all were to expect,
and soon after undergo the extremity of Miseries. After the Diet of Ratisbone,
John Gropper, Deputy from the Archbishop of Cologne, Gropper recommends Bucer
to the Archbishop of Cologne, Who thereupon comes to Cologne.
being returned Home, mightily commended Bucer, saying, That of all Men he was
the ^ittest to be entrusted with the Reformation of Religion; for that he was
both very Learned, a lover of Peace, and of a good and upright Life. Wherefore
the Bishop, who knew Bucer before, and had thoughts of employing him, sent him
word that he had a desire to speak with him. Bucer therefore going this Year,
in the Month of February, to Cologne, was most courteously received, and
particularly by Gropper, who had prevailed with him to come thither from Bonn.
So after some conversation with the Bishop, he gave him leave to be gone, upon
condition, that when he should be sent for at another time, he would come back
again, as shall be said hereafter. About this time also King Henry of England
cut off the Head of his Queen Catharine Howard, The Lady Catharine Howard Queen
of England Beheaded.
for that having Married her for a Virgin, he found that she had been defloured
before. He that defloured her had got some place in Ireland, but being recalled
by her, when she was Queen, and taken into her Family, he was also Beheaded
after her, as some others were, partly for the same Crime, and partly for
concealing it. King Henry's Sixth Wife.
When she was out of the way, the King married a Sixth Wife, the Lady Catharine
Parr.

The French King sent an Ambassy to the Diet at Spire, and Francis Oliver
Chancellor of Alenzon was the chief person in it; who in a full Assembly of all
the States, when they were consulting about the Turkish War, February the
Fourteenth, The French Ambassador's Speech at Spire.
spoke to this purpose; That he needed not use many words to plead for a
favorable hearing at their Hands, since all understood how well affected the
King his Master stood, toward the Interests and Welfare of Germany; that what
he had to say also, was of so great moment, that he doubted not but they would
willingly listen to the King's Counsel and Proposals: Seeing that when the Diet
of Ratisbone was busy in Accommodating the Difference of Religion, News being
brought, That the Turk was preparing to Invade Hungary with a vast Army; the
King had forthwith sent Ambassadors to the Grand Seignior, to avert, if he
could, the War from Hungary, for the sake of Germany which lay next to it; but
that his Ambassadors had been apprehended by the Emperor's Soldiers, and that
it was as yet uncertain, whether they had been killed, or were still alive;
whereby not only the Truce, but the Law of Nations was also violated: Now that
they were sent for that Cause, the King would make it out, by the very Letters
and Instructions which were then intercepted by the Imperialists: That
afterward a false Report had been spread abroad, as if the King had called in
the Turk, when it was publicly known, that they who were straightly Besieged in
Buda, had implored Aid from the Port: That not long after the taking of the
Ambassadors, the overthrow of Hungary came to be divulged, at which News the
King was extremely troubled; and being informed that Resolutions were to be
taken in this Diet of sending Succors into Hungary, and for curbing the Fury
of the Turks, his Majesty could not but declare his thoughts to them in so
weighty a concern: That therefore, if his Discourse should prove somewhat long,
he begged their patience; for that all which was of the cause, would not be
briefly comprehended in any Speech though never so Eloquent and Elaborate. That
the first point to be considered then, was, Whether or not it would be
profitable not only to Germany, but to all Christendom also, that they should
make War against the Turk; for the better understanding whereof, he would take
notice of the Arguments of those who did advise the War: And that the Reasons
most commonly alleged were, That the Germans had always been and were still
accounted valiant Defenders, not only of their own Liberty, but of that of
their Neighbors also: And that therefore it was not to be suffered that the
barbarous and cruel Turk, the common and perpetual Enemy of all Christendom,
being drunk with Prosperity and Success, should make himself Master of Hungary,
a most flourishing Kingdom and the comport of Germany; but that he was to be
attacked with all their Force and Courage, not doubting of Victory, since by
base and wicked ways, and not by lawful Succession nor Right, he had so far
enlarged his Empire: And that though his Dominions were of a vast extent, yet
he might be overcome, and was not so Invincible as many did believe; which was
apparent enough, not only by those great Exploits which John Hunniades,
Matthias King of Hungary, Scanderbeg Prince of Epirus, and Tamberlain Emperor
of the Tartars, had successfully achieved against him; but also by what they
themselves of late years had done, when they drove him away, and made him raise
the Siege of Vienna. That the Turks differed from the Germans in their way of
making War; for that these by Robbing, and like a flying Flame, wasted and
destroyed Countries wherever they came; whereas the Germans either by
fighting courageously put the Enemy to flight, or by Blood and Wounds procured
to themselves an honorable Death: That therefore since the Enemy was at the
very Door of Germany, a War was necessarily be to undertaken, and no longer
delay made. That these and the like were the Reasons urged by those who
promoted a War; but that they did not rightly consider the State of Germany,
when they spoke and urged so, as if Germany were united at Home, when, in the
mean time, it was full of Divisions and Animosities, and nothing but Hatred,
Enmity and Dissension amongst the Princes: That it ought, then, to be
considered, what Germany was able to bear, how great and dangerous a War that
was like to prove, against an Enemy, who in all the World, could not be matched
for Power, nor the necessary Materials of War: For that a Battle or two would
not put an end to the Quarrel, but there would be need of fresh Supplies of
Soldiers, with a vast and constant Charge to continue the War. That though the
Forces of Germany were, indeed, very great, and its strength almost incredible,
yet so great Wealth and Power was not rashly to be squandered away; but rather
that they ought to wait for a better Occasion, and delay, till Princes agreeing
among themselves the Power of Christendom might be enlarged, and strengthened
with more Recruits* That the Battle fought by the Emperor Sigismund at
Nigeboli, and many other overthrows received to the present times, ought to be
a warning to them not to undertake any thing unadvisedly: That no War, wherein
he was not the Aggressor, had ever hitherto succeeded: That, without doubt,
Buda and Pest were so well provided of all things necessary, that unless the
Garrisons should be starved out, there was no Hopes of recovering them; but
that these were uncertain Hopes too; and that, besides, the Turk would every
Foot bring a new Army and fresh Forces, and so Harrass and break the German
Soldiers, already tired out and weakened by a long Siege, as that he might
easily put in Provisions into the place: That again, if they should bring it to
a deciding Battle, and he get the better of the Day, it would be very hard for
the Germans to reinforce their Army; nor could that be so soon done neither,
but that he would advance into the very Heart of Germany, and carry all before
him: That Germany also being by frequent Wars drained of its Soldiery, had need
of Peace and Quietness to recruit and recover strength again; and that all Men
knew what stress was to be laid upon the Hungarians; for who were more fickle
and inconstant than they? Who made nothing of changing their Masters, and
entertained such rancour in their minds against the Germans, that they
preferred the Turkish Government far before theirs: That therefore it would be
much better to Fortify it out of Hand, and put strong Garrisons into the
Frontier Castles and Towns that lie betwixt Austria and Hungary: That the same
should be done in Bohemia, and every where else, where there was occasion: That
it was safer to do so, than without any strong hold behind their Backs to carry
on a War, and endeavor to take from the Turk the places he held; in attempting
whereof the least miscarriage would prove an infinite prejudice to Christendom.
But that if he should begin and make War against Germany first, that then their
whole Forces should be drawn out into the Field: For that it was the ancient
and peculiar Glory of Germany, that as they never enlarged their Borders by
doing wrong to others, so likewise they valiantly beat off the danger, and
stoutly defended their own Liberty: That this praise was, by all means, to be
transmitted to their Posterity, an invading Enemy was manfully to be withstood,
and not rashly believed, if (after declaring of War) he should perchance offer
Conditions of Peace: For that it was natural to those who proposed to
themselves Rule and Dominion, that they knew not how to set bounds to their
Ambition: That therefore, when matters should begin to look as if Force and
Hostility were threatened, then, with all diligence, preparations should be
made for a defense; for that so it would come to pass, that either he would
desist; or, if he proceeded, learn to his own loss, how much it was easier and
more honest, to maintain ones own Liberty, than wrongfully to invade another's
Dominion; but that because it would be very difficult for them to make Head
against such an Enemy, whether they were upon the offensive or defensive part,
nothing could be more requisite, than that the domestic Grudges and
Dissenssions of Germany should be removed. That they had lately at Ratisbone
accorded some chief Articles, as concerning Justification, Faith and Works,
which were fundamental Points of Religion; that they should therefore follow
that Doctrine, live friendly one with another, and not be too apt to jangle and
contend for the future: That the Apostles first, and afterward the Council of
Nice had left us a Symbol of Faith, which all professed; and that since it was
so, there ought to be no place for Dissensions, neither ought one to slight or
reproach another; for that all Men had not received the same Gift from God.
That without concord the State of the Empire could not be safe nor lasting,
especially whilst the Turk hovered over them; that the Romans, became Masters
of the World, not so much by strength and Arms, as by a certain fetch of Craft
and Subtlety, when they made it their Business to raise and foment Strife and
Divisions amongst a Nation whom they intended to subdue, and to defend and
support one Faction against another, until they oppressed both together: That
by these Arts they had overreached the Carthaginians, Asians, Gauls, and the
Greeks, a People naturally fickle and mutable. So also were the Germans deluded
by Tiberius, when they were making War in Italy; that the Britains only had
avoided that yoke, because they understood their Arts, and in common danger
emptied all their intestine choler and hatred upon the Enemy of their Country:
That this art brought the Romans themselves to nothing at last: That by the
same cunning Philip of Macedon subdued all Greece, having set the Athenians,
Corinthians, Thessalonians, etc. together by the Ears: That Ottoman the first
Emperor of this Turkish Race, had taken Bithynia, whilst Christian Princes were
at variance among themselves: That upon the same occasion, the Turk had at
length invaded Europe, conquered Thrace, all Greece, and the Morea; nay, and
for Three hundred Years past had carried all before him, either through the
discord or treachery of the Christians: That at the same time Constantinople
was taken, Italy was all in Combustion by the Factions of the Guelphs and
Gibelins, the Names of the Emperor's and Pope's Parties: That it was to no
purpose to mention what had lately happened to Rhodes and Hungary, and upon
what occasion: That thus the Turks, a mean, obscure, and barbarous People,
creeping out of the Holes of Scythia, had grown upon the Divisions of
Christians, and reared their vast Empire, whilst either the Greeks opened to
them the Door of Europe; or the faithless Genoese wafted them over the
Hellespont; or the Brother-Princes of the Morea Quarrelling one with another,
called them in, to their own Destruction; or those of Epirus assisted them; or
the Servians and Bulgarians combined with them; or, in short, whilst the
Hungarians voluntarily invited them to come. That for the sake of common
Liberty then, ways of Concord and Agreement must be taken; nor must they think
that if they either sat still, or were divided, Foreign Nations would do their
work for them: That this was the King's Advice and Counsel, which he entreated
they would take in good part, and expect from him all steady Friendship and
Affection.

The Pope had sent his Legate thither, The Speech of the Pope's Legate in the
Diet of Spire.
John Morono Bishop of Modena; who being desired by King Ferdinand, and the
Emperor's Ambassadors, to acquaint them with the Pope's Mind, on the Twenty
third of March spoke to this Effect: That when the Emperor, the Year before,
passed through Italy in his Expedition to Barbary, he had conferred with the
Pope about the Turkish War and a Council; but that it being a weighty and
difficult Matter, and the Emperor streightened with time, nothing had been
concluded; but that Granvell remained behind in Italy, with whom somewhat more
had been treated: That his Holiness indeed, had always desired a Turkish War,
and had for that Reason used his Endeavors, that all might live together in
Peace: That now also it was his chief Care, that the Truce betwixt the Emperor
and French King might be observed; and that since there were diverse Reports of
the Turks Preparations, and that it was not certainly known to what they
tended, His Holiness would furnish Five thousand Foot, provided the Emperor
would command the Army in Person; but if not, half the Number, and that so he
had agreed with Granvell; unless the State of his own private Affairs should be
reduced to such Streights, as that he should be obliged to demand Assistance
from them: That otherwise he would be ready to do all that lay in his Power,
having designed all he had for that Use: That it had always been, and still was
the Intention of his Holiness, that a Council should be held; but that he had
hitherto delayed the calling of it with the Advice and Consent both of the
Emperor and King Ferdinand, because it was thought some way of Agreement might,
in the mean time, offer in Germany: But that since that had been endeavored in
vain, he had returned to his former Resolution; however that it should be held
in Germany, neither his Age, the distance of Place, nor the Change of Air,
would suffer him to be present, who both intended and ought to be there: That
besides, Germany did not seem to all People to be a convenient Place; and it
was to be feared too, least Matters might be carried disorderly there: That
therefore he liked better Mantua, Ferrara, Bolonia, or Piacenza, which were all
very large and commodious Cities: That nevertheless, if these did not please,
he did not refuse to have it held at Trent, a City upon the Confines of
Germany: That he had intended it should have commenced at Whitsuntide, but that
by reason of the shortness of the time, he had put it off to the Thirteenth of
August, The Catholic Princes and States consent to the Council offered by the
Pope at Trent; But the Protestants protest against it.
and prayed, that laying aside all Grudges, they would seriously prepare for
it. King Ferdinand, and the other Catholic Princes, with the Emperor's
Deputies, return their Thanks, and if a more proper Place could not be found in
Germany, as Ratisbone or Cologne, they profess themselves satisfied with Trent.
But the Protestants approved neither the Pope's Counsel, nor the Place; nor
that it should be mentioned in the Decree, and openly protested against it.
When the French Ambassadors found they were not like to prevail, that the
States were inclinable to a Turkish War, and that their Presence was ungrateful
and suspicious to the Imperialists, they departed in some Displeasure before
the end of the Diet. Trent is a Town in the Alps, upon the River Etch or
Aidge, under the Dominion of King Ferdinand; three Days Journey from Venice,
and not two Days from Verona.

So soon as the French Ambassadors were returned home, the King began to think
of War: The French King prepares for War.
And though he had, in effect, already restored the Admiral, and conversed
familiarly with him, as we said before; yet least some time or other it might
be prejudicial to him or his Children, he granted him his Letters Patents,
wherein he restored him to his Possessions, Honor and Fame, declaring that he
had never been Guilty either of Treason or Treachery, and remitting him his
Fine of Seven hundred thousand Crowns; and these Letters he ordered to be
entered upon Record, both in Paris and other places. This was done the twelfth
of March. The King being at this time in the Castle of Vincennes near to Paris,
News was brought to him in the night time of a sudden Tumult, as if the Enemy
out of the Emperor's Territories, was about to make an Irruption into the
Country of Vermandois in Picardie: Wherefore the Princes who were present at
Court, were instantly dispatched thither, to wit, the Dukes of Vendosuce,
Guise, Aumale, Nivern, and many others, with a great number of Gentlemen; but
when they came there all was ^ush'd, no Man living stirring. Now some said that
this was a Rumor purposely raised, to persuade the People, that the Emperor
sought for a War, which the King would not seem to be Author of, though he had
already fully resolved it, as shall be said hereafter. For as much as the State
of Germany was such, as has been before related, Aid was voted and an Army
ordered to be levied, An Expedition against the Turk, under the Conduct of the
Elector of Brandenburg.
which being augmented and reinforced by King Ferdinand's Forces, might be able
to make Head against the Turk, and recover what had been lost. Joachim Elector
of Brandenburg, was by common Consent, and the Will of the Emperor, made
Generalissimo, who immediately leaving Spire, prepared himself for the
Expedition. For this War there was a Poll raised all over Germany, and Leave
granted to Magistrates to impose a Tax on their People upon this Account: It
was also resolved that Assistance should be craved from the Switzers, and other
Kings, especially the King of Denmark and the Italians: Moreover a Decree was
made, that all should live in Peace within the Confines of the Empire, and not
attempt any Stirs or Commotions: And so the Diet was dissolved on the Eleventh
of April.

About the same time a great Quarrel broke out in Saxony, A Quarrel betwixt the
Elector and Duke Maurice of Saxony.
betwixt the Prince Elector and Duke Maurice, who now succeeded to his Father
Henry lately deceased: The Dispute was about their Limits and a certain Town;
though Duke Maurice also plainly espoused the Interest of Pflug, who was
recommended to him by his Relations. The Matter was, in all probability, like
to have come to a Civil War, for both mustered their Men; but by the Mediation
of the Lantgrave it was accommodated. This was the beginning of a Rancour
betwixt them, which increasing afterward with the time, gave a sad Blow to
Germany, as shall be said hereafter: And many, indeed, wondered at Duke
Maurice, that he should have hatched such violent and fierce Designs, against
him, to whom both he and his Father owed, in a manner all their Fortune: Some
of his Counselors were thought to have contributed, not a little thereunto;
who being very familiar with Prince George, had no great Kindness neither for
the Religion nor the Elector.

The War being now resolved upon, Luther's Camp-Sermon.
and all preparing for the Expedition, Luther published a little Book in the
vulgar Tongue, being a Military or Camp-Sermon. Let us trace the Matter a
little farther back: In his younger Years, he had amongst other things written,
That to war against the Turk, was downright fighting against God, who smote us
by him as with a Scourge. This Tenet of his was, with the rest, condemned by
Leo X. and his other Adversaries also cried that he dissuaded People from
making War against the Turk: His Position condemned by the Pope.
Wherefore afterward, either of his own Head, or being put upon it by others,
he undertook the handling of that Subject, and in the Year 1528. published a
little Book, which he dedicated to Philip the Lantgrave, The Explication of
that Position.
giving the Reason of his Position, and why he wrote so at that time. For in
those Times of Darkness, says he, no Man instructed People aright, concerning
the civil Magistrate; whence he derived his Power, or what his Duty was. Most
People, and some learned Men also, looked upon that Office as Profane, and
dangerous to the Conscience too: Nay, Kings and Princes themselves were so much
persuaded of this by the Priests and Monks, that they sought to themselves new
Means of Salvation, whereof this was the chief and main Prop; That they should
not only hear Masses, but also settle large Fonds for having them said to the
Worlds End: For seeing they thought that the Life they lead was not very
acceptable to God, they sought to better their Condition by those Assistances.
The Princes who then lived can testity the Truth of this; for not to mention
others, when I published a Book concerning the Magistrate, Prince Frederick was
much rejoiced therewith, and hugged it as his Delight; because it gave him some
Light as to his own State and Condition. The Pope alone and his Ministers
reigned every where, and was a kind of God upon Earth: But the Magistrate lay
neglected and grovelling in Darkness, wholly ignorant of that noble Testimony
and Promise which he had from God. The Pope would needs be esteemed a
Christian, and in the mean time he incited People to War against the Turks:
Then arose a Controversy betwixt us; for I made it my whole Business to prove
what was the Duty of a Christian Man, and because I had not then as yet wrote
any thing of the civil Function, the Papists cried, I flattered the Magistrate.
Now, again, that I have commented on that Subject, they give out that it is
Seditious; when, nevertheless, no Man, perhaps since the Age of the Apostles,
if you only except St. Austin, has treated that matter more clearly or fully.
Amongst other things which I taught then, I explained that saying of Christ's,
Of giving thy Coat with thy Cloak, and, of suffering Injuries; which place the
Pope and all his School had wholly depraved, affirming it most erroneously, to
be a Concord, but not Precept. When therefore they took to themselves the Name
of Christians, and that too above all others; and nevertheless would suffer no
Injury, but must fight against the Turk, I opposed it, and following that
saying of our Savior, made it out, that a Christian ought not to resist Evil,
but suffer all patiently: And then it was that I published that Position, which
Leo, amongst others, condemned; and I did it the rather, that I might detect
the Knavery and Cheats of the Court of Rome; for the Popes were not in earnest
about the War, but made use of it as a Color and Pretext, whenever they had a
mind to squeeze Money from Germany: Wherefore they damned that Position of
mine, not because it dissuaded from the War, but because it barricadoed the Way
by which our Money and Wealth was carried to Rome. Again, I did not approve it
then neither, that they continually edged on our Princes to War, when in the
mean time there was no Reformation of Life and Manners to be seen among us: But
chiefly, that they called that War a Christian War, as if we fought against the
Turks for being the Enemies of Christ; which nevertheless suits neither with
the Doctrine nor Name of Christ: Not with his Doctrine, because he forbids us
to resist Evil, or to revenge a Wrong; nor with his Name neither, because in so
great Armies, there is hardly, perhaps, Five true Christians to be found, most
of them being worse than the Turks themselves; whilst in the mean time all take
to themselves that Name, which, indeed, is an Affront and Injury done to
Christ, when his Name is in this manner defamed and vilified, and would be far
more, if the Pope and Bishops carried Arms also, and marched out into the Field
with the rest. For since it is their peculiar Office, to resist the Devil by
the Word of God and Prayer, it is very undecent that they should leave that
Station, and make use of Sword and Pistol, that ought to be the Care of the
civil Magistrate, and the Offices are distinct: But it is now long since the
Popes invented those things, though they be forbid to do it by the Laws and
Canons of our Ancestors. How unsuccessful have Wars hitherto been, for
wrongfully arrogating the Name of Christ, the thing it self makes it manifest,
since Rhodes and the best part of Hungary being now lost, we have the Turk at
our very Doors: And how unlucky it is to have the Confederacy of Papists in a
War, may be seen by the Battle of Varna, and the Overthrow of King Ladislaus,
who was persuaded by Cardinal Julian to engage the Enemy: It may be seen also
by the late Overthrow received Two Years since, when King Lowis miserably
perished.

Having made this Preface, he came to the Matter it self, saying, That God was
in the first to be reconciled, and enjoining the Ministers of the Church to
exhort Men to Repentance: Afterward he lays open the Religion and Impiety of
the Turks, and says, That it properly belongs to the Emperor to make War
against them; not for Revenge, Vainglory, or Profit, but out of Duty, that he
may defend his Subjects from Injury: That the Emperor was not to be excited to
this War neither, as being the Head of Christendom, Protector of the Church,
and Defender of the Faith, since these were false and vainglorious Titles, and
injurious to Christ, who alone defends his own Church: And that the Injury was
the greater, in that most part of Kings and Princes were sworn Enemies to the
true Religion: That therefore the Turk was to be fought against* and resisted,
not because he is of different Religion, but because he Robs and Spoils,
carries on a most unjust War, and brings along with him the Examples of a most
foul and shameful Life. Then, comparing both together, he affirms that the
Roman Papacy is no better than Turcism; and that as the Turk, by his Alcoran,
so the Pope, by his Decretals, has extinguished the Light of the Gospel: That
what he does by open Force, the Pope does the same by his Curse and
Excommunication: That both lay a Reproach upon Marriage, and are punished,
says he, for the Contempt of the Law of God, which institutes Matrimony; when
being wholly rejected of God, they burn in filthy Lusts, and most flagitiously
invert the Order of Nature. Lastly, speaking of the Power of the Turks, he
advises them not to be secure, but war circumspectly, as knowing that they had
to do with the cruelest of Enemies.

These, Luther's other Military-Sermon.
and the like Points of Doctrine, were the Subject of that Book we mentioned:
But now; when at the Persuasion of the Emperor and King Ferdinand, the States
of the Empire had decreed a War against the Turk, he published another
Treatise, a Military-Sermon, as I said, that the Ministers of the Church, who
followed the Camp, as is common, might have some Form set before them, of
Teaching and Exhorting. The first thing then, says he, is that Men understand
what they are to think of the Turk: For the Scripture prophesies of Two cruel
Tyrants, who are to lay wast and plague the Christian World, before the last
Day of Judgment; the one by false Doctrine, of whom Daniel, and after him St.
Paul speaks, and this is the Pope of Rome: And the other by Force and Arms, to
wit, the Turk, of whom Daniel speaks in his Seventh Chapter. Let those
therefore who will be Christians, put on Resolution, and expect no Peace, no
quiet Life for the future; for that time of Trouble and Misery which he
foretold, is now come. But let us comfort our selves with the Hopes of Christ's
coming, and our future Deliverance, which will appear presently after these
Afflictions; and let us know for a certain, that all the Rage and Malice of the
Devil is fully poured out upon us by the Turk; for no Tyrant hitherto ever
raged as he does. Then he expounds the Seventh Chapter of Daniel, about the
Four Beasts coming out of the Sea; and proves the Turkish Empire to be
signified thereby: For this is that little Horn, says he, which sprang up
amongst those Ten Horns of the Fourth Beast: And though it be grown to a great
bigness, yet it can never reach to the Power of the Roman Empire; for the
Prophet there describes only Four Empires, which were to succeed in order; that
the last of them was the Roman Monarchy: Therefore there shall never be another
that can compare with the Roman in greatness. And because Daniel assigns it
only Three Horns, which it is to pluck out from among those Ten, its Force and
Power will not proceed much farther: For those Three Horns are long since
plucked off, being Greece, Asia, and Egypt; which three vast Provinces of the
Empire, the Turk now possesses; and is by the Prophet confined within those
Limits; so that it is to be hoped, that he will not hereafter make himself Master
of any other Province of the Empire. But now that he makes a Bustle in Hungary,
and is ready to invade Germany, it is the last Act of the Tragedy: He may
possibly, indeed, get some Footing in those Provinces, but it is not to be
thought, that he can peaceably enjoy them, as he does Asia, Greece, and Egypt;
for the Prophecy is manifest and plain. After this he handles all the other
parts; inviteth all chiefly to Repentance, and readily to obey the Magistrate,
who calls for their Service in this War against the Turk, exhorting them not
only to venture their Fortunes, but even their Lives and Persons upon that
account; he uses also many Arguments to comfort the Slaves who were already
under the Power of the Turks, or might be taken by them thereafter; and
admonishes them to have a special Care they be not allured by that specious and
painted Religion of the Turks: For that he was told many Christians of their
own accord made Defection to that Religion, because it had a kind of show of
Probity and Holiness: That they should patiently bear their Bondage, and
faithfully serve their Masters, though Wicked and Profane, not running away
from them, nor putting Hand on themselves, through Impatience for the
Irksomness of their Condition: But that they should always have in their
Thoughts what St. Peter and St. Paul wrote of the Duty of Bondmen: That,
however, when they make War against Christians, they should rather hazard their
Lives than serve them, for that they were Robbers, made War against the Saints,
as Daniel says, and shed innocent Blood: That therefore it should be their
chief Care not to be partakers with them in so great a Crime and Wickedness.
Unto this Discourse he subjoins a Form of Prayer against the Fury of the Turks;
and toward the end, enlarging upon the Vices of the Times, which reigned
amongst all Ranks and Degrees of Men; he concluded, that Germany which was so
wholly corrupted and defiled, could not continue long in Safety. Now this is
the Form of Prayer which he prescribes;

O Eternal Father, Luther's Prayer against the Fury of the Turks.
we have, indeed, deserved to be punished, but do thou thy self punish us, not
in thy Wrath and Displeasure, but according to thy great Mercy, seeing it is
far better for us to fall into thy Hands, than into the Hands of Men and
Enemies; for thy Mercy is infinite and above all thy Works. We have sinned
against thee, O Lord, and broken thy Commandments; yet thou know, O
Heavenly Father, that the Devil, the Pope, and the Turk, have no Right nor
Cause to afflict us, for we have not wronged them; but thou usest them as a Rod
to correct us with, who have many Ways provoked thee all our Life time: They, I
say, have nothing to charge us with; but would rather, that, after their
Example, we should for ever grievously offend thee; that we should sin against
thy Divine Majesty, by Idolatry and false Doctrine; by Lying and Deceiving; by
theft, Robbery and Rapine, and by Adultery, Fornication and Sorcery: That Is the
thing they most desire. But because we worship thee, God the Father, and thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, with thy Holy Spirit, one God everlasting, that is
our Crime and Wickedness, for which they so hate and persecute us. Should we
make Defection from thee, and renounce this Faith, we needed not to expect any
Hurt from them. Look graciously toward us then, O Father, and help us, for
they are more thine Enemies than ours; when they smite us, they smite thee; for
the Doctrine we profess is not ours but thine: The Devil, indeed, cannot endure
it, but would be worshipped in thy place, and force Lies upon us instead of thy
Word: And the Turk also would place his Mahomet in the room of thy Son Jesus
Christ. Now if it be a Sin to profess thee, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to be
the only true God; then certainly thou art a Sinner who teach us so to do,
and requirest this Duty at our Hands: And when for this Cause they persecute
us, they hate and afflict thee. Awake then, O my God, and avenge thy Holy Name,
which they pollute and profane; suffer not this Injury at their Hands, who
punish us, not for our Sins and Trespasses, but endeavor to extinguish the
Light of thy Word amongst us, and to destroy thy Kingdom, that thou should
not have a People to worship and adore thy Name.

Now as to the Origin and Growth of the Turks, since so many have written of it,
it is no purpose to discourse here: Their Rise has been as great as their
Beginning was small; Of the Original of the Turks and of their Kings.
and the first of their Emperors is reckoned Ottoman, who reigned about the
Year of our Lord 1300. After him succeeded in order Orchanes, Amurath, who
first crossed the Hellespont, and brought an Army into Europe, invading Thrace;
Bajazet, Cyriscelebes, Moses, Mahomet, Amurath, Mahomet, Bajazet, Selim,
Solomon.

Much about this time Alfonso Davalo Marquess of Pescara, The Marquess of
Pescara accuses the French King.
whom we mentioned before, published a Declaration addressed to the Princes of
Germany, wherein he Accuses and Blames the French King, that in such
troublesome Times, he should plot and contrive new designs, on purpose to
frustrate and hinder the honest Endeavors of the Emperor and all the States,
pretending a very slight and trivial Reason for it; to wit, the intercepting of
Anthony Rink, and Caesar Fregoso, after whom he had made most diligent Inquiry,
but could not learn what was become of them. This coming to the French King's
Knowledge, he declared that he had a great Injury done him, in that his
Ambassadors had been so barbarously used: The King purges himself.
That he had several times complained of it both to the Pope and Emperor, and
desired Satisfaction; but all in vain: And that therefore if he should let so
unworthy an Act pass it would be to his dishonor, and the greatest stain
imaginable to his Reputation.

Afterward on the Second of May he wrote to the Parliament of Paris, Prayers
appointed at Paris for the Success of the War.
to this Effect; To the end, said he, that God may illuminate our Hearts, and
grant us Constancy in our Faith, bring those that go astray (if any such be)
into the right Way of Salvation again, and send us Peace, by means of
Satisfaction for the Injuries we have received by Usurpation of our Right, and
Violence done to our Ambassadors; or, if in despair of Peace, there be a
necessity of going to War, that he may grant us Victory; our Will is, that
Processions be made, and Prayers in all Churches, and that able Preachers be
employed to give the People an account of the Cause hereof: Moreover we Charge
and Command, that if there be any who entertain sinistrous Thoughts of our
Faith and Religion, and do not promise amendment, that they be publicly
punished for their Crime. Not long after, he sent the Duke of Longueville to
the Duke of Cleve, who having raised Men against the Summer, under the Conduct
of Martin Van Rossem, waited for an opportunity of Action.

The Pope, in the mean time, on the First of June, calls a Council, and by way
of preamble gives a large account how he had often before called a Council, and
last of all suspended its sitting till a more convenient time; wherefore he
clears himself of all the Blame, and professes he could delay no longer, though
the Affairs of Christendom were still in a doubtful State. So then he appointed
it to be held at Trent, The calling of the Council of Trent.
on the First of November, whither he Summoned to appear all Patriarchs,
Bishops, Abbots and others, who had Right and Privilege to sit and Vote in
Councils. He exhorted also the Emperor and French King, that they would either
come themselves or send Ambassadors, and command their Bishops to repair to it:
But before all others he invited the German Bishops, because for their cause
and at their desire chiefly all that pains was taken. The French King declares,
War;
In the Month of July the French King declared War against the Emperor in a
very cutting Style of Language, giving his Subjects free Liberty, by public
Proclamation, to use all manner of Hostilities against him and his Countries,
And Longueville and Rossem invade Brabant.
both by Sea and Land. Longueville and Van Rossem had a little before made an
Incursion into Brabant, where they put the People, who were unprovided into
great Terror and Consternation, and were very like to have taken Antwerp and
Lovain, but wanting Ammunition and other things necessary for the Artillery,
they could not batter the places; however, wherever they went they ravaged
and plundered all, and having extorted a great deal of Money, forced their way
through, and in the Month of August joined Charles Duke of Orleans the King's
Son, who was then making War in the Duchy of Luxemburg. There were Four
hundred Horse in this Service, sent by the King of Denmark: And besides,
Damvilliers, Virton and Yvoix, Luxemberg the Chief City of the Province was
taken by the French. The King himself carried on the War on the other side, and
besieged Perpignan a Town of Roussillon by the Pyrenean Hills: He also ordered
William of Langey to act in Piedmont, whilst the Duke of Vendosme invaded
Artois and Flanders: So that he attacked the Enemy in Five several places at
once; but many thought it would have been better to have fallen into any one
Province with his whole Army, as it proved to be true in the end; for both
Perpignan was attempted in vain, and the Duke of Orleans being returned Home,
the Imperialists recovered all almost except Yvoix. Upon this occasion Antwerp
began to be Fortified, having been a place of easy access before. The French
King demands Aid from the Turk against the Emperor.
When the King was about to make War, he sent back Paulain to the Turk, to
entreat him that he would send him a Fleet into Provence: But Paulain arriving
too late, Solomon put it off till the Year following. In the Heat of this War,
the King published Edicts against the Lutherans: And the Parliament of Paris
charged all Printers and Booksellers under great Penalties, that they should
not print, publish, nor sell any Books that were condemned or suspected, and
Calvin's Institutions by Name. Afterward, at the request of the Inquisitor,
they made a Decree on the Seventh of July, that the People should be admonished
from the Pulpit, to be Obedient to the Church, and if they knew any Lutheran,
or any one that thought amiss of Religion, they should present him; for that it
was a work very acceptable to God. But the Curats and Ministers of the Church
had a Form prescribed to them, which they were to follow in examining and
making their Enquiry: The Form of inquiring who are Lutherans.
For they were enjoined to put the Question to the Informers, If they knew any
that said there was no Purgatory; That so soon as a Man was dead, he was either
damned or saved; That Man is not justified by keeping the Commands of God; That
God only was to be Prayed unto, and not the Saints; That the Worshipping of
Images was Idolatry; That the Saints did not work Miracles; That the Ceremonies
of the Church profited nothing; That the Canons of the Church obliged no Man;
That it was necessary for all Men indifferently to understand the Gospel; That
all Men ought to read the Scripture in the vulgar Tongue; That it was an Idle
thing for common People to pray to God in Latin; That the Priest did not
forgive Sins by the Sacrament of Penance, but that he was only the Minster who
declared God's Mercy in pardoning of Sins; That the Church could not oblige any
Man under pain of mortal Sin; Or that it was lawful to eat Flesh at all times.
This Form of Inquisition was given and enjoined to Priests privately: But there
was an Edict published, whereby all were commanded to inform against and accuse
those who neglected the Rites and Constitutions of the Church, who had
Heretical Books themselves, or gave them to others to read, or willingly
dropped them in the Streets, that so they might be dispersed; who kept private
Meetings in Houses or Gardens, and framed designs contrary to the Constitutions
of the Church; and those who received such Men into their Houses and Gardens:
They that were privy to any such thing were commanded, under pain of
Excommunication, to present all within Six Days to the Doctors of Divinity
chosen by the Inquisitor; to wit, Henry Gervase, Nicholas Clerk, Peter Richard,
Robert Buccine, John Benot, Francis Picard, and John Morine. Booksellers also
were charged within Six Days to bring all the suspected Books and Manuscripts
they had to the aforesaid Doctors; which if they did not, no excuse was to be
admitted afterward. The same Day that Edict was proclaimed, public
Processions and Prayers were made in all Churches of Paris, for the safety of
the Kingdom, and preservation of Religion, and the Relics of St. Gennevieve,
their tutelary Saint, were carried about; and much about the same time some
were burnt for Religion. There was one Francis de Landre, Francis de Landre a
Preacher at Paris.
Curat of St. Croix in Paris, who preached the pure Word of God to the People
at that time, and did not say Mass, because he drank no Wine; but whether out
of natural antipathy or design I know not. The Sorbonn Doctors conceived a
great Hatred against this Man; The Articles of Doctrine proposed to him.
and having employed some Emissaries to take Notes of his Sermon, they
propounded to him these Heads of Doctrine, to know his Judgment of them; That
the Sacrifice of the Mass is instituted by Christ, and is propitiatory both for
the Living and the Dead: That Saints are to be prayed unto, that they may be
Advocates and Intercessors for us with Christ: That the Substance of the Bread
and Wine is changed by Consecration: That none but Priests can Consecrate the
Bread and Wine, and alone have right to the Sacrament in both Kinds: That
monastic Vows are to be kept: That by the Sacraments of Confirmation and
Unction, the Holy Ghost is received: That by Fasting, Prayer and good Works,
Souls are delivered out of Purgatory: That the Constitutions of the Church
concerning Fasting and choice of Meats bind the Conscience: That the Pope is
Head of the Church, whom all are bound to obey by divine Right: That many
things are to be believed and necessarily received which are not expressed in
Scripture: That the pains of Purgatory are remitted by the Pope's Indulgences:
That Priests, though they be vicious and sinful, consecrate the Body of the
Lord: That all mortal Sins are to be confessed to the Priest, and Absolution to
be received from him: That Man has free will, whereby he may do good or evil:
And rise again from Sin by Repentance: That the pardon of Sins is obtained not
by Faith alone, but by Charity and true Repentance: That the Church and
Councils lawfully called cannot err, and that they are to be obeyed: And that
it belongs to the Church to Interpret and Expound the Scripture, if any
Controversy arise about the Meaning of it. These Articles they required him to
approve under hand and Seal. His Answer.
Some Days after he gave them a general Answer, that whatever the Holy
Catholic Church taught, as to these things, was Pious and Holy. But not
satisfied with that Answer, they attempted greater Matters against him, as you
shall know hereafter.

At this time also two Dominican Friars preached the Gospel at Metz; and seeing
the Priests began to show their dislike thereof, most part of the Citizens
begged earnestly of the Senate that they would not Silence them, Two Dominicans
Preach the Gospel at Metz, And so did William Farell. But the Emperor wrote to
the Senate, to suffer no Change in Religion.
they themselves promising all due Obedience. William Farell came thither also,
who at first taught privately within the City, and afterward in a convenient
Place without. But when the Emperor's Letters came to the Senate, wherein he
charged them not to suffer any Innovations in Religion, but punish Offenders
that way, the Citizens were prohibited to be present at any Sermon, unless the
Preacher were Licensed by the Bishop and Senate.

This Summer infinite swarms of Locusts flew over Germany, and the hither part
of Italy. They were of an extraordinary bigness, and wherever they fell
devoured all the Corn and Grass.

We have had several times occasion to speak of Henry Duke of Branswick,
Locusts in Germany and Italy.
of his bitter Invectives against the Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave, and of his
burning of certain Places in Saxony. The Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave make a
successful War against the Duke of Brunswick.
Now at length when he went on in his way, plaguing Goslar and Brunswick, to
Imperial Cities of the Smalcaldick League, with continual Incursions and
Devastations, and would neither obey the Emperor nor King Ferdinand's Edicts,
who, at the humble Desire of the Protestants, had commanded him to desist from
all Force; the Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave of Hess, make War against him in
Name of all the Confederates, and in a short time, subdue his whole Country,
taking by composition Wolfem-Battel, a Castle of his near to the City of
Branswick, wherein he had placed all his Hopes. Nor did he himself stay the
coming of the Enemy, but saved himself by flight, and with his Eldest Son
Charles Victor went to the Dukes of Bavaria. In the Castle we now mentioned,
many Letters were found, which clearly discovered the attempts of the
Bavarians, Elector of Mentz, Held, and others; but that shall be related in its
proper place. The Protestants published a Declaration giving a full account of
the Causes that made good what they had done, and proving that they were not
the Aggressors in the War, but of necessity obliged to defend their
Confederates who were attacked. Their Declaration of the Reasons of it.
In the late Diet at Spire the Protestants had made Application to King
Ferdinand that he would both in the Emperor's and his own Name command him to
abstain from the People of Goslar. King Ferdinand, who then needed their help
against the Turk, complied with their desire, and by his Ambassadors rebuked
him, and charged him to forbear; but he returned a haughty and disdainful
Answer, and went on, which occasioned the defensive War, we have been speaking
of. For they had plainly told King Ferdinand at Spire, that if he obeyed not
Orders, they would not sit still and see their Confederates wronged. The Diet
of Nurimberg.
July the Thirteenth there was another Diet of the Empire held at Nurimberg;
for so it was decreed at Spire, upon occasion of the Hungarian War. King
Ferdinand was there in person, and the Emperor's Deputies were Frederick Prince
Palatine, the Bishop of Ausburg, Frederick Count Furstemberg, Monfort and
Naves. King Ferdinand opened the Assembly by a Speech, wherein he told them,
That what they had done in sending an Army into Hungary was very Acceptable to
the Emperor, who had resolved to have been present in the War with his own
Forces, and had therefore called a Convention of States in Spain, but that
whilst he was consulting about the matter, he had fallen dangerously Sick, and
was forced to put off that Convention to another time: and that when now he had
determined vigorously to push on the matter, and to send before his Forces from
Italy and Burgundy, the sudden enterprises of his Enemies had prevented him in
the very nick, so that dangers threatened him not only in Italy, but in the Low
Countries too; though, in the mean time, he had given no cause for it, since
Peace and Quietness had been his chief desire: But that they themselves were
convinced that ever since the Diet of Spire, the Enemies had left nothing
unessayed, that by drawing over the Suisse and German Soldiers to their party,
they might begin the War; so that the Emperor, quite contrary to his
Inclination, was hindered and retarded, either from coming in person, or
sending Succors, since he stood in need of them for his own defense: That
nevertheless, he was fully resolved to return into Germany before the end of
the Year, and prosecute the War as he had intended; that he would likewise have
a Fleet out at Sea, well Manned and Equipag'd that the Turk being engaged in a
double War, might not turn all his Force against Hungary: That when also he
should come into Germany, he would omit nothing that might conduce to a pious
and tolerable Reconciliation of Religion. That, after all, it was very
prejudicial to the public, that all did not obey the Decree of the last Diet;
for that some of the States had sent no Soldier; others again had sent indeed,
but not their complete quota; and that some had sent Soldiers, but no Money;
and that Artillery and Ammunition, which others had promised, were wanting:
That this was the reason why all Action was at a stand, and that the Army, to
the great prejudice of the Empire, did nothing at all: That the Generals and
Commanders made heavy complaints of it, and that he himself had been an Eye
Witness thereof: That since it was a matter of great concern, he was come to
represent the same in person to the Diet, not without great Inconvenience to
his own Affairs: That therefore he earnestly besought them that they would not
be wanting to the common Cause in such a time of need.

Before King Ferdinand left Vienna to go to the Diet at Nurimberg, The Message
of the States of the Empire to the Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave.
being informed of the War of Brunswick, he had sent a Messenger to dissuade
them from their Enterprise; but now that he was arrived at Nurimberg,
Commissioners were sent by the Advice and Consent of the whole Diet, with
Instructions, to this Effect; That they should not decide their Quarrel by
Arms, especially at this time, least that might hinder the War against the
Turk, and occasion a Civil War in Germany. Their Answer.
To this the Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave, on the Eleventh of August give their
Answer from the Camp before the Castle of Wolfem-Battle, and tell at length the
Reasons why they engaged in that Defense, seeing it was impossible to order the
Matter otherwise; and that though they were necessitated to wage that War, to
their great Charges, yet they had faithfully contributed what Assistance they
ought to the Turkish War, and would not be deficient for the future; so that if
all the rest would do the like, no body needed to fear the dispersion of the
Army; but that it was known by the Letters and Report of many Persons where the
defect lay. Since it was so then, and that there was no other way of curbing
the Duke of Brunswick, who had slighted the Edicts both of the Emperor and King
Ferdinand, and the Decrees of the Empire; they prayed them not to misinterpret
their Actions; for that they had no designs in this War against any Person but
him, and did not refuse, after Matters were quieted, to send all the Assistance
they could command to the Relief of Hungary. The Diet ended on the Twenty-sixth
Day of August, and therein a Decree was made, The Decree of the Diet of
Nurimberg.
inflicting a Penalty on all those that did not obey the Decree of the Diet of
Spire, and several other things enacted in Relation to the Turkish War. None of
the Princes were present at it, except Walter Master of Prussia, and the
Bishops of Bamberg, Aichstadt, and Trent, with the Emperor's Deputies
before-named.

Mention has been made before of Cardinal Contarini, Contarini accused of
Miscarriages.
who, for the Services done in his Legation, had no great Thanks from the Pope
and Cardinals, by whom he was charged, as not having been brisk enough in
opposing the Lutherans, and as having endangered the Interests and Religion of
Rome. He had been by many Accused in his Absence, and none but Cardinal Fregoso
stood up for his Defense. Upon his Return out of Germany into Italy, he came to
Luka, where Pope Paul then expected the Emperor as he was to go to Barbary.
From thence he went to Rome with the Pope, and not long after was made Legate
of Bolonia; where at length, toward the latter end of this Year, he died, not
without suspicion of having been Poisoned, Contarini and Fregoso, Cardinals,
die.
Fregoso being dead not long before. They who were familiarly acquainted with
him, say, That he was right in his Judgment as to Man's Justification. He was a
very learned Man, and wrote a Book of the Magistrates and Republic of Venice.

In the same Month William Poiet Chancellor of France, The Chancellor of France
cast into Prison.
was by the King's Command, who then was going to Perpignan, apprehended a-bed
in the Night time, and carried to Prison. The News of this occasioned much
rejoicing at Paris; for in the Four Years time that he discharged that Office,
he had offended all Ranks of Men, and was now at length disgraced by the
Interest of a Lady at Court; though he had contracted much Envy too, by the
Condemnation of the Admiral, as we said before. He was in great Hopes, and
almost sure of being made a Cardinal, and therefore had taken Holy Orders some
Months before. Though most Men said he did so, that he might fortify himself
against the Hatred that many did bear him, and secure his Life, if at any time
that heat should break out into a Flame. This was the third Instance of the
wantonness and inconstancy of Fortune, which happened within a few Months in
France. For those three we named before, the Admiral, Constable and Chancellor,
being promoted to the highest pitch of Honor and Dignity, could not refrain
from Envying and Hating one another, Otho Prince Palatine, and the people of
Heildesseim embrace the Reformed Religion.
till, at length, by their own Example, they gave an evident demonstration how
fallacious, slippery, and uncertain all worldly Enjoyments are: At that time
Otho Henry Prince Palatine embraced the reformed Religion; and so also did they
of Heildesseim.

You heard before of the Council: And now the Pope sent the Bull of Convocation
thereof to the Emperor in Spain. The Emperor on the Twentieth of August wrote
an Answer to the Brief of his Holiness that came with it. In the First place he
commends his Endeavor, The Emperors Letter to the Pope about the Council.
and the Zeal he expressed for the public Good; but is troubled that the
French King should be compared to him: That that King was a prodigal Son, said
he, but that he who had never swerved from his Duty, ought more tenderly to be
hugged and embraced: That he had never declined any Trouble, spared no Danger
nor Expenses, for obtaining of a Council, that Christendom being at Peace, all
their Force might be employed against the Turk; but that the French King, on
the contrary, had had far different Prospects: That therefore he had just Cause
to take somewhat amiss in his Brief: That it was an usual Bragg of Francis,
that he had the Cardinals at his Beck, wherefore he began to doubt whether it
might not be true; but, however, that he trusted to a good Conscience, and that
the Actions of them both were publicly known: That his Holiness was, indeed,
too kind and indulgent toward him; for that all the Labor and Pains he had
been at now for many Years, was lost: That he had been often admonished of his
Duty, many heinous Injuries pardoned, and Leagues still renewed with him; but
that all these things made him the worse, and he wholly abused his Goodness:
That he had satisfied him at Rome, who it was that gave the Cause of the War,
and who had violated the League; but that what had happened in the mean while
since, he would now inform him of; to wit, That no greater Demonstration could
be given of his own Willingness and Desire to live in Peace, than that after
the Truce made at Nice, he came to an Interview with him at Aigues Mortes, and
put himself into his Hands; nay, and the Year following, took a Journey through
France, to the great Astonishment of all Men, and not without the Censure of
many; for that seeing he had oftener than once broken his Faith, and was very
inconstant and changeable in all his Purposes; it was no small Danger for him
to have ventured his Person upon his Word and Promise: That he was also
assured, that at that time it was moved in Council that he should be detained.
Now as to what some said, He was obliged to go that way, because of the
Rebellion of Ghent, it was but an idle Surmise; for that that Insurrection was
the Act but of a few, and of the baser sort of the People too, the rest of the
Province being still in quiet; and could easily have been repressed by the
Queen his Sister; but that it was his Purpose at that time to have returned
into Germany through Italy, had he not been persuaded by the King to alter his
Resolution, and travel over France; as he could demonstrate by his own Letters,
and by the Letters of his Sons and Nobles; for that he was so earnestly
importuned by him upon that Account, that he thought it would have reflected
upon his Honor, if he had passed any other way than through France; and that
whilst he was in France, he had had it often from his own Mouth, That he would
observe the Truce; but that afterward he began to complain, that Milan was not
restored to him according to Promise; whereas the Promise was made with this
Condition; If he restored his Uncle, the Duke of Savoy, and performed some
other things: That ever since that time, he had framed Designs against him in
several Places, in Germany, Italy, with the Grand Seignior, the Vayvode John,
his Widow, and some Nobles of Hungary, by whose Means the Turk had got Buda:
And that nevertheless he had all along disguised his Malice, and made him
large, but ensnaring Promises of Friendship, that he might spin out the time,
and surprise him unawares; which he did so soon as the Occasion offered, when
Fregoso and Rink chanced to be missing: That, however, his Holiness himself,
who was chosen to be Umpire betwixt them, was a Witness of his Willingness to
have satisfied him in that Particular: That this was the Pretext, then, he now
used for raising new Troubles and Commotions in Christendom, though it was long
since he intended it: That it was well enough known what Fregoso and Rink, had,
by his Orders, attempted in Italy and Turkey, and what Services they had often
done him: That they went about to betray Christendom into extreme Danger; so
that they had no right to the Peace of Nice, who violated the public Peace:
That, again, they scudded privily through Lombardie with a Train of Banditi's;
a Crime that is capital by the Law and Custom of that Country: That the Marquess
of Pescara was heavily accused by him; and yet he had offered to stand a Trial
for it; but that it was not unknown why he refused that, and rejected other
Satisfactions also: That, for his part, when he thought he had been satified,
he passed over into Barbary, and sent an Ambassador into France, to recommend
to him the public Peace; but that at the same time he gave the fairest
Promises, he was attempting several things against him in Germany, Denmark, and
other places; and laid a Design of invading Navarr: That afterward his
Ambassadors, at the Diet of Spire, had made it their whole Business to foment
the Difference of Religion, promising each Party severally their Masters
Frienship and Favor: That he had endeavored to dissuade the States of the
Empire from the Turkish War, solicited the Grand Seignior, sent Forces into
Italy, caused Martin van Rossem in Brabant and Flanders, and the Duke of
Orleans in Luxemburg, to make War against him before any Denunciation; and then
bent all the rest of his Forces toward the Frontiers of Spain: That this,
forsooth, was the Fruit of his Holiness's Tenderness, who had indulged him in
so many things, and so often exhorted him to Peace: That he should also suffer
the Archbishop of Valentia to be detained Prisoner by him, and several
Noblemen of Spain to be abused and affronted by the French in Avignon, was, in
all Conscience, too great a Forbearance: That now therefore, he must be forced
to stand upon his own Defense, at a time when he had least Fear of him, by
reason of his large and most ample Promises, when he was preparing for the
Turkish War, and upon that account to return into Germany: That the Injury and
Damage was, indeed, great, which he had done within his Territories, and he and
his Subjects both suffered by it; but that he was not so much moved thereat, as
at the public Calamity of Christendom; for that as to his own private
Concerns, since he was always shuffling and breaking his Agreements, it were
far better for him to have open War, than to trust to any Truce or Conditions,
which upon every light Occasion he could break and annul: That Peace with him
was, for the most part, a Snare; since it was his Course, in the mean time, to
hatch new Counsels, pernicious to the Public; cherish and foment Factions, and
to make it his chief Study to disable him from resisting the Turks; by
harassing and tiring him out, and exhausting him by Charges: That this being
his own Temper, he made it his Care to bread his Children in the same Nature
and Discipline: That his Ambition and Covetousness was now grown to such a
Hight, that it could no longer be concealed: That as his Ancestors had usurped
Provence, which belonged to the Empire, so now also he held Savoy, and part of
Piedmont, which he so fortified, as made it apparent enough he had no mind to
restore them: That it had been his Design, not only to invade Lombardy, but
Parma and Piacenza too, then Luka and Siena, and afterward the Patrimony of St.
Peter, that so he might have a Passage open into Naples and Sicily: That there
was no Doubt but his Project reached so far, and that it might easily be
gathered from the Designs and Stratagems he had on Foot in Italy: That, in
short, there was no Bounds to be set to his excessive Ambition; nor was it ever
to be thought that he would stand to any Agreement, so long as there remained
any thing for others to lose, or for him to take: For that he was so
transported with this Disease and Restlesness of Mind, as with a violent
Calenture: That forgeting all Religion and Piety, he had made a League with the
Turk, and joined, not only his Counsels, but Fortunes also, with the Enemy of
Christendom, making, at this present, mighty Braggs, that Barbarossa, with a
Fleet, would quickly be upon our Coasts: That his Holiness, in his own
Prudence, ought to consider, if these were Courses to heal the Divisions of
Christendom, and begin a Council with: That it had always been the Endeavors
of the French King, that no Council should be held, as thinking it would prove
prejudicial to his private Affairs: Wherefore, so soon as he had perceived
that, he had taken other Measures for composing the Differences about Religion
in Germany, and had therein Respect only to the Glory of God, and the Honor
and Dignity of the Church: That therefore it was to be imputed to the French
King, who had always hindered, and not to him, who had taken so much Labor and
Pains about a Council, that there was not one sooner called: That if then, his
Holiness were disposed to help afflicted Christendom, he ought, in Duty, to
declare himself an Enemy to him, who was the Author of all the Disorder and
Calamity, who invited and allured in the Turk against Christendom, and who left
nothing unattempted, whereby he might satiate his Ambition and boundless
Revenge: For that since the chief Care of Christianity belonged to him, by
virtue of his Pastoral Office, the thing it self required, that he should not
suffer him to proceed any longer in these disorderly Courses, but declare
himself his Enemy: That if he would do so, it would not only be an Act most
acceptable to all good Men, but would prove of singular Use also for containing
all other Kings within the Bounds of Duty: For that it was the only Way to have
a Council meet, Peace restored, and the Troubles of Christendom settled;
wherein if his Holiness did his duty, he for his Part would not be wanting.

The End of the Fourteenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XV.
The CONTENTS.
The Pope attempts in vain to make Peace betwixt the Emperor and French King. A
hot War betwixt England and Scotland. The French King suppresses a Sedition at
Rochell. In the Diet of Nurimberg, Granvell, in the Emperor's Name, demands
assistance against the French King, who in a very long Manifest, answers the
Emperor's Letter. Langey dies. Francis Landre and de Pensier make a public
Recantation. Mention made of Marot by the bye. Bucer Preaches at Bonn. The Pope
offers to buy the Duchy of Milan. Philip made King of Spain. The Emperor and
King of England make a League against the French King. The Pope writes to the
Clergy of the Cathedral of Cologne, and animates them. The French King takes
Landrecy, a small Town, from the Emperor. A Diet is held at Spire, where the
French King is so grievously accused, that his Herald was dismissed with very
rough Language. There the Protestants lay most enormous Crimes to the Charge of
Henry Duke of Brunswick. There also the Duke of Savoy by his Ambassadors again
accuses the French King. The Speech which the French Ambassadors were to have
made in the Assembly of all the States at Spire, is printed and published. In
the same Diet also an accord was made, betwixt the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and
the Duke of Saxony. The States of the Empire vote the Emperor Money against the
French King. Bulloign is besieged by the English. The Town of Landrecy is
taken. A panick fear at Paris. The Emperor makes Peace with the King of France
at Soissons, and the Conditions of the Peace are related.

WHEN the War was not hot on all Hands, August the Twenty-sixth, the Pope sent
Legates Mediators, Cardinal Michael Bishop of Viseo, Cardinals Pacificators
sent from the Pope to the Emperor and French King.
a Portugese, to the Emperor, and Cardinal James Sadoleto to the French King,
to intercede with them that they would sacrifice their private Injuries to the
public Good, and set their Minds in Peace. He sent Legates also to the Council
at Trent. The Emperor made Answer to the Legate of Viseo, and wrote to the Pope
much to the same purpose, The Emperor's Answer to the Cardinal Pacificators.
as he did in the Letter we mentioned before; and therefore again moved him to
declare himself the Enemy of France: For that his Holiness had often protested,
That he would severely punish him, that should violate a Truce, or make a
League with the Turk: That that was the only solid way of settling the Peace of
Christendom. With this Letter he dismissed the Legate on the Eighteenth of
October. Because the Duke of Longueville and Martin Van Rossem, had raised an
Army in the Territories of the Duke of Cleve, as has been mentioned before; The
Country of Juliers wasted by the Imperialists, and Duren taken.
the Imperialists under the command of the Prince of Orange, invade the Country
of Juliers, put all to Fire and Sword, and upon Composition take Duren, the
chief Town in these Parts: For the Duke of Cleve had succeeded to the
Principalities of Juliers and Mons, in Right of his Mother. At the same time
also the Imperial Army having done no Action in Hungary, only in vain attempted
the Siege of Pest returned Home, but much weakened by the Plague that had swept
away many Thousands of them. Maurice Duke of Saxony served as a Voluntier in
this War, being a Youth of about Sixteen Years of Age, who having one Day gone
abroad out of the Camp, with one Man only to wait upon him, met accidentally
and engaged some Turks, where he had his Horse shot under him. The Gentleman,
who, as I told you, waited on him, covered him with his Body, and defended him,
till some Horse came in to their Relief aad saved the Prince. So that to save
his Life he lost his own; for being brought into the Camp full of Wounds, he
died not long after. This was the issue of the Hungarian War, whither the Pope
had sent Three thousand Foot under the Command of Alexander Vitellio.

About this time a hot War broke out betwixt England and Scotland, A war
betwixt the English and Scots.
upon occasion, that the Year before the King of Scots having promised to meet
his Uncle the King of England at York, to treat about their Borders, had been
dissuaded by his Mother, and many of the Nobility, and so did not come. But the
Scots about the beginning of December this Year, had a great defeat, and many
of their Nobility were taken in Battle, and that of their own accord too,
because they despised their General, as being a Man of inferior Birth, and
could not endure to be Commanded by him. The King of Scots dies.
This the King laid so much to Heart, that returning Home, he died of Grief the
Twelfth of December after, his Queen being brought to Bed of his Daughter Mary
but Eight Days before; which was a thing that also increased his Melancholy,
seeing he had no Male-Issue living; for the Year before he had lost Two Sons in
two several places, within the space of Twenty-four Hours. His Queen was Mary
the Daughter of Claude Duke of Guise of the Family of Lorrain. The Scots being
in this distress, the French King sent them a supply of Men and Artillery.
After the Death of the King the Administration of the Government was put into
the Hands of James Hamilton Earl of Arran the King's Cousin twice removed. Next
to him in power was the Cardinal of St. Andrews, one much addicted to the
Interest of France. We have spoken before the Duke Henry of Saxony, who entered
into the Protestant League both in his own and Son Maurice's Name: But after
his Death, Duke Maurice being called on upon that account, made Answer, That
his Father could not bind for him, nor was he tied by his Obligation.

Henry Duke of Brunswick being forced to fly his Country, as was said before,
brings his Action against the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgrace and Confederates,
before the Imperial Chamber, who being afterward cited to appear, in the Month
of December, The Protestants decline the Imperial Chamber.
declined that Writ and Judicature in all Causes whatsoever, and by their
Agents under public Intimation thereof, protesting at the same time, that they
did not refuse a lawful and ordinary Jurisdiction, but excepted against the
Judges, who were of a different Religion, who adhered to the Decree of Ausburg
made Twelve Years before, and approved it upon Oath, who for that reason were
at great variance with them, and bore malice against them, who looked upon them
as Heretics, thinking that Justice was not to be administered unto them, and
who had many times given manifest indications of this their prejudice and
aversion. It had been decreed in the Diet of Ratisbone that in the Month of
January this Year, the Imperial Chamber should be reformed. To this Decree the
Protestants assented, provided Men of their persuasion might be admitted to
that Bench, which the Emperor granted to them, as we said before; and King
Ferdinand afterward renewed in the Diet of Spire, appointing that Reformation
to be made in the Month of June, whereby he had obtained Supplies from them for
the Turkish War. For unless that were done, they publicly then protested, That
they would not only contribute no more to the Charges of the Chamber, but also,
not obey the Orders of that Court. Since therefore, nothing had as yet been
done in that matter, they sent Agents, as I told you, with Instructions to
decline and protest against the Judicature: But the Judges of the Imperial
Chamber, in a public Writing, afterward rejected their declinatory
Protestation. It was decreed in the late Diet of Nurimberg, That, because of
the Turkish War, the States should assemble there again on the Fourteenth of
November, but that was put off: The Duke of Cleve retakes Duren.
And in the depth of a bitter Winter, the Duke of Cleve besieged and retook
Duren.

When the French King was at the Siege of Perpignan, A Sedition at Rochell.
a Sedition broke out at Rochell, a very famous and well situated Sea Port Town
in Xantoinge. It had been in the Possession of the English, but it fell again
under the Dominion of France, in the Reign of Charles V. who succeeded to his
Father King John. The Reason of the Insurrection was, That the King had put a
Garrison into the Town under the Command of the Signeur de Jarnack the
Admiral's Kinsman: They were up likewise in the places about, because of the
Gavell on Salt, having driven away the King's Officers and Collectors that came
thither. So soon as the King had Information of this, he sent thither a New
Garrison of Horse and Foot: Jarnack also took all their great Guns and Arms
from them, and seizing the Gates, placed Guards and Sentinels in all convenient
places. On the last of December after, the King came thither himself, and being
seated on his Throne, with the Towns-people and their Neighbors laying
prostrate at his Feet to beg Pardon, he made a short Speech to this purpose;
The French King's Speech to the Seditious Rochellers.
Although, said he, when I and my Children were engaged in most weighty
Affairs, for the Protection and Welfare of the whole Kingdom, and your Safety
among the rest; you have so far forgot the Duty you owe to me, as to rise up in
Arms and Rebel, insomuch that I might most justly punish you, and rate my
Satisfaction according to the Character of my Person, and the greatness of your
Fault; Yet seeing I account it no less Honorable and decent for a Prince to be
gracious toward his People, than it is Civil and Honest in them to be Dutiful
and Obedient to him: And that I prefer your ready and humble Submission before
the Rigor and Severity of Justice; I am resolved to forget the Injury you have
done unto me, and to consider, not so much your fault, as my own accustomed
Clemency; in confidence that you will have a care to do so no more for the
future; else, instead of a gracious and merciful Prince, you may look for an
exact and severe Justiciary; and that through your own fault, which ought not
to be reckoned less than that for which some Years since the People of Ghent
were most exemplarily punished, when they suffered not only in their Persons,
but lost their Liberties for ever. Now though no Man would blame me for
following this Example; seeing the Injury I have received is as heinous, and I
am not in any thing inferior to him, who in that manner revenged himself:
Nevertheless, since I had rather grow great in the Affection, Loyalty, and good
Will of my People, than enrich my self by their Wealth and Substance, I fully
pardon your fault, and restore you to your former Condition: However, I accept
what you have freely given me, but order all that has been taken from you upon
account of this Riot, to be given back again. When the Acclamations and Humming
of this his Majesty's Speech was over, a most melodious Consort of Vocal Music
was heard from the Steeple of the Cathedral of St. Bartholomew's Church, which
expressed the public Rejoicing; and then the King was entertained by the
Senate at a most splendid Supper. When, next Day, the King was upon parting, he
told the Representatives of the People that were about him, I am now going,
said he, to another Quarter of my Kingdom, to defend it from the Enemy; see you
to the defense of this place, as I am confident you will; and if there be any
thing that may contribute to the Ornament and profit of your City, let me know
it, and I will not refuse it you.

On the Seventeenth of January, King Ferdinand with his Two Sons came to
Nurimberg to be present at the Diet: 1543.
Eight Days after Granvell came also from Spain, who passing through Trent on
his Journey, with his Son the Bishop of Arras, The Diet of Nurimberg.
had exhorted the Pope's Legates to proceed in the Council. In this Diet the
Emperor appointed for his Deputies Frederick Prince Palatine, the Bishop of
Ausburg and John Naves. On the Fifteenth of February, King Ferdinand made a
Speech at the opening of the Diet. And because, that in some former Diets,
continual Aids had been decreed against the Turk, he willed and desired them,
that they would all now bend their Thoughts that way, that nothing necessary
might be wanting; For that it was reported from all Hands, that he would return
this Year into Hungary, with a vast Army, and that he was incited thereunto by
some Christian Princes: That though his own Provinces where exhausted with
almost continual Wars, yet he was resolved not to be backward; that there was
scarcely any Man but knew of how great moment it was to defend Hungary,
Austria, Moravia, and the adjoining Countries. For the greater persuasion,
there were several Letters read, directed to King Ferdinand and others, all
which, in a manner, confirmed, that the Turk was preparing a new Army and
Fleet, that he might carry on the War both by Sea and Land. At this Diet also
there were Ambassadors from Queen Mary, Coverness of the Netherlands, Wirick
Baron of Crieckengen, and Viglius Lord of Zuichem a Lawyer. These, in a long
Speech, accused the Duke of Cleve, for that by his Aid and Counsel, The
Ambassadors of the Netherlands accuse the Duke of Cleve at Nurimberg.
Granvell's Speech in the Emperor's name at Nurimberg.
the French King had sent Martin Van Rossem to make War in those Places:
Wherefore they demanded that he might be reduced to Duty, made to deliver up
the Possession of Guelderland, and give Satisfaction for the Damage received.
Afterward, February the Fifth, Granvell delivered his Message, to this Effect,
That it was to no purpose to spend time in declaring the Emperor's good
Intentions toward the public; that, however, his Majesty had been exceedingly
rejoiced the Year before, when the News was brought him, that with united
Forces, they were making an Expedition against the Turk: That it was his
Majesty's purpose to have Commanded the Army in Person, and had made his
Preparations accordingly; but that he was unexpectedly attacked by the French
King the Duke of Cleve, which had discondcerted all his former Measures: That
the Forces he had then intended to have employed against the perpetual Enemy of
Christianity, he was obliged to make use of for his own Defense; especially
since the Enemy boasted much also of a Turkish Fleet, whereon they seemed to
lay great stress: That nevertheless, for his part, he continued in the same
Inclinations, that he had always professed, and was resolved not only to spend
his Substance, but even his Life, and blood in the Turkish War, provided they
would also mutually assist him against the French King and Duke of Cleve; to
which not only his propensity of Will and Inclination toward the public; but
the present state of Affairs also ought to persuade them: That it was known to
all Men, how the French King had driven the Duke of Savoy out of his Country:
That he designed to do the same likewise with others, when time and occasion
should offer: And that the cause of this violent Malice of his was, because the
Emperor put a stop to his Attempts and Enterprises: That they themselves had
heard from the Letters lately read, what designs he was carrying on with the
Turk; what also in Germany, and how it was his Resolution to obstruct the
Turkish War: That in like manner since the Duke of Cleve was in League with
him, who also retarded the Emperor's most just Enterprises, and prejudiced the
Welfare of Germany, Aid was to be decreed against both, that their Insolence
and Boldness might be repressed.

In the mean time the Protestants present a Petition to King Ferdinand and the
Emperor's Deputies, The Protestants Petition.
wherein they relate at large, what for many years had been done in Religion;
how that Peace had been granted at Nurimberg, but that the Imperial Chamber had
infringed it; how that the Emperor two Years before had granted them a Proviso,
and told them his mind at Ratisbone; how that there was a Decree made there for
Reformation of the Imperial Chamber, and rectifying of that Judicature; what
they also had then publicly protested, unless the Decree should be fulfilled:
That now, since none of these things were performed, and that the Judges of the
Chamber proceeded in their wonted way to molest them; first for defending
themselves against Henry Duke of Brunswick, and then for non-payment of the
Salaries and Charges of the Chamber, they had declined all their Jurisdiction;
which they protested they would do long before in the General Diet: That now
therefore, if the matter were otherwise represented to them they beg of them
not to believe it; for that necessity forced them to do as they did, and to
make use of a lawful Remedy, which Justice and Equity allowed every Man to do.
For that, should they go on in that manner, usurping to themselves a power of
judging, and pronouncing Sentences of Proscription and other Penalties against
them, it would prove not only hurtful to them, but also to the whole State: For
that who could doubt or be ignorant, how seasonable and advantageous a thing it
would prove to the Turks, if Feuds and Animosities amongst the States, should
kindle a Civil War that might exhaust all their Wealth and Substance? That many
Instances could be given, how difficult it was to pacify and quiet Minds once
exasperated and provoked: That, for their parts, truly, there was nothing they
wished for more, than to see a firm Peace settled, and equal Justice
administered in Germany: That all their Animosities and Diffidences sprung from
difference in Religion: And that the cause of all that Dissension was, that the
preaching of the Gospel, and true Worship of God were discountenanced and
oppressed; that Errors and notorious Vices were not only not removed and
amended, but through Ambition and the sake of Lucre, even tolerated and
defended: That God being therefore provoked and offended by this ingratitude,
did afflict his People with great Calamities, and would never cease to do it,
so long as they continued in them: That it was therefore their desire, that
they would turn their Thoughts this way, and effectuate at least, that no stirs
should be made upon account of Religion, and that Justice should be impartially
administered to all; but that since this was not to be expected, considering the
present state of the Imperial Chamber, they craved, That that Judicature might
be Reformed, according to the Ancient Laws of the Empire, and the Emperor's
Declaration; that other Judges might be appointed; all Suits and Actions left
in the same state as they were in before the Declinatory made, and that
Injunctions should be laid upon the Judges, exactly to observe the Rules of the
future Reformation, and act nothing contrary to the Pacifications of former
Years: For that unless matters were so ordered, and they sufficiently secured,
they would not consult about the Turkish War, though otherwise there was
nothing but what they coveted to do for the Public. When after much and long
debate, King Ferdinand and the Emperor's Deputies made Answer, That there was a
Council already called at Trent where the Emperor himself would be, and that
without a hearing of the Cause, they could not remove the Judges of the
Imperial Chamber; that it was ordered to be Reformed, and would soon be put in
Execution: That they could not deny Justice to Henry Duke of Brunswick, who was
ejected out of all and demanded it; and that that was all they could grant and
no more. The Protestants reply, That they did not approve that Council, nor
would they go to it: That they had no Satisfaction given them in other Matters,
nor sufficient Assurances made them; and that therefore they would enter into
no other Deliberations. The Decree of the Diet of Nurimberg.
Notwithstanding, King Ferdinand and the other States make a Decree, for
Fortifying the frontier Places upon the Turks Territories, for contributing
Money to defray the Charges thereof, and appoint the Third Day of July for the
Reformation of the Imperial Chamber, which they ordered to be Reformed
according to the model prescribed Eleven Years before at Ratisbone: They Decree
also, That those who did refuse to furnish their proportions of the Moneys and
Aid imposed, The Protestants oppose this Decree.
should be prosecuted in name of the Public, and be distrained therefore. But
the Protestants protested against this Decree, as made without their Advice and
Counsel, as containing nothing positive concerning Peace and Property; and as
imposing the Contributions very unequally. Now, because upon the Emperor's
coming the War was like to prove much hotter betwixt him and the Duke of Cleve,
Pacification attempted betwixt the Emperor and the Duke of Cleve.
the Princes Electors and rest of the States interceded by their Deputies; and
with much ado obtained a Truce from Granvell, not indeed positive and absolute,
but such as it was still at the Emperor's Discretion, so soon as he set Foot in
Germany to ratify or reject it, and in the mean time Zittard, a very strong
Town upon the Frontiers of Juliers, was put into the Emperor's Hands, until he
should declare his Mind in the Matter. The Mediators promised also to meet the
Emperor with an Ambassy to make intercession on behalf of the Duke, and
Granvell put them in great Hopes of obtaining a gracious Answer from his
Majesty. The Deputies of Cleve, of whom the chief was John Vlatten, a learned
Gentleman, approved this Agreement, and thanked the Mediators for the pains
they had taken: A Battle at Zittard.
But in the mean while a Battle happened at the Town of Zittard, March the
Twenty-fourth, wherein Cleve having had the better, partly for that Victory,
and partly to comply with the French King, who supplied him with Money, he grew
obstinate, and upon the return of his Deputies, rejected the Truce. The News of
this Success being in great haste carried into France, occasioned great
Rejoicing there, and the French King appointed public Thanksgiving to be made
for it at Paris. The Dukes of Bavaria intercede for the Duke of Brunswick.
The Dukes of Bavaria Brothers, by their Deputies, dealt with the Protestants
in the Diet, and, amonst others, propounded also this Condition unto them, That
all the Country of the Duke of Brunswick, should be sequestrated in the Hands
of the Emperor, or some Princes of Germany, until the matter were decided by a
fair Trial: But nothing could be then concluded as to that. Christopher Bishop
of Ausburg died of an Apoplexy at this Diet, The Bisop of Ausburg dies.
having appointed a Feast at his House the next Day. He was of the Family of
the Stadio's, a learned Man, and not averse to Peace. To him succeeded Otho
Truchses. The Decree here made was neither inserted into the public Records,
as the Custom was, nor had it the force of a Law.

It was somewhat late before the French King saw the Letter which the Emperor
wrote to the Pope, The French Kings Answer to the Emperor's Letter.
as we mentioned in the foregoing Book; and therefore, now at length he made
Answer to it, in a very long Epistle. That for the Emperor to expect to be
preferred before him, as having deserved much of the Church of Rome, was an
idle and ridiculous Thing: For that neither were the Emperor's Ancestors to be
compared with his, nor he himself neither with him upon that account: That he
was an excellent Son, indeed, and worthy of the highest Praise, who sent an
Army to besiege, vex and take Prisoner his Father, the good old Man Clement
VII. who sacked the chief City of the World, many ways profaned and polluted
the Holy Churches, and committed all kinds of Wickedness, Lust and Cruelty: Who
to so great a barbarity added Scorn and Derision, commanding Prayers and
Processions to be made in Spain for the Delivery of the Holy Father, whom, all
the while, he himself kept close Prisoner: That, on the contrary, his
Predecessors, Kings of France, from the times of Charles Martell, King Pipin,
and so downward, had all along studied to honor and advance the Popes of Rome:
That he run much out in commending his own great Care and Zeal for the Public;
but it would appear to be far otherwise, if Matters were rightly examined. For
that under his Conduct and Command many Thousand Christians had been cut off by
the Barbarians not long since in Hungary once and again, at Castle Novo in the
Bay of Ambracia, and afterward at Algiers in Barbary, when he gave it out that
he must needs go thither, but, indeed, fled, and left Germany open to the
approaching Enemy. That it was through his fault, that the Infant-Child of the
Vayvode John, King Ferdinand his own Brother, and Hungary fell into this
Calamity: That he gloried much that he had ventured to come to Aigues Mortes to
settle a Peace; but, that if any Body ought to be praised for that, it was
himself, who first went up to him into the Galley, and sent his Sons also
thither afterward, with no small danger, both from him, who trusted no Man,
and also from Andrea Doria Admiral of the Fleet, a crafty subtle Fox: That he
afterward made a Journey through France, at his desire, indeed, but after that
by Letters and Agents he had craved it of him, and offered him Milan: That it
was true he pretended other Causes now, but in reality he was forced by the
Insurrection of Ghent, to pass that way: That it never entered his Thoughts to
have stopped him; and what he said of the Deliberations of the Counsel of
Francis, in order to have detained him, was altogether false: That he had done
the Duke of Savoy no wrong, but that since the Duke had withheld from him his
Mother's Dowry and Inheritance, would not suffer him to redeem Nizza; and
besides had basely used his Lieutenants and Soldiers; he had regained by force
of Arms, what by Law he could not fairly recover, especially since all his
Actions generally were influenced by the Emperor, whose proper and peculiar
Talent it was, to incite the Subjects of other Princes to Revolt, and then to
leave them in the Lurch; witness the Dukes of Bourbone, Brunswick, and Marquess
of Saluces. Nay, and to be Troublesome and Injurious to his own Kinsmen and
Relations too, as to Christiern King of Denmark, his own Brother King
Ferdinand, and to himself especially, who had Married his Eldest Sister: That
it was to be imputed to him and his Brother, and to no Body else, that the Turk
lately had Invaded Hungary, and seized the chief Town of it, he having
treacherously made War against the young Son and Heir of the Vayvode. That in
the Diet of Ratisbone all the States of the Empire were solicited to give
Supplies pretendedly against the Turk; but in reality, against a poor
unfortunate Child, whom they designed to have turned out of all. That as often
as he had sent Ambassadors into Germany, he had done it without any crafty or
treacherous Intent: And that he was falsely charged with fomenting Factions, and
wheadling with both Persuasions in Religion: For that on the Concord and
Welfare of Germany his own Safety depended; and that all Men knew what his own
Religion was: That, it was true, he had sent Ambassadors lately thither, and
upon most weighty Grounds dissuaded them from the Turkish War: And that the sad
and dismal success of that War made it sufficiently appear that his Counsel was
good and safe; but that all the Emperor drove at, was to keep Germany in
continual Dissension, that it might thereby be prepared and made fitter for
servitude. That, on the other hand, how great an Injury had been done to
himself in violating his Ambassadors, Rink and Fregoso, all Men were sensible;
since they had been sent to the Turk for the good of all Christendom, but
chiefly of Hungary and Germany: For that the Grand Seignior had been frequently
solicited by him to live in Peace with the Christians; and that he had always
received this Answer from the Port; That he had no Quarrel with the Christians
as such, but with the Emperor Charles and King Ferdinand, from whom he had
received Injuries, and whose boundless Ambition he could not brook; so that the
Emperor doubled his Injury in laying a snare for them, wherein he had never
intended to make him Satisfaction, but had in a manner always shamm'd him off,
and fooled him with shifting Answers; and that therefore he had never
dissembled the Offense he had received, but had declared plainly enough, That
if he had not Satisfaction given him, he would not sit down with the Affront.
That he had, indeed, essayed all other Means before he came to Arms, and had
detained the Archbishop of Valencia, to see if that way, at least, he might
recover his Ambassadors, whom then he took to be alive: So that having in vain
taken all other Courses, he had been forced at length to take up Arms, and to
defend himself against Hostilities, which the Emperor was the Author of: That
he objected to him, as a great Crime, his League with the Turk, which he
himself had often sought for, but could not obtain, though he had offered a
yearly Tribute for procuring it: That nevertheless the Amity he had with the
Turk, was so far from being prejudicial, that it would be extremely useful to
Christendom, if not prevented by the Emperor's insatiable Ambition; for that
the Title of most Christian had been given to the Kings his Predecessors; in
whose Steps, by God's Grace he intended to tread, and never do any thing that
might make him seem unworthy of so glorious a Name: That it was an outrageous
Injury then to disperse such a Calumny of him amongst all People; for what a
Madness, nay Fury, would it be, to assist the Enterprises and increase the
Power of him, who, in a very short time after would ruin himself? That neither
was the Council of Trent retarded or hindered by him, since he could reap no
Benefit from so doing; and that it was a thing very inconsistent with the
Examples and Customs of his Ancestors, who had many times promoted Councils,
and done them all the good Offices they could; but that the Emperor was so
transported with Malice and Hatred against him, that he made all, even his best
Actions Criminal; and was of that Temper himself, that nothing would serve him,
but to rule over and make Slaves of all People, cloaking this his Ambitions in
the mean time, with such specious Words and Pretexts, that he would be thought,
forsooth, to be a very virtuous and pious Prince: That therefore, since things
were so, he prayed his Holiness not to give Credit to Slanders, but to think so
of him, as that there was nothing but what he would do for the Public, for
him, and for the Church of Rome.

A little before this died William du Bellay of Langey, The Death of Bellay of
Langey, and his Encomium.
often mentioned before; a Man of great Honor and Virtue, and the Ornament of
the French Nobility, for his extraordinary Learning, Eloquence, Experience, and
singular Dexterity in management of all Affairs: Very unlike to most Courtiers,
whose chief Care is to enrich themselves: But he a Man of an Heroic
Disposition, had no other Prospect, but by solid and true Virtue, to purchase
to himself lasting Glory, and faithfully to serve his Prince, though with
Prejudice to his own private Fortune.

We told you before of the Parisian Preacher Francis de Landre, who having made
an ambiguous Answer to the Heads of Doctrine proposed to him, and persisting
still in his way of Teaching, was sent to Prison some Days before Easter. This
was done at the Instigation of the Sorbonn Doctors, who had accused him to the
Lieutenant Criminal. Some Days after, the King came to St. Germins, Landre
makes a public Recantation of all that he had taught, and confessed his Error.
and being informed of the whole Matter, sent for Landre to appear before him.
He came according to Command; but being terrified by some Men's Words, who told
him, That the King was exceedingly incensed against him, he did not show that
Constancy which many expected from him, and being ordered to return to Paris,
he was, on the Twenty ninth Day of April, forced to condemn what before he had
taught: For that Day there assembled in the Cathedral Church, the Judges and
Counselors of Parliament, the Provost de Merchands, with the rest of the
Magistrates, and a great number of Divines: Then the Church Doors were shut,
and Guards in Arms set to keep off the People. When all had taken their Places,
his Opinions were read to him, and being asked his Judgment as to every
Particular, he answered as they would have him, confessed he had erred,
promised Obedience for the future, and then acknowledged the Heads of Doctrine,
And so does de Pensier.
which the Divines first, and then the King's Counselors propounded to him, to
be true and Holy. The same thing was done, though with less Solemnity, a little
after with de Pensier, another Teacher of the People: Who, at first, having
flattered, and not made his Recantation plainly enough, he was forced another
Day after, to make a Sermon to the People, wherein he explained openly and
distinctly all the Points of Doctrine he had taught, to the Satisfaction of the
Divines who were present. Clement Marot.
There lived then in France one Clement Marot, who, in the vulgar Tongue far
surpassed all the Poets of that or the former Ages. He was not so well
acquainted with the Latin; however, he had much improved himself by the
Conversation of the Learned: Nor was there any thing in the Books of the Poets,
but he was so much Master of it, as to translate and apply it to his Purpose.
Thus he borrowed some things in his Elegies, but not professedly, from
Tibullus, Propertius and Ovid: And out of Catullus he took his Epithalamium on
the Marriage of Hercules Duke of Ferrara, and Renate of Bretagne Daughter of
Lowis XII. of France: He translated also most elegantly the First Book of
Ovid's Metamorphosis. Now in his latter Years he employed the Talent he had
that way, on Holy Scripture, and intended to have turned all the Psalms of
David into French Meter; but he lived only to finish Fifty of them, which are
now extant, and read not without great Esteem of his excellent Wit. For nothing
can be more taking, more neat and clear, nor more quaint and proper, than his
Style. He published them this Year at Geneva, whither he had fled, because he
was not safe in France, as being suspected of Lutheranism. He had Two Years
before published Thirty Psalms at Paris, but with a great deal of Trouble; and
could not have it done, till the Doctors of the Sorbonne, had given a License,
That the Book contained nothing contrary to the Christian Faith. This, perhaps,
is wide of our Purpose; but I thought it not amiss to commend the Name of so
excellent an Artist to other Nations also: For in France helives to all
Posterity; and most are of Opinion, that hardly any Man will ever be able to
match him in that kind of Writing; and that as Cicero says of Caesar; He makes
wise Men afraid to write: Others, and more learned Men too than he, have
handled the same Subject, but came far short of the Beauty and Elegancy of his
Poems.

It has been mentioned in the Tenth Book, The Archbishop of Cologne's
Reformation of the Church.
that the Archbishop of Cologne had a great mind to reform his Church, and
approved not of that Synod of his Province, though a Book on that Subject was
published in his Name: Now after that it was decreed in the Diet of Ratisbone,
and Injunctions laid upon the Bishops, both by the Emperor and the Popes
Legate, that they should in their several Provinces and Diocesses, set about a
Holy Reformation: He called a Convention of his States, which consist of the
Clergy of the Cathedral Church, Earls, Nobility, and the Deputies of Cities.
After some Deliberation, it was agreed upon by all, that so holy and wholesome a
Work should be taken in hand; wherefore he employed some to draw up in Writing
a Form of future Reformation, and look out for good and able Ministers of the
Church. This Writing he sent to the Divines of Cologne, desiring them to
examine it, and give their Judgment thereon according to Scripture: But they
not satisfying his Desire, and finding none that were proper for instructing
the People; he sent for Martin Bucer from Strasburg; one whom both John Gropper
had always highly commended to him, and he himself also thoroughly understood,
by the Conferences he had had with him: Accordingly he came in the Month of
December the Year before, and by the Command of the Prince, began in the
beginning of this Year to preach at Bonn, Bucer Preaches at Bonn.
a Town upon the Rhine, five Miles above Cologne. On the Fifteenth of March
after, the Bishop held a new Convention of States at Born, and proposed to them
to consider of a Reformation of the Church: But seeing the Clergy had sent no
Deputies to this Convention, the rest of the States desired the Archbishop to
choose Men proper for that Affair, according to his own Judgment. Therefore it
was committed to the Care of Bucer, to draw up the Heads of the Christian
Doctrine; and that all things might be done more exactly, the Archbishop
entreated the Elector of Saxony to associate Philip Melancthon with him:
Melancthon and Pistorius come to Cologne.
When these Two, and John Pistorius, sent by the Lantgrave, had finished the
Work, the Archbishop sent it to the Clergy of the Cathedral Church, who are all
descended of Noble Families, requiring them to examine carefully the Doctrines
contained in that Book: And then he called another Convention of States to meet
on the Two and twentieth of June after, where he laid before them the Book of
Reformation, desiring that every State might commissionate some to peruse the
Book with those that he should appoint; that at length some tolerable and pious
Reconciliation might be established: The Clergy of Cologne oppose the
Reformation.
But the Clergy we mentioned, obstinately urged that Bucer chiefly, and some
other Preachers, lately appointed, might be turned out: And then desired time
to consider of the Book, but refused to consult with the rest. The Archbishop,
though he well perceived their Design in interposing this Delay, yet that they
might have no Cause of Complaining, granted them time to deliberate: But that
as to the removing of Bucer and his Colleagues, as they demanded, he did not
refuse it, provided any Man could convict them, either of erroneous Doctrine,
or of bad Life and Conversation, which he several times gave them Liberty to
prove against them, being ready to present them to be tried before any lawful
Judge. Whilst Matters stood thus, they prepared a contrary Book, The
Antididagma of the Clergy of Cologne.
which they called Antididagma; and in the Preface thereof, after a great deal
of Railing against the Lutherans, they professed in plain Terms, That they had
rather live under the Turk, than under a Magistrate that would embrace and
defend that Reformation. Gropper, as they say, was the Author and Contriver of
that Book: For though he had been very familiar with Bucer Two Years before, at
the Diet of Ratisbone; though, after his return Home from thence, he had
exceedingly commended him, not only to the Archbishop, but to all Men also, and
in all Places; and though he had sent him many and most loving Letters, yet
when Matters were brought to this pass, he fell totally off from his
Friendship, and forsaking the Archbishop, to whom he was obliged for all his
Fortune, struck in with the Adversaries: The same also did Bernard Hagey the
Chancellor, who were both enriched with fat Benefices. The Divines of Cologne
oppose Bucer, who is defended by Melancthon.
The Divines of Cologne did violently oppugn Bucer, and loaded him with most
grievous Reproaches: He, on the contrary, desired a friendly Debate; and
professed in all Assemblies, that he would maintain this Doctrine against them.
Melancthon also, wrote a little Book at that time in his Defense, and having
exhorted them to Modesty and the Study of the Truth, he showed them what horrid
Errors they defended.

Duke Maurice of Saxony made some Laws at this time to be observed throughout
his Territories; The Laws of Duke Maurice of Saxony.
and in his Preface before them, he exhorts the Doctors and Ministers of the
Church to be diligent in doing their Duty, preaching the Gospel in purity, and
to be a shining Light to their Flock, by the Examples of a virtuous Life; that
they exhort Men to Prayer and mutual Love and Charity, sharply rebuke Vice,
and, with the consent of the Magistrate, Excommunicate incorrigible Offenders,
till they be brought to Repentance; and that they present such to the
Magistrate as will not be reformed that way neither. In the next place because
Youth is, in a manner, the seminary both of Church and State, He founds three
public Schools.
he Founded Three public Schools at Meisen, Mersburg, and Port; and in each
place he appoints a certain number of Free Scholars, whom he finds in Victuals
and Apparel, and pays their Masters Yearly Salaries, employing for that purpose
the Revenues of those Religious Houses, wherein Monks and the like, had lived
before. To the Students he allows Six Years to remain there, and be taught. Out
of the same Revenues, he also gave an Augmentation to the University of
Leipsick of Two thousands Florins a Year, and some Measures of Wheat: In like
manner he prohibited Begging, and for Relief of poor Families, allotted Money
to be yearly consigned in certain places: Moreover against Uncleanness he
enacted, A Law against those who deflower Virgins.
That such as deflowered Virgins, and did not marry them, though they procured
them to be married to others, should, nevertheless, be committed to Prison; but
Adulterers he commanded to be put to Death: That Noblemen and Gentlemen, who
married the Women whom they had enjoyed before Marriage, Against Adulterers.
should be thus punished; That the Children whom they had by them before their
Marriage, could not succeed to any Lands or Inheritances which they held of him
in Fee.

The Emperor, The Emperor's Letters to the Protestants.
in the mean time arrived at Genoa, from Spain, by Sea, and writing from
thence, May the Twenty Sixth, to the Elector of Saxony, the Lantgrave, and
Confederates, he entreats them, That now, seeing the public Peace was
sufficiently secured by his Edicts, and that there would be a Reformation of
the Imperial Chamber very speedily, that they would not refuse to contribute
Assistance against the Turk, who had not only made extraordinary Preparations,
but was also upon his March, as he had certain Intelligence both by Messengers
and Letters. He had received an Account of all that passed in the Diet, from
Naves, who went unto him: And at the same time he appointed a Diet of the
Empire, to meet at Spire the last Day of November. From Genoa he went to an
Interview of the Pope at Busseto, An Interview betwixt the Pope and Emperor.
a Town upon the River Tava, betwixt Piacenza and Cremona. There again he
demands of him, as he had done before by Letters, That he would declare the
French King an Enemy; but he made Answer, That that would not be expedient for
the public State of Christendom, and persisted therein. The Pope had lately
bestowed upon his Son Petro Aloisio, Petro Aloisio obtained the Possession of
Parma and Piacenza, which the Emperor refused to confirm.
Parma and Piacenza; which, upon an Exchange, he had obtained from the College
of Cardinals: And because those Two Cities had formerly belonged to the Dukes
of Milan, he desired of the Emperor that he would confirm his Son in the
Possession of them, and give him the solemn Investiture of a Prince. The
Emperor, who held Milan, and would not part with any part of his Right, refused
that. The Pope had also a Design, as it was said, to have purchased from the
Emperor, with Money, the Dukedom of Milan, The Emperor delivers up to Cosmo of
Medicis the Castles of Florence and Legborn.
for his Grandson Octavio. But the Emperor, that he might be no longer
hindered, broke up the Interview, and having compounded with Cosmo of Medicis,
Duke of Florence, for the Castles of Florence and Leghorn, which, till then, he
had in his Hands; and having delivered them up to the Duke, for the Sum of
above Two hundred thousand Crowns, which he received for them, The Marriage of
Philip King of Spain.
he went on in his Progress. Before he left Spain he had created his Son Philip
King, and gave him in Marriage the Infanta Mary, Daughter of John King of
Portugal.

This Year also Sigismund, The Marriage of the King of Poland.
the Son of Sigismund King of Poland, married the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter of
Ferdinand King of the Romans. Henry Duke of Brunswick having made a Journey
into Italy to meet the Emperor, grievously accused the Protestants at Cremona.
And now the Emperor being upon his March with an Army from Italy, the
Protestants, who had lately received his Letters, An Assembly of the
Protestants at Smalcald.
dated from Genoa, on the Twenty fourth of June met at Smalcald, and there
consulted about sending Ambassadors to him, concerning those things that
related to the securing the Duchy of Brunswick, and their own League; and
about Application to be made to Duke Maurice, to the King of Sweedland, to Otho
Henry Prince Palatine, to Wolfgang Duke of Deux-Ponts, and to the Bishop of
Munster, who all desired to be admitted into the League: This Assembly ended
the One and twentieth Day of July. Much about this time the Emperor and King of
England made a League against the French King, A League betwixt the Emperor and
King of England.
who assisted the Scots, as we said before: But the Pope was much offended at
this Alliance, and therefore looked upon the Friendship of France as necessary
for his Interests.

When, The Protestant Ambassadors to the Emperor at Spire.
about the end of July, the Emperor came to Spire, the Protestants sent thither
their Ambassadors Francis Burcart, George Bemelberg, Christopher Veninger, and
James Sturmey; who being admitted to Audience on the Second of August, spoke
much to the same Purpose, as, we told you before, they had done to King
Ferdinand. The Effect of their Speech was, That if they had sufficient Security
given them of Peace, if the Judicature of the Imperial Chamber were reformed,
as had been lately decreed at Ratisbone, and if the Inequality of Contributions
were rectified, they would not be wanting to their Duty in bearing their Parts
in the public Necessities: That as to the Duke of Brunswick, they desired the
Cause might be brought to a fair Trial; and then they offered to prove that he
who had first done open Injury to those of Goslar and Brunswick, Two free
States, The Emperor's Answer to the Protestant Ambassadors.
was justly expulsed and driven out of his Country. To these things the Emperor
Two Days after, made Naves give his Answer in Presence of Granvell: That they
could require no more of him; for that their Peace had been sufficiently
secured by former Decrees: That the Judges of the Imperial Chamber could not be
removed without a Hearing: That in the Month of October ensuing, Enquiry would
be made into their Proceedings, and that they should not go unpunished, if they
were found Guilty of any Fault: That a Moderation in the Contributions could
not be made but with the common Advice and Consent of all the States: That they
should reflect upon the present State of the Public, and that seeing it was in
great Danger, without speedy Help, they should follow the Example of the rest
of the States, and contribute their Aid against the Turk: That he, the Emperor,
was now to make all the Head he could against the French King and Duke of
Cleve, that he might defend his Subjects from Injury: That Henry Duke of
Brunswick did earnestly urge a Restitution, and therefore they should declare
their Mind as to that Point. They desired to have that Answer given them in
Writing, that they might consider it more carefully; to which the Emperor
consented, and next Day, leaving Spire, went to Mentz. The Ambassadors, who had
received the Answer in Writing, followed him thither, and made a Reply to Naves
and Granvell, showing them, that they had not sufficient Assurances given them
of Peace, and urging the Emperors Declaration at Ratisbone, mentioned in the
former Book, they altogether persisted in demanding the same things; and that
since their Desire was, That the Cause of Brunswick might be brought to a
Hearing, they had no farther Instructions, they said, in that Particular. They,
on the other hand, alleged that the Emperor could do no more; and repeating
what had been said before, told them, That if the Duke of Brunswick were not
restored, he would certainly take some Course for recovering his own. And this
being all that could be had, the Ambassadors departed, to make their Report to
their Masters. The Archbishop of Cologne came to the Emperor at Spire, and
interceded for the Duke of Cleve: But it was to no purpose; for that unless he
first delivered up the Possession of Guelderland, The Electors of Cologne and
Saxony mediate for the Duke of Cleve, but in vain.
the Emperor would not hear of Peace. And when the Ambassador of Saxony, by
Orders from his Prince, interceded for the same Duke, with Granvell at Mentz,
and to persuade him, alleged that a private Wrong should be sacrificed to the
Good of the Public, especially when now the Turk was coming upon them: His
Answer was, That the Emperor would not desist from his Enterprise, whatever the
Turk might do.

You heard before, The Heildesheimers accused to the Emperor.
That the People of Heildesheim, having abandoned the Popish Religion, entered
into the Protestant League; therefore Valentine the Bishop of that City
grievously accused them to the Imperial Chamber and King Ferdinand before, and
now to the Emperor, That they had changed the old Religion and Ceremonies of
the Church; That they had appointed new Preachers to instruct the People;
abolished the Mass; punished the Followers of the ancient Religion; not only
thrown down Altars and Fonts, but demolished also Churches; partly carried away
the Goods, Furniture and Ornaments of the Clergy, and partly detained them in
their Custody, having seized the Keys of the Places where they were kept: That
they had lately made public Plays, wherein they had exposed the Virgin Mary,
and the rest of the Saints, to the Scorn and Derision of the Mobile: That they
purposed to withdraw themselves from under his Jurisdiction; had entered into
the League, and put themselves under the Protection of the Protestants; That
they compelled, by Force, Monks and other Religious, to conform to their
Religion; and not only openly reviled, but also banished out of their
Territories, those who would not comply. The Emperor, hearkening to this
Accusation, on the Sixth of August, wrote to them from Worms, The Emperor's
threatening Letter to those of Heildesheim.
and with severe Threatenings commanded them, to restore Religion, and all
things else, to their former State, until some public Decree should be made in
that behalf. Three Days after he wrote from Mentz to the Senate of Cologne, His
Letter to the Senate of Cologne.
that he heard there were Preachers amongst them, who made it their whole
Business to mislead them from the ancient Religion, whom, nevertheless, they
had hitherto vigorously withstood: That therein they had exceedingly pleased
him; and that they should continue to do so, and keep the People to their Duty;
which would be very acceptable Service to him, as he would in due time make
them sensible. The Pope had written then to the Senate, much to the same
purpose; wherefore the Senate called together the People, and commanded them to
obey these Edicts. June the First, the Pope wrote to the Canons of the
Cathedral Church of Cologne, The Pope's Letter to them also.
that in the Trouble and Grief of Mind he lay under, through the Foolishness of
the Archbishop, he was mightily comforted by their Piety and Resolution, which
was not only profitable to themselves, but also very edifying to all their
Neighbors; for that under God, they deserved to be thanked for it, that that
most noble City, and the whole Province were in Safety: That therefore he
himself thanked them heartily for their Constancy and Resolution, which he
could never forget: For that though they had done but what was their Duty, yet
for the thing it self, and for examples Sake, he acknowledged himself much
obliged unto them: That nevertheless they stood in need of Steadfastness and
Courage, were it only for this, that if the Archbishop should get the better of
them, he would punish them most severely: That they should therefore show
themselves strong and valiant, in the defense of God's Glory, the Catholic
Religion, and their own Liberty and Safety, which an accursed Arch-heretick
endeavored to subvert and destroy: That they needed not, indeed, a Prompter,
but that, however, he was willing to spur them on in their Course, and
earnestly besought them to labor, that he who was unworthy of the Name of
Archbishop, might not by his Contagion infect and spoil a most noble City, and
that they should not own him for their Pastor, but for an Enemy: That for his
part he would not be wanting unto them neither in Counsel nor Aid. This Brief
of the Pope's John Poggio his Nuncio with the Emperor, sent unto them from
Mentz the Twenty-fifth of August.

A little before this, the French King having marched with his Army into the
Country of Vermandois, took from the Emperor the little Town of Landrecy, which
he Fortified and Garrisoned. The Turkish Fleet in Provence.
And at the same time Barbarossa, the Turkish Admiral, being Piloted by Paulain
a French Man, arrived with a great Fleet at Thoulon, a Sea Port Town in
Provence, betwixt Marsailles and Nizza. So soon as the French King had notice
of this, he sent the Duke of Vendosme to join him with his Forces and Galleys:
And then both together made Sail toward Nizza, The Castle of Nizza Besieged.
where having taken the Town and Haven, on the Twentieth of August, they laid
Siege to the Castle.

Another Army of Turks invaded Hungary, The Turks Invade Hungary.
which took Five-Churches, the Town and Castle of Gran, and Alba Regalis, and
this last too by Storm. The Pope had sent Auxiliary Forces under the Command of
Baptista Savelli and Julio Vrsmi, but these came a little too late.

The Doctors of the Sorbonn having triumphed over Landre and de Pensier in the
manner before mentioned, published those Heads of Doctrine, which, as we said,
had been privately proposed by them to the Preacher Landre, and were in number
Twenty five. This was done at Paris the First Day of August, when the Doctrines
were proclaimed by an Herald with sound of Trumpet, and afterward Printed by
the King's Command, who both confirmed them by Edict, and commanded under a
severe Penalty, that no Man should offer to act or teach to the contrary, and
this was seconded by a Decree for inquiring after and finding out Lutherans.
The Divines, besides, enjoined the Students, the Batchellors in Divinity, and
others to follow this Form, or else to be Expelled their College. Calvin's
Antidote and Book of Relics.
Against these Doctrines of theirs Calvin wrote a Book which he called, The
Antidote, wherein he handled them very sharply, and at the same time published
a little Book in French, about the Relics of Saints, that the present Age and
Posterity might see, how far Religion was degenerated: But he mentioned none
save such as were known to himself, and wished that the same might also be done
in other Provinces: Of that number were the Manger, Cradle, the swaddling
Cloths, Foreskin, and Blood of Christ, partly pure, and partly mixed with
Water, the Water-Pots that were at the Marriage of Cana in Galilee, the Wine
which Christ then turned the Water into, the Utensils and Furniture that were
used at his last Supper with his Apostles; the Manna of the Children of Israel;
the Cross, Cave, Nails, Sponge, Lance, Crown of Thorns, Coat, Handkerchief and
Tears of Christ; the Milk, Smock, Hair, Girdle, Slipper, Comb and Ring of the
Virgin Mary; the Dagger and Buckler of Michael the Archangel; the Skull,
Jaw Bone, Brains and Finger of John Baptist; the Chair, Crosier, Mass-attire
and Brain of St. Peter; besides the Bodies of Saints, which were to be seen in
several places, and yet one and the same. Now he showed with how great
Veneration the People adored these things, when the Priests, for Money, brought
them forth to be seen at a distance; whilst they were no more but Trifles of no
value, devised for Gain, and being viewed near at Hand, a mere Cheat and
Imposture. Moreover there are Two Cities in the Lower Germany, famous chiefly
upon that account, Treves and Aix la Chapel; for hither People used to come
flocking even from Hungary and Sclavonia to visit the Relics, as they called
it, when every Seventh Year, for the greater Admiration and Pomp, these
Hucksters exposed their Wares.

The Emperor came down the Rhine by Water from Mentz to Bonne; The Emperor
comes to Bonne where Bucer and Hedie preached.
where Bucer then preached, as we said before, and Caspar Hedie, whom the
Archbishop had lately sent for from Strasburg, a Man of a very sedate Temper,
and very fit to instruct the People. They were both in some danger, especially
from the Spaniards that were there. The Emperor had sent before to the
Archbishop to dismiss them: Melancthon was gone before: And so they also not
long after having obtained leave, and placed Ministers in the Churches,
returned Home. The Emperors Expedition against Cleve, and his Victory.
From thence the Emperor went to Duren, and being arrived there on the Two and
twentieth of August, next day he sent a Herald to Summon the Town to surrender,
else to expect a Storm. The Soldiers of the Garrison returned a slighting
Answer, saying, That they had no cause to be afraid of him, who was long since
feeding the Fish: For there had been a Report raised, A vain report of the
Emperor's being drowned.
that the Emperor upon his Return Home, after his Misfortune at Algiers, had
been cast away at Sea: And this Report had made such Impression upon the Minds
of the People of Cleve that they could hardly believe those who told them that
they had not only seen the Emperor, but also spoken with him: The Prince was
also so fatally credulous as to be persuaded of the same thing. Now this was
thought to be an Invention of the French, that those of Cleve might not lose
Heart, and being terrified at the Emperor's Power, make Peace with him. The
Emperor having received this Answer, Fortified his Camp, provided all things
necessary, and on the Twenty fourth of August began to Batter the Town by break
of Day, and afterward gave the Assault, especially by the Spaniards, who went
on with great Cheerfulness and Resolution; and though they were often beat off,
and lost many Men, yet they gave not over till they forced the Place, and
treated the Towns-people, as the Inhabitants are commonly used, when a Town is
taken by Storm. We must know, that in this Town was kept the Head of St. Ann,
the Mother of our Lady, and was usually exposed to the view of vast numbers of
People, who flocked thither yearly on the Six and twentieth day of July, the
Anniversary of that Saint, to pay their Devotions to it: But the Spaniards
being now Conquerours took that Head enclosed in a golden Reliquary, and with
great Pomp carried it in Procession to the Gray Friars Church, least it should
have perished in the Ruins and Flames of the Church. The Town being plundered
and burnt, The Emperor takes Liege and Ruremund by Surrender.
the Emperor advanced, and had surrendered to him first Liege, and then
Reremund a strong Town of Guelderland, standing where the Rivers of Roure and
Maese do meet. For the unexpected Calamity of Duren, had put all Men into
extraordinary Fear and Consternation. From Ruremund he went to Venlo. Thither,
at last, came the Duke of Cleve to him in the Camp, accompanied with Henry Duke
of Brunswick, and the Ambassadors of Herman Archbishop of Cologne; where he
having made his Humble Submission, The Duke of Cleve upon Submission is
Reconciled to the Emperor.
and the Duke of Brunswick and the Ambassadors earnestly interceding for him,
the Emperor, at length, arose, and ordered the Prince of Orange and Granvell to
prescribe Conditions unto him, upon which he was received into Favor again,
the Seventh of September. The Conditions were, The Conditions of his Peace.
That he should not depart from the Religion of the Catholic Church: That if
he had made any Alterations, he should restore things again as they were
before: That he should promise Allegiance and Obedience to the Emperor, King
Ferdinand and the Empire: That he should renounce his League with France and
Denmark: That he should make no League, wherein the Emperor, King Ferdinand and
their Heirs were not excepted: That he should deliver up the whole Possession
of Guelderland, and release the People from their Oath: And that he should
Assist the Emperor in Recovering Guelderland, if, perhaps, any places should
refuse to Surrender. The Emperor, on the other Hand, restored to him the
Province of Juliers lately Conquered by War, except Two Towns, Hensberg and
Zittard, which he kept in his Hands for a time, till he should make trial of
his Fidelity and Obsequiousness. Whilst the Emperor was upon his March against
the Duke of Cleve, the French King advanced through Champange toward the
Country of Luxenburg, and sent for his Sister's Daughter the Lady Joanna, who
had been Two Years before betrothed and publicly Married, as we said, to the
Duke, that he might carry her to her Husband. She went most unwillingly, as
has been mentioned also before, but, however, she obeyed the King her Uncle.
The King had appointed Cardinal du Bellay, Bishop of Paris, as the fittest
Person to persuade her, to wait upon her, and keep her Company, during the
whole Journey. Now when she was come as far as Soissons on her way to the King,
News was brought, That the Duke of Cleve was subdued, which much rejoiced her,
as well perceiving that that might put an end to all her Sufferings and
Constraint; and, indeed, she was not mistaken; for the King was exceedingly
troubled at the News, The French King takes Luxenburg again.
and so she returned Home. But nevertheless, he proceeded, and again took the
City of Luxenburg about the latter end of September, which, after deliberation,
he fortified. At the same time Henry King of England, Landrecy Besieged.
who had lately made a League with the Emperor, sent over some Forces into the
Netherlands, who joining the Imperialists, Besieged Landrecy. In the mean time
Charles Boisset, The Emperors Envoy to the City of Metz.
a Lawyer, was, in the beginning of October, sent from the Emperor to Metz, who
having consulted with the Senate, the Monks and Churchmen upon his first
coming, sent for one of the Preachers, whom he severely chid, and commanded
upon pain of Death to depart the City within three Days, and not to converse
with any Citizen for the future: Afterward the Emperor's Edict was on the
Fifteenth of October publicly read, wherein the Emperor commanded the Senate,
not to admit of any new Doctrines, and to punish those that were guilty that
way. Wherefore the Senate published their Orders to the Citizens, that they
should persist in the ancient Religion; produce all prohibited and suspected
Books within a Weeks time; obey the Canons of the Church; abstain from flesh on
days prohibited; show Reverence to Churchmen; and that those who upon account
of difference in Religion had put themselves into the protection of the
Protestants, and promised Fidelity unto them, should within a certain time
renounce the same: Denouncing several Penalties against Offenders herein, as
Fines, Banishment, and other Punishments, according to their several Deserts.
When Barbarossa had in vain Besieged the Castle of Nizza, whither the Emperor's
Forces were coming out of Lombardy under the Command of the Marquess of
Piscara, he drew off and went to his Winter Quarters in Thoulon, somewhat
sooner than the Season of the Year required; for the King had assigned him that
Town, the Citizens and Inhabitants being commanded to leave it.

Scotland was this Year much disturbed with intestine Broils and Divisions,
Divisions in Scotland.
the Nobles disagreeing among themselves. For those of the Nobility who were
Prisoners in England, as we said, being generously dismissed by the King,
cordially espoused his Interests: But the Cardinal of Scotland, who enjoyed
great Revenues from Church Livings in France; and the Queen, the Duke of
Guise's Daughter, maintained the French King's Part. After the Death of the
King of Scots, it was the chief Design of Henry VIII. that the young Queen of
Scots might be affianced to Prince Edward his Son. In that matter, the Nobles
we mentioned, The Queen of Scots betrothed to Prince Edward of England.
did him good Service: And having persuaded the Earl of Arran the Regent, they
seized the Cardinal of St. Andrews, and kept the Queen Besieged in a Castle,
till they had confirmed the Marriage, and drawn up Writings thereupon. But the
French King interfering in the Matter, the Nobility also pitying the Queen's
Condition, and the Regent falling off to the other side, they broke their
Articles; which gave occasion of a new War betwixt the English and them, as
shall be said hereafter. The King of Denmark was also in War with the Emperor's
Subjects in the Netherlands, The Danes make War against the Imperialists.
because of King Christiern who was kept Prisoner; and he desired Assistance
from the Protestants; but they alleged that that Cause had no Relation to the
League; for it was only stipulated, That if any made War against him upon
account of Religion, that then they should join with him, and assist him.

The Duke of Cleve having made his Peace with the Emperor, The Duke of Cleve
renounces his League with France, and demands his Wife.
sent an Ambassador to the French King, to renounce the League he had with him,
and to demand his Wife to be sent unto him, for whose Passage he had obtained a
safe Conduct from the Emperor. The King made Answer to the Ambassador, That it
was none of his Fault, but that he had had both his Wife delivered, and an Army
sent him; but that he himself was in the blame, who had sent word that there
was no free Passage for them through those Places, nor could they be supplied
with Provisions: That he himself had generously performed whatever he had
promised, and more too: But that the Duke had not done well, who forgetting his
Lineage and Quality, had cast himself into such Bondage. That as to his Niece,
he might inform himself of her Parents and her self, what their Resolution was;
for that he was no longer obliged to him in any thing. The Emperor having
settled of his Affairs in Guelderland, came with a vast Army before Landrecy.
Thither also came the French King, with all his Forces; and there was no other
likelihood but of a Battle betwixt them: But the French having put Provisions
into the place, drew off so silently in the Night time, The French Flight at
Landrecy.
that the Enemy perceived it not before it was Day. Then at length they
pursued, and came up with the Rear of them, of whom they slew a great many. But
because Winter now approached, the Emperor thought it not fit to attempt any
thing else; only he sent some Forces to the Siege of Luxenburg, and so
dismissed the rest of his Army to Winter Quarters. Duke Maurice served the
Emperor as a Volunteer at Landrecy, whereby he procured much good Will, and
opened himself a Way to his Friendship. In the Winter time the Duke of Lorrain,
and some others, mediated for a Peace, but to no purpose. The Emperor being
returned home from Landrecy, sent Ferrante Gonzaga, Viceroy of Sicily, to the
King of England, that he might edge him on more and more against the French
King.

We have several times spoken of Count William of Furstemberg: He being now
somewhat alienated from the French King, made way, by the means of Granvell, to
be received again into the Emperor's Favor; and for a Proof of his Fidelity,
having raised some Companies of Foot in his own Territory, in the middle of
Winter he marched to Luxenburg, and joined the Imperialists there: But the
French, under the Command of the Duke of Longueville, having put Provisions
into the Place; he retreated without doing any Exploit, having lost many of his
Men by Hunger and Cold.

It was said before, The Protestants assemble at Franckfort.
that the Emperor had appointed a Diet of the Empire to meet the last Day of
November: Therefore the Protestants assemble before at Franckfort, to consult
about the Affairs they were to treat of in the Diet: And seeing the Meeting of
it was deferred, The Elector of Saxony and Lantgrave write to the Emperor.
because of the French War, the Elector of Saxony and Lantgrave, wrote to the
Emperor in November, promising to come to the Diet, provided he himself came,
and did grant them and their Confederates a safe Conduct. Hereunto the Emperor
wrote an Answer from Brussels, His Answer to them.
dated the Tenth of December, that he would come, and that in the Month of
January too; and at the same time sent a safe Conduct: Wherein, nevertheless,
he excluded those who were engaged to his Enemies by Faith or Compact,
intimating thereby the secret Agents and Spies of the French King. So, 1544.
in the beginning of January, he left the Netherlands, and came to Spire. On
the Twenty sixth Day of this Month, Extraordinary Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.
there happened a great Eclipse of the Sun, which was beheld by all, not
without Admiration: There were Three total Eclipses of the Moon also this Year;
a very prodigious thing, indeed, and such, as Astronomers said, had not
happened before since the time of Charlemagne. Cardinal Alexander Farnese,
Alexander Farnese sent Legate to the Emperor.
having made his Journey through France, met the Emperor on his Way to the
Diet, and took his Leave of him at Worms. It was believed, that he was sent to
mediate a Peace. This Diet of Spire was exceeding great: The Diet at Spire very
full.
For not only was King Ferdinand present at it, but all the Electors also
(which is a rare thing) and generally all the Princes, amongst whom was the
Duke of Cleve too.

The Elector of Saxony came on the Eighteenth of February; and was met upon the
Rode by the Lantgrave, the Archbishop of Cologne, Frederick Prince Palatine,
The Emperor's Speech at the opening of it.
and the Viceroy of Sicily. Two Days after the Diet commnced, which was opened
by the Emperor's Speech, to this effect: That he had acquainted them by Letters
from Genoa, with the Causes that made him leave Spain, to make another Journey
into Germany, and call this Diet: Nor needed he now represent to them, how much
he had always studied the Safety and Welfare of the Public; that all things
being settled and composed at Home, he might have turned his Arms against the
common Enemy of Christendom; and that therefore, in the former Diet at
Ratisbone, he had earnestly proposed the raising of Forces and Supplies; but
that when, the Year following, the War undertaken against the Turk had proved
unsuccessful, their last Deliberations concluded in this, That for the present
the frontier Places should only be well fortified and garrisoned: That now,
though it had been his earnest Desire then, to have been personally present in
the War, according to the Duty of his Charge; yet it was publicly known, by
whom, and upon what Occasion, he was and is still hindered and retarded: For
that by the Persuasion and Money of the French King, a Turkish Fleet came last
Year upon the Coast of Italy, and made a Descent in the Country of the Duke of
Savoy, a Prince of the Empire; where having taken the Town and Harbor of
Nizza, with all their Force they besieged and battered the Castle; and that
though, upon the Approach of his Forces, they were forced to raise the Siege,
yet they carried the War into other Places both of the Empire, and of Spain;
having now nothing less in their Thoughts, than to Ruin and Destroy all: So
that Matters are brought into extreme Danger, and are, in a manner, at the last
Cast; insomuch, that if the Enemy be not resisted with joint Hearts and Hands,
Germany might, too late, see and bewail its own Calamity: That he had many
times wished he could have remedied those Evils, but that the French King
having attacked him at several Places at once, he could neither return into
Germany, nor join his Aid with theirs: Now that the Turk did so confidently
invade Germany, and that the War against him, hitherto, has been so
unsuccessful, the Reason was plain: For first, He was informed of the
Difference in Religion; of the public and private Janglings of the States; of
the Temper of Affairs; and of what was done and acted in the Empire, upon all
Occasions, by the French King, to whom these things were carried. In the next
place, because he was sure of Aid and Assistance from the French King, as it
was by Letters and Witnesses made out in the last Diet, and has been since
verified in effect; and though it would have been Advantageous to the Public,
to have instantly withstood those Enterprises of France, and nipp'd them in the
Bud, that they might not spread farther; yet he was pleased with the Answer
they made, as to that particular, in the last Diet of Nurimberg: That, however,
since he animated and excited the common and most cruel Enemy of Christendom
against the Public, it was his Expectation, that they would look upon the War,
which he was obliged to make against them, no otherwise than if it were
undertaken against the Turk himself: And that they would not only condemn his
Actions and Counsels, but also give him their Assistance; that being delivered
from a Domestic Enemy, he might be able to employ all his Force against the
Turk: That, moreover, he heard, to his Trouble, that the Aids, which were
decreed in former Diets, were not given, as they ought to have been, and much
too late for the Necessities of the Public: For that since his Brother King
Ferdinand had placed all his Hopes in them, who was not able to do much
himself, as being exhausted by the Charges of the former Years, the Turk had
this last Year taken from us other Towns and Castles; which Misfortune might
certainly have been prevented, if the Aids that were decreed, had been
seasonably furnished: That since that was the State of Affairs then, and that
it was the main Design of the Turk, that Hungary, as the Rampart, being
subdued, and many Ways made open into Germany, he might overrun it; since the
thing it self required it, that the Hungarians should be relieved, least, being
destitute of Succors, they might be forced to submit to the Turkish Yoke, and
of Friends to become Enemies, it was his Desire, that in a Matter of so great
Importance, they would take it into Consideration how to raise present and
lasting Aids, not only for a defensive but offensive War also, that so they
might preserve their Wives, Children, and Country from utter Ruin and
Destruction: That, in the mean time, as to those things, which have hitherto
been a great Hindrance to all public Actions, he desired, as much as in him
lay, to apply a Remedy: That in the matter of Religion, they themselves were
sensible what Labor and Pains he had been at, for many Years past, and lately
also at Ratisbone; but that seeing Differences could not there be accommodated,
the whole Affair had been referred to a Council, and other Diets: And then,
that the Pope at his Solicitation had called a Council, wherein he had
resolved to have been present himself, if the French King had not made War
against him: That what had been done in the mean while, they had learned,
without doubt, from his Deputies: But now that the same Difference still
remained, and was very pernicious to the Public, he put it to themselves to
consider on it, what way chiefly it might be removed and ended, and to
represent to him what they themselves thought best to be done in the Matter:
That he had also taken care already, and would omit nothing for the future:
That the Judicature of the Imperial Chamber, the Groundwork and Stay of
public Peace, might be lawfully constituted. The same Day King Ferdinand's
Ambassadors made a long Narration of the Turkish Invasions, and demanded
Assistance.

Presently after the Elector of Saxony, the Lantgrave, and their Confederates,
addressing their Speech to the Emperor; You know, say they, most Victorious
Emperor, that from the very beginning we professed, that in this most
Honorable Assembly, we would declare the Ground of our defending our selves by
Arms against Henry Duke of Brunswick; The Protestants Plea about the Affair of
Brunswick.
and we are still in the same Mind and Resolution; not doubting but that after
a full hearing of the Matter, it will clearly appear to you, that we had just
and weighty Causes which necessarily obliged us to undertake that defensive
War, and that he ought not to sit here and consult with the Princes: But since
we perceive he thrusts himself into this Assembly, without our Approbation and
Consent; all that we can and may lawfully do, that the public deliberations
may not be hindered or retarded, is, that we protest, we neither own nor
acknowledge him for a Prince of the Empire, and that his Presence shall be no
ways prejudicial to our Right. Brunswick's Accusation of the Protestants.
Whereunto the Duke of Brunswick immediately made Answer, by the Mouth of his
Chancellor; The Elector of Saxony, says he, the Lantgrave, and their
Confederates, in defiance to all Law both of God and Man, contrary to the
Constitutions of the Empire, and the public Faith and Peace, have by force of
Arms, and the highest Injustice, robbed me of my Country; for which they stand
indicted before the Imperial Chamber; so that they can have no place in the
Diet of the Empire; and, if any had, they have now lost it by that Crime, and
deserve, that all Men should avoid their Company: But, if I must needs sit with
them in Public Consultations, I protest that I consent not that they should
have this place, and that it shall be no prejudice nor derogation to my Cause.
The Protestants were then for having read their Plea, containing the whole
matter of Fact, and the Reasons of what they had done in Writing, least his
Accusation might appear to be true, or make an impression upon the Minds of
those that heard it: But the Emperor ordered Frederick Prince Palatine and
Naves, to desire them to deferr it till another time, because the Day was far
spent; promising to assign them a Day for a Hearing; to which they acquiesced.
And because the Lantgrave happened then to (...) next to the Duke of Brunswick,
John Prince Palatine arose, and to prevent any Quarrel, sat himself down in
the middle betwixt them, having first protested that the same should be no
prejudice to him nor his Family; and this was thought to have been done by the
Emperor's Advice. The Day before, the Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave, had prayed
Frederick Prince Palatine and Naves, that they would procure the Emperor's
Order for Brunswick, not to appear in the public Session: But that could not
be obtained, the Emperor alleging that he could not be excluded, till the
Causes of it were first known. A French Ambassy to the Diet of Spire.
The French King might easily imagine that the Emperor would make a sad
complaint of him to the Princes of the Empire; he therefore resolved to send a
most splendid Ambassy to them, in the Persons of Cardinal John du Bellay,
Francis Olivier Chancellor of Alenzon, and Affrican Malley President of the
Parliament of Dijon. These stopped on their way at Nancey in Lorrain, whither
they came in the Month of January, and expected a safe Conduct from the
Emperor; The French Herald ill received at Spire.
for the King had sent a Herald before to Spire upon that account, with Letters
to the Emperor, and privately also to the Princes Electors wherein he demanded
a safe Conduct for his Ambassadors. When about the end of February the Herald
arrived there, in his Coat of Arms, as Custom is, he was stopped by Granvell,
to whom he both delivered his Master's Letters written to the Emperor, (for he
could do no otherwise) and also told the cause of his coming, demanding that
according to the Law of Nations, he might have a safe Conduct for the
Ambassadors, who were not far off; but he was confined to his Lodgings,
carefully observed that no Body might come to speak with him, and Four Days
after sent going with a severe Reprimand: That he had done an unwise Act, and
run the danger of his Head, in daring to come thither: For that the King his
Master, who was an Enemy to Germany, had nothing to do within the Bounds of the
Empire, nor any Right neither to the Law of Nations: That he should therefore
return Home, and tell his King so; but let him not, nor any other, venture to
come again: That now the Emperor was pleased to pardon his Fault, more out of
his own Mercy and Goodness, than for any Desert of his, but that he should have
a care for the future, otherwise he would suffer for it. For that he had gone
beyond the Privilege of Heralds, and ought not to have entered within the
Emperor's Court without his Leave: That as to the Letters, which he said he
had; the King had so deserved of all Christendom, and especially of Germany,
that as Affairs stood, the Emperor would not, nor could not receive them, least
by his usual way of Writing and Promises, either he or others might be
deceived. This Answer was given him, written in French: And so he was sent back
with the King's Letters to the Emperor and Princes, and a Party of Horse
appointed to bring him going as far as Nancey. Now there was nothing of this
imparted to the Princes; which was thought by most, to be done contrary to the
Custom of the Empire. When this came to the Knowledge of the Ambassadors, they
were in great Streights, being anxious how they could get home again without
Danger: But having consulted with Anthony Duke of Lorrain, they departed
secrtly in the Night time, and so returned into the next Place of France.
Whilst they were, as yet, in Nancey, Duke Anthony's Daughter-in-Law came to
Spire; that, what neither he nor others could do, She being the Emperor's
Sisters Daughter, by Prayers and Tears, and the Favor of her Sex, might
obtain: But that was also in Vain; for the Emperor was wholly bent upon War,
and his Counselors said, he could not do otherwise, with Honor and
Reputation. Now, though the Duke of Lorrain espoused neither Party, and had
long since conditioned with both, that he might be Neuter; yet, when he found
that the Seat of the War was like to be on his Frontiers, which could not but
be to his great Prejudice, he was exceedingly desirous of Peace. The Letter of
some Princes to the Pope.
February the Ninth, some Princes, at the Emperor's Suggestion, wrote from
Spire to the Pope, telling his Holiness, That they had been exceedingly
rejoiced when last Year they heard, how that the Turks and their Confederates
had been, by the Emperor's Forces, and the Assistance he had sent, driven from
the Siege of the Castle of Nizza, and forced to fly for their Safety; and that
their Joy was the greater, that they were given to understand, that the Loss of
that Rampart would much endanger, not only the Provinces and Patrimony of the
Church, but also all Italy, and, indeed Christendom: But that now, since they
were informed, by credible Hands, that they were again fitting out their Fleet
and Forces at Thoulon with a Design to reduce that Castle under their Power, it
did not a little trouble them, both because of the Danger and Disgrace of it
also: And that was the Reason, why, out of the Duty and Love they bore him, who
was the common Father of Christendom, they now wrote to his Holiness: Wherefore
they earnestly besought him, that he would befriend Charles Duke of Savoy with
his Counsel and Assistance; and in his own singular Prudence, consider with
himself, how much it would be safer, and more advantageous for the Public, to
beat off the Enemy at his first Approach, than to dally away the time, and not
to run to Arms, till the most commodious Castle of Italy should be lost: That
his Holiness would also think of some Measures, whereby so barbarous an Enemy,
might, not only, be driven away from before that Castle, but also out of those
Places where he had safe Harbor and Retreat: For if he looked upon the Turk
and his Confederates as Enemies, which they could not but think he would, for
the Love he bore to the Flock, whereof he was the chief and universal Bishop:
If he should employ all the Forces and Substance of the Church this way, they
made no doubt, but God would deliver his People out of the Hands of their
Enemies: That, since then he saw how much the Public Safety depended on that
Castle, they again begged of him, that he would use his Endeavors, not to let
it fall into the Hands of Strangers; which would be very acceptable Service to
God, and beneficial to the public Interest of Christendom.

To this the Pope made Answer, The Pope's Answer.
February the Twenty Sixth: That the Safety of the Castle of Nizza had hitherto
been, and should still be his Care for the future: That the good Will and
Kindness they expressed was very acceptable unto him; and he hoped, that as
they were concerned for Nizza, so they would be no less sollicitous for the
Public, which was the thing they ought chiefly to do: That it was publicly
known how he stood affected in relation to the common Enemy, from his very
first Inauguration into the Pontificate: That he had constantly given Aid
against him; furnished Commanders and a Fleet, both in Hungary and Africa:
That, in short, he had left nothing undone, whereby he might defend Christendom
from the Yoke of so barbarous and cruel an Enemy; so that during the Ten Years
that he had been at the Helm, he had been exhausted by continual Expenses,
which he was at when even the public Treasure was at a low Ebb, his Revenues
being much lessened and impaired by the Defection of many. How could he be
thought wanting in any thing, who had not only sent frequent Ambassies, but
himself also taken many Progresses for the good of the Public? That two Years
since he had called a Council at Trent, a Town within the Dominion of Germany,
to the end that Peace might be restored to the Empire, Vices Reformed; the
Differences of Kings and Princes composed, and Measures taken for carrying on a
Turkish War: But that as yet he had seen no Fruits of all his Labor and Pains.
For that the cause of the common disease still remained, and all the parts of
the State were in a visible Consumption and Decay: That he took it very well at
their Hands, that they so affectionately recommended to him the Defense of the
Castle of Nizza, and that he would make it his whole care for the future; that
not one place only should be provided for; but that the infection also might
not spread to other Places, and that Christendom should be delivered from the
Turks, and such like ungodly Men: For that it was his Duty to provide for all
the Members in general, and to apply Remedies to the languishing Body. That
therefore as they recommended Nizza to him, so did he again recommend to them
the State of Christendom which was very much afflicted and weakened: That the
Chief and only way to cure it was, Peace and Reconciliation amongst Kings and
Princes; for that all Disorders sprang from that source: But that if these
Dissensions were removed, the whole Body would recover its former Comeliness
and Beauty: For that before these Clashings and Animosities, there were neither
any Heresies in Germany, nor Turks in Hungary and Italy: But that so soon as a
vent was given to civil Discord, then presently sprang forth Heresies and
Factions, both private and public Hatred and Dissensions, which was also the
Cause that the meeting of the Council had hitherto been hindered and retarded:
That Peace was therefore to be established, and, in imitation of Physicians,
the Root of the Evil removed. For that Peace would banish both War and Turk;
and a Council assembled in Peace and Quietness, would soon Root out Heresies,
and reform whatever was amiss; that otherwise they needed not think, that
either Nizza could be defended from the Enemy, or any part of Christendom be
exempt from Danger; but, on the contrary, that all would be involved in the
same Calamity and Destruction.

In the Month of March Ludovick the Elector Palatine died, Ludovick Elector
Palatine dies, his Brother Frederick succeeds.
to whom succeeded his Brother Frederick. The Electors and all the other States,
by the Advice of the Emperor, on the Second day of April, wrote to the
Switzers, That they, the Cantons, had been informed by the Ambassadors, which
King Ferdinand and they had sent to them, The Letter of the States of the
Empire to the Swisse.
of the Reasons why two Years before, they had decreed a War against the Turk,
and that it grieved them they had not then a franker Answer from them: That the
Emperor had then resolved to have commanded in Person in that War, but that he
had been diverted by the French King, who had not only made War against him in
diverse places, but had likewise solicited Aid from the Turks: And that the
Year before a Turkish Fleet having, at his Charges and Procurement, come upon
the Coast of Italy, had attacked the Duke of Savoy and taken Nizza: That the
same Fleet was still in the Ports of France, and waited only for an opportunity
of doing the Emperor and Empire all the Mischief they could: That this so
horrid and unparallelled an Action of the French King's, was so much the more
to be detested, that it tended directly to the aggrandizing of that wicked
People, and to the highest danger and disadvantage of Christendom: That to
them, therefore, it seemed very strange, that they, who had no less cause to be
afraid of the Turks than the Germans themselves, should have sent Forces to the
Assistance of the French King in that War, who had the Turk for his Ally and
Assistant. For that without their Aid he would not rashly have undertaken this
Civil War: That they were told also now, that he was again soliciting them
about fresh Supplies: But since it concerned all equally, not only to resist
the Force of the Turks, but also to take from their Confederates all Aid and
Assistance, for the Safety of Christendom; they earnestly desired, that for the
future, they would not suffer their Subjects to serve the French King, who
because of his accursed League ought to be taken for a public Enemy; but that
they would recall those who were already, perhaps, in his pay, and so demean
themselves, that it might appear, they did not slight the public Welfare of
Christendom.

Whilst the Matters proposed by the Emperor were under Deliberation, the
Elector of Saxony, The Protestants Accuse the Duke of Brunswick.
the Lantgrave and Confederates, on the Fifth of April, accused Henry Duke of
Brunswick before the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and the whole Diet of the Empire,
charging him with most enormous Crimes, and exhibiting against him a Bill in
Writing, containing an exact Relation of all the Damage he had done to the
Cities of Brunswick and Goslar, their Friends and Confederates, for whose
defense they had been necessitated to resist Force by Force, and to repress his
Usurpations. Then they alleged against him, That for some Years he had done
nothing but sought after occasions of making War against them; which they
proved by the Letters we mentioned before, that were found in his chief Castle
that was taken, after he had been driven out of his Country. In those Letters
which where all in a manner written to the Elector of Mentz, the Duke of
Bavaria and Eldo before he was expelled, he frequently wished for the Emperor's
coming out of Spain; and when any Hopes offered, he huffed and threatened; but
after that the Emperor was come, and proceeded a little too slowly, he
complained of his remissness and delay, and lamented that neither he nor his
Associates had Satisfaction, and that the League made at Nurimberg was not
regarded; accusing and laying all the Fault upon Granvell, who was, as he said,
corrupted by the Protestants Money, whom he railed against, and prayed that he
might come to a shameful End, as he deserved: He frequently also affirmed, That
the Emperor was a-sleep and could not be rouzed, and that he made use of his
Name only for a Cloak and Terror, as Fowlers used to do when they frightened
the Birds with a dead Hawk. Many Letters of his were read, containing such
stuff as this, whereby he vented his Purpose and Inclinations. Much to the same
purpose the Duke of Bavaria and Eldo had written to him again. And because Duke
Henry, Brother to Duke George of Saxony, changing his Religion, as we said, had
entered into the Protestant League, the Duke of Brunswick had plied the Emperor
by Letters and Messengers to divest him of all his Lands and Goods, hoping that
he himself might be put into the Possession of his Country. Letters to this
purpose were also read. Afterward they alleged, That he was an impious Man,
who slighted and made a Derision of the Popish Religion. Whereof he would be
thought the Defender, which they proved by a very notable Instance. The Duke of
Brunswick had Married the Lady Mary, A pleasant Story of the Duke of Brunswick
and his Miss, Eve Trottine.
Sister to Vlrick Duke of Wirtemberg, who, amongst other Ladies that waited on
her, had one Eve Trottine, a Young Lady of extraordinary Beauty, and a noble
Family. The Duke began to be desperately smitten with her, and having by his
Courtship prevailed, enjoyed her, and had some Children by her: But that the
intrigue might not be discovered, and that he might still have her Company, he
put a Stratagem into her Head, that she should pretend to return Home to her
Parents; and he furnished her with a Wagon, Horses, and all things necessary
for her Journey. Away went she, and it was thought she was going Home; but she
was conducted another Way to a Castle of his, whereof the Governor was
beforehand instructed by him what he was to do; and had a Woman or two in whom
he most confided to assist him in the Plot. Some Days after Eve came there, she
took her Bed, pretending to be Sick. Now the Duke had before caused an Image to
be made of Wood, representing the Head, Neck, and Breast of a dead Body: The
other Parts of the Body were done and shaped in Linen, which the Women stuffed
with Dust or Earth, that so it might seem to be solid, and then fitted the
wooden Head and Bust to it, which was likewise covered over with the Linen
Cloth. The Body, then, being thus ordered, and wrapped in a Shroud, was laid
forth on the Floor; and presently one of the Women ran to the Governor's
Parlour Door, crying out, that Eve was dead: Whereupon he straight ordered a
Coffin to be made, to put the Body in: And to scare People from approaching the
Corpse, it was given out, that she died of the Plague, and Juniper Berries, and
other Odoriferous Things were burnt to perfume the Rooms. Afterward the Corpse
was carried in funeral Pomp to the Gray Friars Church, where it was honorably
buried, the Franciscans performing all the usual Ceremonies, and praying for
the Soul departed, as they did for a whole Year after, and in their Sermons
exhorted the People to do the like. By the Duke of Brunswick's Order also, an
Office of Funeral was performed for her in the Chapel of the Castle, where it
was said, she died, Priests being invited thither from the Neighborhood. The
same was done in the chief Castle Wolfem-Battel, which is not far distant from
the City of Brunswick: For hither came also the Report of her Death. Now at
this Office his Wife, the Duchess, was present, with her Women and Maids, all
in Mourning. Many Priests were invited to it, who had afterward a Dinner, and
every one of them a piece of Money in Gratuity, according to the ancient Custom
observed amongst the Papists. In the mean time, Eve, whose Death was bewailed
by so many, was in very good Health in the Castle of Stauffenburg, where she
was still visited by Duke Henry, who since that time had Seven Children by her.
He also persuaded his Duchess to write to the Lady Eve's Parents and
Relations, to acquaint them with her Death. But when afterward there was a
Report raised, That she was still alive, and kept in Stauffenburg; his
Duchess, who had some inkling of that, conceived a violent Suspicion, and
enquired of the Servants about the Truth of the Matter: But he commanded, that
none of whom she might learn any thing, should come near her. However, that
Suspicion stuck in her Mind as long as she lived, which made her write many
Letters to him, bewailing her own Misfortune. This prank of his, amongst other
things, was also publicly read in that Session, that all might know what
Opinion he had of his own Religion. The Effect of the Accusation was to show,
how just and necessary Causes they had of taking up Arms against him, who
despising the Edicts of the Emperor, and King Ferdinand, had disturbed the
public Peace, and done all the Injury he could to their Associates and
Confederates. The Duke of Brunswick was not present at this Action, it being
the Emperor's Pleasure, that he should not: For the Protestants wished he might
have been there to have heard all, and had for that purpose made Application to
the Emperor.

On Easter Monday, The French Victory at Carignan.
which then fell on the Fourteenth of April, the Imperialists, under the
Conduct of Alfonso, Marquess of Pescara, fought a Battle with the French in
Piedmont near the Town Carignan, and were defeated with the loss of many
Thousands of Men. The French General was the Duke of Vendosme, whom we
mentioned before. Many thought that the News of this overthrow would have
inclined the Emperor to admit of a treaty of Peace, but he continued firm in
his purpose of War.

The Duke of Brunswick, The Proceedings of the Duke of Saxony and the
Confederates, with the Duke of Brunswick.
on the Thirteenth of April, gave an Answer to the Accusation of the
Protestants, and foully bespattered them with Reproaches, laying to their
Charge Conspiracy, Rebellion, Treachery, Rapine, French and Turkish Leagues,
and what not. As to the Letters found in his Castle, he justified himself as
well as he could: Alleging, That if their own Closets were searched, far worse
might be found in them; but he slightly touched at that which was objected to
him concerning his Intrigue with his beloved Mistress Eve. To this
Recrimination the Protestants replied: And since the Emperor would have no more
of it in the public Diet, they exhibited and dispersed a written Paper of the
whole matter, which Brimswick also afterward did. April the Eighteenth,
Charles Duke of Savoy by his Ambassadors accused the French King in the
Assembly of the Princes; The Duke of Savoy's Accusation of the French King.
That besides the Violence and Injuries done him in former Years, he had
stirred up Barbarossa the Turkish Admiral, who being assisted by French Forces,
had taken his Town of Nizza by Surrender, and contrary to Faith and Promise,
had Plundered and Burnt it, carrying away many into slavery. He therefore
craves their Aid in this his distressed Condition, especially seeing it was
more than probable that the Enemy would return to the Siege of the Castle: That
having demanded Assistance from the Pope, he had only granted him the yearly
Rent which he used to receive from the Clergy: But that that was but a very
small matter in his so low and mean Condition, when he scarcely possessed the
Tenth part of his own Dominion. He likewise excused himself for not coming to
the Diet in person, because of his Age, the length of the Journey, and the
imminent danger of the Enemy; and besides, that he was not able to bear the
Charges of it, having scarcely enough to maintain himself, The Switzers Answer
to the Letter of the States of the Empire.
his Son and Family. About the end of April the Switzers, who then held a
Convention at Baden, answered the Letter of the States of the Empire. That
having put the Question to their Commanders and Officers, they affirmed, That
they had seen no Turks in the French Camp, nor had heard any thing of Aid from
them; otherwise they would not have served the French. That when they had put
the same to the French King, he complained, that the Ambassadors he sent last
Winter had been rejected, who, if they had been heard, would easily have
refuted that Calumny: That, if the Emperor would not refuse a Peace, they
promised to assist him, as also the Bohemians, who had written to them in
February, and the Germans against the Turk. That, as for themselves, some of
them were, indeed, bound in Articles to serve the French King in his Wars: But
that some others had only for many Years entertained Amity with him, and that
if any run into France out of their Territories, it was against their Knowledge
or Consent, as it might happen also in other places of Germany: That after all,
they thought it advisable to give Audience to the King's Ambassadors, and
conclude a Peace, wherein, if they could contribute any thing, they were very
willing to do it.

At that time the King of England sent a great Fleet into Scotland, who meeting
with fair Weather, An English Expedition against Scotland, and Edinborough
taken.
arrived there soon after, and took first Leeth, a considerable Sea Port Town,
and then Edinborough, the chief City of Scotland, which because the Castle held
out, and could not be taken, they burnt. This happened in the beginning of the
Month of May. In this Diet the Emperor, in public and solemn manner
inaugurated Wolfgang Master of Prussia, Wolfgang made Master of Prussia.
conferring upon him the Arms and Honors of that Magistracy, which for many
Years past had been possessed by Albert of Brandenburg, the Brother of Casimire
and George, who marrying a Wife usurped it to himself, and was therefore
Outlawed by the Imperial Chamber Twelve Years before, as we mentioned already.
However Sigismund King of Poland defended him, as being his Feudatory and
Vassal: And when another was now installed, as we said, his Ambassador
publicly protested against it as unlawful, and that it should not derogate
from the Right of his Master the King of Poland, of whom the Land of Prussia
held in Fiefe.

The Ambassadors of Hungary having given a Relation of their Misfortune and
Loss the Year before, The complaint and desire of the Ambassadors of Hungary.
implored the Assistance of the Empire, for that now they were reduced to the
last push, and should they be deserted, would take the Course that Men in
Despair commonly do, and which no Body can blame them for: That they would
submit to the worst of Conditions, nay, and to Bondage too, rather than run
voluntarily into Ruin and Destruction, whilst their Neighbors stood by and
looked on as Idle Spectators.

We told you before that the French Kings Herald was sent back from Spire, The
Speech of the French Ambassadors that was not heard in the Diet.
without effecting any thing: When therefore, the Ambassadors returned Home,
they published in Print the Speech which they were to have made in the Assembly
of the States: They begin with complemental Insinuations to curry Favor,
affirming both Nations to have been Originally one and the same, and that
nothing could befall Germany, but France must be affected therewith: Then they
wipe off the Imputations of their Enemies, That the King did now disturb
Christendom with another War, and had made a League with the Turk, using a
wheadling Preface to stroke and claw the Emperor; the former War, they say, was
first begun, because their King could not obtain from the Duke of Savoy his
Mother's Inheritance; and that this last, because contrary to the Law of
Nations, his Ambassadors had been Murdered: That the King had no League with
the Turk, nor any traty but only for Trade and public Peace sake, such as the
Venetians, Polonians and some other People had: Though, if there were any
League betwixt them it could not be objected as a Crime, since the same thing
had been anciently done by Abraham and David, Solomon and Phineas, the Children
of Tobias and the Macchabees: And since that also, by the Emperors Honorius,
Constantine, Theodosius the Younger, Justinian the Second, Paleologus, Leo,
Frederick the First and Second, who made use of the Assistance of Nations of a
different Religion: And that Frederick the Second was upon the very Shoulders
of the Saracens carried back again into Italy, out of which he had been driven
by the Popes: That they themselves knew what Forces and Aid the King had oftener
than once promised to send to the Turkish War, the Truth whereof could be amply
attested both by the Pope and College of Cardinals: That if the Turk had
invaded Hungary, upon occasion of the Quarrel that arose about the Government,
and that being afterward more provoked by the War in Barbary, and the taking
of Tunis, he had lately sent a Fleet upon the Coast of Italy, the King was not
to be blamed therefore: That it made nothing to the purpose, that Paulain the
King's Minister was on Board in that Fleet; for that Barbarossa's Design was to
find out and be Revenged on his Enemy Andrea Doria; but that failing therein,
he had of his own Head besieged the Castle of Nizza: That the King, indeed, had
a Truce with the Turk, as he had told them at another time, which was both
honorable, and hurtful to no Man: That he could not now be charged with that
as a Crime; since many times, and that lately too, the greatest of Men had
desired it: That the King was extremely grieved at the afflicted State of
Christendom; but that the only way of restoring Peace was, for the Emperor to
give back to the King, what, by all Law and Justice belonged to him: That if
they would bring this about, the King would spare neither Labor, Rest, nor
Danger, to defend Germany from all foreign Violence.

In the former Books you have been told, An Accommodation betwixt the Emperor,
Ferdinand, and the Duke of Saxony.
that the Duke of Saxony would not acknowledge Ferdinand for King of the
Romans: Now in this Diet, the matter was in the Month of May accommodated, and
the Duke promised to honor him accordingly. The Emperor, on the other Hand,
ratified the Marriage contracted betwixt the Duke of Saxony and the Family of
Cleve; which till then he had constantly refused to do; Ferdinand is
acknowledged for King of the Romans.
and if the Duke of Cleve should die without Male issue, he confirmed his
Succession to the Duke of Saxony, who had married his Sister, and to the Heirs
Male procreated of their Bodies: But upon this Condition, if there were no
Difference in Religion when the Case happened. As a closer Link of Friendship
too, King Ferdinand, with the Emperor's Consent, betrothed his Daughter the
Lady Eleanor, Eleanor the Daughter of King Ferdinand betrothed to the Duke of
Saxony's Son.
to the Duke of Saxony's eldest Son, if he proved right in Relgion before she
were Marriageable. This last thing was a great Secret, and kept under profound
Silence on both sides, insomuch that neither the Lantgrave, nor his
Confederates knew any thing of it; for the matter was contracted by a few
Counselors, to wit, Granvell for the Emperor, Hoffman for King Ferdinand, and
Pontane and Burcart for the Duke of Saxony. The King of Denmark also sent
Ambassadors, The King of Denmark's Accommodation with the Emperor.
and made a final Agreement with the Emperor, having all the Winter long, and
till then kept an Army on foot against future Contingences: He seemed to have
forsaken the Amity of France, because of the Report of the Turkish League; for
the Ambassadors expressed little less when they discoursed more familiarly with
their Friends.

Let us now return to the Demands of the Emperor and King Ferdinand: After long
and great Debate about the Matter, on the Twentieth of June, the Diet was
dissolved. The Decree of the States, for a Subsidy against the French, and
other Matters.
But though it seemed to lie heavy upon the States of the Empire, to be charged
with double Aid, yet because they thought that the Turkish War might be more
successfully carried on, if the domestic Enemy were first reduced to Duty,
they granted the Emperor a Six Months Subsidy for entertaining Four thousand
Horse, and Twenty four thousand Foot, against the French King; of which Money
the Emperor allotted a part to his Brother King Ferdinand, for fortifying the
Places upon the Frontiers against the Turks: And for the future Turkish War,
they imposed a Tax and Poll all over Germany, that all, without Exception,
should pay according to their Lands and Estates, and for their Heads: They
enacted under severe Penalties, that no Man should serve Foreigners, especially
the French King, in their Wars; and Power was granted to Punish such as should
be found Transgressors herein. Because the Difference about Religion could not
be treated of during these warlike Occupations, it was referred to the next
Diet, to be held in the Month of December. The Emperor, in the mean time,
promised to employ some learned and pious Men, to draw up a Form of
Reformation: He entreated the Princes to do the like also, that having compared
all together in future Diets, something might be agreed upon by common Consent,
to be observed till the meeting of a General Council, to be held in Germany; or
until a National Synod of Germany: That in the mean time all should live in
Peace, without making any Bustle or Stir for Difference in Religion; and that
the Churches every where, of what Religion soever, should enjoy their Rents and
Revenues, which should be applied to the Maintenance of the Ministers, of
public Schools, and the Poor: That the Judges of the Imperial Chamber should
retain their Places, during the time that was prefixed to them: After the
Expiration thereof, that all should be indifferently admitted to that Bench,
without any respect to their Religion: That the Edict of Ausburg, and all Suits
commenced against the Protestants upon account of their Religion and
Profession; as also the Proscription of the Cities of Goslar and Minden, should
be suspended till the next Treaty: That the Anabapists should suffer the
Punishments long since decreed against them: The Decree of Spire displeases the
Catholics.
That nevertheless the Magistrates should employ learned and pious Men to
convince them of their Error, and reclaim them. This Decree was much disliked
by the Catholics, who with all their Force opposed it: But seeing the Bishops
of Cologne and Munster sided with the Protestants, and Cleve and Baden
submitted all to the Emperor's Pleasure, who after much debate made it appear,
That this was a middle and tolerable way for both; they being much weakened in
number, condescended at last, not, indeed, to assent to it; but yet that they
might not seem to prescribe Rules to the Emperor, nor to derogate from his
Power, to tolerate the same; and the Electors Palatine and Brandenburg, had
interceded to have the Decree pass in this manner. The Protestants also desired
that the Cause of the Duke of Brunswick might be comprehended in that Decree,
but that could not be obtained: And the Emperor urged, That either they would
restore him, or else put the Province into his Hands by Sequestration, until
the matter should be Tried. The Cities and two Princes refused to give Aid
against the French.
He had treated about this with the Duke of Saxony and Lantgrave whilst they
were present, and much more with their Deputies after their Departure. The
Cities at first refused to contribute to the Subsidy against the French,
because of Intercourse and Trade. But when the Princes assented to it, and the
French King's Cause seemed Odious to all, they also subscribed, though much
against their Wills, especially they who bordered upon France. The Deputies of
Lunenburg and Wirtemberg refused also, but they were privately admonished, and
with harsh words too, that they alone should not put a stop to the Resolutions
of the rest. When the Lantgrave upon his Return Home, went to take leave of the
Emperor, he was most graciously received; his Imperial Majesty telling him,
That he would not now make use of him against the French King, on purpose not
to expose him to hatred; but that so soon as that War was over, he designed to
march against the Turk, and that then he would make him his Lieutenant General,
and commit the whole management of the War to his Care: And when he modestly
and humbly excused himself, as unfit for such a Charge. You have done good
Service ere now, says the Emperor, both for your self and others, and I make
no doubt but you can render me good Services too; and with these words most
courteously dismissed him; so that he having acquainted some of his familiar
Friends with what had passed betwixt them, returned Home full of Hopes and Joy,
that the Emperor was so Favorable unto him. The Duchy of Brunswick
Sequestrated into the Emperor's Hands.
As to the Business of the Sequestration, after the matter had been long
canvassed and disputed, it was agreed upon at length, That all the Country of
Brunswick should be put into the Emperor's Hands as chief Magistrate, until the
Controversy were either friendly taken up, or fairly tried and determined by
Law: And that the Emperor should commit the Government of the Country either to
the Prince Palatine, or the Elector of Brandenburg; or else to Duke Maurice or
the Duke of Cleve; that they that did not obey, should incurr the penalty of
the breach of the public Peace: That the Emperor should command Henry Duke of
Brunswick to obey, or else to punish him according to Law. The Emperor at
length proposed these Conditions, and persisted in that, and the Protestants
ratified them afterward, as you shall hear in the proper place. The Emperors
Expedition into France.
After the Conclusion of the Diet, the Emperor went from Spire to Metz. Now all
his Army had Mustered in Lorrain upon the Borders of France, and about the
latter end of May had taken Luxenburg upon Surrender. In this War Duke Maurice
of Saxony and Marquess Albert of Brandenburg served the Emperor with a Thousand
Horse a piece; also Count William of Furstemburg an Officer of Foot, and
Sebastian Scherteline, all Protestants.

Whilst the Emperor was at Metz, Count Bichling was condemned to die, but saved
by Maximilian.
Hubert Count Bichling, a German, that served the French, was taken in Lorrain
and brought to Metz. He was there condemned to lose his Head, and his Wife, who
came thither and fell at the Emperor's Feet, could not prevail for his Pardon;
so that all things were prepared for his Execution: But at length Maximilian,
King Ferdinand's Son, whom the Emperor had lately received into his Court,
being solicited, used his Interest with the Emperor, and at last saved his
Life.

In the mean time Babarossa, Barbarossa's Incursions.
either because his Affairs so required, or that he was persuaded by the French
King, or else that he feared the King might make Peace with the Emperor,
returned Home, and Landing made sad Havoc in all maritime Places which
belonged either to the Emperor or Empire, that he passed by in his Voyage; but
he spared the Popes Territories, at the French Kings desire, as it is credible.
The Imperial Army advancing, took the Town and Castle of Liney three Miles from
Bar; from thence they marched to Sandizier, a Town under the Dominion of France
upon the River Marne. It was kept out by a strong Garrison, commanded by
Landrey, he, who the Year before valiantly defended Landrecy against the
Emperor and the English.

Whilst these things were acting, Anthony Duke of Lorrain dying, his Son
Francis succeeds to him.
Anthony Duke of Lorrain died, not so much for Age, as of Grief and Trouble
that he conceived at the neighboring and almost domestic War. To him
succeeded his Son Francis, who, as we said before, had married the Emperor's
Sister's Daughter.

At this time the King of England crossed the Sea with a great Army, The
English make an Expedition into France.
and came to Calais: Afterward he besieged Montrevil, having in his Army
Maximilian Count to Buren, who served him by the Emperor's Order. From thence
he marched to Boloigne, a Sea Port Town, and besieged it. The Emperor laid
Siege to Sandizier, Boloigne besieged.
and after he had battered the Place, gave the Assault on the Thirteeth of
July; Sandizier taken upon Surrender.
but having lost about Five hundred Men, and the Towns-people making a brave
Resistance, he was obliged to desist, and had not the Town till Two Months
after; that Landrey being killed by the fall of a House, and they wanted Powder
within, Renate Prince of Orange killed.
it was surrendered to him. During that Siege Renate Prince of Orange received
a Shot, whereof next day after he died, to the Emperor's great grief, having
made his Cousin William, the Count of Nassaw's Son, his Heir. The Protestant
Ambassadors were then in Lorrain, for confirming the Articles of Sequestration
lately proposed by the Emperor: They stopped first at Metz, and then at Toul,
from whence, by frequent Letters, they gave the Emperor and Granvell an Account
of the Businesses they were come about: But at length the Emperor excusing
himself, as being hurried with the Affairs of War, ordered them to return home,
putting off the whole Matter to the next Diet of the Empire, or to a more
convenient time. Sandizier being taken, the Emperor, August the Twenty fifth,
advanced with his Army, and leaving Chalons, a Town of Champaigne, encamped by
the River of Marne; on the other side whereof lay some Troops of French Horse
to defend the Passage. There Count William of Furstemburg, who was well
acquainted with all the Ways and Passes in France, went out of the Camp in the
Night time, with one Servant only to wait on him, that he might discover where
the River was fordable, and the Army might pass it. Having therefore taken a
Peasant for his Guide, who showed him a Ford, he passed over the River, but
falling in amongst some French Horse on the other side, he was taken, and
carried to the French Camp with great Derision, and not without Reproached, for
that in the French Service before, he had got a great deal of Gold, and carried
it with him out of France: From thence he was sent Prisoner to Paris. This
Accident happened quite contrary to the Emperor's Expectation, and held him
some time in Suspense. The French King all this while declined a Battle,
because the Swisse had not as yet joined him: And the Emperor, removing his
Camp, marched forward along the Marne. There was a great Magazine of Provisions
and Ammunition in the Town of Espernon, on his March; but the French, that it
might not fall into the Enemy's Hands, partly removed it down the River in a
great Tumult and Confusion, and burnt what they could not carry away, they
themselves setting Fire to the town; wherefore the Emperor, without any
Opposition, came to Chastea^-Thiery, a Town upon the same River, not Two Days
Journey from Paris: And though the French King's Ambassadors, sent to treat of
Peace, The Consternation of the Parisians.
were in the Emperor's Camp, yet he advanced forward still; so that being come
thus far, incredible was the Consternation at Paris; all fled who had any
considerable Estates, nor could the King's Edicts and Proclamations stay them,
none but the Rabble remaining in the City: So that this vast and rich City was
now in danger of being plundered by their own Rascality that stayed in it.
There was a vast number of Students there from all parts of Europe almost;
these also fled, and the King had likewise, by Proclamation, commanded all
Strangers to depart immediately, upon pain of Death; this was in the beginning
of September. Boloigne taken by the English.
Some Days after, the King of England, having much shattered and battered
Boloigne, had it surrendered unto him, which was more then his Father, and all
the Kings before him could ever atchieve. At length, on the Twenty Fourth of
September, the Emperor concluded a Peace with the French King at Soissons,
after he was come from Chastea^-Thiery. The Commissioners who treated the
Peace, were on the Emperor's part, The Peace betwixt the Emperor and French
King at Soissons, and the Conditions of it.
Gonzaga Viceroy of Sicily, and Granvell: For the King were Claude d' Annebaud
Admiral of France, Charles de Nucil and Gilbert Bajara. Now these were the
Conditions; That whatever had been taken on either side, since the Truce of
Nice or Nizza, should be restored: That the French King should deliver back the
Town of As^eney, to the Duke of Lorrain, because it was a Dependence on the
Province of Luxemburg: That they should mutually assist one another with all
their Force for restoring the ancient Religion, and the Unity of the Church:
That the French King should assist the Emperor in the Turkish War with Six
hundred Horse, and Ten thousand Foot: That he should renounce all Claim and
Title to Arragon, Naples, Flanders, Artois and Guelderland: That the Emperor,
on the other Hand, should renounce all Pretensions to the Bolonese, Peron, and
other Towns situated upon the River of Soame, as also to low Burgundy, and the
Country of Mascon: Again, That he should give in Marriage to Charles Duke of
Orleans, the King's Son, his own eldest Daughter, the Lady Mary, or the
Daughter of King Ferdinand his Brother; and that he should have Four Months
time to declare which of the Two he would give: If he gave his Daughter, that
she should have in Dowry Brabant, Guelderland, Luxemburg, Limburg, Flanders,
Holland, Hainault, Artois, Namure, Freiseland, Vtrecht, and all his Provinces
in the Netherlands, with the Duchy of Burgundy, to be possessed and enjoyed by
them after his Death. The French King, in that case, for him and his Heirs,
renouncing all Right and Title to Milan; but that if the Emperor's Daughter
should die without Issue, then the Duke of Orleans should leave the
aforementioned Possession, and the King retain his Right to Milan, as the
Emperor to the Inheritance of the House of Burgundy. If he gave King
Ferdinand's Daughter, that the Duchy of Milan should be her Dowry: That with
which of the Two the Marriage were, it should be accomplished within a Year;
and the French King should restore the Duke of Savoy to all that he had taken
from him: That the French King should also keep Hesdin: And that the Emperor
should use all his Endeavors to procure a Peace betwixt England and France:
That as to the Duke of Cleve, since the King and Queen of Navarre did affirm
that their Daughter never consented to that Marriage, but on the contrary had
protested against it in the solemn and usual manner; the French King should
within Six Weeks, send that Protestation to the Emperor, that he might consider
what was to be done. In this Peace were comprehended the Pope, King Ferdinand,
the Kings of Portugal, Poland and Denmark, the Venetians and Switzers, the
Dukes of Savoy, Lorrain, Florence, Ferrara, Mantua and Vrbin; the States of
Genoa, Luca and Siena; the Princes Electors, and States of the Empire, that
were obedient to the Emperor. The Peace being concluded, the Emperor dismissed
his Forces, and returned home from Soissons. All Men wondered at this
Pacification; for the Emperors familiar Friends promised themselves certain
Victory before the Emperor took the Field, and bragged, that within a few
Months France should be their own, or at least the King become Tributary,
having Three such powerful Enemies against him, the Emperor, the Empire, and
the King of England.

The End of the Fifteenth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XVI.
The CONTENTS.
The Pope writes to the Emperor; admonishing and expostulating with him,
sharply threatens his first-begotten Son, and the same year promotes a great
many new Cardinals. A Council is again called. The Clergy and College of
Cologne once more vigorously withstand their Archbishop. Peter Bruly having
preached the Reformed Religion at Tournay, is therefore burnt alive. The
Divines of Paris assemble at Melun. During the Diet at Worms, (wherein many
things are handled) they of Merindolle and Cabrieres, commonly called the
Waldeneses, are miserably harassed, and at length turned out of all. Though the
Pope had called a Council, yet he is wholly bent upon a War against the
Protestants. Luther publishes a little Book, wherein he sets him off in his
colors. Grignian is sent Ambassador to the Protestants, that he may persuade
them to approve the Council. The Emperor cites the Archbishop of Cologne, to
appear before him. A hot War between the Kings of England and France. The Duke
of Orleans dies. A War breaks out betwixt Henry Duke of Brunswick, and the
Landgrave, wherein the latter prevails. The Elector Palatine embraces the
Reformed Religion. Rumor of War against the Protestants is spread abroad. A
Conference appointed at Ratisbonne, about matters of Religion. This being
broken up, a Council is called at Trent, and the Sessions begin. Luther, in the
mean time, dies.

IN the heat of War, the Pope sends Letters to the Emperor, bearing date
August 23. acquainting him, that he had an account of what nature the Decrees
were, The Pope's Letters to the Emperor: written at the instigation and upon
the confidence of the French King.
which he had lately made at Spire; but that in discharge of his own Duty, and
for the love he bore to him, he could not dissemble his thoughts concerning
them, and that the Example of Eli the High Priest, was a warning to him to do
so, whom God severely punished for his too great indulgence to his Sons: That
in the same manner, since these Decrees tended to the danger of his own Soul,
and great disturbance of the Church, he could not but give him this Admonition.
First then that he should not leave the uniform practice of the Church, nor
customs of his Forefathers, but carefully observe the same Discipline, Method,
and Rule; which Method is, that when any Debate happens about Religion, the
whole Decision ought to be referred to the Church of Rome: Whereas he lately in
appointing a General and National Council, and a Diet of the Empire, had had no
regard to him, who by Divine and Humane Right has alone power of calling
Councils, and determining matters of Religion. Nor was that all he was to be
blamed for, but also that he allowed not only private men, but even the
Asserters of damned Heresies to judge of Religion; that he gave judgment
concerning Ecclesiastical Possessions, and the Controversies that arose about
them: that he restored to Honors and Dignity such as were out of the Communion
of the Church, and long ago condemned by his own Edicts, without the consent of
those who persevered in their ancient Allegiance and Religion. Did these things
agree with the sacred Laws and Ordinances? Nay, rather did they not overturn
all Discipline and Order? That it was his opinion however, that these things
proceeded not from himself, but that ill affected persons, out of the hatred
they bore to the Church of Rome, had counseled and solicited him to give some
sign of his aversion to the same; but that it grieved him the more to see that
he should be drawn in, and persuaded by them, in that he clearly perceived the
prejudice it carried along with it, would be greater both to himself and the
Church, unless he repented: That this his fear also grew greater and greater,
when he considered who the persons were, with whom he had contracted
friendship; for that as ill company corrupts good manners, so also it was very
dangerous to make Alliances with wicked and vicious men: That he made no doubt
but they had used specious pretext to him, since there is no counsel so bad but
may be varnished over with some plausible color; but that in truth he who
searches the Scriptures, will meet with many and famous instances of the wrath
and vengeance of God, against those who had usurped to themselves the Offices
of the High Priest. That Adversaries object Negligence to Priests as an odious
crime, and make use of that as a Spur to incite Princes, whilst they exhort
them to undertake the care and conduct of Religion; a thing, indeed, that seems
fair and laudable, but which has no foundation in reason to support it. That as
in private houses the Master of the Family allotted to every one their several
businesses, and would not suffer any to set about the work of another, lest
Order might thereby be disturbed: so also in the Church, which is the house of
God, every one had his duty assigned to him, which he was to discharge; so that
it was undecent, that Inferiors should take upon them the Offices of
Superiors; and that that was so much the more to be observed, by how much the
Church surpasses any other house in greatness and glory. That seeing then the
chief Office of the Church is by God recommended to Priests, it was a great
injury in him to act their parts, and take upon him their honor. That it was
known what happened to Uza, who put his hand to hold up the Cart wherein the
Ark of God was, which was tottering and ready to fall: That no man but would
think he had done right, when in the absence of the Levites he lent a hand to
support the Cart which was in danger of falling: Nevertheless that God's
striking of him with a sudden death, was a document to us, how careful we ought
to be not to invade the Provinces of others. That therefore he should take
heed, lest at the persuasion of those who had always in their mouths the
Reformation of the Church, he should rashly put his hand to those things which
peculiarly belonged to the Priests. The like and more grievous also was the end
of Dathan, Abirom, and Core, when they disputed the Authority of Moses and his
Brother Aaron. That Ozias was a renowned King, and yet God struck him with
Leprosy, because he would offer Incense at the Altar, thereby avenging upon
him the usurpation of another man's Office. That the care of the Churches was,
indeed, an Office most acceptable to God, however that it did not belong to
him, but to the Priests, and chiefly to himself, to whom God had given the
power of binding and loosing. Nor was it pertinent what he said, that these
Laws, were not perpetual, but temporary, and only to continue till the meeting
of a Council: For though the design might be pious, yet by reason of the person
it became impious. That it was God's part to call bad Priests to an account, to
whom men ought to refer them, and not to attempt any thing besides. That God
had signally crowned those Princes with honor and blessings, who assisted the
Head of the Church, the Sea of Rome, and who rendered that love and duty which
is due to the Priesthood, as may be seen in Constantine the Great, the
Theodosius's, Charlemaigne, etc. but that such as did otherwise, were afflicted
with most grievous punishments: nor did he mean Nero, Domitian, and others of
that stamp, who endeavored to stifle the Church in its infancy; but such as
withstood her, when she was grown up, and the Chair of St. Peter settled: In
which number were Anastasius the first, Mauritius, Constans the second, Philip,
Leo, and many more, who being turned out and stripped of all, ended their days in
ignominy and disgrace. That Henry the Fourth, because he had behaved himself
unworthily toward him, whom he ought to have reverenced as a Father, was by
his own Son taken, and made to suffer for it at Liege: That Frederick the
Second, a grievous Enemy of the Church of Rome, was killed by his own Son. That
nevertheless, Rebels were not always afflicted and punished, but did sometimes
flourish in wealth and prosperity: which came to pass, as the Fathers say, lest
that if all wicked men were punished here, it might be thought that God
reserved to himself no Tribunal hereafter. That there was no sin, indeed, that
went unpunished, but that it was the most grievous effect of the wrath of God,
when they that sin think they may do it freely; and that these were in a
deplorable and truly wretched condition, because they went on continually
heaping sin upon sin. That in the same manner, not only single men, but even
Countries and Provinces have been punished, which either rejected Christ, or
refused to obey his Vicar. That two people, especially the Jews, to wit, and
the Greeks confirmed this clearly to us by their calamities and sufferings, of
whom the former put to death the Son of God, and the latter more than one way
slighted his Vicegerent. That therefore, if God manifested his wrath against
them, for crimes and attempts of that nature, he had much more reason to be
afraid, if he should design any such thing, seeing he sprung from those
Emperors who had received as much honor from the Church of Rome, as they had
conferred upon her. That his words, however, were not so to be taken, as if he
thought any such thing was intended by him, or that he did not most earnestly
desire the Controversy might be made up, but only that he was concerned and
sollicitous for his danger. That some Priests of old having referred to
Constantine the Great, the decision of their Lawsuits and Causes, he had
rejected it, and would not undertake to judge those, who had power to judge all
men: that these were the footsteps he should follow. That in wishing to see an
end made of all Controversies, and a Reformation in the Church, he did what was
extremely laudable: that as to that, he prayed him to lend him his assistance,
to whom God had committed the care and administration of those affairs. That he
might, indeed, make himself an Assistant, but not the Head and chief
Administrator. That he was most desirous of a public Reformation, as he had
made it oftener than once appear by calling Councils, whenever there was the
least glimpse of hope that they could meet: and that though hitherto all that
he had done that way was in vain, yet still he had omitted nothing on his part
for effecting the same. That he wished to see a Council for the sake of the
public, but chiefly of Germany, which was rent and torn with various Jars and
Divisions; but that it grieved him that he should use the counsels of those,
who had been long ago condemned, even by his own Sentence: nor did he therefore
grieve, because he would have them for ever barred from his friendship, but
because they became more rash and insolent by that Indulgence of his. That
since there was no way of curing the Evil but one, to wit, a Council, therefore
they must betake themselves to that. That then he should make way to the
calling of it, and restore the so-much-desired Peace to the People of Christ,
or at least restrain all Hostilities in the mean time, until the public safety
should be consulted about; since Consultation and Debate was to be used, rather
than Force and Arms; which being laid aside, all things would succeed as they
ought. That there was a Council already called a good while ago, though because
of the Wars, it had been put off till a more convenient time. That he would use
his endeavors with other Princes, especially with him with whom he was in War,
that they should do the like. That he should therefore comply with his
Admonitions, and as he held the place of his first-begotten Son, embrace the
sound counsels of his Father, tred in the footsteps of his Ancestors, not
deviating from the right way, nor assuming to himself any right or authority in
the management and handling of sacred matters; that he should exclude all
disputations about Religion from the Diets and Assemblies of the Empire, and
refer them to his Tribunal. Nor should he neither meddle with the Revenues of
the Church, but lay down Arms, and bring matters to a peace and accommodation;
or if there were no other way of obtaining peace, that he should submit the
whole Controversy and cause of the War to the arbitrament and decision of the
Council. Lastly, that he should wholly rescind and annul what with too much
lenity and easiness he had granted to those Rebels and Enemies of the Sea of
Rome: for that otherwise he must, unless he would be wanting to his own duty,
be forced, to the great detriment of the Church, to deal more severely with
him, than either his custom, nature, or inclination led him to do: But that he
would by no means let it be thought that he had neglected his duty, having
always before his eyes that instance of divine severity against Eli the
High Priest. That hitherto he had, indeed, used the clemency of a Father, but
that if he obtained nothing now by that means, he must needs take another
course. That he would therefore consider what it became him to do, and whether
it would conduce more to his own honor and interest, to assist his old age, in
recovering the peace of the Church, or to favor those rather, who aimed at
nothing else but the rending of her into pieces.

It was thought that the Pope was put upon it by the French King, on whom he
relied, to write in this manner to the Emperor: for it is credible; that that
King had put odious interpretations and constructions upon the English League,
that he might whet the edge of the Pope. Hence that insinuation in the Letter,
mentioned before, of contracting friendship with ill men: for both of them are
wont by Letters and Ambassadors sollicitously to court the friendship of the
King of England, especially in time of War, and severally strive which can make
himself most acceptable unto him. The Bishop of Winchester's Book against Bucer.
About this time, Stephen Bishop of Winchester published a very reproachful and
bitter Book against Bucer, wherein, amongst other things, he defended the
single life.

This year the Pope created Cardinals, Cardinals created to gratify Princes.
Christopher Madruce Bishop of Trent, Otho Truchses Bishop of Ausburg, Germans;
George d'Armagnac, James Annebaud Kinsman to the Admiral of France, Frenchmen;
Francis Mendoza, Bartholomew de la Cueva, Spaniards: and that to gratify the
Emperor, Ferdinand and King of France. About the same time also he again
summons the Council, The Council is again called.
which had been hindered by the Wars, to meet on the 15th of March, of the
following year: and because the Emperor and French King were now at peace, he
makes a great show of gladness, beginning his Bull of Indiction of the Council,
with that place of Scripture, The Controversy about the Lords Supper is
renewed.
Rejoice, O Jerusalem. At this time also Luther's Book about the Lords Supper
came abroad, wherein he renews the old Controversy, and falls foul upon
Zuinglius and his Adherents; but it was afterward answered by those of Zurich,
and that smartly too.

We mentioned before, how vigorously the Clergy and College of Cologne had
resisted the Archbishop in his intended Reformation. But he still persisting in
the same, by Deputies and Letters again sent to him, they repeat their former
suit, telling him, The Plea of the Clergy of Cologne with the Archbish.
That they had earnestly desired two things of him, some time ago. First, that
he would desist from his purpose, and expect the Decree of the Council; and
then that he would discharge all new Preachers: but that he proceeded, and
would not condescend to their Supplications, which must needs prove very
prejudicial to the whole Province. That therefore they again besought him by
all that was sacred, that being mindful of his own Duty, and the obligation
that lay upon him to the Church of Cologne, the Pope of Rome, and the Emperor,
he would remove those Preachers, and defer the whole matter until it should
come to a public hearing. That unless he did do so, they must implore the
protection of higher Powers, and take such courses as might discharge their
Consciences, and avert the anger of God. That they were unwilling to proceed so
far, but that if he persisted, they must of necessity do so. When by this means
they could not prevail neither, October the ninth they meet in the chief Church
of Cologne, and there read over a Writing, containing, amongst other things,
what was acted at Worms three and twenty years before, when Luther, with
consent of all the Princes, was condemned by the Emperor: what had been done
at Ausbourg, Ratisbonne, and what was lately decreed at Spire. That since
Archbishop Hermon had taken a new course, and setting light by all these
things, had sent for Bucer an Apostate Monk, twice polluted by incestuous
Marriages, and an Assertor of the Sacramentarian Doctrine, whom he employed in
the Ministry, as he everywhere also appointed lewd and profligate Wretches to
be new Teachers of the people. That by the same hands a new Model of
Reformation had been drawn up, and published by command of the Prince. That
they had indeed vigorously protested against all these Innovations, and often,
but in vain, besought the Archbishop, that he would expect the meeting of the
Council, or at least delay till the Diet of the Empire. That now the Province
being in a deplorable condition, and all things tending to confusion, The
Clergy of Cologne appeal to the Pope and Emperor.
without any hopes of condescension on his part, they were necessitated to
betake themselves to the last Remedy, and to appeal to the Pope, and to the
Emperor, the chief Advocate and Protector of the Church of God, and to commit
themselves and all their concerns to their protection. George of Brunswick, the
Brother of Duke Henry, George of Brunswick, President.
and Provost of the College, presided in that Assembly.

When this came to the knowledge of the Archbishop, by a public Writing he
denied that they had any cause for an Appeal: The writing of the Archb* against
the Conspiracy of his Clergy.
that he had done nothing but what was his duty; and therefore that he rejected
the Appeal, hoping that they would let it fall of themselves; but if not, that
he would proceed in those things that concerned the glory of God, and the
Reformation of the Church. In another writing afterward, he refutes their
Accusations; alleging, That he had no private Engagement neither with Luther
nor Bucer, but that he looked upon their Doctrine as being consonant to
Scripture, to be truly Apostolical, and worthy to be embraced by all. That
Luther was indeed condemned by the Church of Rome, but in a violent tyrannical
manner, without being heard. That he knew nothing of that Edict of Worms,
whereby they affirm that Luther was condemned, before it was printed and
published: That whereas then they affirm it to be made with consent of the
Princes, that did not at all concern him, to whom nothing of the matter was
ever communicated. That he never liked that Decree of Ausbourg concerning
Religion: And that when some Princes promised the Emperor great matters at
that time, and offered their lives and fortunes for maintenance of the Popish
Religion, he sent Orders to his Deputies, that they should promise no such
thing; nay, that in express terms they should declare the contrary. But that
they acted not according to their Orders, and that the cause of their silence
was known to some, who now held the chief Rank amongst his Adversaries. Which
being so, he was no ways obliged by that Edict; and that though he might have
been sometimes obliged, yet upon discovery of the truth, he was no longer
bound, seeing no Covenant or Oath that derogates from the honor of God, can
have any force or obligation. That the Decree of Ratisbonne not only permitted,
but also enjoined him and some other Bishops to undertake the Office of
Ecclesiastic Reformation. That his sending for Bucer was chiefly at the
instigation of Gropper, who both personally and by Letters, had very much
commended him to him, as might be made appear. That he found nothing in Bucer
that was unworthy or unbeseeming an honest man: And that it was a great sign he
was so, that the Emperor had employed him in the Conference of Ratisbonne, as
a learned, pious, and peaceable man. That he had the same opinion also of the
other Ministers of the Church appointed by him.

Afterward, The Clergy of Cologne subscribe the Appeal.
November the 18th, the Clergy summon the rest of the States into the City, and
require them to subscribe the Appeal. The same thing also they demand of all
the Churches and Bishops of the Province; nay, of some foreign Universities
also: and having turned out such of their own Order, as refused, they
grievously accuse the Archbishop to the Emperor and Pope, as shall be related
hereafter.

After the Pacification at Soissons, The Emperor's Embassy to the King of
England.
the Emperor sends the Bishop of Arras, Granvill's Son, and the French King,
the Cardinal du Bellaye, to treat jointly of a Peace with the King of England;
but it proved ineffectual, he refusing to restore Bauloigne. At the same time
also the Duke of Orleans, and the Cardinal of Tournon, with some Ladies of the
French Court, take a Progress into the Netherlands, to complement and
congratulate with the Emperor. The Emperor sends his Spanish Forces to
Winter Quarters in Lorrain and the adjacent Countries.

In most places throughout all the Emperors Provinces of the Netherlands, The
Netherlanders love^ of the Reformed Religion.
many were very desirous to be instructed in the Reformed Religion; but
secretly, for fear of the Emperor's Edicts, and the punishments by them
inflicted. Now some people in Tournay, a chief Town in those parts, had invited
thither one Peter Bruley a French Preacher, Peter Bruley burnt.
mentioned in the twelfth Book, from Strasbourg. So soon as he arrived there,
which happened in the month of September, being most kindly received by those
who had invited him, he began to instruct them privately: and having made a
Progress to Lisle, a Town in Flanders, upon the same account, he returned to
Tournay about the end of October following. But the matter was now divulged,
and a strict search made after him throughout the whole City, the Gates for
that end being shut. In this imminent danger, seeing there was no possibility
of concealing him longer, on the second of November, in the nightime, his
Friends let him down over the Town-Wall by a Rope. When he had reached the
ground, he sat down to take a little rest; but one of those who had let him
down, leaning as far as he could over the Wall, that he might softly bid him
farewell, forced out a lose stone with his foot; which casually falling upon
him, broke his leg: so that whilst afflicted with pain and cold, he dolefully
bewailed his sad misfortune, the Watch overheard him, who suspecting what the
matter was, came running in, The Intercession of Strasbourg, and the
Protestants, for Bruley.
laid hold of him, and cast him into prison. So soon as the news of this came
into Germany, the Senate of Strasbourg interceded for him by Letters; which the
Deputies of the Protestants, who then were at Worms, did afterward also, but
that was a little too late: for before the Letters, which were sent in the name
of the Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave, were delivered, he was on the 19th of
February put to death. The manner of his Execution was severe, having been
burnt by a gentle and slow Fire, for his greater torment. He constantly
professed his Doctrine even to the last breath, and writing out of Prison to
his Disciples, who were also in many places in Bonds, he exhorted them to
constancy. His Sentence was, to be put to death, for offending against the
Emperor's Commands: The Emperor's severe Edicts against the Lutherans.
For many years before the Emperor had sent out most severe Edicts against the
Lutherans of the lower Germany, and the Netherlands under his Dominion, which
were twice a year publicly read over in those places, that none might pretend
ignorance. When he was examined in Prison, the Monks, in presence of the
Magistrates, Bruiey's Answer to the Monks Interrogatories.
asked him the Question, What he thought of the Sacrament of the Altar, as they
call it, of the Mass, Consecration, Adoration of the Hosts, of Purgatory, the
Worshipping of Saints, Free Will, good Works, Justification, Images, Baptism,
Vows, Confession of Sins, and of the Virginity of the Blessed Mary. To these he
made answer, That the real Body and Blood of Christ was there received, Of the
Body and Blood of Christ.
not by the Mouth, but spiritually by Faith; and that the substance of the
Bread and Wine was not changed: That when according to Christ's institution,
Christ's Supper is given to the Church in the Vulgar Tongue, so that all may
understand the use and benefit thereof, that then these things are truly
consecrated, and that by the words of Christ; for that that silent Whisper and
Muttering which the Mass-Priests used over the Bread and Wine, did better
become Conjurers and fuglers, Of the Mass.
than Christian Ministers. That the Popish Mass had nothing to do with the
Lords Supper, but was a Worship invented by Man, to the disparagement and
injury of Christ. Of the Adoration of the Bread.
That the Adoration of the consecrated Bread was Idolatry, because a Creature
was there worshipped instead of the Creator. That he knew not, nor looked not
after any other Purgatory, Of Purgatory.
than the Blood of Christ; which pardons not only the guilt, but also the
punishment due to our sins: Of Masses and Prayers for the Dead.
That therefore Masses and Prayers for the Dead, were not only useless, but
impious, as having no warrant from the Word of God. That Saints cannot be more
truly worshipped, than by imitating their Faith and Virtues: that if more be
done, it is impious; How the Saints are truly worshipped.
and that they, when they were in the World, were very far from admitting any
Worship: That therefore they are not to be invoked as Intercessors, which is a
glory belonging to none but Christ. Of Free Will.
That by Adam's Fall, Man's Nature was wholly corrupted, and the Freedom of his
Will forfeited, so that he can do no good, without the grace of God; but that a
regenerated man, moved by God, like a good Tree brings forth good fruits. That
that is Faith, Of Faith.
which brings us salvation, to wit, when we believe the divine promises, and
certainly conclude, that through Christ Jesus our sins are forgiven us. That
Traditions, Of Traditions that enslave Minds.
to which the minds of men are enslaved, are not to be received. That it was
very dangerous to have Statues and Images in Churches, for fear of Idolatry.
That Baptism is the sign of the Covenant that God made with us, Of Images.
whereby he testifies that he will pardon our sins: Of Baptism.
that it is also a sign of perpetual Mortification, and a new Life, which ought
to accompany Baptism: That this Sacrament is to be received by all, and
Children not to be barred from it, seeing they also are Partakers of the divine
promises. That no Vow is to be made, Of Vows.
which either the Word of God does not allow, or that cannot be performed by
man. Of Confession.
That every one ought to confess his sins daily to God, and beg his mercy and
forgiveness: that if the Conscience be disquieted by any scruple, counsel is to
be had of a Minister of the Church, for comforts sake; but that that Auricular
Confession and Enumeration of ones Sins, had neither any warrant in Scripture,
nor was it possible to be done, but was a very dangerous racking of the Mind.
Of the Virginity of the Blessed Mary.
That he never doubted of the Perpetual Virginity of the Virgin Mother. Some
days before he was brought to trial, he wrote of all these things to his Wife,
and the rest of his Friends, who earnestly had begged that of him, making use
of the assistance of his Sister. And being condemned, in another Letter he
acquainted his Wife with the kind of Death he was to suffer the day following;
telling her for her comfort, That the Servants condition ought not to be better
than that of his Master; and prescribing her also some Rules of good Life.

The Divines of Paris, The Assembly of the Divines of Paris at Melun.
two years before, had made some Decrees of Religion, as has been already
mentioned. Now again, by the Kings command, they assemble at Melun, a Town
standing upon the Seine, about ten miles above Paris. The King was in the
neighboring Palace of Fontainbleau, and had summoned them to meet, that since
the Peace being concluded, there was now a Council to be, they might consult
about and resolve upon such necessary Points and Articles for the Church, as
they thought might be defended in the Council, that public Theater of all the
Christian World. The issue of this Convocation was, that though there had been
a great deal of Jangling amonst them, yet they altered nothing in those
Articles, which they had already published at Paris, as has been already said.
In imitation of the Parisians, the Divines of Louvaine draw up Articles also,
and afterward by the Emperor's License publish them. They were in number
thirty two, and exactly of the same kind as those of Paris we mentioned before,
which the Emperor confirmed and established by an Edict. March the 14th, the
Divines published their Letters, signifying that they had the more willingly
put themselves to that pain, because they certainly knew it would be very
acceptable to the Emperor; who had already a good while ago earnestly craved
some such thing to be done. In the Pacification of Soissons it was agreed, as
we said before, that the Emperor and French King should use the utmost of
their power for resetling the ancient Religion, as they called it: so that what
we have been now relating, seems to look that way; and the Cardinal of Tournon,
who had been in Flanders with the Duke of Orleans, was thought to have
contributed not a little to that design. But Luther, Luther's Positions
contrary to those of the Divines of Louvaine.
by contrary positions, answers the Divines of Louvaine, calling them,
Bloud-thristy Heretics, who teaching impious Doctrines, which they could not
make good neither by Reason nor Scripture, betook themselves to force, and
disputed with Fire and Sword. For they, as also the Parisians, laid down only
bare Rules, and directed what was to be followed, but alleged no Texts of
holy Scripture, and withal incited the Magistrate to severity and animadversion.

At that time there was an Imperial Diet held at Worms; An Imperial Diet at
Worms.
but the Emperor who resolved to be there, being hindered by the Gout, came
not to it till it was late. The Deputies he had there, were the Cardinal of
Ausbourg, and Frederick of Furstenberg. March the 24th, The first Session.
in absence of the Emperor, King Ferdinand opens the Diet, telling them, That
it was known to themselves for what that Diet was called, to wit, for settling
Religion, Right, and Peace, and for considering of the Turkish War. That the
Emperor, indeed, wished he might have been present at these Deliberations by
the time appointed, and as it was decreed at Spire, but he could not, because
of his sickness; and that therefore he had prorogued the Diet, first, to to the
second day of January, and then to the first of February: but that seeing his
Disease lasted longer than he expected, he had changed his mind, and that he
might no longer be a hinderance to the public Deliberations, especially those
concerning the Turkish Affairs, he had pressed him to supply his place, which
for the Public sake, to his so small detriment, he had undertaken. That
therefore they should take into deliberation the Affairs of public and common
concern, that when the Emperor himself should come, some things might be in a
readiness to pass into Laws; for that the daily Advices both by Messengers and
Letters, giving a good account of his health, he made no doubt but he would
soon be there for the public good. That for this cause also he had made Peace
with the King of France, his Ally, and had therein preferred the public before
his own private Interest, to wit, that all things being quieted, Religion might
be settled and reformed, and then an Expedition with all force and alacrity made
against the Turks. That the advantage of this Peace extended to all Germany,
and especially to the States of the Empire. That the King of France had also
promised assistance against the Turk, and by his Plenipotentiary Ambassadors
in Flanders, approved the Council of Trent, and resolved to be present at it
himself, or to send thither a most ample Embassy. That the Emperor had
likewise prevailed with the Pope, again to call the Council, which he had
before prorogued: so that the 14th of March past, was the day appointed for its
meeting; to which Ambassadors were already sent both from the Emperor and
himself: That the Emperor having solicited the Pope also, that for the
dignity of his place and character, he would give Aid against the Turk, his
Answer was, that in this Diet he would by his Legate signify what he intended
to do as to that. That they themselves were not ignorant what trouble the
Emperor had been at in procuring a Council to be called: how industriously he
had dealt with Clement VII. at Bononia, afterward with Paul III. at Rome,
Genoa, Nizza, Lucca, and lately at Busset. And that though the Emperor after
the last Diet at Spire, was taken up about most weighty Affairs, yet he had not
neglected what was enacted at Spire, but had employed some good and learned men
to frame a Model of Reformation, which he had also received from them: But that
this being a matter of very great moment, requiring long and serious
deliberation, and that because of the approaching Council, and the threatened
irruption of the Turk, to consult about that reformation was not seasonable,
the Emperor thought it proper, that waving it now, the progress of the ensuing
Council was to be expected. And that if it appeared that there was no Council
like to be, that then before the dissolution of this, another Diet of the
Empire should be appointed upon this very account. As to what concerned the
Peace, and every man's Right, that the Emperor was of opinion, nothing could be
desired but what was by public Edicts already provided: That if Violence or
Injustice were offered to any person, he also thought they might sue for, and
have remedy from the Imperial Chamber. That he likewise entreated them to
consider speedily of raising Money for Subsidies, and of constituting Judges in
the Imperial Chamber; and if perhaps the latter should not be agreed upon, that
they would be pleased to entrust him with that Affair, lest for want of
Jurisdiction the Public might suffer prejudice. That the Emperor had the
Turkish War constantly in his thoughts, and that there had been no War with
that People in this Age, wherein he did not wish himself concerned. That for
that end he had once and again crossed over into Africa, and some years since
marched as far as Vienna with a purpose to engage them. That what he had
promised also at Spire for the safety of Germany, he was ready to make good,
provided they also on their parts contributed the appointed Aids. That
therefore he required them to take that solely and wholly into their
consideration, and because the Season was far spent, to come to a final
resolution about it. That he had frequent Advices that the Grand Seignior
himself was marching into Hungary with greater Forces than ever, that he might
afterward invade Germany. That they should therefore deliberate and resolve,
whether they would attack him, or only defend themselves, and send their
resolutions to the Emperor, who had engaged the Pope and King of France into
the War, and was hopeful also that others would not be wanting; and that if
possibly, because of the streightness of time, and the barrenness of the year,
they should not think it convenient to carry the War into his Country, that
then they should think of making a defense, and raising of Money, that both
they might be able to make head against him in time, and that the Emperor also
being moved by their alacrity and readiness, might carry on the War in person,
as he himself promised long since to do. That in the next Diet, they might
treat of moving the War against the Turk for the recovery of what was lost, and
of Religion; but that their present Consultations required dispatch and
expedition: for that should the thing be longer protracted, the Enemy might
possess themselves of the frontier places and passes of Hungary, and other
adjoining Countries, and so having defeated and broken the Light Horsemen,
which are of greatest use in Hungary, and stopped all intercourse and
communication betwixt places, the people might be reduced to the utmost point
of despair, so as to fall off from us, and submit to the dominion of the Enemy:
which how dangerous a loss that would prove, and how chargeable afterward to be
retrieved, was a thing that all who had eyes must see.

To these things the Protestants, The Protestants make answer to Ferdinand.
and with them the Archbishop of Cologne, and Elector Palatine, make answer on
the third of April, That this Diet was appointed chiefly for the cause of
Religion. That in some former Conferences a way had been opened to a
Reconciliation, which gave greater hopes now of a final Accommodation. That it
would be therefore most acceptable to them, that that Article should first of
all be handled. That it was much the interest of Germany it should be so, and
that if they had the fear of God before their eyes, they did not doubt of
success: But that if either the weightiness of the matter, the shortness of
time, or the imminent danger from the Turks, would not allow it, yet it was
necessary, that that Chapter of the Decree, concerning the Peace, should be
more amply explained. That, indeed, Peace was granted as to matters of
Religion, until a Council should meet; but that they owned not that Council of
Trent for such a lawful Council, as had been promised in the Diet of the
Empire, and that why they did not acknowledge it, they had already often
declared. That therefore they needed such a Peace, as should not be limited to
the Popish Council, but might take place, until the whole affair should in a
Pious and Christian manner be transacted. And that because there could be no
firm and lasting Peace, unless there were an equal administration of Justice,
and that in the last Diet of Spire it had been enacted, what was to be done as
to that particular, they should not be wanting in paying obedience to that
Decree. That if these two points were then decided, The deliberation of the
Popish States.
they would be ready to take the Turkish War into deliberation. The rest of the
Princes and States, and amongst these the Archbishops of Mentz and Treves,
resolved, that the Cause of Religion should be referred to the Council now
called, that the Chamber should be constituted, and Justice administered
according to the written Laws, and that a Committee should be chosen out of all
the States, to advise about the Turkish War. One half of the Subsidies of the
Chamber they promise to pay within six Years, and pray the Emperor to advance
the rest, King Ferdinand, and the Emperor's Deputies, make answer to what the
Protestants urged; King Ferdinand and the Emperor's Deputies Answer to the
Protestants.
That the Decree of Peace made at Spire, at that time pleased them, without any
other caution or exception, tho the Council had then had been called, and
shortly after, again indicted; that fit Men also should be admitted into the
College of the Chamber, according to the Decree of Spire; and that Matters
being so, it was but just they should insist no longer upon that particular,
but consult with the rest about the Turkish War; The Protestants Petition.
To which they reply, That seeing for the shortness of time, and the imminent
danger of the Enemy, Matters of Religion could not be handled, and that no good
was to be expected from the Popish Council, they prayed, that, before the end
of this Diet, the Emperor would appoint another, wherein ways of reconciliation
might in a friendly manner be sought after: That it was decreed at Spire,
first, That no stirs should be raised for Religion, and then, that all
dissension and animosity should, by a pious and friendly debate, be healed and
made up: that upon this foundation the Peace of Germany rested, nor would they
have desired anything more, if things had continued so: But now, when the Pope,
that he might disturb and hinder this reconciliation, has called a Council,
wherein he alone, with those of his party, has the power of deciding, and whose
decision, as all men say, must put an end to the pacification, it was
absolutely necessary for them, that they should have more ample security: nor
was it any new thing, that they required, but the very same, which is contained
in the Decree of Spire: That the reason why they refused the Pope's
Determination and Councils, was long since published to the World, and that
three Years ago, when the Pope by his Legate at Spire, had promised a Council,
they had protested against it, as appears by the public Records: in short,
that as often as any mention had been made of a Popish Council, they had always
rejected it, and that solemnly too in an Assembly of all the States: Now also,
though no such exception was made at Spire, yet, if a War must be carried on
against the Turk, it was necessary, that all things should be first quieted at
home: for Money must be raised of the People for that War; but what color of
Justice can there be to exact Money from Subjects, unless certain hopes may be
given them of living securely with their Wives and Children, in the free
exercise of their own Religion? For the true end of making War against the
Turks, is the safety of the Commonwealth, the preservation of the true
Religion, and the Liberties and Properties of the People: Now to war with the
Turk, and in the mean time to be exposed to danger at home, were two things
that consisted not well together: That therefore the Cause was weighty,
wherefore they desired greater security for themselves: that as for the
Chamber, they were satisfied with what they said, that it should be constituted
according to the prescript of the Decree of Spire: and that they were willing
to confer with the rest about the Subsidies that were to be paid to it. These
Debates lasted all the Month of April, and until the seventh of May: and then,
at length, the Emperor being upon his Journey thither, King Ferdinand commands
them to be put off, until his arrival; but at the same time requires of them,
that in the interim they would, with the rest, consult of the Turkish Affair.
The Protestant Princes themselves were not present, nor the Papists neither,
except the Cardinal of Ausbourg. Grignian the the French Ambassador to the
States.
The King of France sent an Ambassador thither, one Grignian, Governor of
Provence in France: through whose absence there arose a great persecution in
those places.

In Provence, The Persecution of the Waldenses at Merindole.
in France, there are a People called Waldenses; These, by an old custom,
acknowledge not the Pope of Rome, have always professed a greater purity of
Doctrine, and, since Luther appeared, greedily hunted after more knowledge.
Many times had they been complained of to the King, as despisers of
Magistrates, and fomenters of Rebellion, which envious, rather than true,
Accusation, is by most made use of at this day. They live together in some
Towns and Villages, amongst which is Merindole. And about five years since
sentence was pronounced against them in the Parliament of Aix, A cruel Sentence
of the Parliament of Aix against the Waldenses.
the chief Judicature of the Province, That they should all Promiscuously be
destroyed, that the Houses should be pulled down, that Village levelled with
the ground, all the Trees also cut down, and the place rendered a Desert, as we
hinted at in the thirteenth Book. Now though this Sentence was pronounced, yet
it was not then put in execution, William du Bellay of Langey, the King's
Lieutenant in Piemont, Meinier President of the Parliament of Aix.
with some others, having represented the Matter to the King, as a Case that
ought to be reviewed by himself. But at length this Year, John Meinier,
President of the Parliament of Aix, having, April the 12th, called the
Parliament, reads to them the King's Letters, which warranted him to put the
Sentence in execution. Now Meinier is said to have procured thse Letters by
means of the Cardinal of Tournon, Philip Cortine.
and the solicitation of Philip Cortine, a proper Agent in the case. However,
having received them in the Month of January, he produced them not presently,
but kept them up till a season more proper for the exploit. The Letters being
read, some of the Parliament were chosen to see the Matter put in execution, to
whom Meinier offered himself as assistant, because that in the absence of
Grignian, the Governor of the Province, he had the chief command. Before that
time, he had by the King's orders raised Forces for the English War, and these
he makes use of for his purpose: besides these, he commands all that were able
to carry Arms in Marseilles, Forces raised by Meinier against the Waldenses.
Aix, Arles, and other populous places, to repair to him, under severe
Penalties, if they disobeyed, having assistance likewise sent him from the
Country of Avignon, under the dominion of the Pope. The first attempt then was
not made upon those of Merindole, but upon the Country adjoining the Town
Pertuse. April the thirteenth, Meinier, attended by a multitude of Gentlemen
and Officers, came to Cadenet. In the mean time some Captains make an irruption
into one or two Villages upon the River of la Druance, and putting all to Fire
and Sword, plunder and carry away a great many Cattle. The same also was done
in other places, whilst those of Merindole seeing all in a flame about them,
leave their Habitations, fly into the Woods, and in great consternation spend
the night at the Village of Sainfalaise. Now the Inhabitants of that place were
themselves preparing to fly; for the Pope's Vice-Legat had ordered some
Captains to fall upon them, and put them to the Sword. Next day they advance
farther into the Woods: for they were beset on all hands with danger, Meinier
having made it death for any person to aid or assist them, and commanding them
all, without respect, to be killed wherever they were found. The same Edict
was in force in the neighboring places of the Pope's Jurisdiction, and some
Bishops of that Country were reported to have maintained a great part of those
Forces. They had a tedious and uneasy Journey of it then, marching with their
Children on their Backs and in their Arms, nay, and some in the Cradle, poor
Women also big with Child following them. When they were got to the appointed
place, whither many in that forlorn condition had fled, they had intelligence
not long after, that Meinier was mustering together all his Forces, that he
might fall upon them; and this News they learnt toward the Evening. Wherefore,
consulting together what was best to be done, they resolve upon the spot,
because the Ways were rough and difficult, to leave their Wives, Daughters and
little Children there, with some few to bear them company, amongst whom was one
of their Ministers, and the rest betake themselves to the Town of Mus: This
they did in hopes, that the Enemy might show some compassion toward a helpless
and comfortless multitude; but what wailing and lamentation, what sighing and
embracing there was at parting, any man may easily imagine. Having marched all
night long; and passed the Mountain de Leberon, they have the sad prospect of
many Villages and Farms all in a flame. Meinier, in the mean time, having
divided his Forces, sets about the work, and, because he had got intelligence
of the place to which those of Merindole had betaken themselves, he himself
marches to Merindole, and sends the rest of his Men in search and pursuit of
them. But, A Soldier gives the Fugitives forewarning.
before these were come into the Wood, one of the Soldiers, moved with pity,
runs before, and from the top of a Rock, in the place where he judged the poor
Fugitives might have rested, he threw down two stones, calling to them by
intervals, though he did not see them, that they should presently fly for their
lives. And at the same instant, two of those who had betaken themselves to Mus
come; and having got notice of the Enemies approach, advise the Minister of the
Church, and the rest of those few Guards that, as we said, were left with the
Women, to be gone, having showed them a steep way through the Wood, by which
they might escape all danger in their flight. Hardly were these gone, when the
raging Soldiers came in shouting and making a heavy noise, and with drawn
Swords preparing for the butch^ry. However, at that time they forbear to kill,
but having committed many insolences, and robbed the poor things of all their
Money and Provisions, they carry them away Prisoners. They had purposed to have
used them more basely, but a Captain of Horse prevented it, who by chance
coming in, threatened them, and commanded them to march straight to Meinier; so
that they proceeded no farther, but leaving the Women there, who were about
five hundred in number, they carry off the Cattle and Booty. In the mean time
Meinier came to Merindole, and finding it forsaken by the Inhabitants ^he
plunders and sets it on fire, which was ushered in by a very cruel action; for
having found there one single Youth, Merindole is burnt.
he commands him to be tied to an Olive Tree, and there shot to death. Cabriere
surprised by craft.
He marches next to Cabriere, and begins to batter the Town; but, by the
mediation of Captain Poulain, he persuades the Towns people, upon promise of
indemnity, Is demolished.
to open the Gates; which being done, and the Soldiers let in, after a little
pause, all were put to the Sword, without respect to Age or Sex. Many fled to
the Church, others to other places, and some into the Wine-Cellar of the
Castle; but being halled out into a Meadow, and stripped naked, they were all put
to the Sword, not only the Men, but also the Women, and many of these with
Child too. A honorable piece of Cruelty of Meinier.
Meinier also shuts up about forty Women in a Barn full of Hay and Straw, and
then sets it on fire: and after that, the poor creatures having attempted, but
in vain, to smother the fire with their Clothes, which for that end they had
pulled off, betook themselves to the great Window, at which the Hay is commonly
pitched up into the Barn, with a purpose to leap down from thence, they were
kept in with Pikes and Spears, so that all of them perished in the flames; and
this happened the twentieth of April. Meinier after this sends part of his
Forces to besiege the Town of Cost: but when they were just upon their march,
those were found, who, as we said a little before, had fled into the
Wine-Cellar of the Castle: a noise being thereupon raised, as if there had been
some ambush laid, the Soldiers are recalled, The number of the slain.
who put every Man of them to the Sword. The number of the slain, as well in
the Town as abroad in the Fields, amounted to Eight hundred. The young Infants,
which survived the fury, were for the most part rebaptized by the Enemy.
Affairs thus dispatched at Cabriere, the Forces are sent to Cost: The Lord of
that Town had transacted beforehand with the Inhabitants, that they should
carry their Arms into the Castle, and in four places make breaches in their
Walls: which if they did, he promises them, that he would use his interest,
which he knew could easily prevail with Meinier, that they should receive no
damage. Being over-perswaded, they obey; and he departs with a purpose
seemingly to treat and intercede for them; but he was not gone far, before the
Soldiers met him; Cost is taken, and the Inhabitants most barbarously used.
who nevertheless proceeded in their march, and attacked the place. At first
onset they did but little, but next day they more briskly renew the assault;
and having burnt all the Suburbs about, they easily become Masters of the
place, and the rather, that the Night before, most had deserted the Town and
fled, having got down over the Walls by Ropes. After the victorious had put all
that stood in their way to Fire and Sword, they run into a Garden adjoining the
Castle, and there satiate their Lust upon the Women and young Girls
promiscuously, who in great fear and consternation had fled thither; and for a
Day and Night's time, that they kept them shut up there, so inhumanly and
barbarously they used them, that the big bellied Women, and younger Girls
shortly after died of it. In the mean time the Merindolanes, and many others,
who wandered with them over the Woods and Rocks, being taken, were either sent
to the Galleys, or put to death, and many also were starved. Not far also from
the Town of Mus; we mentioned before, some five and twenty Men had got into a
Cave, and kept lurking there, but being betrayed, all of them were either
smothered with smoke, or burnt: so that no kind of cruelty was omitted. Some
however, that had escaped this butchery, The Intercession of the Swizers for
the Merind^lanes.
got to Geneva, and the places thereabouts. Now when the News of this was
brought into Germany, many were highly offended thereat; and the Swizers, who
are not of the Popish Religion, interceded with the French King, that he would
be merciful to those who had fled their Country: But the King made them
answer, The King's Answer to the Swiss.
that he had just cause for what he had done; and that what he did within his
own Territories, and how he punished the guilty, concerned them no more to
know, than it did him what was done amongst them. The Year before the Waldenses
had sent the King a Confession of their Faith in Writing, thereby to clear
their innocence: The Heads of the Waldensian Doctrine.
And the Heads of their Doctrine are, Of God the Father, Creator of all things.
Of the Son, the Mediator and Advocate for Mankind. Of the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter and Teacher of Truth. Of the Church, which they say is the
Congregation of all the Elect, and has Jesus Christ for the Head. Of the
Ministers of the Church, who they say are to be turned out, if they perform not
their Duty. Of the Magistrate, whom they confess to be God's Minister, for
protecting the Good, and punishing the Bad: that not only Honor, but also
Tribute and Custom is due to them, according to the example of Christ, who
himself paid Custom. Of Baptism, which they say is an external and invisible
Sign, which represents to us both the renewing of the Spirit, and the
mortification of the Members. Of the Lord's Supper, which they say is a giving
of thanks, and commemoration of the benefits received by Christ. Of Matrimony,
which being a holy thing, and instituted by God, they think ought not to be
denied to any. Of Good Works, which they teach, are to be done and practiced,
as the Holy Scriptures declare. Of false Doctrines, which, because they lead us
away from the true Worship, they say ought to be avoided. In short, they
allege the Old and New Testament for the Rule of their Faith, and profess to
believe all that is contained in the Apostles Ceeed. Lastly, They pray the King
to give credit to their relation, for that, if any other report be made of
their Belief and Doctrine, they offer to prove it false, provided they may be
heard. The King was then engaged in a War, and therefore the Matter rested; but
Peace being made, it broke out again, and, at the instigation of some, flamed
into this so heinous a cruelty.

Mention was made before of the Spaniards, whom the Emperor had sent into
Winter Quarters in Lorrain: The Spaniards marched through Germany into Austria.
These having done a great deal of mischief in those places, by orders from the
Emperor, take the Field in the Month of April, and having marched to
Strasbourg, and passed the Rhine there, they advance through Shwabia into
Austria, to the number of Three thousand Foot. At this time died Louis, The
Death of Louis Duke of Bavaria.
Duke of Bavaria, the Brother of William, leaving no Issue behind him; for it
had been agreed betwixt them, that he should not Marry, that the Inheritance
might not be dismembered. Great friendship and familiarity past betwixt him and
Henry Duke of Brunswick. For, as we said, they were the chief of the League
made against the Protestants, and the Duke of Brunswick being driven out of his
Country, The Emperor and Cardinal Farnese come to Worms.
fled first to him. The Emperor came now to Worms, May the sixteenth; and
next day Cardinal Farnese. I dare not affirm, what the cause of this Man's
coming was; but it was certainly thought, that he came to stir up a War against
the Lutherans: He acted, indeed, nothing publicly, nor in his way from Rome
did he pass through the Duke of Wirtemberg's Country, but resting sometime at
Delinghen, a Town upon the Danube, belonging to the Cardinal of Ausbourg, he
struck off another way. King Ferdinand had written to the Duke of Wirtembourg,
that for his sake he would give him safe conduct, and be civil to him; to which
the Duke made answer, that he had rather, indeed, he had taken any other way;
but that nevertheless, if he had a mind to pass through his Country, for his
sake he should be welcome. But he, as we said, took another way, and came to
Worms the day after the Emperor arrived. The Emperor having made Peace with
the King of France, solicited also some other Potentates, that they would
assist at the ensuing Council; and taking that occasion, his Ambassador, whom
he sent to the King of Poland, The Emperor's Embassy to the King of Poland.
declared to him, That for many Years now past, it had been the Emperor's
chief care, that all Christians in the World would undertake a common War
against the Turk, and that now almost all were inclinable to it; but that the
Controversy about Religion was the only hindrance to the same: now that that
might be removed, and that the desire of the Protestants might be satisfied,
who still insisted upon a Council, after much pains and care, the Emperor had
now procured a Council to be called at Trent: That therefore he besought him,
that he would send his Ambassadors thither, who by their presence might honor
that solemn Assembly, and confirm the Decrees that should be made therein
concerning religious matters: But that because the Emperor thought that the
Protestants, who were always obstinate, would neither forsake the Confession of
Ausbourg, nor yet obey the public Decrees, the thing it self required, that
Kings and Princes should interpose, and unless they did obey, fall upon them as
the disturbers both of Church and State: Now seeing he amongst others had the
reputation of a Pious and Christian King, it was the Emperor's desire, that he
would both think of the Turkish War, and subscribe to the Council of Trent, and
that if the Protestants returned not to their Duty, he would assist him with
Council and Force, which other Kings had likewise promised to do. The King of
Poland's Answer to the Emperor.
The King of Poland's answer was, That he longed to see that day, when
Christian Kings and Princes, putting an end to all civil and intestine Wars,
would convert their united Forces against the Turk, and that then he should not
be the last: That as to the Council and Protestants, he would do any thing that
might conduce to the tranquillity of Church and State; nor would he be wanting,
on occasion, to assist the Emperor, his Friend and Allie, in his greatest
dangers.

At that time, The Pope very greedy of Lutheran blood.
it was written from Rome, That though the Pope had called the Council, and
sent his Legates already to Trent, yet he was so desirous of a Lutheran War,
that he had promised an assistance of Twelve thousand Foot and Five hundred
Horse: that Captains and other Officers were also secretly listed by him: but
when it was represented to him, that the Season was too far spent for doing any
important Action, and that another occasion was to be expected, he had
presently communicated the same to his Commanders, and put them in hopes
against the next Year. A bloody Sermon of a Franciscan Friar.
On Whitsun-munday, an Italian Franciscan Friar, preached before the Emperor,
King Ferdinand, Cardinal Farnese, the Bishop of Ausbourg, Granvell, etc. and in
his Sermon, digressing to the Lutherans, after he had bitterly inveighed
against them, It is time, said he, most powerful Emperor, that at length you
do your Duty: too long, indeed, have you delayed: the business ought to have
been done long since. God has honored you with great Blessings, and made you
the Defender of his Church: wherefore exert your strength, and utterly destroy
that pestilent sort of Men. For it is not fit they should longer see the Sun,
who so defile and confound all things: nor must you say it shall be done; for
now, even now, I say, it ought to be done, and no delay interposed. How many
thousand Souls do you think are in daily danger of eternal damnation, through
their madness? all which, unless you apply a Remedy, God will require at your
hands. It is said, that Granvell was offended at that alarm, Cardinal Farnese
parts from Worms for Rome.
either that he counterfeited displeasure, or that he perceived, it gave the
Protestants a warning to be upon their guard. Not many days after that Sermon,
Cardinal Farnese departed secretly in the nighttime, and made all have back to
Rome.

Much about the same time was published Luther's Book, written in the Vulgar
Language, Luther's Book against the Papacy of Rome.
with this Title, Against the Papacy of Rome, constituted by Satan: in which
Book he first answers the Pope's Brief; wherein, in a high strain, he dehorted
the Emperor from meddling with the Administration of Religion, as we mentioned
before: then he most amply refutes those places of Scripture which the Pope
makes use of for the confirmation of his Supremacy, and retorts them upon him.
A Picture set before the Book.
He put a Picture before his Book, which plainly represented the Subject
thereof. The Pope sitting in a lofty Cheer, stretching forth his joined Hands
in solemn pomp, but with the Ears of an Ass: a great many Devils of various
shapes surround him, of which some set a triple Crown upon his Head, with a
Sir-reverence on the top of it: others with Ropes let him down into the middle
of Hell, looking dreadfully underneath: others bring Wood and Coal: and others
again, in an officious manner, lift up his Feet, that he may go straight and
easily down. Not long after came forth some of his Theses, Luther's Theses of
the three Hierarchies.
that he had sometime defended, of the three Hierarchies, the Ecclesiastic,
Politic, and Economick, which he says, God has instituted against the rage
of the Devil. But from all the three he excludes the Pope, because he condemns
and stifles the Gospel, raises himself above all Laws and Ordinances, forbids
Marriage to whom he pleases, and therefore says he is the Beast, which over
Germany has its name from a Woolf and Bear. Nothing is fiercer, says he,
nothing more cruel than it: wherefore when the sign is given, or a rumor
started, all presently run to their Arms, that they may kill it: now if
perchance it were kept up in a Cage, or within a Fence, and the Governor or
Judge of the place, should take it out, or defend it, nevertheless it were to
be pursued, and they that should stop or hinder the pursuers, might be safely
assaulted: In the very same manner, if the Pope prepare Men and Arms, and make
War, he is to be resisted, as a cruel and raging wild Beast, whatsoever aids,
helps and assistances he may have. For those who fight for or assist a Robber,
ought to expect the Reward they deserve. He published also another Picture,
ridiculous enough, indeed, but a prognostic of what afterward happened. The
Pope in his Pontificals is riding on and spurring a great Sow with large Duggs:
with the two first fingers of the right hand, stretched forth in the usual
manner, he blesses those that chance to be in his way: in his left hand he
holds a new reeking Sir-reverence, the smell whereof makes the Sow turn up her
Snout, and, gaping, snatch at the Prey: but he scornfully and bitterly chiding
the Beast, I must ride thee, and spur thee too, said he, whether thou will or
not: thou have troubled me long enough about a Council, that thou may
traduce and freely accuse me: take here then that Council, thou keep such a
clutter about. By the Sow he meant Germany. Most Men censured those ludicrous
trifles of his, as immodest and unworthy of him: but he had his own reasons why
he did do so, and it was thought his prospect reached farther than other men's;
for there are many Prophesies to be found here and there in his Books
concerning most weighty Matters, The Emperor's Treaty with the Protestants.
some of which the effect has verified already, and the rest are still in the
hand of God. The Emperor in the mean time employs Granvel and Navis to treat
with the Protestants about the Council and the Turkish War. For that end they
choose Francis Burcart, Gunter Chancelour of Hess, Christopher Veninger, and
James Sturmey, who in few words repeal all their former Plea, and so desire to
have security for the Peace, that it may not be frustrated by a Decree of the
Council: moreover, that the Imperial Chamber may be constituted according to
the Decree of Spire: And if these things be done, that they would be ready to
consult with the rest about Public Affairs. To this the others replied, That
it was not in the Emperor's power to grant their Demands, to wit, that he
should exempt them from the Decrees of the Council, and grant them such a
Peace, as might excuse them from obeying the same, to whose Authority all are
subject; for what excuse could the Emperor make for that, to other Kings and
Princes? or to what end should there be a Council, if Germany alone, for whose
sake it is chiefly called, should have the liberty to submit to it or not? On
the other hand, the Deputies give their Reasons why they did not own it for a
lawful Council: that their public Declarations concerning that matter, were
extant also: that if Assistances were to be given against the Turk, they had
need that security should be given them, that whatever the Decrees of the
Council proved to be, they should not suffer violence. To this again it was
returned, That they might appear in Council, and there declare the Reasons why
they suspected it of partiality: they should there be heard; for it was not the
Pope that had all the power: that if then the Proceedings seemed unjust, it
might be refused; but that now they spoke of things future, and passed a
judgment upon matters that were not yet in being; which was a little too great
precipitancy in them. To this the Deputies say, That the Pope and all his
Faction had already long ago condemned their Religion, and severely punished
the Professors of it: that therefore there was no necessity, that they should
come, and there make their declinatories: But that the only way to pacify
Germany, would be, in a mild and friendly way* to examine and inquire after the
truth, since nothing but mischief was to be expected from a Council, overruled
by the Pope. Grignian, Ambassador from the King of France, The Plea of
Grignian, the French Ambassador.
because he could not speak Latin, drew up what he had to say in Writing, and
had it delivered by an Interpreter, June the 20th. The sum of which was, That,
by God's blessing, the King his Master was reconciled to the Emperor, and that
a Peace was made, which would be profitable to all Christendom; That the King
his Master, for the love he bore to Germany, and because of his ancient League,
would be extremely pleased, if they also could agree among themselves about
Matters of Religion: for, because of that difference, much calamity had
befallen Christendom, which daily grew greater and greater: that since then
there was no better way of curing all those Evils, than a Council, and that the
same was already called, and almost began at Trent, the Emperor, and the King
his Master, had resolved, that all things should be done legally and in order,
and that Offenses being removed, Concord might be reestablished, and the wished
for Peace restored to Germany: that therefore the King besought them, that,
after the example of other Kings and Princes, they also would approve the
Council; as being the way to procure their own safety. Grignian was an intimate
friend of the Cardinal of Tournon, who is thought to have been the Author of
this Embassy. For, as we said before, he had been in Flanders, and treated
there of Matters relating to the Council: and then it was so concerted, that
the King of France by an Ambassador should also exhort them to the Council,
which the Emperor and he had already approved: for it was thought, that this
would strike a terror into the Protestants.

At this time Francis, Francis, Duke of Lorrain, dies.
Duke of Lorrain, died, leaving behind him a young Son, two Years old. He had a
Brother, named Nicholas, Bishop of Metz, who contended with the Mother of the
Child, Christina, the Emperor's Niece, about the Guardianship of the Heir. The
Nobility inclined more toward him, disdaining the government of a Woman, but
by the intercession of the Emperor, both were admitted to the Administration,
King Ferdinand's Daughter dies.
yet so, that the Mother had the chief Authority. About the same time also died
the Daughter of King Ferdinand, whom Sigismond, the King of Poland's Son had
married two Years before. The Birth of Charles, the Son of Philip, King of
Spain.
But glad-tydings were brought from Spain, of the Birth of Charles, Grandson to
the Emperor, by his Son Philip; for which there was great rejoicing made by
the Spaniards at Worms: but a few days after News came of the Death of the
Emperor's Daughter-in-law. The Emperor's Daughter-in-law dies.
The Marquess of Piscara came to the Emperor at Worms, bringing with him some
of the chief Quality in Milan. It is thought that the Emperor was then
resolved, Piscara comes to Worms.
to give the Daughter of King Ferdinand in Marriage to the Duke of Orleans, and
had therefore sent for them, that he might learn of them the state of Milan,
which he had promised her in Dowry, as we said before.

Whilst the Emperor is holding this Diet, The Duke of Brunswick chouses the
French King of Money.
the Duke of Brunswick make a Progress to the King of France. At that time
Frederick Riffenberg was raising Foot Soldiers for the Service of the King of
England, upon the Borders of Saxony. The Duke of Brunswick eying the occasion,
promises and persuades the King, that if he did furnish him with Money, he
would easily disperse them, and thereupon got of him some thousands of Crowns;
but, after all, he gave no disturbance to Riffenberg, and made use of the Money
he had received to make War with against the Protestants, as shall be related
hereafter. None of the Princes, as we said before, came to this Diet, neither
Protestant nor Papists, except the Cardinal of Ausburg: but when the Emperor
himself was come, the Elector Palatine came also, and, at the desire of the
Protestants, made intercession. Now when the Emperor perceived, The Emperor
makes a Truce with the Turk.
that they would contribute nothing toward the Turkish War, unless they were
satisfied in the Points of the Council and Imperial Chamber, he sent Gerard
Feldwig, a most learned Man, and skilful in Languages, Ambassador to the Turk,
to treat of a Truce. During this Diet, the Senate of Metz made enquiry after
those who, The Senate of Metz inquire after Protestants.
according to the Popish custom, had not lately at Raster taken the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper; and such as were found faulty, they banished the Town.

It has been mentioned before, The Archbishop of Cologne is cited by the
Emperor and Pope.
how that the Clergy and College of Cologne, appealed to the Emperor and
Pope, that by that means they might put a stop to the attempts of the
Archbishop. But seeing he still went on, and would not remove the Ministers of
the Church, which was the thing they most desired, they made heavy complaints
of him to the Emperor, and again implored his help. About the end therefore of
June, The Emperor takes the Clergy and College of Cologne into his protection.
the Emperor, by Letters published at Worms, takes them into his protection,
and, under pain of proscription, commands, that no man hinder or molest them in
their Religion, Possessions, Revenues and Rights. Then, by other Letters, he
summons the Archbishop within thirty days, either to appear personally before
him, The Archbishop of Cologne is cited.
or to send his Proctor, and to answer the Accusations that were brought
against him: In the mean time he commands him to make no Stirs no Innovations;
and if any Innovations be made, that things be restored into their ancient and
former state. The same Commands he lays upon the Inhabitants of Andernach,
Bonn, Lintz and Campen; for in those places chiefly the Archbishop had placed
Preachers to teach the people. Afterward, July the eighteenth, Paul III. cites
him in the same manner, that within threescore days he appear at Rome: He also
cites Henry Stolberg, Dean of the chief Church of Cologne, and his Colleagues,
all well-born Gentlemen, James Ringrave, Frederick Wenden, Christopher
Oldenburg, Richard Bavar, and Philip Oberstein: for these loved the Archbishop,
and disapproved the action of the rest. The Pope, indeed, for many years had
entertained a prejudice against the Archbishop: The Pope's prejudice against
the Archbishop.
which was in a great measure occasioned by Vergerio, Bishop of Justinople; who
being Nuncio in Germany, as has been said oftener than once before, came to
Cologne, and hearing that he had a mind to reform his Church, took him up for
it very sharply, both in Discourse and by Letters, and accused him of the same
after he was returned home.

After many long and tedious Debates, about the Council, Peace, Imperial
Chamber, and Turkish War, as has been before mentioned, on the fourth of
August, the Emperor puts an end to the Session, telling them, that because
most part of the Matters could not be handled, unless the Princes were present,
and that some of the Deputies had not full Instructions for acting in all
things, he prorogued the Diet, and all farther action, to the Month of January
of the following Year, An Assembly and Conference appointed at Ratisbonne.
and commanded all the Princes to come to Ratisbonne, unless they should be
detained by sickness, promising also to be there himself. That truly he chiefly
wished for a pacification in Religion, but that they all knew, why nothing of
it could be undertaken in this Diet: but that at length differences might be
made up, he appointed another Conference of learned Men, Conferours are
appointed for the pacification of Religion.
four on each side, and two Moderators, whom he commanded (...); at Ratisbonne,
by the first of December, and to begin the Conference before the meeting of the
Diet. Then he renewed and confirmed the Edicts of Peace of the preceding year,
and ordered, that nothing should be done in prejudice of them. What Money was
raised for the Turkish War, by virtue of the Decree the Year before, he orders
to be kept, until the War be resolved upon, and where it has not as yet been
collected, to be forthwith with raised and gathered. The Reformation of the
Imperial Chamber, he refers to the next Diet. In the mean time he allows and
continues their Jurisdiction. The Papists refused that Head of the Decree which
related to the Conference of learned Men, The Papists refuse the Conference.
nor would they therein assent to the Emperor, though they agreed to the rest.
The Protestants again repeat their former Plea, saying, it was none of their
fault, that the point of Religion was not discussed. And what they had said
before, concerning their refusing the Council and Imperial Chamber, they again
insist upon, urging the Decree of Spire the Year before, and professing, that
they did not admit of this Decree of the Emperors, wherein it differed from
that. How the Ambassadors of the Protestants, because of the sequestration,
followed the Emperor's Camp the Year before; and how the Emperor referred the
Action to another time, The Duchy of Brunswick adjudged to the Emperor.
we mentioned already. Now in this Diet the Matter was finally decided, and all
the Duchy of Brunswick adjudged to the Emperor. Who forthwith commanded Duke
Henry to try the Matter by Law, and abstain from Arms. The stubbornness of the
Duke of Brunswick.
But he refused to submit, and protested against it. And when the Emperor
again, in a threatening strain, and under pain of the Imperial Ban, commanded
him to obey, he not only refused, but also wrote back a sharp Letter, odiously
reflecting upon his Counselors, Granvell and Naves especially: nor yet
satisfied, he began secretly to raise Troops, that he might recover what he had
lost, as by and by shall be related. From Worms, the Emperor came down the
Rhine to Cologne, and from thence returned home. The Archbishop of Cologne,
because he had been cited to appear personally before the Emperor, or to send
one in his Name, The Elector of Cologne sends a Proctor to the Emperor.
within thirty days, though by the ancient custom of Germany, and privilege of
the Electors, he was not obliged to appear before the Emperor, without the
limits of the Empire, nevertheless sent thither a Proctor to make his defense.

At that time the War betwixt France and England was hot, War betwixt the
French and English at Bologne.
both by Land and Sea, and the French King was building a Fort near to Bologne,
which he had lately lost, that he might intercept their Provisions; and, that
the Work might not be interrupted, nor the English suffered to roam abroad, he
covered it with an Army. Now it grieved the Protestants to see those two Kings
in War, who for so many Years had entertained peace together. Wherefore when
they understood that it would not be unpleasing to neither party, they sent
Ambassadors to treat of Peace; to France, Christopher Veninger, John Bruino,
and John Sturmey: to England, Lodovick Bambach, and John Sleidan. When on the
tenth of September they were come to Amiens, there they had the News of the
Death of the Duke of Orleans, The Death of the Duke of Orleans.
who died the day before. He was to have been the Emperor's Son-in-law, or
allied to him by Marriage, (as has been already said) and so a most firm
pledge of perpetual friendship; but now, much about the time the Marriage was
to have been solemnized, an accute Disease snatched away the Youth, in the
Twenty third Year of his Age.

At the very same time, The Duke of Brunswick takes the field.
Henry, Duke of Brunswick, supplied, as we said before, with French Gold,
raises Troops, as secretly as he could; and, having mustered Fifteen hundred
Horse, and Eight thousand Foot, he marches toward Rotenbourg, a Town in the
Country of Bremen, that he might join the Artillery of his Brother, the
Archbishop of Bremen. But his attempt was in vain; for the Senate of Bremen had
before sent Men to defend the place. Wherefore, having marched through the
Country of Lunenbourg, and done much hurt in his passage, he enters into his
own Country, He takes Stembruck.
and takes the Castle of Stembruck upon capitulation: having afterward wasted
the Country by pillage and fire, he demands satisfaction of the neighboring
Cities of Brunswick, Hanover, Minden, Bremen, and Hambourg, for the injuries
received from them, and that they should renounce the Conspiracy of Smalcalde,
for so he called it; if not, that they might expect the worst. Another Body of
his Forces, consisting of about Eight hundred Horse, and Three thousand Foot,
having by plundering and fire harassed the Country of the Count of
Teckelnbourg, one of the Protestant Allies, they pass the Weser, and join his
Army. Whereupon he besieges Wolfembottle, the chief Castle of his Territories,
and every where makes the People swear Allegiance to him. The Landgrave's
Expedition against the Duke of Brunswick.
The Landgrave, in the mean time, by orders from his Allies, raises in his own
Territories Seven thousand and some three Ensigns of Foot, and about Sixteen
hundred Horse, and with that Body, and Three and twenty Fieldpieces, marches
to Northeim. Thither came to him Duke Ernest of Brunswick, the Son of Philip,
being sent by the Elector of Saxony with a Thousand Horse, Three thousand Foot,
Six thousand of the Forces newly raised in his Territories, and twelve
Fieldpieces. Duke Maurice also, the Landgrave's Son-in-law, came in, bringing
with him a Thousand Horse, about Five thousand Foot, and some Fieldpieces. The
Duke of Brunswick having intelligence of this, left the Siege of the Castle,
which was valiantly defended by the Garrison, and drew off; and having raised
what Money he could, paid his Soldiers, who now began to fall off, and then
marching forwards, came and encamped near to Calfeld, a Village about a Mile
distant from the Landgrave's Camp. In this state of Affairs, Duke Erick of
Brunswick, and his Mother, a Widow Lady, John, Marquess of Brandenburg,
Son-in-law to Duke Henry, with some others, mediate for a Peace: But the
Landgrave and Saxons affirming, that they had no power to treat of any such
thing, without the advice and consent of the Confederates; they therefore
address themselves to Duke Maurice, and entreat him, that he would persuade his
Father-in-law. This he undertook, and being come into the Camp, which was on
the sixteenth of October, he propounds the matter, and desires a Treaty. The
Landgrave, in the same manner, as we said before, excuses himself. So that next
day some Troops of Brunswick's Horse, draw nearer to Northem, and skirmish with
the Landgravians, but being beaten off with great shot, they return into their
Camp. Maurice interceeds for Peace.
The same day, toward the Evening, Maurice again presses the Landgrave; and
because he had promised to Duke Henry and his Relations, to use his endeavors,
he desires conditions to be proposed, that if Duke Henry did refuse them, he
might have a fair excuse from acting any farther. The Landgrave then offers
such conditions, as it was not to be doubted, but that they would be refused.
Duke Maurice sends Christopher Elleben, and Comerstat, a Lawyer, to carry the
Proposals unto him: But, in the mean time, News is brought, that the Duke of
Brunswick approached with all his Forces, that he might possess himself of a
Hill adjoining the Landgrave's Camp. However, the Landgrave got the start of
him, and having left three Troops of Horse, and some Companies of Foot, to
guard the Camp, draws out all his Army to that Hill, and not long after both
parties began to skirmish. In the mean time Duke Maurice his Ambassadors
return, and acquaint their Master, that Duke Henry had answered frankly, that
he would refer himself wholly to Maurice, and not trouble those of the
Protestant Religion any more for the future. The Langrave being informed of
this, and Duke Maurice pressing the matter hard, after some little debate
betwixt them, the Landgrave tells him, The Conditions of Peace proposed.
that the only Conditions of Peace were, That he should give security not to
molest the Protestants; deliver himself up to Maurice; surrender into his hands
his whole Country; and that he should stand to what Maurice should determine
concerning the Charges and Damages of the War, and the Controversy of Goslar.
The Landgrave gave liberty to Duke Maurice, as Mediator, to propose those
Conditions himself, telling him, that if he received them, after he had
acquainted the Duke of Saxony and the neighboring Cities therewith, they
should come to a conclusion. Maurice sends again Agents with these Proposals;
who being returned, affirm, that there was good hopes of the matter, but that
in the noise and tumult of War, whilst there was nothing but clashing of Arms
on either side, nothing could be well done; and that therefore there was need
of a Cessation, to treat of the Affair. It was now toward night, wherefore the
Landgrave allowed a Cessation for the rest of that day, A Truce granted.
and all next day, until the evening. In the mean time Duke Maurice had a
Conference with Duke Henry, that he might persuade him: but he rejected all the
Conditions proposed, offered others of a far different nature, and in a
Conference with some of Maurice's Counselors, told them, Duke Henry breaks the
Truce.
Within these three Hours, said he, it shall be seen whether the Landgrave, or
I, be Master of the World, as Hannibal said to Scipio: Nay, besides, he broke
the Truce, having fallen upon the Landgrave's Foragers. So soon then as the
Landgrave was made acquainted with the Conditions proposed by Duke Henry, he
breaks off the Treaty, and thanks Duke Maurice for his Mediation. October the
20th. Duke Henry, by some of his Counselors, again sollicits Maurice, and
desires a meeting in some convenient place betwixt the two Camps: but the
Landgrave refused it, wherefore Duke Maurice also declares War against Duke
Henry, as he had foretold him, by Letters from Mulhausen, unless he did agree
to a Peace. And now, in the dead of the night, the Landgrave sent before a
Detachment of eight Troops of Horse, and about a thousand Foot, with twelve
pieces of Cannon, under the command of Conrad Hansteen; whilst he, with the
rest of the Army, and the Dukes Maurice and Ernest, follow after. About break
of day, the Vanguard came to a Pass upon a rising ground, not far from Duke
Henry's Camp, and afterward the Landgrave arrived with the rest of the Army.
Here happened a sharp conflict, and because of the narrowness of the ground,
which could only be passed in one place, A Fight betwixt Brunswick and the
Landgrave.
the Fight was for some time doubtful: but in the nick of time, the Landgrave
fired upon the Enemy, and beat them back: and after a Council of War, when in
other places the Pass had been opened, he advanced with part of his Army, and
played upon the Enemy with his Ordinance. Then Brunswick sends a Trumpeter to
Duke Maurice, and desires a Parley: but the Landgrave giving no answer, marches
through first his whole Army, and draws them up in batallia, thundering upon
the Enemy with his Artillery. Then again two Messengers come from Duke Henry,
and earnestly demand the same thing: to whom the Landgrave, There is no other
condition of Peace, said he, than that Duke Henry and his eldest Son deliver
themselves up into my hands: if they will do so, well; but if not, I Will try what
I can do. Go tell him this from me; and dispatch what ye do. Here again Duke
Maurice applied himself to his Father-in-law; All the Army, said he, is now got
through the Pass: but what is there no hopes of Peace? None, answered he,
unless Duke Henry and his Son surrender themselves to me. If they will not, I
ll try the issue of a Battle. Duke Maurice having got this answer, goes and
discourses Duke Henry. Nevertheless the Landgrave proceeds to action, keeps
firing, draws nearer the Enemy, and halts about five hundred yards short of
them, sending Duke Maurice word by Conrad Hansteen, that he could not desist,
lest, under pretext of a Conference, Duke Henry might escape. Maurice sends
back word, that he must stay a little, till he had spoken with him, and prays
him, that he would so long forbear. A little after he comes back, bringing
word, that Duke Henry, with floods of tears, bewailed his misfortune, and was
willing, both he and his Son, to render themselves prisoners; but withal,
prayed him, that he would not be too harsh in upbraiding of him. When Duke
Henry, with his Son, Charles Victor, was come into the Landgrave's presence,
The Duke of Brunswick surrenders himself with his Son, to the Landgrave.
the Langrave told him, Were I now in you power, as you are in mine, I should
not have long to live: yet I will use you more generously than you deserve. But
how came it into your mind, to disobey the Emperor, by rejecting the
Sequestration? for had you submitted to it, you might have provided for
Yourself and Family. Having spoken to this purpose, he puts them both under
Guards; but, in the mean while, the Landgrave's Army had like to have come to
blows with the Enemy, and, if the Landgrave and Duke Maurice had not with all
speed interposed, there had been a great slaughter. Duke Henry's Forces thought
of marching off in an entire Body, but because there was danger lest they might
again take occasion of coming to action, the Landgrave follows them, and coming
up with them in an open Plain, compels them to tear their Colors, and take an
Oath, that within six Months time they should not carry Arms against him or his
Confederates. He then takes from them all their Artillery, (amounting to
eighteen pieces of Ordinance) and Ammunition; and, marching forwards, recovers
Stenbruck-Castle, makes the People again swear Fealty to him, gives God thanks
for his Victory, punishes John, Count of Schawmbourg, and Otho, Count of
Ritberg, because they had assisted his Enemy; and then, having dismissed his
Forces, he returns home.

At this time died Albert, The Death of Albert of Mentz.
Cardinal of Mentz, to whom succeeded Sebastian Husestene; but John Albert, his
Counsin-German, got the Bishopric of Magdeburg, who had been his Coadjutor
therein before. Maurice purges himself of the suspicion of betrying Brunswick.
A Report was afterward spread abroad, that Duke Maurice had, by captious and
crafty Expressions, drawn Duke Henry into these streights; whereupon he
published a Manifesto, declaring, how that being desired, he could not but
assist the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave; relates the series of the whole
Affair; Luther's Book against the setting the Duke of Brunswick at liberty.
proves, that they did him wrong, and nevertheless interceeds for his liberty.
But Luther published a Book, wherein he exhorts the Princes, not to let their
Prisoner go: for that Victory, without Blood, was sent from Heaven. Much about
the same time Count William of Furstemberg, having been hitherto kept Prisoner
at Paris, William of Furstenberg is set at liberty.
upon payment of his Ransom of Thirty thousand Crowns of Gold, is set at
liberty; and, taking his journey through Flanders, where he acquainted the
Emperor with his misfortune, he returned home. The Emperor advised him to
cast about for some way how he might repair the loss he had sustained, The Duke
of Saxony and Landgrave's Letters to the Emperor about the taking of the D. of
Branswick.
and therein promised him much kindness. At the very same time died Alphonso
Davalos, Governor of Milan for the Emperor, into whose place succeeded
Ferdinand Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, who had been before Viceroy of Sicily. The
Duke of Saxony and Landgrave, presently acquainted the Emperor with the taking
of the Duke of Brunswick and his Son; And because he had, in contempt of all
the Edicts, disturbed Germany with a new War, they craved, that both he and his
associates, for violating the public Peace, might be put to the Ban of the
Empire, according to the Tenor and Conditions of the Sequestration before
agreed upon. Afterward, October the last, the Landgrave, being at the Siege of
Ritberg, writes again to the Emperor, and having desired the same thing as in
the former Letter, The Landgrave's Letter to the Emperor.
which he mentions; He informs him, that after the defeat and taking of the
Duke of Brunswick, he had found in his Camp several Letters, concerning very
weighty Matters too, and secret Contrivances, which sufficiently showed, that
he had designed some great things against his Majesty, or King Ferdinand, for
that, amongst others, there was a Letter, wherein a certain Prince Elector
writes back to him, that upon those Conditions he cannot enter into that League
and Confederation, but that it is rather his duty, to discover such Counsels,
which, if he had not given him a promise of Secrecy, he had certainly done, let
him not therefore trouble him any more with that hereafter, otherwise he will
disclose it. That he had this, and some others of that kind, in his hands. And
if his Majesty thought it for his interest, he might send some trusty Servant;
to whom he would show these Letters, and let him take a Copy of them from the
Original. The Emperor, The Emperor's Answer to the Landgrave by an
Ambassador.
who then was at Bruges, a Town in Flanders, November the sixth, sent Nicholas
Conritz, to the Landgrave, with this Message: That he heard, how Henry, Duke of
Brunswick, and his Son, came into his hands: and though he could have wished,
that he had accepted the Condition of the Sequestration, nevertheless, as the
state of Affairs now stood, he did not think it needful, he should at present
be punished for breaking the public Peace: that he trusted also, he would make
so moderate a use of this Victory, that no man needed to apprehend any violence
from him: He put him in mind, however, that, after the ancient Custom of
Princes, he would generously and civilly use his Prisoners, and not force them
to any condition unjust or beneath themselves, but refer all to a friendly and
lawful Debate and Arbitration, wherein he himself would not be wanting in any
thing that his Character and Quality required: and that because he and his
Confederates had no reason now to fear any danger, he should dismiss his
Forces, and keep the peace; and that if he had Complaints against any Man, upon
the account of assisting or associating with his Enemy, he should try it out by
Law, and that therein he would do him justice. The Landgrave's Answer.
When, November the eighteenth, Conritz had delivered this Message at Cassels,
the same day the Landgrave gave this answer: Since Brunswick and his Associates
had by more ways than one broken the Edicts of the Emperor and Empire, he
hoped the Emperor would openly declare, how ill he took such proceedings: That
one of the chief of his Associates was Otho, Count of Ritberg, a Vassal and
Tenant of his own, whom, upon that account, he had punished: that there were
some others also, on whom he might justly be revenged: But that the Emperor
and all men might see how far he and his Confederates were from stirs, he had
not attempted any thing against them, but had disbanded his Soldiers: since the
case was so, and that what they had done was upon their own necessary defense,
he earnestly begged, that the Emperor would proscribe Duke Henry and his
Associates: for though he himself were prisoner, yet his Auxiliaries ought to
be punished, from whom there was nothing but Hostilities to be expected: that
the Prisoners were used civilly enough: and that he should make a report of the
rest to the Duke of Saxony and other Confederates.

The Ambassadors, A Treaty of Peace betwixt the Kings of France and England.
who, as we said before, were by the Protestants sent into France and England,
discharged their Commission very well, but at the same time the Emperor also
promoted the Peace, and at Bruges appointed a day for the Ambassadors of both
Kings to meet. The French King sent Claud Annebaud, the Admiral: the King of
England, Stephen Bishop of Winchester; but the Treaty broke up without any
success. In the mean time, however, the Protestant Ambassadors prevailed so
far, that both Kings condescended to a more ample Treaty, and therefore sent
Ambassadors; the French King to Ardres, and the King of England to Calis and
Guysnes. On the twenty sixth of November, the Ambassadors met midway betwixt
the two Towns, under Tents in the open Fields; where, after that the Protestant
Ambassadors had proposed some Overtures of Peace, the Matter was long and much
debated betwixt them, the French urging chiefly the restitution of Bologne, and
that the Scots might be comprehended in the Peace. But the English plainly
refused that: the matter afterward was transacted betwixt the two Kings by
Letters and Messengers; and nevertheless, after much treating, nothing could be
effected. 1546.
Wherefore, January the sixth, the Ambassadors of the Kings and Protestants
depart to their own homes. The day after, as the French were carrying in
Provisions to the new Fort, which, as it has been said, the King had built on
the Shore, the English attempted to have hindered them, and so came to an
Engagement; but though many were killed on both sides, the Fort was
nevertheless victualled. When the Protestant Ambassadors, whom I named, were
in England, The King of England forewarns the Protestants of their danger.
the King occasionally in discourse told them, that they were threatened with a
most dreadful War; that he knew it for a certain; and therefore, that they
should acquaint their Friends therewith. A Privy-Counsellor also of eminent
authority about the King at that time, afterward told one of the Ambassadors
the same thing, naming some Skirmishers and Pickeerers that were to bring the
business about. The King seemed also vexed that the Emperor had the Year
before made Peace with the French King, and the rather, he said, that it was at
his solicitation that he had made War with France, because of the Turkish
League.

In the Month of January there was a meeting of the Protestants at Franckfurt:
A Meeting of the Protestants at Franckfurt.
Their Consultations there were about the Council of Trent; the prolonging of
their League; the Charges of the War with Brunswick; the not forsaking of the
Archbishop of Cologne; the soliciting of the Emperor in the next Diet, that
he would give peace to Religion, and establish the Imperial Chamber. In this
Assembly the Deputies of the Archbishop of Cologne complain of the Injuries of
the Clergy, and of the Commands and Citations both of the Emperor and Pope.

In the mean while the Elector Palatine appoints everywhere Ministers in
Churches to Preach the Gospel; The Elector Palatine appoints Preachers of the
Gospel.
he also allows the Sacrament in both kinds, and Marriage to Priests; and,
January the tenth, instead of the Popish Mass, in the chief Church of
Heidleberg, Divine Service was celebrated in the Vulgar Tongue. The Protestants
therefore, by an Embassy, congratulate with him, and thank him, that he had
given a civil Answer to the Ambassadors of the Archbishop of Cologne. They
also exhort him to proceed, to profess the Doctrine of the Augustan Confession,
and that he would use his endeavors in the next Diet, that Peace and Justice
might be established. To these things, he makes answer, That he was always
desirous of peace, and will be so as long as he has life: That it grieved him
much the Archbishop of Cologne should be so molested, especially in his old
age: that therefore when they should send Deputies to the Emperor, the Clergy
and Senate of Cologne to intercede for him, he would send Deputies along with
them: That for many Years past he had hoped for an accommodation in Religion:
but because he perceives that the matter is dangerously delayed, and no great
hopes appear, he could no longer frustrate the wishes and expectation of his
people: that therefore he had set about a reformation of Doctrine and
Ceremonies, which he resolves for the future to advance, and openly profess.
January the seventeenth, the Deputies of the Electors who are called, A Meeting
of the Electors of the Rhine for the Archbishop of Cologne.
of the Rhine, because their Territories reach to the Rhine, who are Metz,
Cologne, Treves, and the Palatine, met at Wesel. The Palatine here urged the
Electors of Metz and Treves, that they would join with him and Brandenbourg,
and send Ambassadors to intercede for the Elector of Cologne: but they,
fearing to give offense, declined it.

A Rumor began to be spread abroad at this time, A Report of a War against the
Protestants.
that the Emperor, underhand, was preparing for War: wherefore, by Letters
dated the twenty fourth of January, the Landgrave acquaints Granvell, that it
was not only talked of in Germany, The Landgrave's Letter to Granvell.
but that News came also from Italy and other places, that the Emperor and
Pope were preparing for a War against the Lutherans, that they intended to
defend the Council, commence the War in the beginning of the Spring, and fall
upon the Archbishop of Cologne, from Lower Germany, upon Saxony, from Bohemia,
and Upon Upper Germany, from Italy: that the Emperor was also to have Ten
thousand Foot, and some Troops of Horse, who were to wait upon him as his
Guards to Ratisbonne: that this was more than a popular Rumor, since it was
publicly talked of by Colonels, Captains and Officers of the Army, of whom
some bragged, that they had already received Money from the Emperor: That now
seeing the Emperor was at peace with France, and, as most said, had made a
Truce with the Turk, it seemed strange to many, for what end he should raise
Forces: That when he and the rest of the Confederates reflect upon the
Pacification made first at Norimberg, and afterward confirmed at Ratisbonne,
Spire, and other places, they cannot be persuaded that that Report is true,
especially considering that they had done the Emperor and King Ferdinand good
Services against the Turk, and other enemies also: nevertheless, that he
thought fit in a friendly manner to give him an account of these things, which
by frequent Letters and Messengers were beat into him and his Allies: that it
is possible malicious men may report the like things of him and his
Confederates to the Emperor, which may give occasion of diffidence and stirs,
and put them both to charges: However, that he made no doubt but he would give
him an Answer as to these things, and that as he had formerly been a Counselor
to Peace, so he would still continue to incline the Emperor that way. Granvell
answers the Landgrave.
February the eighth, Granvell writes an Answer to the Points abovementioned.
That the Emperor had neither made any agreement with the Pope, raised
Soldiers, nor paid Money to any Officer: although it should not seem strange to
any, if he raised some small Body of Men, at this time, when Affairs are in
such a doubtful state, and when neighboring Kings and Princes are levying
Forces; who can blame him, if he endeavor the safety of his Provinces? but
that he wondered men should be so impudent as to report such things of the
Emperor, whose inclination to peace and quietness cannot but be obvious to all
men: that he himself knew very well, how much he had labored, that Germany
might enjoy a settled and firm peace: that the same was now his purpose and
resolution, and that therefore a Conference was appointed to be held at
Ratisbonne: that the report of the Ten thousand Men, whom he was to bring to
Ratisbonne with him to the Diet, was too silly to need a refutation; though if
he did do so, it would not be without a precedent, since he came formerly to
Ausbourg so attended, nor yet without reason, there being various reports
brought unto him of the Affairs and State of Germany: but that the rumor was
false; for that now the Emperor was ready for his Progress into Germany, and
intended to set out with a very small Train, as thinking all men saw into his
intentions, and that none might blame him for doing otherwise. That the
Archbishop of Cologne himself is evidence how graciously and mildly the
Emperor treated him, and how lovingly he endeavored to reclaim him: for
though he lie under grievous accusations, yet the Emperor had done no more in
his case, but what in reputation he could not avoid: that he lately also sent
him word by Naves, that he should desist, and expect the Sentence of the Diet
of Ratisbonne: for, indeed, neither was it just what be attempted, nor did it
become the Emperor, to bear with those things in him, for which he had most
graciously admonished him before: that for his part he wished all prosperity to
Christendom in general, and chiefly to Germany.

About the end of January, A Meeting of some Princes at Franckfurt.
the Landgrave, and Frederick, Elector Palatine, met at Franckfurt. They of
Ausburg, having had intelligence from many places of the Preparations the
Emperor and Pope were making for War, Sebastian Scherteline.
had sent Sebastian Scherteline, a Soldier, and much devoted to their
interests, to the Palatine and Landgrave, that he might secretly inform them of
those things: and he, having had Audience of them severally, prevailed, that
they should both repair thither to consult together, as they did, the Palatine
bringing with him Otho Henry, his Cousin-German. A few days after, the
Protestant Ambassadors came thither also from France and England, and gave the
Landgrave and Confederates an account of their Embassy. Next day after, being
the fourth of February, the Landgrave departed, and went to wait upon the
lately created Archbishop of Mentz, who was but at a Mile's distance from
thence, that, amongst other things, he might entreat him, to bend his Councils
and Actings in the Diet of Ratisbonne, to the procuring of the peace and
tranquillity of Germany. Deputies from the Protestants are sent to the Emperor
and Clergy of Cologne.
Not long after, the Assembly of Franckfurt was dissolved, and, according to a
Decree past, the Protestants sent Deputies to the Emperor and Clergy of
Cologne, to intercede for the Archbishop. Duke Maurice of Saxony was not of the
Protestant League, yet he had a Deputy at Franckfurt, one Christopher
Carlebitz; a Gentleman of great Learning, who, upon the dissolution of the
Assembly, hastened away immediately to the Emperor. He was at that time in
Guelderland, and had had intelligence brought him before, that those of the
League of Smalcalde, The Protestants accused of a Conspiracy.
had conspired against him at Frankfurt; nor were there wanting those, who
(according to the Proverb) poured Oil into the Fire, saying, that such
Assemblies of States and Princes, were held in contempt of his Authority.
Naves, as has been said, having been sent from the Emperor, to the Archbishop
of Cologne, The Conference of Naves, and Renard, Count of Solmes.
came from thence to the Elector of Mentz, and Prince Palatine, and upon the
Road meeting casually with Renard, Count of Solmes, an active and industrious
Soldier, they fell into discourse about the present state of Affairs, and of
the Reports brought to the Emperor. When Solmes began to tell him, what sort
of Rumors were dispersed all over Germany of the Emperor, he denied all,
affirming no such thing to have ever entered his thoughts: that he was so great
a lover of Peace, that, to the prejudice of his own Affairs, he was now going
to the Diet of the Empire: nor did he doubt, but should the Landgrave come to
him, he would be kindly entertained, and that it was his opinion, that by all
means he should come: for in so doing, since, perhaps, he intended not to be at
Ratisbonne, he might justify himself and party, know the Emperor's thoughts
from his own mouth, and freely discourse of public Affairs: nay, and that by
that means also, all the suspicion and distrust, raised by rumors and reports
on both sides, might be mutually removed: but that, if he desired a Conference,
he would do well to come with a small Attendance, and by that generous and
frank proceeding, show how much he relied upon the Emperor's Honor and
Integrity. The Landgrave's Letters to Naves.
So soon as the Landgrave had understood this from Solmes, he writes to Naves,
February the twentieth, and, to remove all suspicion, he partly declares what
was done at Franckfurt; and then tells him, that there had been a Report raised
of the Emperor, as if he intended a War, and that, amongst other Commanders,
he had sent Orders to Albert, Marquess of Brandenbourg, to raise about a
thousand Horse: but that the Count of Solmes had, upon his relation, assured
him, that it was a false Rumor: and that, because Granvell also wrote the same
thing, he would rather trust them, than the flying Reports of the Vulgar: for
he and his Allies were in very good hopes, that the Emperor would by no means
recede from the Acts and Decree of Spire, especially seeing there was no cause
why he should: That as to the Conference whereof Solmes spoke to him in his
Name, he was not against it, but that he must first acquaint his Allies with
the Matter, of whom he would be willing that some, though but a few, were
present thereat.

We told before, The Conference of learned Men at Ratisbonne.
how the Emperor had appointed a Conference of learned Men, to be held at
Ratisbonne, and commanded all to be present by the beginning of December: but
he prorogued it afterward to the thirteenth of the same Month. Upon the
Emperor's account came thither, Presidents, Colloqutors and Witnesses of the
Conference.
Peter Malvenda, a Spaniard, Eberard Billick, a Carmelite Friar, John
Hofmester, an Augustine Friar, and John Cochleus, Divines: George Loxan, Caspar
Caltentan, George Ilsinger, and Bartholomew Latome, Witnesses and Hearers,
which number the Emperor had increased, for before there were but two
appointed, as has been said. From the Protestants came Bucer, Brentzen, George
Major, Ethard Snerfius, Divines: Volrat Count Waldeck, Balthazar Gutlingen,
Laurence Zouchey, a Lawyer, and George Volchemere, Witnesses. The Papists had
Ambrose Pelary, a Dominican, and the Protestants John Pistorius, Martin Frecht,
and Vitus Thierry, supernumerary. The first of January came Maurice Bishop of
Aichstadt, appointed President of the Conference by the Emperor, and some days
after Frederick, Count of Furstemberg, his Colleague. At length, on the
twenty-seventh day of January the Conference began, The Conference begins.
and the Presidents having premised a few things, relating to their own
persons, the burden imposed upon them, and the delay, exhorted the Divines,
that in so weighty and so holy a Matter, they would not be swayed by passion,
but act sincerely, having before their eyes the Fear of God, and a respect to
Unity and Concord: lastly, they promised Diligence, Fidelity and Uprightness.
They afterward told them, that it was the Emperor's command, that the
Confession of the Protestants, exhibited heretofore at Ausbourg, should be
handled in this Conference, omitting the three first Articles, Of the Trinity,
The Heads of Doctrine to be chiefly handled.
the Incarnation of the Word, and Original Sin: for that the former two were
not controverted, and that this last had been sufficiently debated already: But
that the other Heads of Doctrine should be handled in order; to wit, Of
Justification, the Remission of Sins, the fulfilling of the Law, Faith, Good
Works, Merit, the Sacraments, Purgatory, Praying for the Dead, the Worshipping
and Invocation of Saints, Relics, Images, Monastic Vows, the Single Life of
Priests, the Distinction of Meats, Holy Days, Ecclesiastical Traditions, the
Church, the Power of the Keys, of the Hierarchy, and the Authority of the Pope,
Bishops and Councils. The Conditions of the Conference.
These things thus stated, the Protestants, who saw what kind of Adversaries
they had to engage with, desired that all their Conference and Acts might be
taken in Writing by Clarks and Public Notaries, that the Emperor and Princes
might understand the whole Matter, and the Arguments and Probations of either
side. But the Presidents, on the other hand, alleged, that that would be too
tedious, and that it would be enough, that the chief Points were only set down;
besides, they would have nothing that passed to be divulged, and appointed the
Forenoon for the Conference. After much debate, it was agreed upon, that two on
each side should take in Writing all that was said; that the Acts should be put
into a Chest, to be kept secret, and communicated to none, unless the rest were
present. The Presidents allow this to be done, provided it were the Emperor's
pleasure, from whom they had no Instructions as to that Matter. The Protestants
also accept the same Conditions, yet so, that they may have liberty to acquaint
their own Princes with what it concerns them to know, and what they may desire
to be informed of by them. This order being taken then, Malvenda treats of the
Point of Justification.
Peter Malvenda, a Parisian Divine, on the fifth day of February, began, and
having made a long preamble in the commendation of the Emperor, he largely
handled that Point of Doctrine concernine Justification, and in a very
scholastic manner too. But Bucer, interrupting, told him, that was contrary to
the Law of the Conference, and the Method prescribed by the Emperor; that
their Doctrine, the Confession of Ausbourg, lying before them, he should out of
that Book pitch upon the Chapter of Justification, and if he had any thing to
say against it, either refute or object in order. However, he went on, and
concluded, ascribing much to Man's Free Will, and affirming, that Man is not
justified by Faith alone, but by Hope and Charity also. Bucer answers Malvenda
as to the Article of Justification.
Next day Bucer showed, that five Years before the Article of Justification had
been adjusted in the Conference of Ratisbonne, and declared what the Emperor
and the rest of the Princes and States at that time decreed concerning it,
which he desired might be recorded; then observing the Order prescribed by the
Emperor, he repeated the same Article, and divided it into four Heads: That a
man is not justified before God through his own Works or Merits, but that he is
freely justified through Christ by Faith, when he believes, both that he is
received into Grace, and that his Sins are pardoned through Christ: That Christ
by his Death made satisfaction for our Sins: That God does impute Faith for
Righteousness: these things he proved and illustrated by Testimonies from
Scripture; showed wherein he agreed, and wherein he differed from Malvenda,
Billick the Carmelite.
and confuted his Arguments. Billick, the Carmelite, seconded Malvenda, and,
amongst other things, refuted what Bucer had said of Justification, denying
that it had been ever adjusted. Malvenda answers Bucer.
February the thirteenth, Malvenda answered Bucer, and concluded these three
points; that Works do dispose and prepare for Justification: that Charity is
the form of Righteousness: that the Works of men justified, consummate
Justification, and deserve Eternal Life. Whilst these things were under
debate, The Emperor's Letter to the Doctors.
February the fifteenth, the Emperor's Letters are brought to the Doctors,
wherein he enjoins them, that Julius Pflugg, Bishop of Hamburg, should be
admitted amongst the Presidents; that the number both of the Discoursers and
Witnesses should not be increased by supernumeraries; Pflugg admitted amongst
the Presidents.
that no Clarks should take the Acts in Writing, but such as should be
appointed by the Presidents; that all should take an Oath of Secrecy, and not
to disclose the Affairs of the Conference to any Man living, till they were
reported to the Emperor and States of the Empire; that what was agreed upon,
should be subscribed by both Parties, but what remained still under
controversy, should be marked down in as few words as might be, relating only
in general the chief Points that were thereupon urged by either party, and be
given to the Clarks to be kept. When the Letter was read, the Protestants
desired time to consider; and in their Answer, of the second of March, say,
that they were not displeased with the third President, provided their Princes
also approved him: Then they demanded leave to prosecute their Answers, which
were not as yet finished; that the Point concerning the former Accommodation at
Ratisbonne might be inserted into the Journals; that John Pistorius might be
continued Clark, and that many Questions might not in debating be confusedly
propounded at one and the same time, but that one after another handled in
order: But that as to the Point of so strict a Secrecy, they could not oblige
themselves to it, since it was part of their Instructions, that from time they
should acquaint their Principles with the state of the Conference. These things
were long and much debated, The Conference is broken up.
whilst the Presidents, on the one hand, alleged, that the Emperor's
Commands must be obeyed; and the Protestants, on the other, that they could not
recede from the Instructions of their Princes: so that the Presidents, at
length, signified to the Emperor in Writing, what they demanded. In the mean
time the Duke of Saxony, who approved not the Conditions of the Conference,
when he came to know them, recalled his Deputies, that he might examine the
whole Affair. These being gone, Bucer also, that he might make a Report of what
was done to the Landgrave, departed March the twentieth. This extremely vexed
the Presidents, who as they had before advised those who were present to stay,
so now, some having dropped off, they most earnestly dealt with and entreat the
rest that remained, by all means to expect the Emperor's Answer: but they
excused themselves, saying, that there was no staying for them now the chief of
their Colleagues were gone, but that if the Conference continued, they should
be ready upon all occasions for the future. The Papists afterward published
Books, wherein they bitterly enveighed against them for this matter: But Bucer
sometime after fully answered all their Reproaches, and handled at large all
that can be said of Man's Justification. The Ambassadors of the Prince
Palatine, and Elector of Brandenburg, joined with the Ambassadors of the
Protestants, who were sent to the Emperor to intercede for the Archbishop of
Cologne. The Protestant Ambassadors with the Emperor in favor of the Elector
of Cologne.
The sum of their desire was, that the Emperor would refer the Archbishop's
Cause, to the rest of the Causes of Religion, and annul the Action commenced by
the Clergy of Cologne against him; seeing that if any violence were offered to
him, they could not desert him. They had their Audience of the Emperor at
Utricht the six and twentieth day of February, and March the second he sent
them his Answer by Naves: that hitherto he had showed him all good will; The
Emperor's Answer to them.
that both personally, and by his Ambassadors, he had admonished him, that he
would behave himself fairly and tolerably toward the Clergy and other States
of the Archbishopric, which was no more but his Duty: but that though he had
given great hopes, and was very free in promises, yet slighting all these
things, he had acted so violently, that, for the protection and safety of the
whole Province, and his own Reputation's sake, he was necessitated to apply a
Remedy, and that truly, a very mild and lawful one, which he would not have
made use of neither, but that having in vain tried all other courses with him,
he would not yet so much as defer until the ensuing Diet at Ratisbonne, but
went on in contempt of all his Edicts and Commands, trusting to a certain
frivolous Appeal, which was neither admitted by any body, nor could in any
manner take place: that if he had had a mind to make use of that refuge, it had
been but just, that he had been quiet in the mean while, and waited for his and
the States of the Empire's decision: but that when he refused to do so, it
behoved him to put a stop to his career, and that he had weighty and good
grounds for his so doing; nor did he doubt but that if they knew the whole
matter, they would be of the same opinion, since it was well known to them how
mildly and gently he had ever behaved himself in all the common causes of the
Empire, and how sollicitous he had been for the public good: That,
nevertheless, he took in good part this Embassy, as thinking it might
contribute to the peace and reconciliation of Religion: that therefore, if the
Archbishop would desist, and obey his Orders, no man should have any cause to
find fault with his conduct, and that in the ensuing Diet he would make use of
the Councils of the Princes and States in that particular: that it was his
desire, the Princes should, laying aside all excuses, come to it in person;
that he himself was ready to set out upon this Journey, and that though he was
hindered by his health, nevertheless, that once for all, an end might be put to
their Controversies, he would decline no labor nor trouble.

We told you before, that the Council was appointed to meet at Trent, the
fifteenth of March, The Pope's Legates sent to Trent.
the Year before. Thither the Pope sent his Legates, John Maria de Monte,
Marcello Cervino, and Reginald Pool, an Englishman, all Cardinals. Thither
also came in behalf of the Emperor, but not at the day appointed, James
Mendoza, Mendoza's Speech to the Fathers in Name of the Emperor.
a Spaniard; who having made a large Speech in praise of the Emperor, and of
his great Zeal and good Intentions toward the Church of Rome and Council, he
excused his Master's absence, offered them his Labor and Services in his Name;
and withal told them, that the distance of Place, and difficulty of the
Journey, was the cause why the Bishops, whom the Emperor had ordered to come
from Spain, The Cardinals answer Mendoza.
were not yet arrived. This was done during the Diet of Worms, mentioned
above. The Cardinals Legates return him answer: That though they never
questioned the Emperor's Piety, yet his Speech had been very acceptable to
them: and that since the Pope, the true Vicar of Christ, and Successor of
Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, had, with the advice of the Emperor, called
that Council, for curing the public Evils, and especially those of Germany;
they hoped, that the Emperor would take care that nothing should be determined
concerning Religion at Worms, but that all things be referred to the Council;
for that that was a Matter that highly concerned both the peace of his
Conscience, and his Reputation: But that, if it should happen otherwise, not
only the ancient Custom of the Church, but the Law of God and Man also would be
violated, a pernicious Precedent introduced, and the Dignity of the Council
utterly vilified: that as for himself, his person and presence was very
acceptable unto them. However, since most part of the Members were late in
coming, there was nothing done that Year, unless that in the Advent (which is
the time immediately preceding the Birth of Christ) some Monks preached to the
Fathers, Preaching Monks acted the first part in the Council.
according to the usual custom. The Pope also in his Bull of Indulgences,
emitted the Thirteenth of December, bewails the Misery of the Times, which he
affirms to be so great, A Bull of Indulgences.
by reason of over-spreading Heresies, that all the pains, labor, and care
that possibly he can and does take, does not all satisfy himself: that
therefore he had called a Council, that the Wounds of the Church, which wicked
Heretics had made, might be healed: that now, seeing the salvation of all men
depends upon it; and then, that the Fathers of the Council, assisted by other
men's Prayers, may be the more acceptable to God; He exhorts all and every one,
that forthwith they betake themselves to Repentance; confess their Sins to a
Priest; three days a Week subdue the Flesh by fasting, and the same days be
present at Divine Service; or if their Health do not allow it, that they bestow
something on the Poor. That the poorer sort say often over their Pater noster,
and then receive the Sacrament. To those that obey, he grants Free Pardon and
Remission of Sins, and commands all Bishops to declare the same to the People.
The commencement of the Council.
The seventh of January after, when the number of the Bishops was increased,
the Council commenced: And when they were all met in the chief Church, after
Mass, the Cardinal-Legates, whom we named, read a Speech to the Fathers,
telling them, that for three causes the Council was called; That Heresies might
be rooted out; the Discipline of the Church restored, The first Session.
and Peace resetled: That the blame of the present Calamities ought to be
imputed to the Clergy; for that no Man did his Duty, nor minded God's Husbandry
as he ought; and that therefore Heresies were sprung up like Briers: and that
though they themselves had raised no Heresy, yet because they had not labored
the Land, sowed the good Seed, and rooted out the growing Tares, they were in
the same fault: that they should look about them, and every one examine his own
Conscience, whether or not he had done his Duty: that certainly all the blame
lay at their doors, that the Discipline of the Church was neglected. That a
third Evil was War, and that this was a punishment inflicted by God for the
neglect of Religion and Discipline: that the Church was now afflicted not only
with Turkish and Foreign Arms, but also with Domestic and Civil, whilst
either Kings themselves were at War, or they, who had made defection from their
own Pastors, confounded all Order, and made havoc of the Goods of the Church:
That they themselves had given occasion to all these Evils, when, through
Avarice and Ambition, they had introduced into the World most pernicious
Principles of living: That therefore God's Judgment was just, in smiting them
so at this time, and that yet the punishment was far less than what they had
deserved: that happy were they, indeed, who suffered for Righteousness-sake,
but that they could pretend to no such thing, who deserved a far more heavy
Judgment: That all and every one, then, should confess their Faults, and study
to appease the Wrath of God; for that unless they acknowledge them, there was
no hopes of amendment, and then it was in vain to hold a Council, and in vain
also to implore the Grace and Assistance of the Holy Ghost: That it was, truly,
a great Blessing of God, that he had given occasion of beginning a Council,
whereby, as Jerusalem of old, after a long Captivity; so the Church, after a
long and violent Storm, being brought into a safe Harbor, might be repaired:
That Esdras, Nehemiah, and the rest of the leaders, when they were returned
home, seriously admonished the People of Israel, that confessing their own, and
the sins of their Forefathers, they should implore the Mercy of God; that the
same Example was to be imitated by them: that there were men in those days who
hindered and laughed at the Jews, who were repairing Jerusalem: that in this Age
also there would not be wanting those that would endeavor and do the same
thing: and that, because they bore the Office of Judges, they must have a care
not to be swayed by Passions and Affections, but to lay aside all hatred and
friendship, not to determine any thing for the love or favor of man, nor
flatter the ears or desires of any, but to ascribe all Glory and Honor to God
alone: for that all Ranks and Orders of Men had strayed from the way, nor was
there any that did good, no not one. That the eyes of God himself, and his
Angels, were upon this Assembly, and that the thoughts of no man's heart could
be hid from them: That they should then act with sincerity, and that those
Bishops who were sent by Kings and Princes, should, indeed, obey their
Instructions, but have, in the first place, the Fear of God before them, and
not be biassed either by love or hatred: for that since it was for the sake of
Peace they were met, all Faction and Contention should be banished.

After this Oration was made, The Decree of the first Session.
the Decree of the Session was next read by John Fonseca, a Spaniard, Bishop of
Castrimarino. Therein all that profess the Christian Religion, are admonished
to reform their Lives, to fear God, often confess their Sins, frequent the
Churches, and pray for the Public Peace: That Bishops and all other Priests be
diligent at their Prayers, and every Lord's Day, at least, say Mass, and pray
for the Pope, the Emperor, and the whole State of Christendom: that they also
fast, and relieve the Poor. That in the chief Church the Mass of the Holy Ghost
be said every Thursday, and in time of Oblation, all be intent upon the Priest,
and refrain from talking. That the Bishops also live soberly, use no luxury in
their Tables, and avoid all vain and idle Discourse, accustoming their Families
to do the like; that in Speech, Apparel, and all their Actions, they may appear
honest and decent: and that because it is the chief design of the Council, that
the darkness of Error and Heresy, which for so many Years have overspread
the World, being dispersed, the light of Truth may shine out, all Men, but
especially the learned, are admonished, to consider with themselves, what way
chiefly that may be done: That in giving their Opinions, they should observe
the Decree of the Council of Toledo; act modestly, not with clamor and noise;
not be contentious, nor obstinate, but speak what they have to say calmly and
sedately.

The next Session was on the fourth of February. The second Session of the
Council of Trent.
In it nothing was done, but that they made a Profession of their Faith, and
appointed the eighth of April for the next Session; for many more were said to
be upon their way to come to the Council: they thought it fit then to stay for
them, that the Authority of the Decrees might be of the greater force.

Whilst these things were acting at Trent, Luther chosen Umpire betwixt the
Counts of Mansfield.
Luther, being invited, goes to the Counts of Mansfield, to take up a
difference that was betwixt them, concerning their Bounds and Inheritance. It
was not, indeed, his custom to meddle in affairs of that nature, having spent
his whole Life in studies: but seeing he was born at Isleben, a Town within the
Territories of Mansfield, he could not refuse that Service to the Counts and
his Native Country. Before he arrived at Isleben, which was about the end of
January, he was indisposed in health, nevertheless, he dispatched the Affair he
was sent for, and sometimes preached in the Church, where he also took the
Sacrament. But on the seventeenth of February, he began to be downright sick in
his Stomach. He had three Sons with him, John, Martin, and Paul, besides some
Friends, and amongst these Justus Jonas, Minister of the Church of Hall: and
though he was grown now weak, yet he dined and supped with the rest.
Discoursing of several things at Supper, amongst other things he put the
Question, Whether in the Life to come, we should know one another? Whether we
shall know one another in the life to come.
and when they desired to know his Opinion as to that. What was the case, said
he, with Adam? He had never seen Eve; but when God made her, lay fast asleep:
but seeing her, when he awake, he asks not, who she was, or whence she came,
but says, this is flesh of my flesh, and bones of my bones. Now how came he to
know that? but that being full of the Holy Ghost, and endued with the true
Knowledge of God, he spoke so: after the same manner, we also shall be renewed
by Christ in the other World, and shall know our Parents, Wives, Children, and
every thing else, much more perfectly than Adam knew Eve. After Supper, having
withdrawn to Pray, as his custom was, the pain in his Stomach began to
increase. Then, by the advice of some, he took a little Unicorns-horn in Wine,
and, for an Hour or two, slept very sweetly upon a Couch in the Stove: when he
awoke, he retired into his Chamber, and again disposed himself to rest, after
he had taken leave of his Friends that were present, and bid them, Pray to God,
said he, that he would preserve to us the pure Doctrine of the Gospel; for the
Pope and Council of Trent are hatching Mischief. All being hushed, he slept a
pretty while, but his Distemper increasing upon him he awoke, after Midnight
complaining of the stoppage of his Stomach, and perceiving his end drawing
nigh, in these words he addressed himself to God.

O God, Luther's Prayer before his death.
my heavenly Father, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, God of all
Consolation. I give thee thanks, that thou have revealed unto me thy Son JESUS
CHRIST, in whom I have believed, whom I have confessed, whom I have loved, whom
I have declared and preached, whom the Pope of Rome, and the multitude of the
Ungodly, do persecute and dishonor: I beseech thee, my Lord Jesus Christ,
receive my Soul: O heavenly Father, though I be snatched out of this Life,
though I must now lay down this Body, yet know I assuredly, that I shall abide
with thee for ever, and that no man can pluck me out of thy hands.

Not long after he had made an end of that Prayer, Luther's death.
having once and again commended his Spirit into the Hands of God, he in a
manner gently slept out of this Life, without any bodily Pain or Agony, that
could be perceived. And so Luther, to the great grief of many, died in his own
Country, (which for many Years he had not seen) the eighteenth of February.
The Counts of Mansfield desired, indeed, to have buried him within their
Territories, because there he had his Birth; His dead Body is carried to
Wittemberg.
but by Orders from the Prince Elector, he was carried to Wittemberg; and five
days after honorably buried there. He was about Sixty three Years of Age; The
Birth and Life of Luther.
for he was born the Tenth of November, 1483. of honest and well-respected
Parents, John and Margaret. His first Rudiments of Learning he had at home,
afterward, being sent to Magdeburg and Isenach, he far outstript all of his
Age. Next he came to Erfurdt, and applied himself wholly to Logic and
Philosophy: and having stayed there some time, without acquainting his Parents
and Relations, he put himself into a Monastery of Augustine Friars, and bent
his whole studies to Divinity, abandoning the study of the Law, to which he had
addicted himself before. Now there was a new University established at
Wittemberg: wherefore Stupitius, whom we mentioned in the first Book, being
Rector thereof, invited Luther, that he might come and profess Divinity there.
He was afterward sent to Rome, He was sent to Rome.
by those of his Order, that he might solicit a Suit of Law, that they had
depending there; and that was in the Year, One thousand five hundred and ten.
Being returned home, at the instigation of his Friends, he took his Doctor's
Degree, Duke Frederick being at the Charge of it. How eloquent and fluent in
Language he was, his Works sufficiently testify. The German Language, Luther's
Eloquence in the German Language.
his own Mother Tongue, he much beautified and enriched, and in it he merited
greatest applause, for he turned out of Latin into Dutch, things that were
thought could not be translated, using most significant and proper words, and
in one single Diction sometimes expressing the emphasis of a whole Sentence. In
one place, writing of the Pope, how he had profaned the Lord's Supper, and
caused Mass to be said also for the Dead: he says, that with his Mass he had
not only pierced into all the corners of the Christian World, but even into
Purgatory itself: but he uses a Dutch word, which represents a noise, such as
may be made by the rattling of dead Men's bones, when one hurls or shoots at, His
Constancy and Courage.
and suddenly throws down a pile of them. He was a Man of a most undaunted
Spirit. When he began first to Preach concerning Indulgences, he was ignorant
what it might tend to, as he himself confesses, and meddled with nothing but
that; wherefore he wrote very humbly then to the Pope and others: but when he
advanced more and more in the knowledge of the Scripture, and found that his
Doctrine was agreeable to the Word of God, he bore the brunt of his Adversaries
malice, and the hatred of the whole World, with an unshaken courage, and stood
unmovable, like a brazen Wall, despising all danger. When the Emperor, being
crowned by Clement VII. held a Diet at Ausbourg, a fearful Storm seemed then to
threaten, as we mentioned in the Seventh Book; but he, in the mean time, both
privately and publicly comforted all his Friends, and applying the 46th Psalm
to the present juncture, God, said he, is our refuge and strength, etc. That
old Enemy of Mankind, is now, indeed, busy at work, applying all his Engines:
and our power is but weak, nor can we long withstand so great a force: But that
Champion whom God himself chose, has taken up Arms and fights for us: if you
ask who that is; know that it is Jesus Christ, who must needs conquer and
triumph: Though the whole World swarm also with Devils, we are not therefore
dismayed, but with assured confidence expect a joyful issue: and though Satan
foam and rage, yet shall he be able to do nothing against us: for he is judged,
and the Word alone makes all his Arms to fall: that Word our adversaries shall
not rob us of, but whether they will or no, shall leave it with us: for the
Lord is in our Camp and in our Battles, and defends us by his spiritual gifts
and graces: if they take away thy Goods, Children, and Wife, bea^ it patiently:
for they get nothing thereby, and to us there is an immortal Kingdom prepared.
That Psalm which, as I said, he applied to those sad and dismal times, he
paraphrased also into Dutch Rhyme, and set a Tune for it, very agreeable to the
Subject, and proper to excite and elevate the mind: and therefore, since that
time, it is frequently sung amongst the other Psalms. That the Decree of
Ausbourg, The Authors of the Decree of Ausbourg.
such as it is, was made, he blames for it Pope Clement, and his Legate
Campegi, in a Book which he afterward published: but speaks very honorably of
the Emperor, whose Name and Authority they made use of, though, he says, he
was innocent.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XVII.
The CONTENTS.
John Diazi, going with Bucer to the Conference at Ratisbonne, is murdered by
the procurement of his Brother Alphonso. The Landgrave being admitted to a
Conference with the Emperor, tells him what kind of a Council it was that the
Protestants demanded, and having excused himself, that he could not be present
at the Diet, is very friendly dismissed by the Emperor. The Pope, having
pronounced sentence against the Archbishop of Cologne, thunders him with
Excommunication. A Report is spread abroad, that the Emperor, Ferdinand, and
the Pope, are making great Preparations against Germany. Decrees are made by
the Fathers at Trent. In that Session Peter Danes, Ambassador from the French
King, makes an harangue. The Emperor cunningly sollicites some Cities of
Germany, and the Switzers also. The Protestants having heard his answer, arm.
The Articles of the League betwixt the Emperor and Pope are related: the
Emperor is so inflamed by the Pope, that he makes no head against the
encroaching Turk, but bends all his Force against the Protestants. The Castle
of Erenberg and Town of Donawert being taken, the Emperor, by Proclamation,
puts the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave to the Ban of the Empire. The Pope's Army
comes to the Emperor's assistance.

MEntion was made a little before of the Conference at Ratisbonne. John Diazi
went to the Conference at Ratisbonne.
Now John Diazi, a Spaniard, with leave from the Senate of Strasbourg, went
thither with Bucer. For many Years he had followed his studies at Paris, and
applied himself to the Sorbonne* Divinity: but falling upon the Books of Luther
and others, and being indefatigable in reading the Scriptures, he began more
and more to nauseate that Doctrine: and, at length, that he might profit the
more, he left Paris and came to Geneva, where Calvin was then Minister. After
some stay there, he went to Strasbourg: and because Bucer perceived him to be a
Man of much learning and unwearied study, being within some Months after to go
to the Conference at Ratisbonne, he proposed to the Senate, that they would be
pleased to send him with him, as a Companion and Fellowlabourer. John Diazi's
Conference with Malvenda.
Being come then to Ratisbonne, in the Month of December, he went to pay a
visit to Peter Malvenda, we spoke of before, whom he had known at Paris. He, as
all in amaze, lamented and bewailed to see him in those parts, and in the
company of Protestants too, who would triumph more for one Spaniard brought
over to their party, than for some thousands of Germans. Wherefore he began to
admonish him to have a care of his Reputation, and not cast so foul a blemish
upon Himself, his Country and Family. Diazi answered modestly, commending only
the Protestant Doctrine, and so at that time departed: but when some days after
he returned again, according as they had appointed, Malvenda set all engines at
work to deter him; and having spoken much of the power of the Pope, he laid
before him at large, what a grievous thing his Excommunication was: and then
seeing the Emperor was to be there within a little time, he advised him not to
stay his coming, which, perchance, might be dangerous to him, but that he would
go meet him, fall at the feet of the Emperor's Confessor, and beg pardon for
the offense he had committed; and in that he promised to assist him. Whereunto
Diazi made a resolute and brisk Answer, affirming, that the Doctrine of the
Protestants was the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and bewailing the
misery of his Native Country, Spain, that lay under so much darkness; he also
reproved Malvenda and his companions, for impugning the truth, and giving the
Emperor bad Counsels. He seriously advised him to desist, told him, that he
would take none of his counsel, but that, with the grace of God, he would, in
spite of all danger, profess and persist in that Saving Doctrine. When
Malvenda saw, that he was thoroughly confirmed, Your coming hither, was in vain,
said he; for nothing will be determined here: but if you had had a mind to do
good to the Public, as you boast, indeed, you should have gone to Trent. After
this Diazi always shunned his company. Malvenda's Letter to the Emperor's
Confessor.
In the mean time Malvenda, having written to the Emperor's Confessor, gives
him an account of the whole Matter, and earnestly advises him, that he would
presently prevent this growing evil. One Marquina, a Spaniard, who was lately
come from Rome, was present when the Letter was delivered: and he being
informed of what was laid to Diazi's charge, began to excuse him, as having
been familiarly acquainted with him: But returning home some few days after, he
relates to Alfonso, the Brother of Diazi, a Lawyer at Rome, what he had heard
from the Emperor's Confessor. In the mean time Diazi went from Ratisbonne to
Newbourg, Diazi goes to Newbourg.
a Town belonging to the Prince Palatine, Otho Henry, and seated upon the
Danube, twelve Miles above Ratisbonne. The cause of his going, was, that he
might correct at the Press, the Sheets of a Copy which Bucer had given to a
Printer of Newbourg to be printed. Alfonso, his Brother, being moved by
Marquina's Discourse, and perhaps also, by some Men's* Letters, immediately
prepares for his Journey, Alfonso, Diazi's Brother comes into Germany.
and, with all speed, comes first to Ausbourg, and then to Ratisbonne, till
being informed where Diazi was, he hastens thither, and gives him an account of
the reason of his sudden and unexpected coming. Afterward he makes use of the
very same Arguments almost, that Malvenda had plied him with before at
Ratisbonne. When he could not prevail that way, he promises him a yearly
Pension out of Church Livings, provided he would go with him to Rome. The
Cain-like and traitorous Mind of Alfonso.
When that would not take neither, some days after, he comes and tells him,
that he was convinced, and pretends to be in love with the Doctrine of the
Gospel he professed; praying him withal, that he would leave Germany, that
abounded with learned Men, and needed not his Labor, and go with him to Rome,
where he might do good to many: that they would take Trent in their way, where
there were many learned and judicious Men, who would be very glad of his
Conversation and Acquaintance: that then they would proceed to Rome, and
Naples; so that many by his means being instructed in the right way in several
places of Italy, it might be an occasion, that the same Doctrine should be also
propagated in Spain. Wherefore he prays and beseeches him, that he would comply
with him in that, promising to de^ray the Charges of the Journey, and to
furnish him with all Necessaries. Diazi, overjoyed at this, both for his own
and Brother's sake, writes of it to Bucer and others at Ratisbonne, and demands
their Advice. They write back to him again, and counsel him not to go with him.
Alfonso, then, failing in his hopes, prays him, to go with him, at least, to
Ausbourg. Bucer in the mean time comes to Newbourg, upon his Journey homewards,
as we said before, and entreats him not to move a step from thence, nor did he
himself budge out of the Town until Alfonso departed, which was May the
twenty-fifth* Now the day before Alfonso went away, he entertained his Brother
very kindly, exhorted him to constancy, and reckoned himself happy, that in a
few days he had by his discourse profited so much in the true knowledge of God:
He besought him to write to him now and then; promised him all kindness; forced
fourteen Ducats upon him, whether he would or not; and so, with many Tears
shed on either side, departs, and goes to Ausbourg, six Miles distant, by
Wagon. Next day, having by good Words and a little Money, stayed the Waggoner
some time, that he might get before him, he takes the same way he came, and
having bought an Axe of a Carpenter, whom he accidentally met upon the Road,
March the twenty-seventh, by break of day he comes to Newbourg, and leaving his
Horses without the Gate, with the Post of Ausbourg, whom he had brought with
him, he enters the Town, accompanied by his Man, a bloody Ruffian, and goes
straight to his Brother's Lodging. The Servant, that he might not presently be
known, had put on the Habit and Cap of a Post, and going before, knocks at the
door, and asks for Diazi, for whom he said he had Letters. Being let in, he
went up stairs, whilst Alfonso stayed below, to watch, that none might come
and prevent their design. Diazi being awakened, and told, that a Post was there
from his Brother, starts out of Bed, and in his Cloak and Nightcap only, steps
into the next Chamber: presently comes the Fellow, and delivers him a Letter,
when it was hardly as yet day: The purport of the Letter was; That he was
mightily concerned for the danger he was in: John Diazi is killed by his
Brother's means.
that he should look to himself, and have a care of Malvenda, and such other
Enemies of the Gospel. Whilst Diazi was reading the Letter, the Murderer
standing at his Back, struck the Axe, that he had hid under his Coat, with all
his force into the right side of his Head, even up to the handle, so that all
the Organs and Vessels of his Brain being broken and disordered by the sudden
blow, he died without speaking a word. The Ruffian leaves the Axe sticking in
the Wound, and getting presently down stairs, hastens out of Town with his
barbarous and inhumane Master. There they mount on horseback at the Gate, and
with all speed post away to Bothmey, a little Town halfway betwixt Ausbourg
and Newbourg, where, taking the fresh Horses which they left there on purpose,
they come back to Ausbourg. One Claude Senarcley, a young Gentleman of Savoy,
by chance lay in the same Room with Diazi, but the Murder was so silently
committed, that he heard nothing of it, till the murderer, going down stairs,
made a noise with his Spurs; at which, he starting out of Bed, and coming into
the next Room, there found a sad and doleful Spectacle lying before his eyes.
The Report of this horrid and unheard of Villainy was immediately spread all
over Newbourg; where some Courtiers, that had a love for Diazi, taking Horse,
pursued the Malefactors; and being come to Ausbourg, and no News of them there,
were about to return home, as despairing of success: but one of their number,
Michael Herffer, a stronger man than the rest, with all speed followed the
pursuit, and whilst the murderers, quite spent with the Journey, were taking
a little rest in a Village, he got before them to Inspruck, whither they were
coming, What was done with the Ruffians at Inspruck.
and informs the Magistrate of the whole matter. Not long after they arrived
also, where, being apprehended, he accuses them of Murder and Parricide, and
writes an account of all his Proceedings to his Prince, Otho Henry. The Prince,
hereupon, sent two of his Counselors from Newbourg to Inspruck, with Orders to
manage the Process. April the first, they came thither by Post, and that the
Fact might be put out of all doubt, bring with them Diazi's Nightcap, the
bloody Axe, still daubed over with the gore, and his Brother's Letter that was
brought to him. But before they arrived, Alfonso had leave given him, to write
to some Friends, of the condition he was in. April the second, the Deputies of
Newbourg, having laid open the whole Matter before the Magistrates, demand
Justice to be done upon the Prisoners, or if they denied the Fact, that they
should be put to the rack. These refer them to other Judges, before whom, when
they had appeared, the Prisoners had Counsel assigned them, and these Advocates
spun out the Matter from day to day; till at length the Accusers were ordered
to bring in their Indictment in Latin and Spanish; whilst, in the interim, it
was given out, that Letters were come from the Emperor, as he was upon his
Journey to Ratisbonne, commanding a Nolle Prosequi; because, that he would have
the Matter to be brought to a trial before Himself and his Brother, in the next
Diet. When nothing else could be obtained, Otho Henry, and the Elector
Palatine, require the Senate of Inspruck, to send the Prisoners with security
to Newbourg, where the Crime was committed: but, by the Emperor's Letters,
they excuse themselves. At the time the Murder was committed, The Emperor
comes to Spire, on his Journey to Ratisbonne.
the Emperor came to Spire, on his Journey to Ratisbonne: And whilst he stopped
at Deux-pontz, a Town belonging to Wolffgang, Prince Palatine, the Princess his
Wife, Daughter to the Landgrave, at that time lay in: The Emperor gave her a
Visit, and having passed some Compliments upon her, He visits the D. of
Deuxpont's Lady, Daughter to the Landgrave.
distributed large Presents amongst the Women; but because he had nothing about
him, that was fit to give the Lady herself, he sent her a Present afterward
from Spire, whither he came about the latter end of March.

The Landgrave, as we said before, had been advised, by Naves, to come and wait
upon the Emperor, whilst he was on his Progress to Ratisbonne: Granvell had
put him in mind of the same thing also, in the Month of February, when the
Emperor was at Maestricht. Having then obtained a safe Conduct from the
Emperor, he came to Spire; whither came also the Elector Palatine, and William
Massenbach, Ambassador from the Duke of Wirtemberg; and this was on the
twenty-eight day of March. The Landgrave therefore went to the Emperor, and
his Chancelour, The Landgrave comes to the Emperor.
speaking in his Name, had a private Conference with him, wherein, having told
the reason and occasion of his coming; We have Advice, said he, most mighty
Emperor, not from one Place only, nor out of Germany alone, but from foreign
Countries also, The Landgrave's Speech to the Emperor.
that your Majesty, at the Pope's instigation, are hatching bad purposes
against the Confederates of the Augustan Confession: It is a current Report
also, that in the Treaty of Peace, you persuaded the French King, to assist you
in punishing them: nay more, that you solicit the Turk for a Truce, that you
may the more conveniently accomplish your Designs; and that therefore a
Council, it is said, was called by the Pope, and is begun, that by virtue of
the Decrees, that are quickly to pass there, the Matter may be put into
execution. Now that which makes us give some credit to this Report, and does
not a little startle us, is the Process carried on so vigorously against the
Archbishop of Cologne, and that heavy Proclamation published against him, at
the Suit and Importunity of his Enemies. And forasmuch as we so freely
contributed our aid and assistance to your Majesty against the French and
Turks, and were ready to have done greater things, as we made it appear at
Spire; because we contributed also more than our Ancestors were accustomed to
do, and that your Majesty, both at Spire and Ratisbonne, gave us large
assurances of Peace, Liberty, and Property; these are things we did not at all
look for. We are, nevertheless, in good hopes, Sir, that before your Majesty
leave Germany, you will, by a National Council of the Empire, cause Religion to
be settled, according to the Warrant of God's Word: and if, perhaps, the
difference cannot be taken up, that you will command the Peace, which was
promised to us at Spire, to be inviolably observed, and that in such manner,
that no Decree of the Council, nor Diet of the Empire, may be able to alter or
annul it. To these things the Emperor made answer, The Emperor's Answer to
the Landgrave.
by Naves, That there had, indeed, several Reports been brought to him of them,
as if they intended some Stirs, but that he did not believe them, especially
after that he had seen his Letters to Naves, and that he believed them far less
now: That he could bring no proof of what he said, concerning the French King:
that he had only a Peace with him, and nothing else: that it was the humor of
the French, to brag and talk rashly of things: That he moved the Turk to a
Truce, chiefly for the sake of Germany: for since that in almost all Diets,
Grievances had been represented of the heavy Burdens and Charges, and the
Poverty of the People, he looked upon that to be the most proper way, that,
during the Truce, they might have time to treat of carrying on the War against
him abroad, and of settling Religion at home: However, that there was nothing as
yet determined in the matter, but that he would discourse his Brother about it:
That, after a great deal of labor and pains he had been at, the Council, which
for so many Years they had importuned him about, was now met: that whatever he
had done in that Affair, was with a very good intention to the Public: and
that it was very ill done in some, who, perhaps, put a contrary interpretation
upon it: That he had used the Archbishop of Cologne kindly, but that he was
unwilling to put the least stop to his Proceedings: That he himself was witness
of what preparation he was in for a War: That he had none about him but his
Friends and Servants: That he raised no Troops: and that the reason why he had
sent for him, was, because he looked upon him as a lover of Peace: and that
therefore he desired to know of him, how he thought Matters of Religion might
be composed, or what he did believe might be obtained from his Confederates:
but that if at present he was unwilling to give a positive answer as to that,
he would appoint Commissioners to confer with him about the matter. The
Landgrave's words to the Emperor.
With that the Landgrave speaking himself, If, Sir, said he, I could contribute
any thing to the Peace and Safety of Germany, and to the preservation of true
Friendship betwixt your Majesty and all the States of the Empire, I would,
certainly, spare no Labor nor Pains on my part, and for that cause I chiefly
came hither: I should have been glad, indeed, that more of the Confederates had
been here, but because of the narrowness of the time, that could not be; for
the Elector of Saxony is at a great distance, and James; Sturmey is detained by
sickness. I believe, indeed, your Majesty has had various Reports brought unto
you, but, really, Matters are no otherwise, than as I wrote to the Hier Naves.
For we entered into no Resolution against your Majesty at Franckfort, but all we
did, was only, how we might persevre in our Religion, and be able to defend
ourselves against unjust Violence: We had intelligence of the French King, as
if in view of the affinity of the Duke of Orleans with your Majesty, he had
promised you Supplies against us: That your Majesty sued to the Turk for a
Truce, was a thing many wise men wondered at, and could not but conclude, it
was for some great Matter, seeing you were at peace with the King of France:
but now that your Majesty says, you do it for the sake of the Public, I have
nothing, indeed, to say to the contrary: for it is long since Germany stood in
need of some ease from the great Charges it has been at: We did, indeed,
earnestly demand a Council, but it was a free, pious Council, and that in
Germany too: now that we do not reckon the Council of Trent for such, we fully
declared to your Majesty at Worms; for all Laics, as they call us, being
excluded, the Bishops and others, who are bound by Oath to the Pope, take to
themselves solely the Power of Judging and Decreeing: That I should propose
some way for accommodation in Religion, is a thing, Sir, I dare not venture
upon, without the concurrence of my Allies; and I Am sure, that if I did so, I
should have but little thanks from either side for my pains: but, in the mean
time, provided it draw not into consequence, I do not refuse a Conference with
such as your Majesty shall please to appoint for that purpose. The truth is, I
have no great hopes in the Council, but believe, that a Provincial Assembly of
Germany might not prove unuseful; for other People differ too much from us as
yet, in Opinions and Doctrine; but in Germany matters are now come to that
pass, that they cannot be changed: so that nothing could be better, than if
your Majesty would allow a liberty of Religion there, but so, that all should
live together quietly and in peace. I make no doubt, but that the Conference
you appointed at Ratisbonne, was done by your Majesty with a very good intent:
but I had it from those that were present, Monks the disturbers of the Peace.
How some bitter Monks, bring again under debate, Points that were adjusted
some Years since in the same place, and are of so bad a Life and Conversation,
that no good at all can be expected from them. Without all doubt, the
Archbishop of Cologne is a good Man, and does what he does, purely because he
thinks it his Duty, especially seeing the Decree of the Diet at Ratisbonne,
commits the care of the Reformation of his Church to him; which, truly he set
about in a very moderate manner, taking away no more than what was necessary
should be, and making but very small Alterations in the Goods of the Church.
Now the Book he published for that purpose, agrees with the Holy Scriptures,
and is backed by the Testimonies of the ancient Doctors, Tertullian, Augustine,
Ambrose, and others, who lived nearest the Age of the Apostles: if any harsh
course then be taken against him for that matter, it will be a warning to
others, who have made far greater Alterations. The Emperor's Answer to the
Landgrave.
To this the Emperor replied, That he passed by the Treaty of Franckfort;
neither did believe, the things that were told him of it, nor had given any
cause why he should; but that yet he was much better satisfied by his
discourse: That he had, indeed, procured a Council to be called, that it might
both be beneficial to the Public, and that the Fathers, who were there, might
of their own accord reform themselves: and that it was none of his design, that
violence should be offered to those of the Augustan Confession, because of any
Decree that might pass there: that the Conference of Ratisbonne was appointed
for that very reason, which had begun very well, indeed, if it had continued
so: That the Archbishop of Cologne, though he had promised to supersede and
delay, did nevertheless proceed, and force men to do as he would have them:
That it was the intent of the Decree of Ratisbonne, that the Bishops should
reform their own Churches, but not introduce a new Faith and Religion: and that
it was added, besides, that they should draw up a formulary of Reformation, and
give it in to be considered of in the next Diet of the Empire: but that he
having turned out the ordinary Ministers and Pastors of the Church, had of
himself appointed new ones: nay, and more, that he withheld the Revenues and
Stipends of the Canons, and appropriated part of them to himself, carrying all
things, by his Edicts, with a high hand, so that the Clergy being necessitated
to implore his help and protection, he could not but according to the Power and
Character he bore, put a stop to him, by contrary Edicts and Commands: that, in
fine, he was well pleased, that the Conference betwixt his Commissioners and
him, should in no ways be captious nor ensnaring. The Landgrave again speaks to
the Emperor.
To which the Landgrave made answer, That it exceedingly rejoiced him to see
his gracious Majesty so well-affected toward Germany and his Associates, and,
that he prayed God, he might persevere in the same mind. For, said he, if your
Majesty, according to that excellent Judgment God has endowed you with, do but
seriously consider, and weigh with yourself, how advantageous Germany is to
your Majesty, your Kingdoms and Provinces, you will find that there is nothing
more to be wished for, than that all Ranks and Qualities may rejoice and
delight in you, their chief Magistrate, and your Majesty again use them as
loving and dutiful Subjects. For, truly, if Germany happen to be weakened, it
will recound chiefly to your Majesty's disadvantage. I have likewise most
joyfully heard what your thoughts and intentions are concerning the Decrees of
the Council; but that they should reform themselves, is a thing, I fear, not to
be expected; for they are bound by Oath to the Pope, judge alone in their own
cause; and though they stand in need chiefly of a reformation, yet they look
upon that as a thing can do them no great good, and which will prove
prejudicial to their yearly Revenues: I doubt things are not carried at the
Conference of Ratisbonne, in the way and method they should be; for not only
Copies of the Proceedings are denied, but also in the beginning, our
Commissioners were not allowed to have Clarks and Notaries. As to the
Archbishop of Cologne. I can say no more, but what I have already said; He is a
Shepherd, and therefore desires to give good and wholesome Food to his Flock: He
thinks, that to be his Duty, and therefore caused a Form of Reformation to be
drawn up; nay, and those who are now his Adversaries, and especially Gropper,
were in the beginning most desirous of a Reformation; but when they find it is
come to that, they shuffle and draw back. The ignorance of the Archbishop of
Cologne observed by the Emperor.
Here the Emperor interrupting, Ha, said he, what can that good Man reform? He
has hardly a smattering in the Latin Tongue; In all his lifetime he never
said but three Masses, of which I myself heard two: nor does he know so much as
the very Rudiments of Learning. But he carefully peruses German Books, answered
he, and, what I know for a certain, he understands Religion. The Emperor to
the Landgrave.
To which the Emperor again replied; To bring in a new Faith and Religion, is
not to reform an old. Nor does he profess, said the Landgrave, to have embraced
any new Religion, but to have restored the ancient and true one, as it was left
unto us by Christ and his Apostles: that he has turned out some and promoted
others to Cures in the Church, is a Duty belonging to his Charge: for if a
Minister be either of a scandalous life and conversation, or unlearned, it is
certainly the Bishops part to substitute a fit man in his place: there are a
great many vacant Churches in the Bishops Lands, as I can affirm, where, for
want of Pastors, the People are neither taught nor ruled, but lead a dissolute
and barbarous Life, liker to Beasts than Men. That he intercepts some of the
Revenues of the Clergy, he gives this reason; That he had contributed a great
deal of Money to the maintaining of the War against the Turk and French: now it
is the custom of the Empire, for Magistrates to lay Taxes upon their Subjects
on such occasions, and that therefore he was not to be blamed; but as it is
commonly given out, that he does it upon a religious account, that is a
malicious Aspersion of his Enemies, The Conferences of some Princes.
to render him odious. Next day, the Landgrave, Granvell, Naves, and Masbachen,
met at the Elector Palatine's Lodgings. There Naves begins the discourse,
repeats somewhat of the Conference the day before with the Emperor, declares
the reason of their present meeting; and shows, that when the Emperor, out of
his earnest desire of peace and concord, had appointed a Conference at
Ratisbonne, the Divines had of themselves broken up and departed. To this the
Landgrave made answer, That he knew nothing as yet of their departure; but that
they had written to the Elector of Saxony and himself, what uneasy Conditions
were proposed to them, when the Presidents would neither suffer them in the
beginning to have Clarks, exhibit any Copy of the Proceedings, nor to send home
any account of them: that he did hear also how immodestly the conferring Monks
behaved themselves, who not only recinded what had been agreed upon before,
took away all hopes of agreement, but also gave scandal and offense by their
lewd Lives and Conversation: that he did not as yet know whether or not his
Deputies were therefore gone; Granvell speaks.
but that he had not recalled them. Next spoke Granvell, and having premised
some things concerning the Emperor's good intentions, and desire of peace, he
partly excuses what was objected touching the Conditions of the Conference:
nevertheless, that they were forbid to write home what they thought fit to be
imparted, was a thing, he said, they had no orders for from the Emperor. The
Landgrave answers.
But the Landgrave, having prayed them to wave those things and come to the
matter in hand, makes mention of that Decree made two Years before at Spire,
concerning Peace and the Administration of Justice, urging chiefly, a
Provincial Council of Germany, as the fittest means for settling and quieting
Religion: and because the Italians, Spaniards, and French, differed so much
from the Germans, in the matter of Doctrine, it was his opinion, that a
General, or, as they call it, an Ecumenical Council, would be but of little
use: but let things happen as they pleased, whether a reconciliation could or
could not be effected, that yet the Decree of Spire ought not to be recinded:
that the state of Religion was such now in Germany, that if any attempted to
bear it down by force, it would cost many and many a thousand Lives, which
would redound to the great loss of the Emperor, whose Power was mightily
increased by the Forces of Germany, and to the no small Joy and Benefit of
other Nations, Granvell's words.
and especially the Turks, our Enemies. The Decree of Spire was suited to the
times, said Granvell, and it was none of the Emperor's fault, that it had not
its effect: but that it was well enough known, at whose door it lay: In Private
and National Councils, Vices and Manners only are reformed; but not a word of
Faith and Religion: Now there is nothing but Sects and Divisions, when all Men
have not the same thoughts in matters of Faith; so that to the Debates of this
Nature, not only the Germans, but all other morose Christians also have a just
right: Divines are awkward and obstinate.
That most part of Divines, are a morose, awkward and obstinate sort of Men,
unfit to dispatch any business; that therefore Princes and Great Men ought to
be admitted, and some middle way found out of according Doctrines: nor do you
yourselves allow a liberty of Religion, since they who differ from you in
Opinion are imprisoned and fined: Now though the Emperor be above all things
desirous of agreement, yet he cannot grant any thing that is impious; for if
all things were left to the disposal of the promiscuous multitude, The
Landgrave's words.
the chief Magistrate himself could no longer be safe. It is unwisely done in
me, said the Landgrave, to speak of such weighty Matters in the absence of my
Associates; However, since there is no body here upon the catch, I will go on.
I think, that the Decree of Spire was made by the Emperor, with a very good
intent: and since our Adversaries promised then to comply with it, they ought
not now to retract. In the next place, because we gave the Emperor good
assistance against the French King, we hope, that what was then granted and
confirmed under Hand and Seal, is not to be violated: Now there is nothing that
ought to put a stop to a National Council: do we not profess the same Faith
that the Apostles, that the Nicene Council, and Athanasius, professed; and are
not our Divines agreed about the chief Points of Faith? There was, indeed, some
dispute amongst them, concerning the Lord's Supper, but that is now quite
hushed: there is none but confesses, that the Body and Blood of Christ is
really there received: There are Anabaptists, Davidians, and I know not who
besides, but those are punished by Law: there is no need then that foreign
Nations should also be present, when these things are determined; though, if
they proposed to themselves the knowledge of the truth, that were chiefly also
to be wished: that certain middle Opinions were established, and that by Men of
Honor and Quality, I am not much against it, but do not think, that it can
well be done without Divines: However, make no doubt, but that if the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel were preached, The Opinion of Paphnutius about the
Lord's Supper and marriage of Priests.
the Sacrament given in both kinds, and Churchmen allowed to marry, as
Paphnutius of old urged in the Council, a reconciliation might be accomplished:
I know no place where men are forced to be of our Religion: we do not, indeed,
suffer a variety or diversity of Doctrine in one and the same place; but we
compel no man, nor, upon that account, deprive any of Life or Goods. Now, if
men of our Religion were suffered to live quietly, and allowed their Churches
apart in your Dominions, I should be content, for my own part, to allow the
same liberty to those of your Persuasion throughout all my Territories: but
because you will by no means grant that, we also are willing, that there should
be an equality in those matters: what then I said before of the Decree of
Spire, and a Council of Germany, I say again, that I look upon it as the best
course that can be taken. Granvell speaks after the Landgrave.
There is no man living, a greater lover of Religion than the Emperor, said
Granvell, nor will he for fear or favor of the Pope, step the least out of the
way of Equity and Justice: nay, he has also observed the Decree of Spire,
notwithstanding the other Party and the Pope too were highly offended thereat;
for which reason also the Hier Naves, and I, lie under envy and ill will
enough: But now, in a National Council, I cannot see who is like to be the
Judge; for all men do not understand the Scripture in the same sense: and
because there seems to be but little hopes in a Conference, other ways,
certainly, are to be thought on: some Points are settled, indeed, already; but
again, many are still under controversy; and then Bucer gives a larger
interpretation to the Points adjusted, than the thing it self will bear: Now,
if men go on at that rate, it may be easily judged what state Germany will be
reduced to. You tell very acceptable News, said the Landgrave, when you say,
that the Emperor is not at all influenced by the Pope; The Landgrav's Answer.
and would to God he might bring the Pope to know his duty: Heretofore, the
Bishops of Rome honored the Emperor as their chief Magistrate, but now
Emperors are bound to them by an Oath of Obedience. In all Controversies, the
Word of God ought chiefly to be the Judge, which is not obscure, provided the
mind of man would submit to it. For it lays Sin open before us, invites us to
Repentance and Amendment of Life, and offers to us Christ, who took away the
Sins of the World, in whose Name also we are to pray to God the Father, that he
would bestow his holy Spirit upon us: This is the Faith and Doctrine which has
always continued in the Church, as the Lord's Prayer, the Apostles Creed, and
several Hymns and Songs about the Benefits of Christ, that are used in
Churches, do sufficiently demonstrate: Nor is it to be minded here, what the
Opinion of the greatest part is, but what is true. For when at Jerusalem most
of the Apostles and Disciples would have had the Gentiles, to whom the Gospel
was preached, circumcised, Peter only, and Paul, James and Barnabas were of a
contrary opinion, and, having convinced the rest of their error, abolished that
yoke of the Law; at which time the greatest part of the Assembly was overruled
by, and yielded to the judgment of a few, that were in the right. We do not,
indeed, give Rules to other People, but heartily wish, that the Germans, at
least, might agree amongst themselves. I should not, truly, be against the
finding out and laying down of some middle ways, but so, that the Decree of
Spire should still be in force, in so far as concerns the Peace and the
Administration of Justice: Now, in other things, it is to be considered, what
may lawfully, according to the Word of God, be established, and what not. But I
wish the Prince Elector, my Kinsman and Friend, who has been present at several
Diets, and knows what has passed, would now be pleased to speak what he thinks
fit to the purpose. The Elector Palatine's Opinion in this Conference.
Then, he having spoken somewhat as to the Emperor's good intentions, declared
his opinion to be, that the Conference at Ratisbonne was well begun, and that
if it were renewed, and the Points already agreed upon brought no more under
debate, he thought matters might be brought to a tolerable accommodation.
Granvell's Answer.
The Emperor, answered Granvell, is very much for an accommodation, as has
been oftener than once said before: for he-knows, that unless that can be
accomplished, the Public must needs suffer; and though the Emperor reap not
the least profit from the Empire, and be, besides indisposed in health, yet,
for the sake of Germany, he has undertaken this Progress: He entertains no
secret Designs with the French King, or any else, nor is he come to ask
Supplies, but to do all the public good he can. The Kings of England and
France are both raising Forces, which is a thing much to be suspected: besides,
the death of the Emperor's Daughter-in-law, has cut him out work enough to do
in Spain: Nevertheless, he has laid aside the care of all these things, that
he may repair to the Diet, but if none of the Princes meet there, what can he
do alone? He is much called upon and implored to interpose his authority and
reform things, and yet no body comes to the place appointed for public
deliberation: It would do very well then, my Lords, speaking to the Elector
Palatine, and Landgrave, if you, who make the chiefest Figure amongst the rest,
would go thither, and be present at the Diet. The Landgrav's Speech.
Though, perhaps, said the Landgrave, the Emperor have no great Revenues from
the Empire, yet is it to be reckoned nothing, that he has aid and assistance
given him against the Turk, the King of France, and others; that the Dignity of
the Empire procures him great Authority with all other Kings; that he can
always levy Forces and raise vast Armies in Germany, which is not allowed to
others? Our Adversaries are more clamorous than we, and yet acquiesce not to
safe and sound Councils. On our parts, we have approved the Decree of Spire,
and demanded, that the Points which five Years since were agreed upon at
Ratisbonne, should be confirmed, and entered upon record, and admitted also all
the just and reasonable Conditions of the last Conference: they, on the
contrary, have accepted none of these things, nor will they condescend to any
terms: nay, and at Worms they openly protested against the Conference. Now,
for my own part, it is not possible that I should go to Ratisbonne, the Charges
will be so great: Besides, The Landgrave Arbitrator betwixt the Dukes of Saxony.
there is a difference depending betwixt the Elector of Saxony, and Duke
Maurice, which, as it is referred to me, because it could not be taken up by
Commissioners appointed on both sides, it is of great concern to be adjusted;
nevertheless, I shall send Deputies with ample Instructions to the Diet.

The Conference thus breaking up, some hours after Naves came back to the
Landgrave, The Emperor advises the Landgrave to come to the Diet.
to assure him, that the Emperor was pleased with that days Conference; he
again pressed him, that he would come to Ratisbonne in person, and asked him,
if he was willing to wait upon the Emperor again toward the Evening. He
declined not the proposal, and so soon as he was come, the Emperor gave him
thanks by the mouth of Naves, The Emperor thanks the Landgrave.
first for his coming thither, and then because he perceived, that the Elector
Palatine and he were desirous of concord: he told him, moreover, that he
thought the Conferrors would again return to Ratisbonne, which, if they did
not, he would call them thither: but that he desired, in the mean time, that he
would come to the Diet in person, if not in the beginning, yet about the latter
end of it at least: That he himself, laying all other things aside, had now
spent three whole Years in Germany, that he might make all things quiet there.
The Landgrave's Answer to the Emperor.
To this the Landgrave answers, that the first news he heard of the departure
of the Conferrors was that day, and that he had told him what he judged might
be the cause of it: that if it was his Majesty's desire, and if his Allies
thought fit, that the Divines of both parties should return, his, amongst the
rest, should not be absent: But that he could not go thither in person, because
he had been at great Charges in the War of Brunswick; that he had lately
married a Daughter; that he was to be Umpire betwixt the Dukes of Saxony; that
he could not travel, but with a great Retinue; and that in his absence his
Country might be in danger from the Confederates of his Prisoner, The Emperor
to the Landgrave.
the Duke of Brunswick. To all this the Emperor made reply, that it was not
his purpose, to put him to any unnecessary Charges, but that he was very
desirous he might come, because he thought his presence would have a very great
influence upon all the Transactions, and by that means the Saxons, and others,
would be excited to do the like: nor needed he to be afraid of the Confederates
of Duke Henry; for that neither were they so powerful, nor though they were,
and did attempt any thing, would he himself sit still and suffer any man to
disturb the public peace. The Landgrave to the Emperor.
The Landgrave having urged again his former Reasons, told his Majesty, that he
could not promise any thing; but that he would send thither Representatives,
who should make it their business to promote the Peace: but that if in
everything they could not obey and comply with his Majesty's desires, he prayed
him not to take it ill, but think, that what they did, was not out of any
obstinacy or perverseness, but merely out of fear of offending the great God;
since this Life being but very short and uncertain, The Emperor to the
Landgrave.
it was fit men should think of Eternity. The Emperor taking a little notice
of the care and pains he himself had been at; told him, that the Affair of
Saxony might be put off, and earnestly pressed him again, that nothing might
hinder him from coming; for that, by his good advice and example, he might
incline his Allies to moderation and condescension, and that so their
Consultations might have a lucky beginning. The Landgrave's Answer.
After this, the Landgrave having complained of some who had assisted the Duke
of Brunswick, gives a short relation of the whole matter, and how that he was
made prisoner; tells his Majesty, that Duke Maurice and he had received
Injuries from them: that they were, indeed, a sort of fickle and restless men,
born to create troubles: that the night before, one of that number, Spede's
soppishness.
Frederick Speed, had come and told him, that if he would give him the hearing,
he would discover to him some secret and crafty Councils, that were a hatching:
but that distrusting the man, he had refused him audience, and told him, that
he might send him what he had to say in Writing. At these words, the Emperor
fell into a great passion against Speed: and so the Conference ended, and the
Landgrave being, The Landgrave takes leave of the Emperor.
with great expressions of friendship, dismissed by the Emperor, took his
leave, and departed first to Heidelberg, and then home. But the Emperor
continued his Journey streight-way to Ratisbonne; and much about the same time,
An Assembly of the Protestant Deputies at Worms.
to wit, the first of April, the Deputies of the Protestants assemble at
Worms, to consult about their Affairs; but because the Emperor had
courteously dismissed the Landgrave, who had acquainted the Duke of Saxony by
Letter, with all that had passed; They of Ravensbourg enter into the Protestant
League.
April, the twenty-third, they break up, that at Ratisbonne whither otherwise
they were going to the Diet, they might consult of the same Affairs. In this
Assembly, they of Ravensbourg entered into the Protestant League.

April the eighth, The third Session of the Council of Trent, and the Acts of
it.
was the third Session of the Council of Trent. In it, the Books of the Old and
New Testament are reckoned up, and declared to be Canonical, to the least
tittle: the Ancient and Vulgar Translation of the Bible only is enjoined to be
made use of in the Churches and Schools: It is also enacted, that no man
presume to interpret Scripture according to his own private sense and
apprehension, but that therein all men follow the consent of the Church and
Fathers. All Printers and Booksellers are commanded also, not to Print or
Publish any thing, without a License from their Ordinary. It is furthermore
decreed, that no man abuse Texts of holy Scripture, to idle, fabulous and
profane Uses, to superstitious Charms and Enchantments, nor in scurrilous and
slandering Phamphlets and Libels; and the seventeenth of June, is appointed to
be the day of the next Session. Don Francisco de Toledo was Ambassador there
from the Emperor, The Speech of Don Francisco de Toledo, in the Council.
who having made a long Speech in his Master's commendation, importing how
acceptable that day had been to the Emperor, whereon the Pope began the
Council, he told the Fathers, that he was made Colleague to Don Diego de
Mendoza, who being taken with an Ague, was gone back to his former Embassy at
Venice; and having professed his own readiness to serve them, said, that it was
their parts to pray to God, that he would ever continue this so holy harmony
and consent of minds between his Holiness and the Emperor, for the public
good, that so men's vices being reformed, and hurtful weeds rooted out of the
Lord's field, it might again be rightly cultivated and fructify. The Pope's
Letters to the Bishops of Switzerland.
April the eleventh, the Pope wrote by Jerome Franco, whom he then sent back
into Switzerland, to the Bishops of Sitten and Coyra, and some other Abbots,
signifying to them, that since all the Prelates of Christendom were called by
him to a General Council at Trent, it was but just, that they who represent the
Helvetian Church, should in the first place repair thither: The Switzers highly
commended.
For that the People of that Nation were, above all others, dear unto him, as
being, in a manner, the peculiar Children of the Apostolic See, and Defenders
of Ecclesiastic Liberty: That a great many Bishops were already come to Trent,
from Italy, France, Spain, and that their numbers daily increased; so that it
was an unbeseeming thing, that those who lived at a great distance, should have
come before them who were neighbors: that their Country was in many parts
infected with Heresy, and therefore stood the more in need of a Council: that
they should now therefore make amends for their past remisness by diligence,
and hasten thither without longer delay, if they would not incurr the Penalties
prescribed by Law, and the crime of neglect of Duty, and slighting the
Obedience they promised to him by Oath: That his Nuncio would tell them the
rest, whom he prayed them to give credit to.

The Clergy and College of Cologne, The Archbishop of Cologne excommunicated
by the Pope.
vigorously pursued their Process at Rome against the Archbishop. So that on
the sixteenth of April, the Pope pronounced sentence against him; That
forasmuch as unmindful of his own salvation, he had several ways offended
against the Rules and Doctrine of the Church, and Apostolical Traditions,
against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Christian Religion, in the Church
accustomed, contrary to the Censure of Leo X. published against Luther and his
Adherents; he therefore deprives him of the Communion of the Church, of his
Archbishopric, and all other his Benefices, Privileges, Dignities, and
Faculties, charging and commanding all People within his Territories and
Jurisdiction, not to obey him in any thing for the future: he also absolves
them from their Oath of Allegiance to him, enjoins him silence, and awardeth
him to pay to the contrary Party all the Costs of Suit. The Bishops of Liege
and Utricht, with the University of Louvain, were joined with those of Cologne
in the Action. This Sentence was in the Month of August following printed at
Rome.

So soon as the Emperor came to Ratisbonne, The Emperor's coming to
Ratisbonne.
and was informed of what had passed in the Conference by the Presidents
thereof, he was extremely offended at the departure of the Divines, and by his
circulatory Letters over Germany, complains much of it, and earnestly presses
the Princes to come themselves in person. From the Protestants there came only
Deputies: there were also present, Duke Maurice, Duke Erick of Brunswick, John
and Albert of Brandenbourg, the Bishops of Trent, Ausbourg, Bamberg,
Wirtsbourg, Passaw, and Hildesseim. About the latter end of May, Diazi's murder
unrevenged.
King Ferdinand came thither also. June the second, the Protestants make
application to the Emperor, complain of the Murder of John Diazi, and demand
Justice to be done upon the murderer: all the Emperor told them was, that he
would advise about it with his Brother, and when they had applied themselves to
Ferdinand, his Answer was to the same purpose. With the Protestants were the
Deputies of the Prince Palatine, the Archbishop of Cologne, Munster, Norimberg,
The Emperor's Speech at Ratisbonne.
Ratisbonne, and Norlinguen. The third day after, the Emperor assembles all
the States, and in his Speech tells them the reasons of calling the Diet. That
it was known to them, how that most weighty Affairs of the Empire, because of
the absence of many, remaining undetermined in the former Diet of Worms, had
been referred to this Assembly; but that he did not himself come at the
appointed day in the beginning of January, it was partly because of his
indisposition, and partly because the Conference began later than he had
expected: That he had had respect also to the bitter Winter-season, and was
unwilling to put them to any unnecessary charges: and that though he had
business enough to do at home, yet he had undertaken the Journey, and was the
first that came, contrary, indeed, to his expectation; since the rest,
according to his example, ought to have preferred the public before their own
private concerns. However, that he was still confident, that they who were
detained by sickness would come, and the rest send their Deputies with full
power and commission. That moreover, there had been a Conference of learned men
appointed at Worms, which had, indeed, commenced and given him ample hopes,
that it would have continued; so that when he and the other Princes had met
here, they might have found the Conferours minding their business, and have
taken cognizance of what had been transacted by them: but that now they
themselves were sensible, that the Conference was dissolved and broken up
without any fruit. That seeing now it was his earnest desire to pacify
Germany, by removing all dissensions about Religion, he prayed them to
communicate to him, what more they thought it fit for him to do in the case,
that at length he might, in discharge of his duty and trust, enact somewhat for
the public good. That moreover, since it was absolutely necessary to the
Empire, that the Judicature of the Imperial Chamber should be reformed, and
seeing the manner how that was to be done, was already prescribed by Law, he
did require, that they whose right it was, should provide Assessors, and defray
all the charges, and not put him to more expenses, who was already overburdened
with charches upon account of the Empire; for that it was an intolerable thing,
and without precedent, that Germany should be without Laws and Justice. That
the Debate about the Turkish War was also put off to this time, but that last
year the French King had sent him advice, that there was hopes of obtaining a
Truce, and promised his aid and assistance for procuring it: and because that
not long since the States had given him supplies, and that in many places the
Crop did not answer expectation, he had thought it convenient to give Germany a
little relief, that it might be able, when occasion required, to support the
necessary charges; so that by the mediation of the French King he had made
Truce with the Turk for one year: Truce with the Turk, by the mediation of the
French King.
but that now since it expired at the end of October, and was otherwise often
violated, as he was informed by his Brother King Ferdinand, nor was it known
what the issue thereof might prove, it was wholly his opinion, that seeing the
matter required it, they would now perform what formerly they had promised
concerning supplies: and that he, on his part, would do all that lay in his
power both by counsel and acting for the safety and protection of the Empire.
It is the custom of the Electors to communicate and consult together; A
Division amongst the Electors.
but at this time the Deputies of the Electors of Mentz and Treves separated
from those of Cologne, the Palatine, Saxony, and Brandenbourg, struck in with
the Papists, and having consulted the matter, approved the Council of Trent,
and entreated the Emperor that he would maintain the same, and persuade the
Protestants to go thither, and submit themselves to the Judgment and Decrees
thereof. The Protestants on the other hand beseech the Emperor that he would
maintain Peace, and the equal administration of Justice, that he would refer
the matter of Religion to a lawful Council of Germany, a Diet of the Empire, or
a Conference of learned men to be managed according to a prescribed Rule and
Method; The Protestants opinion of the Council of Trent.
alleging that the Council of Trent was not the Council that was decreed and
promised them in the Diets of the Empire. Whilst these matters are under
debate, a sudden report flies abroad of great preparations for War, A constant
report of a War against the Protestants.
that were making by the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and the Pope. For since the
Emperor had peace with the King of France, and the Turk had granted a Truce
for this year, it was thought a fit time to attempt somewhat. Some Bishops and
the Emperors Confessor were said to have had a great hand in this, as being
set upon it by the Pope. When the Emperor had fully then set his mind upon
War, The Cardinal of Trent is sent to Rome to solicit the promised assistance.
on the 9th day of June, he dispatched the Cardinal of Trent in all have to
Rome, to solicit the Pope to make good his promised Aids. Within two days
after he dismissed all his Colonels, Captains and Officers, with money
forthwith to raise men. He had before sent Orders to Maximilian Count of Buren
to levy all the Horse and Foot he possibly could in the Low Countries. The
Preparations of War.
He ordered also Marquess Albert and Marquess John of Brandenbourg, with
Wolfgang Master of the Teutonick Order, to raise Horse; for though these two
were of the Protestant Religion, and John even of the League, yet because the
Emperor gave it out that he undertook not the War upon the account of
Religion, Albert and John of Brandenbourg take charge under the Emperor.
but to punish some Rebels, they offered him their services: and this John was
the Son-in-law of Henry Duke of Brunswick, who was a Prisoner, as we have often
said already. The Protestant Deputies alarmed at this news, and being concerned
for the common danger of Germany, entreat the rest of the States of the Empire,
to join with them and intercede with the Emperor, that he would lay aside the
thoughts of War: but that was in vain; for the Representatives of Mentz and
Treves, The Landgrave's Segacity.
flatly refused it. The Landgrave, who had most carefully pried into all
matters, by Letters now and then gave advice to Ratisbonne of what he had found
himself, and what he had word sent him of from several places, giving advice
that those few Troops of Horse that had been raised upon a suspicion of War,
might be still kept on foot, and more levied; but because the Emperors demands
were so far from any show of hostility, that they seemed to be all lenity and
peaceableness, they did not dream of any War for that year. However, when the
thing it self began to make it apparent, The Protestants ask the Emperor the
warlike preparations.
that it was no vain report, when not only in Germany, but in Italy Forces were
raising, and the Spanish Troops upon their march, June the 16th they wait upon
the Emperor, and seeing all places were full of the noise and preparations of
War, they desire to know, whether these things were done by his Majesty's
command or not: for seeing there was no talk of his making War upon the Turk,
nor against any other foreign Prince, they could not but wonder what the
meaning of so great preparations was; with them were the Deputies of the
Electors of Cologne* and the Palatine. The Emperor ordered Naves to give them
his Answer, The Emperor answers the Protestants.
That it was to no purpose to repeat how affectionate the Emperor had ever
been to Germany, and how great a lover he had always been of Peace, since his
first inauguration into the Magistracy: That his inclinations were still the
same, nor had he any other design, but that the States should agree among
themselves, and that Peace and Justice might flourish in the Empire: That they
who obeyed him in that matter, might expect all kindness from him; but that if
any did otherwise, he was resolved to use his power and authority to reduce
them. The day following he wrote Letters to most of the confederate Protestant
Cities, especially to Strasbourg, Norimbourg, Ausbourg, and Ulm, The Emperor's
Letter to the Protestant Cities.
to this purpose: I make no doubt, says he, but that you are sufficiently
convinced how dear Germany, our common Country, has always been to me, and how
great pains and charges I have been at, to the great prejudice of my own
Kingdoms, to have that sad and dangerous difference about Religion taken up. In
which affair, truly, I have not sought my own private interest, but made it my
study always, that all discord and dissension being removed, Germany might
flourish with Peace: for the Decrees which at every turn I renewed, are a
sufficient evidence of this, though some put another interpretation upon my
actions, and falsely impute to me other designs. In the administration of this
my Government, it has been also my care always to protect and defend the Free
Cities, lest their liberty might have been oppressed by some, who would not
have slighted the occasion, if any had offered, of accomplishing that end,
which I believe you your selves in your own wisdom have oftener than once
observed from past transactions. Now though some have often offered at several
things, prejudicial to you, the rest of the States and my self, yet because I
could not without a great stir redress them, I bore with them, in good hopes,
that some time or other I might reap the fruit of this my lenity, to the
benefit of the public: which would indeed have proved so, had not some by
secret and strange tricks hindered all Reconciliation, not that they either
love Religion, or respect the glory of God, but that under a Cloak of
godliness, wherewith they cover their own Knavery, they might oppress the rest
of the States, and get their possessions into their own hands: for they have
already usurped the Estates of some, and still violently detain them, to the
great prejudice of many. And now they have brought things to this pass, that
Justice being trampled upon, they stand in aw of nothing, but even attack and
bespatter my Power and Authority, with no other intent, but that partly by
force, and partly by treachery and craft, they may subdue the States of the
Empire, and especially the Free Cities. I am convinced of this by their own
Speeches, for they brag, and as I am told by credible persons, threaten me with
open Force and War. And the many false, seditious, and scandalous Libels and
Pictures which they publish and vend, that they may kindle Faction, and animate
the people against me, are a good argument of their intentions. So that now I
am past all hopes, that ever I can reduce them to duty, or reclaim them from
their insolences by lenity and Patience. For hitherto I have prevailed so
little by this course, that in so many years time, they are not only not become
better, but grown worse and worse, more obstinate, rebellious and desperate.
Which is a thing, indeed, that tends directly to the ruin of the State, and if
means be not used to prevent it in time, Germany will certainly fall from its
ancient liberty, into a most grievous bondage and slavery: Now that is a thing I
can no longer suffer nor bear with, nor could I any way be justified, If I
should do so. For the preservation therefore of my own Dignity, the maintaining
of Peace and Justice, and that this imminent danger may be diverted from
hanging over your heads, I am resolved to reduce into duty those disturbers of
the Public, and to restore Germany to its ancient luster and liberty. I
thought fit to acquaint you with this my resolution, that you may not listen to
those, who, perhaps, may traduce me, as if I had other intentions. For I
solemnly protest, that I have no other design than what I have now declared to
you. And therefore, I trust, you will not be wanting to me on your parts, that
both their sauciness may be curbed, and that you may recover your ancient
Dignity. If you do so, you may expect from me all good will and kindness, and
of this I shall make a more ample Declaration, if you send me any Ambassador
to that purpose. The Emperor wrote also to the Duke of Wirtemberg, The
Emperor writes to the Duke of Wirtemberg.
to the same effect: and the very same day the Letters were written, Granvell
and Naves sent for the Deputies of the Cities I mentioned, and having
discoursed them severally, much to the same purpose, Granvell and Naves
discourse the Deputies of the Protestants Cities.
told them, that this War was not designed against the free Cities, but against
some Rebels who were guilty of High Treason, had contemned the Emperor's
Authority, invaded the Estates and Possessions of some Princes and Bishops, and
who, if occasion did offer, would not spare the free Cities neither. That
therefore they advised them to be true and faithful to the Emperor, and not
assist his Enemies, that the Emperor might have no cause to be offended with
them to whom he wished well: that they should with all expedition acquaint
their Principals with these things, and exhort them to continue in their duty;
and that the Emperor would himself write and send Ambassadors unto them.

The same day a Decree passed at Trent, A Decree of the Council of Trent.
that a Divinity Lecturer should be established in the Abbeyes and Monasteries
of Canons Regular and Monks, and that some Benefice should be annexed, as a
Stipend to the Office: but that no man be admitted to that place, but he whose
learning, good life and conversation the Bishop or Abbot is assured of: and
because the preaching of the Gospel is no less necessary, than the reading of
Divinity, the Bishops and all other Guides of the Church are enjoined to teach
the People, or if any lawful impediment hinder them, The Office of Pastors.
that they substitute another in their place: Pastors and Curates are likewise
commanded, that every Lord's Day at least, they instruct the People in those
things that are necessary to Salvation, exhort them to Virtue, and deter them
from Vice: A Penalty is appointed for those that neglect their duty: and the
Bishops are admonished to be diligent in examining what Doctrines are taught,
and that if, perhaps, Heresies or erroneous Opinions be broached, they take a
course according to Law, Decrees concerning Original Sin.
to prevent the danger of them. Then a Decree is made touching Original Sin,
all the guilt whereof, they say, is washed away by Baptism: That in those who
are baptized, there remains, indeed, a disposition to sin, or concupiscence;
and that though St. Paul call that sometimes sin, yet he does it not as if it
were really and properly sin, but because it inclines men to sinning: But that
the Virgin Mary is not to be comprehended in the Decree, and that as to that
particular, what Sixtus IV. heretofore defined, is to be observed. And, to
conclude, the nine and twentieth of July is appointed to be the day for the
next Session. Now Sixtus IV. in the thirteenth Year of his Pontificate, made a
Decree, whereby he excommunicates, The Decree of Sixtus IV. concerning the
Virgin Mary.
as Heretics, those who teach, that the Virgin Mary was conceived in Original
Sin, and that the Festival of her Conception, appointed by the Church of Rome,
was not to be observed; which Decree is extant in the Extravagants of the Canon
Law. In this Session of the Council, the French Ambassador, Peter Danes, The
Speech of the French Ambassador.
made a Speech, wherein, having extolled the Merits and Zeal of the Kings of
France toward the Church of Rome, from Clouis, the first Christians King, and
downwards, he enlarged in the Praises of King Francis, who being descended of
such Ancestors, was inferior to none of them in dutifulness to that See,
having entertained a constant friendship with Leo, Adrian, Clement, and now
with Paul III. And in all this tempest and agitation of Religion, suffered no
alterations within his Dominions, because he would have the decision of the
whole matter referred to the Church: for though he was naturally a most
gracious and merciful Prince, yet had he inflicted most severe Punishments upon
those who through private rashness had presumed to disturb the state of the
Church: by which strict care and animadversion he had gained this point, that
now he could put all France into their hands in a peaceful and quiet state: For
in it there was no strange nor new Doctrines, nor any thing but what had been
introduced and settled by ancient custom and discipline: and since it had been
always his opinion, that there was nothing more beneficial to the Public, than
that the Pope of Rome, as Successor of St. Peter, should be Head of the
Church, to whom all others should submit and refer themselves, he had always
been careful, that none should impeach his Supremacy. And that though he had
been many times solicited by large offers, to do other ways, and follow the
example of another, He means the King of England.
who had done so, yet nothing could ever shake him in his resolutions: but that
so soon as he had heard that some Fathers were met to celebrate the Council,
which was lately called, he had presently ordered some of his select Bishops to
repair hither; and that when the Decrees made in some Sessions were brought
into France, he had dispatched hither him and his Colleagues to declare his
will and pleasure unto them. The Demands of the French King.
First, then, That it was his desire, that once for all they would establish
what ought to be followed and believed by all men in general, in matters of
Religion. In the next place, That they would prescribe to all Churchmen a most
strict and austere Rule of Life and Manners, assuring them, that whatever they
decreed in those matters, should by the King's command be punctually observed
all over France: That, moreover, because the Kings of France had merited very
much of the Church of Rome, they would not suffer any alteration or diminution
to be made in those Rights and Privileges which the Kings of France had
constantly enjoyed from the time of Louis the Debonnair, the Son of
Charlemaigne. Lastly, That they would confirm all the Rights, Privileges and
Immunities of the Gallican Church, the protection whereof was transmitted to
him from his Predecessors.

June the twenty-fourth, Lazarus Schuendi came from the Emperor to Strasbourg
with the Letters we mentioned a little before, and other more ample
Instructions, having met the rest we named on his way. But the Senate having
dismissed him, not long after writ back to the Emperor, The Answer of those of
Strasbourg to the Emperor.
acquainting his Majesty, that the reason why they did not presently give their
answer to Lazarus, was, because of the difficulty of the Matters proposed,
which concerned not them alone, but others also: that what his Majesty was
pleased to say of his good Intentions toward Germany, they gave him their most
humble thanks, praying him to continue in the same mind, and not to listen to
those who would incite him to a Civil War: that it was a great grief to them,
to find in his Majesty's Letters, that he complained of some who did not do
their duty, and were disobedient and disloyal: but they hoped still, that none
of their Religion was any way guilty of so heinous a crime: nor was it our
fault, say they, that differences about Religion are not ended: for when in the
Diet of Ratisbonne, five years since, some Points were agreed upon, and the
question put by your Majesty to the States, whether they would have them to
pass into a Law or not, you may remember, Dread Sir, that we and many others
gave our assent; which was in all likelihood a very good beginning of an
accommodation; but that others, by the suggestions of the Pope refused, and
referred all to Rome: there was no more done neither in other Diets afterward,
through the opposition of our adversaries, who not only did not approve of the
Conference your Majesty appointed a Year ago at Worms, but struck out also of
the Decree all the words relating thereunto. We make no doubt neither but that
your Majesty has been informed by the Papers we exhibited, of the reasons why
the last Conference broke up, and how we are not to be blamed for it: How
desirous also of agreement were they whom your Majesty appointed to be
Conferrors, were there nothing else to show it, may sufficiently appear from
this, that the point of Justification agreed upon five years since, was by them
stoutly impugned again, nor would they allow it to be adjusted. What our wishes
are, and how very desirous we are of peace, God Almighty knows, from whom, in
our daily Prayers, we beg it in our Churches: But since the last Diet of
Ratisbonne, our adversaries have not admitted of any Treaty, but referred all
to the Pope, whose Votaries they are, and to the Council. Now it is the Pope's
design, by force, and a kind of high hand, to retain the Errors which have
occasioned these divisions in the Church, and, indeed, he so orders all things,
that we cannot refer our cause to his decision: whence it is apparent enough,
that they do us wrong, who blame us still, that our divisions are not healed:
besides, it is not kindly done, to accuse some of robbing the Church, under a
pretext of Religion; for your Majesty knows very well, by the late years
transactions, and the cause has been often heard before you, why the Protestant
Confederates, could no longer suffer that Monastic Life, which was so
extremely degenerated, within their Dominions, but converted into better uses
the Revenues belonging unto it: But our adversaries, when possessed of the
Goods of the Church, are so utterly careless of its concerns, that in many
places of their Dominions, there are either no Ministers at all, or such as are
(...) for nothing more unfit, either in regard of their Learning, or of their
Lives and Conversation. It is well enough known also, how they order Schools,
and what care they take of the Poor. Nor is it to any purpose to mention, how
they hook in to themselves and accumulate the Revenues of several Churches,
that nothing may be wanting to their Luxury and Voluptuousness. Wherefore
though some, perhaps, of our Profession do not in all things rightly dispense
the Revenues of the Church, yet that is not at all to be compared to those
things, which now for many Ages they have committed: so that the thing itself
calls for a Remedy, to wit, that these Revenues be distributed according to the
Word of God, and the Decrees of the Primitive Church; to which we are, indeed,
most willing to contribute our endeavors: Besides, your Majesty has made
Decrees both at Ratisbonne, and lately at Spire, how, for the public peace,
these Goods ought to be disposed of: for if there be any that have not observed
a just measure therein, we make no doubt, but if they be brought to a trial for
it, and have a fair hearing, they will willingly submit to an equitable sentence,
and give no occasion, that Germany should therefore be wasted and ruined by an
intestine War. It is objected to those of our persuasion, that they have
subverted the administration of Justice; but you are not ignorant, Great Sir,
why they complained of the Judges of the Imperial Chamber, and how earnestly
they have sued for a Reformation of that Judicature; which, though it has been
often promised, yet was never as yet accomplished. And therefore, for
peace-sake, you lately turned them out of Commission at Spire, and prescribed a
manner, how the Chamber should hereafter be established. This Regulation we
also approved, and in the other Diet of Worms, declared ourselves ready to
submit to its Jurisdiction: But our adversaries, as your Majesty well knows,
constantly refused, and had rather have no Justice at all: at their door then
all the blame ought to lie; for if matters were carried in the manner your
Majesty prescribed, which is the thing we chiefly desire, and accordingly have
given Instructions to our Deputies in this Diet of Ratisbonne, there is no
doubt, but that they who think that our Brethren have offended against the
Decrees of Ratisbonne and Spire, might have right and justice done them. For
effecting of that, we offer our endeavors, nor will we aid or abbet any that
are refractory and regardless of their duty. We have never discovered neither
any of our party, that aspired to your Majesty's dignity, attempted to oppress
others, or bragged and threatened, as if they intended open force. And, indeed,
we cannot but think, that such things are frequently suggested to your Majesty,
by the Pope and his Ministers, for the hatred they bear to our Religion:
However, we presume, that your Majesty has had proofs oftener than once of our
love and fidelity to your Interests, in those Wars we engaged in against
Foreigners: and would to God, that he, who now exasperates your Majesty against
us, had been always as true to you, as we have been; some Wars then certainly
had never been made, or had been ended much sooner than they were. Now, how
these men behaved themselves toward your Majesty in these Seditions and Wars,
that broke out in Germany, since you were Emperor, and then, how freely those
of our persuasion sent in their Supplies against the Turk, is every where
known, but more especially in your Provinces of Austria. Since we make no doubt
then, that those States are clear of the Crimes they are charged with before
your Majesty, and that if they were brought to a fair trial, they could make
their innocence appear to you and the whole World; we most earnestly beseech
your most gracious Majesty, the Father of our Country, by all that is sacred,
and by the safety and preservation of Germany, that you would desist from those
so great Preparations, and bring them against whom you are so grievously
informed, to a fair trial, in the ancient manner observed by your
Predecessors, which we hope your Majesty will never recede from. If you will be
pleased to do so, we are very confident your Majesty will find, that they have
had wrong done them, and that they have been upright in their intentions
toward their Prince. Cast an eye, we beseech your Majesty, upon the sad
condition of Germany, wretched, indeed, both through a long scarcity and dearth
of all things, and also because of the Turk, that formidable and perpetual
enemy of the Empire: Consider, Sir, what fidelity the Parents of those great
men have showed to your Ancestors, how true themselves have always been to you
and your Brother, King Ferdinand, when against the Turk, and your other
Enemies, they assisted you, even more liberally than any of the rest, and are
still ready to do the same: Consider seriously with yourself, how bloody and
dismal a War this is like to prove, what sad Evils and Calamities it will bring
upon multitudes of innocent People, Babes, Children, Women, and the like; and
do not at the instigation of those men, who, that they may preserve their own
Dominion and Power, are our implacable Enemies, bring things to such a pass,
that renowned Germany, or, indeed, any part of that Loyal Country, being
weakened and exhausted of all its strength, should become unable any more to
resist or put a stop to the progress of the cruel Turk. We therefore humbly
beseech your Majesty to hearken to the Prayers of your Petitioners, whereby
you will confer upon us the greatest favor we can receive: And if any man, after
a fair hearing and trial, shall, contrary to Law and Equity, refuse to obey
your Commands, we will be so far from approving what he does, that, according
to our allegiance, we will to the utmost of our power, assist your Majesty,
whom God has set over us, as our supreme Lord and Master, in reducing of him.

Duke Maurice, Duke Maurice had a private Conference with the Emperor.
who came to Ratisbonne, May the twenty-fifth, having had a long Conference
with the Emperor in private, on the twentieth of June departed; but what the
subject of that Conference was, will afterward of itself appear. The Deputies
of the Protestants, finding all things tending to open War, and not daring to
consult together, The Protestant Deputies return home.
about their necessary Affairs, nor to write to their Principals, for fear of
danger, drop off one after another, and return home. June the fifteenth, The
Emperor's Embassy to the Suizers.
the Emperors sends John Muscher, Treasurer of Upper Burgundy, Ambassador to
the Suizers; And after he had premised some things of his good will toward
them, his affection toward the Public, especially toward Germany, and of his
desire of the peace thereof, he acquaints them, that some Princes, under
pretext of the Gospel, did many seditious things, overturned all Law, that
there being no administration of Justice, they might boldly act what they
pleased: that their boldness was now come to such a height, that they attempted
against his Honor and Dignity, threatened open Violence and War, and gave no
obscure intimations, that it was their design, in his absence, to invade and
oppress the common Country: That for these reasons, he was forced to take
Arms, that for the dignity of his Place and Character, he might free the
Public from danger, and restrain their insolence: nor did he doubt, but that
God Almighty approved his endeavors: that he expected the rest of the States
whose safety and preservation lay at stake, would assist him with their aid and
council: That he therefore entreated them, that they would not suffer
themselves to be persuaded by his adversaries, who spightfully broached many
odious and evil things of him, nor at their instigation act, or suffer any
thing to be acted within their borders, whereby this his purpose might be
hindered or retarded: For that it was a War undertaken for the welfare of all
Germany, and for no other cause. That they should therefore persist in the
ancient Amity and League that was betwixt them: that he would do nothing
contrary to it himself, nor suffer that any of his should; but be ready upon
all occasions to give them Testimonies of his Love and Favor, as hitherto he
had done, which as by many other instances, so chiefly it might be understood
by this, that he never made Peace with any other Kings or Potentates, but that
they were comprehended in it.

The Towns of the Upper Germany, The Duke of Wirtemberg, and the Towns of Upper
Germany rise in Arms.
and the Duke of Wirtemberg, hearing of the Emperor's Answer, which Naves made
in his Name, as we mentioned before, wrote instantly to the Duke of Saxony, and
the Landgrave, the Heads of the League, and acquainting them with what was
doing, promise all the assistance and fidelity they can; they raise as many
Foot as possibly they could, and were, indeed the first in Arms. Their Army was
divided into two Bodies; the one, that of Prince Ulrick, consisting of Four and
twenty Ensigns of Foot, and many Gentlemen amongst them: and the other, that
which the Towns hired and paid. When these had joined at Ulm, June the
twenty-first, they march to Gunsperg; and, being next day drawn up, The first
of the Protestant Commanders.
they encamp in two Bodies. The Commanders were John Heideck, Schertelin,
Balthazar Gutling, Sebastian Besserer, Matthew Langemantel, John Harder, and
Joyce Rosenberger. These take an Oath of the Forces of the Cities, as the
custom is, obliging them to certain Conditions, and command them to obey and
take their Orders from Schertelin, until the Princes, the Heads of the League,
should come themselves. Then having gone to Wirtemberg's Men, and done the like
with them, they appoint Heideck, upon the same conditions, to be their
Commander. This being done, Balthazar Gutling, a Gentleman by Birth, and
Counselor to the Duke of Wirtemberg, with the consent of all the rest, spoke
to his Princes Men to this purpose. Balthazar Gutling's Speech to the Soldiers.
Gentlemen, and most dear Fellow Soldiers, The Pope of Rome, Satan's Vicar, is
again about raising a Combustion, such as may consume and utterly destroy
Germany, our Native Country; and to this he is moved, not only by the bitter
and irreconcilable hatred wherewith he persecutes the true Religion, but also
by revenge for the Calamities he suffered some years ago, when Rome was taken
and sacked by the Germans. He has therefore spurred on Charles, our most mighty
Emperor, to make War against our Princes and States, who are joined together
in league, in hopes that by force, and all manner of cruelty, he may compel
them to submit to his Religion, and to observe the Rites of his Diabolical
Worship. For, indeed, it is reported for a certain, that that proud and
accursed slave of Satan, has already a considerable Body of choice Horse and
Foot in Arms, whom he intends to send to the Emperor; it goes current also,
that the Spaniards are upon their march against us: now-what havoc and
desolation, what misery and mischief, our Country is to expect from foreign
Soldiers, all men of sense foresee: Our Princes and States therefore, knowing
it to be their duty, not only to protect and defend their Subjects from all
violence and injury, but also to labor and provide, that they be not deceived
by any false Religion, and thereby endanger their own Salvation, have fully
resolved, by the help of God, to stand upon their defense, and resist this War,
which is brought upon them, contrary to all expectation, nay, and to former
Promises and Covenants too. And therefore they have listed you and others for
Soldiers, with all the expedition they could. But because the Heads of the
League are as yet absent, though within a few days they will be with us, the
most illustrious Prince Ulrick, Duke of Wirtemberg, in the mean time, that all
things may be done in order, and no opportunity given to the Enemy of doing us
any prejudice, has appointed John Heideck, a Gentleman of an honorable and
illustrious Family, to be your Captain, in place of himself. Him therefore,
according to the Oath you have taken, ye shall obey, and in all things so
behave yourselves, that the glory and renown which our Forefathers, fighting
valiantly against foreign Nations of old, purchased with their best Blood, may
be by us also handed down to our Posterity. All things else we shall commit to
the care of the Almighty, who without doubt will in this so just a cause and
defense, order all matters, as to his Divine Majesty it shall seem most
conducing to our safety and welfare. The Reader has been told before, that the
Protestant Deputies left Ratisbonne, when they found there was no good to be
done in the Conference there: A Meeting of the Protestant Deputies at Vlme.
but Forces being now raised, as we said, they meet at Ulm, there to consult
what was to be done. Therefore, June the one and twentieth, they write to the
Doge and Senate of Venice, and, complaining of the Pope's injustice, beg, that
they would not allow his Troops a free passage through their Territories, and
by former instances put them in mind, what they and the rest of Italy were to
expect, if the Pope's Forces did increase. Their Letters to the Venetians, the
Nobility of Germany, the Grisons, and those of Tyrol.
They write also to most of the Nobility of Germany, and urge them not to put a
stop to the Soldiers who repaired to their Camp: And being informed, that the
Grisons, and those of Tyrol, were much troubled at the approach of foreign
Soldiers, by Letters, dated the last day of June, they entreat them also, that
they would hinder their passage, and for that end promise to send them
assistance. They demand Aid likewise from the Citizens of Norimberg; but they
excuse themselves as not able, seeing they were hardly strong enough to defend
their own borders. They, moreover, July the second, give orders to Scherteline,
to fall upon the Enemy, that were raising Men near the foot of the Alps; and
lastly, they send Ambassadors to the Suizers.

It has been said before, that the Cardinal of Trent was by the Emperor sent
in post haste to Rome. By his means and solicitation, then, the League, which
had been before conceived and drawn up in Writing, is June the six and
twentieth, concluded and agreed upon on these Conditions. The Emperor's League
with the Pope against the Reformed.
Whereas for many Years Germany has persisted in great Errors, such as
threatened extraordinary danger; for the averting of which, a Council has been
called, that commenced at Trent in December last, and whereas the Protestants
reject and disown the same, therefore the Pope and Emperor, for the glory of
God, and the Public Good, but especially the Welfare of Germany, have entered
into league together upon certain Articles and Conditions: And in the first
place, that the Emperor shall provide an Army, and all things necessary for
War, and be in readiness by the Month of June next ensuing, and by Force and
Arms compel those who refuse the Council, and maintain these Errors, to
embrace the ancient Religion, and submit to the Holy See: but that in the mean
time, he shall use his endeavors, and try all means, to accomplish that, if he
can, without a War: That he shall make no Peace nor Capitulation with them,
upon Terms prejudicial to the Church and Religion. That the Pope, besides the
hundred thousand Ducats, which he has already advanced, shall deposite as much
more in the Bank of Venice, to be employed by his Lieutenants, in the War only,
and for no other use: but if no War happen, he shall receive his Money again:
that, moreover, he shall in this War, maintain at his own charges, for the
space of six Months, twelve thousand Italian Foot, and five hundred Horse, who
shall be commanded by a General and other inferior Officers commissioned by
him: but if the War be ended before six Months expire, he is no longer to be
obliged to keep his Forces in pay. The Church Revenues in Spain given for
maintaining a War against the Lutherans.
That the Emperor, by virtue of a grant from the Pope, may for this Year,
raise one half of the Church Revenues all over Spain; That he may also sell as
much of the Abbey-Lands of Spain, as do amount to five hundred thousand Ducats;
but all this only for the use of the present War, and upon condition also that
he morgage to them as much of his own Lands: and because this is a new thing,
and without a president, he shall at the discretion of the Pope, give all the
security he can: That if any one endeavor to hinder this their design, they
shall join their Forces, and assist one another against him; and to this both
shall be obliged, so long as the War continues, and six Months after it is
ended. That all may freely enter into this League, and share both in the Profit
and Charges of the War: That the College of Cardinals shall also ratify this
League; and that what is said of June, is to be understood of the Month of June
this present Year. And this League both Parties signed; a Copy whereof Jerome
Franco, the Pope's Nuncio, produced afterward in Suizerland, as shall be said
hereafter.

Much about this time the French King makes Peace with the King of England,
Peace betwixt France and England.
leaving Buloigne in his hands, till the Money he owed him should be paid: And
Henry, Henry, the Dauphin of France, has a Daughter.
the Dauphin of France, having a Daughter then born to him, who was named
Isabel, for confirmation of this new friendship, the King of England is invited
to be Godfather. At that time also the Cardinal of St. Andrews in Scotland was
about dinnertime killed in his own Castle, The Cardinal of Scotland killed.
by a Gentleman, whose Brother he had too severely used for Lutheranism: after
the slaughter was committed, the murderer fled into England. July the third,
the Pope wrote to the Suizers, and insinuating into their favor, upon account
of the intimate friendship that he and his Predecessors had entertained with
them, The Pope's Letter to the Suizers.
he bewaileth, that some of them, through the craft of the Devil, and the arts
of Rebels, were snatched away from the Apostolic Religion and him, like dear
Children out of the bosom and embraces of a most loving Father: nevertheless,
that it was a great blessing of God, that many of them continued steadfast and
constant in the Faith toward God and his Church, that so others who had been
seduced by the persuasions of wicked men, might have an example set before
their eyes, and at length return to the Religion of their Forefathers: for it
was a great argument of God's goodness toward them, that in this dissension
about Religion, they lived in peace together, whereas upon that occasion
grievous commotions were raised in other places: for the quieting whereof, he
had from the very beginning of his Pontificate, applied all Remedies, and made
use of greatest lenity: that he had lately betaken himself to the last refuge,
by calling a General Council, and appointing it to be held at Trent, a Town of
Germany, where that vicious Seed of Heretics most increased: to which Town
they might safely come, and there, if they pleased, maintain their own
interests: That he had hoped, that that being so august an Assembly, to which
Christian Kings and People had always paid a great deference, and the
Congregation of so many Bishops, who, under the conduct of the Holy Ghost,
treated of Matters of Religion, no man would be so wicked, as not to submit to
so great an Authority, and presently, forsaking all erroneous Doctrines, yield
to the judgment and decision of the Catholic Church: That he entertained still
the same opinion of them, and hoped, that by reason of their domestic peace,
those of them who had continued faithful and constant, would obey the Council:
and that the rest, who not deliberately, but by too much credulity had been led
away into error, would not slight the Authority of the Assembly: which, that
they would do, and repair to the Council, as unto a Celestial Congregation,
wherein God himself presided, he now again earnestly exhorted them, as he had
done before: But that it was a great grief unto him, that there were not a few
in Germany, and of the number of those also who were reckoned Princes, that not
only with pride and insolence despised the Council, but reproached and reviled
it also, declaring, that they would not submit to its Decrees: that it chiefly
therefore grieved him, to see himself necessitated by the stubbornness and
obstinacy of those desperate men, to seek a remedy by Arms. For that he could
no longer suffer neither the loss of so many Souls, which perished daily
through Heresies, nor this oppression of the Christian Religion: the one
whereof belonged to his Pastoral Office, and the other concerned the Dignity of
his Place and Character: And that whilst he was often casting about in his
thoughts for a remedy, and making his Prayers to God, that he would discover to
him a way, it happened most opportunely, that the Emperor, a most religious
Prince, being provoked by the same Crimes, in a manner, of wicked men, as he
himself was, had resolved to revenge the cause of Religion by Arms: for when,
by his means, and at his intercession, a Council was granted to Germany; it
seemed to him, that they who refused and slighted it, despised also what he had
done, and set light by his authority: that therefore he had willingly embraced
this occasion, as offered by Heaven; and was resolved with all his own and the
Revenues of the Roman Church, to further and assist the Emperor's laudable
inclinations: for that should he do otherwise, should he act negligently and
remissly, there was no doubt to be made, but that God would require at his
hands, as at the hands of a Father, the Souls of so many Children, corrupted
and undone by the treachery of Heretics: that therefore he made known to them
this his purpose and resolution, that they might both see the anxiety that
overburdened him, and join their Wishes and Prayers with him, that is, with God
and Religion. That they were famous for many noble Exploits, but that a more
honorable Name they could not procure to themselves, than by entertaining
their ancient Amity with God, according to the example of their Forefathers, by
paying their wonted Love and Obedience to the Church of Rome, which had always
gratified and obliged them; and lastly, by contributing their Aid and
Assistance, which he earnestly begged of them, in this so just and religious a
Cause.

The Ambassadors of the Protestants of Upper Germany, The Ambassadors of the
Protestants to the Suizzers.
on the fifth of July, came to Baden from Ulme, to a Convention of the Suizers,
and having delivered their Message, were put off to the Month of August. Their
Demands were, That they would not grant a Passage to foreign Soldiers through
their Country; And that, if there was occasion, they would permit their
Subjects to serve them in the War. The Men of Brunswick, Goslar, Hildesseim,
and Hannover, by orders from the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave, Wolffembottel is
demolished.
demolished Wolffembottle, the chief Fort of Henry Duke of Brunswick, which to
this time he had kept by a good Garrison. In these stirs and commotions, The
Prince Palatine enquires after the cause of the War.
the Elector Palatine, by his Ambassador, Sir Wolff Affensteyn, made
application to the Emperor at Ratisbonne, and desired to be informed what the
Cause of the War was, and against whom these Preparations were making: he
dissuaded him also from hostility, and begged, that he might have leave to
mediate. Some days after, the Emperor sent him this Answer by Granvell and
Naves, That it was no difficult thing for him to know, both what the cause of
the War was, and against whom it was designed. Afterward he objected the same
things almost, that he had before alleged in his Letters to the Free Towns,
That they would not obey him; that not only in Germany, but in foreign Parts
also, some had contrived and plotted many things against him, under a color of
Religion; that they would be bound by no Laws; that they had invaded other men's
Possessions, and especially Church Lands, disposing of them in a tyrannical
manner, with no other intent, certainly, than that by a kind of hereditary
right they might transmit Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Possessions, to their Children and Offspring, was it credible, that they, who
committed such things, would abide by any fair and lawful trial, and was it not
rather their intention, by raising Broils and Troubles, to baffle all Justice
and Censure? that there was not the least hopes of amendment, and that he
himself knew, what lenity he had used, and how many faults he had pardoned
them; that, nevertheless, all he had got thereby, was, that growing more
insolent, they tampered with the rest of the States, and stirred them up to
Rebellion: That he knew not by what Arts they did do so: but that it might be
easily perceived by any, how unworthy a thing it was, and how justly to be
lamented by him: That since they, without any regard to Law or Justice, acted
arbitarily and by violence, trampling upon the Decrees of the Empire, there was
no other way now to be essayed, but that which was familiar and common to
themselves, that is to say, Force and Arms: that therefore it was his purpose,
by this War, not only to settle Religion, but also to compose all other
differences, restore the Peace and Liberty of Germany, and to secure those
under his protection who did their duty, but severely punish all disturbers of
the public peace, and oppressors of liberty, according to their demerits.

July the tenth, the Elector Palatine sent this Answer of the Emperor's, which
he had received the day before, to the Duke of Saxony, the Landgrave, and Duke
of Wirtemberg, The Elector Palatine desires to reconcile the Protestants to the
Emperor.
and laying before them the danger that hung over Germany, especially from
strangers, if the War should rise to any height, He besought them to condescend
and grant what possibly they could: for though the countenance of Affairs
looked very sad and dismal, yet it was his opinion, that if they would submit
to the Emperor, and comply with him in some things, it would be a very fair
way toward an Accommodation: That he understood the Emperor might be
appeased, if they would first beg his Pardon for their Offenses; next, if what
had been done amiss by any of them were reformed; and lastly, if that they
possessed any thing of other men's, they would refer it to the Emperor, or any
body else that might be judged proper, to determine the matter: wherein, if he
could do them any service, he promised to use all his endeavors. In the mean
time the Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave, who were much surprised and alarmed
at this so sudden and unexpected a revolution; Saxony and the Landgrave arm.
especially seeing the Emperor had gone lately from Spire in a most friendly
manner: having got certain Advice how all things went, with great diligence
raise Forces themselves, and write to their Confederates to do the like; and
not to suffer themselves to be taken off by the crafty Councels of some. The
Protestants Letters to the Emperor.
Having met also to consult about their Affairs, they wrote to the Emperor to
this effect, We have learnt from our Deputies, say they, whom at your Command,
Most Gracious Sovereign, we sent to Ratisbonne, that when those of our
Profession and League, had heard of the Preparations that were making for War,
they made their earnest Address to your Majesty, That you would take care that
Germany should not suffer: and though you made such an Answer then, that we
might have very justly entertained some suspicious upon it; yet still we were
in good hopes, that the War was not designed against us, nor any other State of
the Empire; because that being by your Majesty summoned to come to that Diet,
we sent Deputies thither with full and ample Commissions, who both consulted
about your Demands, and freely gave their opinions; so that we did not
apprehend there was the least cause given of displeasure: Besides, Sir, your
Answer given then, has no relation to what is past, but only to the future,
whilst you declare your resolution to settle the Commonwealth, and by virtue of
your Authority to punish those that are refractory and disobedient: wherefore
we had no reason in the World to think, that before you made known your
Demands, and received our Answer, you were preparing for War: but when by
several conjectures, especially your Letters to some Princes and free Towns,
and the Speeches of Granvell and Naves, we came at length to know, that your
design was to punish some disobedient Princes; and that it was the general
report, that the whole stress of the War was intended against us: it grieved
and troubled us very much, as it ought indeed, and therefore we thought fit to
write to your Majesty in our own justification. And in the first place, Sir, we
can truly affirm, that we and our Confederates have always born the public
Burdens imposed upon us, more than others, when some were even exempted:
besides, we used our endeavors that you should obtain the Supplies which you
demanded in the last Diet of Spire, and contributed to them our selves: and now
that after all these offices performed, we should be accused of disobedience,
we cannot but be much grieved and troubled at it. We could have wished, and
indeed it was but reason, that we had been accused first, and brought to a
Hearing, before it should have come to a War, and our Accusation have been made
public: for so we might easily have cleared our Innocence, and refuted the
Calumnies of those who have in this manner informed you against us. It is well
known how kindly you treated both of us, lately at Spire, and five Years since
at Ratisbonne, so that no Rebellion or base Practice can be objected unto us:
We insist not upon this, that at your Request we put the Duchy of Brunswick
under Sequestration a year ago, and thereby run a great risk of our Lives and
Fortunes; nor are you neither ignorant, Sir, when you were Created Emperor at
Franckfort, how you bound your self to the Empire, what you promised by your
solemn Oath, and how the Laws of the Empire, are to have their effect against
those that are accused of the Crimes, which you object to us: but now that
without a Hearing you are preparing to use open force against us, we will refer
that to God, and when we come to understand what it is you accuse us of, The
Authors of the War against the Protestants.
shall so answer, that all men may know that we are wronged, and make it appear
that you, at the instigation of the Roman Antichrist, and of the impious
Council of Trent, have undertaken this War, for the oppression of the Gospel,
and of the Liberty of Germany, and for no other Cause whatsoever: The condition
of our Affairs does require, that we should represent this unto you; and so you
are to take it: For it would have been far more agreeable to us, to have
pleased you by all the Testimonies of sincere Duty and Affection.

July the seventh, The Emperor's Letter to the Archbishop of Cologne.
the Emperor by Letters acquaints the Archbishop of Cologne, That for the
welfare of Germany, that is, that the Public Peace, Right, and Justice, the
Dignity of his own Character, and the Liberty of the Empire might be recovered,
(all which some seditious People had almost already overturned, and, unless
they were restrained, would certainly do so) he was forced to take Arms, that
he might reduce them to their Duty: And because he was told, that they made it
their whole Business to allure the Archbishop and others into their
Confederacy, he commanded him, in the first place, that he should make
Proclamation throughout his whole Province, and use his endeavors that no
Subject of his served in these Wars, unless under the Emperor himself, or his
Commanders, who should for that effect show authentic Commissions. In the next
place, That if any were already gone into the Wars, he should forthwith recall
them, and command them to live at home, expecting the Emperor's Pleasure: That
he should severely punish those that did not obey, and so behave himself, that
the Emperor might perceive, that he loved the Peace and Quiet of Germany; but
that if he did otherwise, he threatened him with great Dangers, and the loss of
all he had. So soon as the Archbishop received these Letters, he published them
in all places, and commanded that they should be obeyed; ordering Public
Prayers also to be said in all Churches, That God would avert the Judgment that
was hanging over Germany. The Protestants send Ambassadors to the Kings of
England and France.
About the same time the Protestants send Ambassadors to the Kings of England
and France, who, as has been said, had lately made Peace, to solicit them for
Succors. In the mean time, after that the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave had
written privately to the Emperor, as we said before, they publish a
Declaration, July the thirteenth, wherein they allege, That this War was a War
of Religion, Saxony and Landgrave publish a Declaration concerning the War.
and that it was the Emperor's Design, under a certain color and pretext of
Rebellion, and as if he intended but to punish a few, to divide and break the
Confederates, that so he might afterward more easily destroy them one after
another. For confirmation of this, they bring several Proofs, and give a
Relation of what King Ferdinand, Granvell, Naves, and others, had privately
said at Ratisbonne, to wit, That the Contempt of the Council was the cause of
this War. They affirm also, That the Emperor had sent Letters to the
Magistrates of Ravensberg, who had lately received the Reformed Religion, That
they should within a few days desist from their Enterprise, else he threatened
to give their Town and Lands to be plundered by his Soldiers; but that the
Messenger was recalled with his Letters, when he was upon the Rode, le^t it
might become public, that Religion was the Ground of the War. That the
Archbishop of Cologne also was, for attempting a Reformation, excommunicated by
the Pope, and deprived of all his Ecclesiastical Possessions and Dignities, and
is threatened almost with the very same by the Emperor; What was that, if not a
plain Declaration of the Cause of the War? For it was no light Report that went
about, That the Cardinal of Ausbourg, The Bishop of Ausbourg a great Incendiary.
a great Incendiary in these Troubles, was by force to be put into his place:
That it was also given out by some, That when they were once vanquished and
subdued, Forces should be dispersed all over Germany, to see that the Decrees
made in the Council, concerning Religion, should in the Emperor's Name be
obeyed and put into execution: Moreover, that many Letters gave an account,
That the Archbishop of Toledo chiefly, and many other Prelates of Spain, did
contribute vast Treasures for the carrying on of this War, which they would not
certainly do, if any Secular Interest were the cause of it: That it was known
besides, what sort of a Decree it was that past at Ausbourg sixteen years
since, when the Emperor declared, That he could not endure that Sect and
Doctrine of Luther, but that he and his Friends would hazard all they had,
Life, Strength, Blood and all, that he might destroy it Root and Branch: For
should they, indeed, be subdued, which God forbid, then would it soon appear,
that no favor was to be shown to this Religion, but that rather having killed
their Ministers, ravished their Wives and Children, they would again restore
Monks and Friars, and the rest of that filthy Rout: That it was not lawful for
the Emperor to use violence against any State, nor to proscribe any Man
without a Trial, nor yet to call into Germany Strangers or Foreign Forces, nor
indeed to aspire to any Hereditary Right or Succession to the Empire; because
to these Conditions he was bound by a sacred and solemn Oath: For could he in
right do otherwise, there would be no lasting Form of Government in the
Commonwealth: That they could not imagine what the Cause of his Quarrel was:
For as for my part, says the Duke of Saxony, all the Difference that he and
his Brother King Ferdinand had with me, was two years ago wholly ended at
Spire, and to cement our Friendship, Eleanor the Daughter of Ferdinand was
freely promised to my eldest Son, provided we could agree about Religion. The
Emperor approved of that then, and when I was returning home from the Diet, he
sent Granvell and Naves to my Lodgings, to complement me in his Name, and to
assure me of his Kindness, and of his Good Will toward my Person, Children,
and whole Country. What Crime can I have been guilty of since that time, that
he should from such cruel Resolutions against me? But the truth is, this is our
Case, as we said before, we refuse the Pope's Counsel, and therefore incur his
Hatred: However, he had no reason to act so, nor to design such things against
the House of Saxony; for he knows, that after the Death of Maximilian, this
Imperial Dignity being offered to my Uncle Frederick, he by his Vote and
Interest secured it to him; not to mention many other good Offices which at
several times the Family of Saxony have done to the House of Austria. But if,
perhaps, he be offended, that I turned Julius Pflugg out of the Bishopric of
Numburg; as to that, I both asserted my Right in a Public Manifesto, and
referred my self to any unsuspected Judges and Arbitrators that the Emperor
might appoint. Now, as for my part, says the Landgrave, I was fully reconciled
unto him five years ago at Ratisbonne; and if that some years past I intended
to make War against the Bishops, and did after assist my Cousin the Duke of
Wirtemberg, in the recovering of his own; for all that, and whatever also I
might have publicly or privately acted against the Statutes and Written Laws
of the Empire, I had a Pardon in due form: What then should be the Cause of
Prejudice or Animosity, I cannot at all imagine. Besides, when I was to wait
upon him lately at Spire, he was so gracious and obliging to me both in
Countenance and Speech, that I could not perceive the least sign of Displeasure
in him. It was stipulated betwixt us five years since at Ratisbonne, That if at
any time he should attempt any thing against the Duke of Cleve, I should not at
all meddle in the matter: He made War afterward against him, and I performed
what I promised; and when afterward he received the Duke of Cleve into favor
again, which was before Venlo, he pardoned all that had served under him, or
assisted him in his Wars. But if he be offended at our Absence, and that we did
not come to Ratisbonne, both of us made our Excuses; the Duke of Saxony by
Ambassadors, and I personally, in a Conference at Spire. But what Liberty or
Form of Government is there then in Germany, if that should give a good Cause
for War, when not only in former Diets, but in the very same Diet also of
Ratisbonne, several Princes were absent? And as for the War of Brunswick, we
cannot be blamed; for it is lawful for all Men to withstand Force by Force. We
frequently moved, and earnestly desired in several Diets, That a Restraint
might be put upon his Boldness: but unless it were fair Words and Letters, we
could obtain nothing: And nevertheless, the Public Letters which at our desire
King Ferdinand wrote to Duke Henry, were accompanied with other Private ones,
whereby Duke Henry was given to understand, that he was not to obey them. These
Letters, under the King's own Hand, were found in Wolffembottel, and, if need
were, could be produced. Now had we acted with the same severity against the
Duke of Brunswick, as the Emperor does now against us, though innocent, there
would have been no War at all: But because he attacked us, who are obnoxious
and exposed to great hatred upon account of the Gospel and our Religion, all
his Trespasses were connived at. Nor is the Emperor ignorant, that we both put
the Province we had taken under Sequestration, and offered our selves to submit
to the Verdict of Arbitrators appointed by his Majesty, concerning the Defense
we undertook against him. If he had followed this course, and had not, in
contempt of the Emperor's Edicts, rejected the Sequestration, and raised new
Stirs, but come to a fair Trial at Law with us, all would have gone in the
right way: For if, being cast, we had not submitted to the Sentence, then would
the Emperor have had a good and lawful Cause of putting the Laws in execution
against us; whereas for what now he does, he has none. Nay more, since the time
Duke Henry and his Son were made Prisoners, the Emperor never demanded any
thing of us upon that account: We are not then to be accused of Undutifulness.
Now if it be laid to our charge, That we hinder the Course of Justice, it is
the greatest wrong can be done to us; for since, for many years past, none were
admitted to be Judges and Assessors in the Imperial Chamber, but the sworn
Enemies of our Religion; that these slighting all Transactions and Agreements,
gave Sentence against us and our Confederates in Causes of Religion; that in
Civil Causes also they would do us no Justice, we did no more but what we might
lawfully do, in refusing them as suspect and our Enemies; offering withal to
give more ample Reasons for our declining them, before Judges chosen for that
purpose. Nothing then can be objected to us as to that: Besides, it was decreed
at Spire two years since, That the Chamber should be equally constituted; and
it cannot be imputed to us and our Associates, that it is not done. It is known
also to the Emperor, that in the Diet at Worms last year, none did more oppose
that Decree of his, than those very Princes who would seem to be most dutiful
and obedient, for that very Reason, That because they are our Adversaries, they
might be our Judges. We are, moreover, informed, That it is laid to our charge
as a Crime, that we endeavor to bring over some of the Nobility to our Party:
But it is strange that we should be blamed for that; it being manifest from the
Records of the Empire, that it was the Practice of our Forefathers to associate
to themselves not only the Nobility, but the Bishops also. And grant there were
any fault in that, is it therefore lawful, without a fair Trial, to make War
against us? Now, though the Emperor be excepted in that Herediatary League
which is betwixt the Houses of Saxony, Brandenbourg, and Hesse, yet it is still
so to be understood, provided he abuse not his Power and Authority. Let Albert
and John, Marquesses of Brandenbourg, who have engaged in the Emperor's
Service against us, seriously consider then what they do, and remember the Oath
they are tied by: We have thought fit to make this known to them, and to those
also, who being our Vassals, serve under them in this War. Nor will it excuse
them to pretend, that it is the Emperor's Design only to punish some Princes
for their Disobedience; since they themselves know, that no such thing can
justly be objected to us. But if the Emperor had laid any Crime to our charge,
as in reason he ought to have done, and we could not have justified our selves,
there would have been no necessity then of using such Artifices, or of
soliciting our Confederates to a Defection; seeing if the Crime had been
proved, most part would have forsaken us of their own accord, and few would
have ventured a Risque with us in a bad Cause. Furthermore, when two years
since we, with others, concluded to assist the Emperor against the French
King, he then promised, That so soon as that War was ended, he would march into
Hungary in Person against the Turk: But now when the Turks, as it is reported
by many, do with vast Armies make Incursions into Hungary and the adjacent
Countries, and have besides strong Garrisons in Buda and Pest, the poor
Wretches of that Country are left as a Prey to the cruel and harbarous Enemy,
and no care taken of them, that the Blood of those who profess the Name of
Christ may, in the mean time, with more ease be shed in Germany. This being so,
we are in good hopes, that most Men will pity and commiserate our Condition,
and not join with our Enemies, who have no other intent than to stifle the
Light of the Gospel amongst us, as we see it is in all other Places of their
Dominions, and to bring us under the worst kind of Bondage and Slavery; but
that they will acccept of moderate Pay with us, rather than serve in the Armies
of the Antichrist of Rome and his Adherents, whose chief Endeavors are, that
even with the Ruin and Destruction of Germany they may again establish their
impious and impure Doctrine. And since now we are forced, after we have
earnestly begged for Peace, and are convicted of no Crime, to defend our selves
against unjust Violence, we trust that God Almighty will side with Truth
against Falsehood, and in this his own Cause be our Chief Leader and
Standard Bearer against the wicked Contrivances, of the Pope: For to him alone
we wholly commit our Cause, praying his Divine Majesty that he would confound
the Devices of blood-thirsty Men, and more and more promote his own Honor and
Glory.

The same day they write to John Marquess of Brandenbourg, The Protestants
Letters to the Marquess of Brandenbourg.
wishing him, as being one of the Protestant League, which might be proved by
his own Letters, and then as an ancient Confederate of theirs also upon a
particular account, not to take Arms against them, but to act and demean
himself according to the Articles and Covenants of the League; for that
otherwise they would divulge the Matter, Brandenbourgs Answer.
and publicly accuse him of transgressing his Duty. To which he made answer,
That he denied not but that he served the Emperor, since he had given him
assurance that his Design was not against the Religion: That he was indeed of
the Smalcaldick League, but in so far only as concerned the Augustane
Confession: That as to the private League, the Emperor was expressly therein
excepted; which being so, that they had no reason to find fault with him for
his Service, nor to accuse him of having done any thing contrary to his Honor
and Obligation. A Manifesto against Brandenbourg.
Having received that Answer, they publish a Manifesto, and, amongst other
things, refute what he had said of the Augustane Confession, proving by his own
Letters, that he was bound to assist them and the Confederates, if Matters
should come to that pass, although it might be pretended and given out that
Religion was not the Cause of the War, as the Emperor now did. Wherefore they
caution all men, but especially Colonels, Officers, and Soldiers, not to serve
under a Man who had violated his Faith and Promise.

July the thirteenth, the Pope emitted a Bull, wherein having said much of his
own Care and Zeal for the Public, the Salvation of Men's Souls, the obstinacy
of Heretics, who slighted and rejected the Council that now was begun, and
made a pernicious War against all pious and good men: he exhorts all Men in
general, to give themselves to fasting and praying, confess their Sins, choose
what Confessor every one pleased, and then receive the Sacrament, that so God
might be prevailed with, to prosper that War, which the Emperor and He were
obliged to undertake, for the rooting out of Heresies, and restoring Peace to
the Church.

Now, though it was the Emperor's design to have raised Forces with all
imaginable secrecy, and to have fallen upon the Protestant Confederates before
they were provided: yet such was their diligence, and so great zeal and
resolution was in the minds of Men to defend themselves in this War, that July
the sixteenth, the Landgrave took the Field with his Forces; The Forces of the
Landgrave.
though in the lower Germany Maximilian Count of Buren, had an Army almost
complete, and that it was uncertain whom he intended first to attack. Before
the Landgrave marched out of his own Country, The Landgrave sends his Son to
Strasbourg.
he sent his Eldest Son William, a Youth of sixteen Years of Age, to
Strasbourg, a City of great strength. When he was upon parting, Henry Duke of
Brunswick sent him word out of Prison, That if he would give him the hearing,
he would discover unto him, The Duke of Brunswick offers to betray the Papists
Councels against the Protestants.
when and how the measures of this War were concerted: But the Landgrave who
looked upon that to be a cunning fetch of his, to atone a little for his
fault, or to procure his liberty, declined the conference: but the Duke would
by no means discover the matter to any but himself. The first Exploit performed
by the high Germans, who now were in a readiness, was against their Enemies of
Bavaria. For when frequent intelligence was brought, that the Pope's Forces
having almost passed the Alps, The first Exploit of the Protestants.
were drawing nigh the Borders of Germany, they thought it best to prevent
them. Thus stands the case now. They who come from Italy pass by Trent to
Inspruck, a Town belonging to King Ferdinand; from thence there are two ways
that lead to Bavaria, where the Emperor then was, either down the River of Inn
by Copsteyne, or else to the left hand through the middle of the Alps. Near the
entry into the Alps, on the German side, King Ferdinand has the Castle of
Erenberg, standing upon a very high Hill, surrounded with steep and abrupt
Precipices and narrow Passes; so that whoever is Master of that Castle, may
hinder the passage of the greatest Army that way. Wherefore in the Month of
July, Sebastian Scherteline marches thither with a competent Body of Men, by
orders of the Protestant Deputies that were then assembled at Ulm, as we said
before, Fiessen taken.
and having on his march taken Fiessen, a Town upon the River of Leck,
belonging to the Bishop of Ausbourg, on the tenth of July he makes himself
Master also of that Pass and Castle, Erenberg is taken by Scherteline.
the Garrison having surrendered it unto him. His design was to have continued
his march along the Alps, and to have taken Inspruck also, and fortified it
with a strong Garrison, and so he would have commanded both the ways, that lead
from Italy into Germany, and stopped the coming of Soldiers or Provisions, to the
Emperor, by those places. But the alarm being taken, and by orders from King
Ferdinand, all the Country of Tirol being in Arms, a considerable Body of Men
came to Inspruck, under the Command of Francis Castlealto, Francis Castlealto.
Governor of Trent, and having left a Garrison to defend the Town, they
possess themselves of the ways and passages. Wherefore Scherteline having left
Garrisons in the Castle of Erenberg, and the Town of Fiessen, retreats, and
marches with his Men to that Army which was raised in upper Germany, and lay
upon the Danube. This Army which was Commanded by Heideck, July the
twenty-third, took by composition the Town and Castle of Dilinghen, Dilinghen
and Donawert taken by the Protestants.
belonging to the Bishop of Ausbourg, and exacted of them an Oath of Fidelity
to the Cause. At the same time Maurice Bishop of Archstadt, sent Messengers to
the chief Commanders of the Army, entreating them to spare him and his people,
and he would allow them free passage through his Country, and furnish them with
Provisions. Below Dilinghen, is the Town of Donawert, which being summoned,
refused to surrender: but when the Inhabitants saw an Army appearing to batter
it, they surrendered the place to the Protestants. In the mean time the Duke of
Saxony, and Landgrave, advance with their Forces, and marching through
Franconia, where they capitulated with the Bishop of Wurtzburg, for free
passage and Provisions, they hasten to join their Companions. In their Camp, at
that time, were the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenbourg, and Duke
Maurice, sent to negotiate a Treaty, but they referring the matter to their
Confederates, there was nothing done in it. The rich Merchants, and other
Banquiers of Ausbourg, having packt up their Goods, were already gone out of
the Town: These of Ausbourg furnish the Emperor with Money.
but because it was reported that they lent the Emperor Money, the Deputies
that then were at Ulm, by Letters and Messengers complain of it to the Senate
of Ausbourg as of an ill thing, and seriously advise them to take care that the
like be not done for the future. The Magistrates answer, That formerly when
they knew nothing of War, they had lent Money, indeed, according to their
Custom, that it might not lie idle by them: but that now they did not think any
body did it, nor should they go unpunished, if it came to their knowledge that
they did do so. The Emperor's Forces at Ratisbonne.
The Emperor was at that time at Ratisbonne, and had as yet no Forces with
him, besides three thousand Spaniards, about five thousand German Foot, and
seven hundred Horse. The Spaniards he had sent for out of Hungary: and they
were the same who, as we mentioned in the preceding Book, had after the
Pacification at Soissons wintered in Lorrain, and having afterward marched
near to Strasbourg, were the Year before sent into Hungary. It fell out luckily
for the Protestants, that Peace being lately concluded betwixt the Kings of
England and France, the German Soldiers who had served the French King being
dismissed, listed themselves in their Service, under the Command of Count
Bichling, and George Record, who was the Landgrave's Vassal.

July the twentieth, The Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave Outlawed by the
Emperor.
the Emperor by Proclamation Outlawed the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave. In the
beginning he gives a large account, what pains he had hitherto taken, that he
might keep all Germany in Peace, what Decrees he had made to that purpose,
whereby it was provided, that no Force should be used against any man for any
cause whatsoever, but that all things should be done according to the standing
Laws, and ancient Customs: and then he shows how the States of the Empire are
bound in Duty and Allegiance to him. But without any regard had to any of these
things, says he, John Frederick Elector of Saxony, and Philip Landgrave of
Hesse, have with insolent boldness, at all times, as much as in them lay,
frustrated all the pains and labor we have been at for the public good, and
have continued disobedient: nor did they themselves only resist our Authority,
but enticed likewise the other States, to enter into unlawful Combinations with
them. Besides, the Landgrave, some Years since, under, I know not what pretext,
made War against some of the chief States of the Empire, and marching into
their Countries, raised great vast Sums of Money there: then afterward both in
conjunction together, without any cause given, invaded a certain Prince of the
Empire, drove him out of his Country, and seized his Territories. Nay, they
have also appropriated to themselves some Bishoprics, and other both Secular
and Ecclesiastical Fiefs, the Owners whereof, by ancient Custom, are Members of
the Empire, and have place in the Assembly of the States, and still detain them
in that Bondage, though they have often sued to Us, and implored our Protection
in several Diets. They have also spoiled many of their Estates and yearly
Revenues, and received into their Homage the Clients and Vassals of others.
Lately, also, they were so strangely bold, as to solicit some of the States,
not to repair to this Diet, that they might thereby hinder the dispatch of all
Affairs, and bring Us and Our Authority into contempt. And all these things
they do with the greater security and liberty, that they slight Justice, and
neither fear, nor stand in awe of any Magistrate: for through their fault, the
Supreme Judicature of the Empire is suppressed, the Laws are silent, and now
for a long time (which is a thing not to be paralelled) there has been no
Administration of Justice, to the great prejudice of many. And, what is most
grievous, all these things they act under the specious and sweet Name of
Religion, Peace and Liberty: for these plausible Titles they make use to veil
and cloak their Actions, when in the mean time they desire nothing less, than
Agreement in Religion, or the Peace and Liberty of Germany. Surely they can
prove by no Text of Scripture, that it is lawful for them, in any manner of
way, obstinately to resist the Supreme Magistrate: but the contrary is easily
made out, both from the Word of God, and approved History, to wit, that the
ancient Professors of the Christian Doctrine, who not only confirmed their
Faith by their words and actions, but sealed it also by their death, obeyed
even profane and Pagan Kings; How much less then ought they under a pretext of
Religion, to deny Us their Duty and Obedience? for by denying it, they make it
manifest, that their Design is to Usurp our Crown, Scepter, and Authority, and
having put all into confusion and disorder, to oppress Religion, Law, Peace,
and Liberty; that with the accession of new Titles and Possessions, they may
constrain all men to truckle under their Tyranny. And, indeed, nothing less can
be gathered from their haughty Words and Menaces, and from those scandalous
Libels and Pictures scattered abroad in all places among the People, to the
great dishonor and contempt of Our Person and Authority. Moreover, they have
not only made Leagues against Us, in those Conventicles of theirs, but also
stirred up foreign Kings against Us, and underhand assisted them both with
Supplies and Council. Some may be found also, that can tell Tales, how far they
have gone, that they might invite the Turk into Germany; which is indeed the
more credible, that such a Juncture would have proved very commodious for their
designs. By these Acts of their then, they break their Allegiance to Us,
trample upon the Dignity of Our Character, and evacuate the force of all
Decrees, which they look upon as made for no other end, but that others should
be barred from the liberty of resisting Violence, and they only allowed a
permission to do wrong to all men. For all which Causes, they have fallen into
that most heinous Crime of High Treason, and incurred the Penalties thereunto
due by the Laws; as plainly appears by their Villainies, which are so notorious,
that it is to no purpose to spend time in proving them. Now though we might
have long ago used Our Authority, and punished them according to their deserts,
nevertheless for peace-sake, and for avoiding all stirs and troubles, We still
showed them Our Favor, and in many things condescended to them, more than was
becoming; and in that We often offended our own Conscience, lessened our
Authority, and neglected the Interests of others. Thus We used most gentle
means five years ago, with the Landgrave at Ratisbonne, and two years since
with the Duke of Saxony at Spire, and that in hopes that being gained by our
extraordinary lenity and forbearance, they might at length break off their ill
purposes, and save themselves and Us the trouble of any more violent Remedy.
But now that We find all our endeavors to have been in vain, and that they
have plainly cheated Us by their Words, in regard that slighting our Decrees
and the Laws of the Empire, they obstinately go on even contrary to their own
Covenents and Engagements, and through an unbridled Desire of Rule, invade
other men's Rights and Possessions; having no respect to Law, but in all their
Actions aiming at the overthrow of the Government: so that unless they be
restrained, there will be so little possibility of composing the Differences of
Religion, that all the parts of the State must remain discomposed and out of
order. We are forced to use the power that God has put into Our hands against
them. And since their Rebellion is so notorious, that they themselves cannot
deny it, and that they carry all things on in a violent way, refusing to submit
to Law and Justice, We therefore Proscribe and Outlaw them as false Traitors,
perfidious and seditious Rebels, and are resolved to bring them to condign
punishment, that they may no longer be a hinderance unto Us, in settling the
State, and doing those things, which properly belong to Our Character and
Place. We therefore strictly Charge and Command all and every one of Our
Subjects, that they presume not in any manner to aid and assist them, or
otherwise take their part, under the pain of forfeiture of Lives and Fortunes:
and that such as are now in their Service, return to their Duty and Obedience
to Us, without pretending any League or Association to the contrary, all which
we hereby rescind and annul. We moreover absolve all the Nobility, Gentry, and
Commons of their Dominions, from their Oath of Allegiance to them, assuring
them, in the Word of an Emperor, of all Security and Protection if they obey;
and that such as refuse, and are disobedient to Our Commands, shall be punished
in the same manner as the Principals.

July the two and twentieth, Gerard Feldwig, who lately returned from
Constantinople, is sent back again thither from Ratisbonne. When the Emperor
perceived that there was no business to be done in this Diet of the Empire, he
Prorogues it to the first of February the year following. We spoke before of
the Pope's Letters sent to the Suizzers: now so soon as Jerome Franco, his
Holiness's Nuncio, had received them, he sent them forward from Lucerne, with
Letters of his own, dated July the twenty-fifth, wherein he acquaints them,
That three days before he had received Letters from the Pope and College of
Cardinals: and that though they were much to the same purpose with some other
former Letters of theirs, yet because they contained somewhat that was new, he
had sent them in all haste a Copy of them, promising to produce the Originals
in the next Assembly: and that because in the League which the Pope and
Emperor had concluded, about the latter end of June, there is place left for
others who would engage in the same Confederacy; and because also it was
stipulated, That the Emperor should first try if, without a War, his, and the
Enemies of the Sea of Rome, could be reclaimed and brought to their Duty; his
Holiness did earnestly desire of them, that they would in plain terms tell,
whether or not they would enter into that League, and submit to the Decrees of
the Council of Trent: Wherefore since they had appointed him a Day, at their
next Assembly at Baden, to give him an Answer to his former Demands, he did now
write of these things unto them, that they might in the mean time consider of
them: That therefore he begged of them, for the Blood of our Savior Christ's
sake, that they would seriously reflect, how glorious and advantageous it would
be to them, and to their Children also, if they did contribute in extinguishing
the Flames of Division in Germany, and approve the Decrees of the Council. In
that the Pope divulged the Cause of the League, some looked upon it as cunning
Fetch, that by that means he might entangle the Emperor in many Difficulties;
for it is certain, as shall be said hereafter, that he took it very ill, that
the Emperor had pretended another Cause for the War. The Marriages of Bavaria
and Cleves, amidst the noise of War.
About this time Albert Son to the Duke of Bavaria married the Lady Anne
Daughter to King Ferdinand, and William Duke of Cleves, the Lady Mary her
Sister: For seeing the Duke of Cleve had in vain expected the Daughter of Navar
from France, as has been said before, he was dispensed with by a Bull from the
Pope to marry another: He therefore married this Lady, and both Marriages were
celebrated at Ratisbonne, amidst the Tumult and Noise of Wars, and were
designed as a Bond to strengthen a new Alliance.

The Session of the Council of Trent was appointed to be about the latter end
of July, The Session of the Council is put off.
as has been said; but it was put off to the beginning of the next Year, as
will appear in its proper place. There was at Trent, at this time, besides the
Cardinal-Legats, The number of the Fathers of the Council of Trent.
the Cardinal of Trent, and Cardinal Pacieco a Spaniard, four Archbishops,
thirty three Bishops, and of these (...) French, five Spanish, and one
Sclavonick, the rest were all Italian Bishops (...) of Divinity, who were of
Religious Orders, thirty five; and twelve others, were Secular, for most part
all Spaniards. Titular Archbishops, Olaus Magnus of Vpsale, and Venant a Scot.
Moreover, two of those Archbishops were Titular only, Olaus Magnus of Upsale,
and Robert Venant a Scottish-man. Now the occasion of this was: When Gustavus
King of Sweden, the Neighbor of Denmark, made an Alteration in Religion, in
the Year 1537. John Magnus Archbishop of Upsale, who disliked that Reformation,
The King of Sweden reforms Religion.
leaving his own Country, fled to Rome, whither he came with small Attendance.
Afterward going to Venice, he was made Vicar, and, as they commonly call it,
Suffragan to the Patriarch of that City: But being afterward weary of that
Office, The Archbishop, reduced to poverty, dies.
he returned to Rome, and there being reduced to such Straits, that he sold his
Horses, and broke up his Family, he was by Pope Paul placed in the Hospital of
the Holy Ghost, and there died in a poor and low Condition. He had a Brother
Olaus with him, to whom the Pope gave that Gothic Archbishopric, though it
was not within the Pale of the Roman Church, and sent him to the Council, with
an Allowance of fifteen Ducats a Month for his Maintenance. The other, the
Scottish-man, having informed the Pope of the Archbishopric of Armagh in
Ireland, obtained it from him in Title. He was a blind Man, and nevertheless
not only said Mass, but rid Post also. These two then the Pope would have to be
present at the Council, only for ostentation, as if those two so distant
Nations, the Swedes and Irish, had acknowledged his Power, Duke Maurice his
Progress to King Ferdinand.
when, in reality, they enjoyed no more but the Shadow and bare Title of
Prelates.

We told you before, That Duke Maurice, after a private Conference with the
Emperor, left Ratisbonne, and went home. King Fendinand following not long
after, The Emperor's Letters to Duke Maurice, and to his Brother Augustus,
wherein he desires them to take possession of the Inheritances of the Duke of
Saxony and Landgrave, and so prevent others.
he went to wait upon him at Prague. Afterward, on the first of August, the
Emperor sent to Duke Maurice from Ratisbonne a Copy of the Proscription we
mentioned before, and in his Letters to him and the People, relates the same
things almost that were contained in the Ban and Instrument of Proscription:
And because he was related in Blood and Affinity to the Parties Outlawed, so
that he might claim some Right and Title to their Estates and Goods, he
strictly charges him to assist him with all his power, in seizing and taking
possession of their Provinces; nay, that for preservation of his own Right, he
should with all diligence put himself in possession of all; else the first
Possessor, whoever that might be, should have all, without any regard had to
his Consanguinity, and the Rights of Entail: That besides, if he slighted his
Emperor's Command, he should incur the same Pains that they had done. He
charges also the Nobility, Gentry and Commons, upon the same Penalty, to obey
his Proclamation, and faithfully assist the Prince. These Letters were equally
directed to Duke Maurice and his Brother Augustus.

The Whole Protestant Army was now come to the Danube: The Protestants Letters
to the Duke of Bavaria.
There the Duke of Saxony, Landgrave, and Council of War, August the third,
wrote to William Duke of Bavaria, signifying, That it was to no purpose for
them to say much of the Emperor's Warlike Preparations, since the whole Matter
was well known to himself: That though they had never been wanting to the
Emperor in any kind of Dutifulness, nor did think they had ever given him any
cause of offense, yet had they long since learned, both from his Answer, and
the Discourses of other Men also, that he intended a War against them, as
disobedient Subjects, when, in the mean time, they were neither convicted of
any Crime, nor had done injury to any Man; and that though the Crime he imputed
to them were never so true, yet was it not lawful for him to come to an open
War, before the Case had been brought to a Judicial Trial; but that this
Proceeding of his was contrary to Justice and the Laws of the Empire, contrary
to Covenants and Capitulations, and contrary to the Custom and Practice of
former Ages: For it was the constant Custom of the Emperors, when they had any
thing to say against any State of the Empire, to bring it always to a public
Trial: That he himself knew, that for many years there had been diverse Projects
on foot, to deprive Germany of its Liberty; and that there was no doubt but
that the present War tended also to that: That now, though they had hitherto
always observed in him a great forwardness to preserve their common Liberty,
and though he had lately, after many Expressions of his Kindness and Good Will
toward them, sent them word, That he would not allow Passage to any Foreign
Soldiers, yet they had advice, that he had already both given them a (...)
Passage, supplied them with Provisions and Artillery, and received Garrison
(...) the Enemies into his Towns: That they were not a little troubled at (...)
^^eiving him to have been persuaded thereunto by Calumnies and slanderou^
^^persions: That however, since by their Declarations lately published, they
had sufficiently made it out, that the Emperor's Proceedings were unjust, and
that many both public and private Compacts and Agreements were thereby at once
violated, they trusted, that in defense of the Public Liberty, he would not be
wanting to them neither in Aid nor Counsel, especially since he had lately put
them in hopes of that, by the Messenger he sent unto them: That he would then
order the Emperor's Soldiers to march out of his Towns of Roen and Ingolstadt,
or suffer them to put equal Garrisons into those Places also: That he would
allow them safe Passage and Provisions through his Country, and assure them
thereof by Letters: And that though they did not think he would refuse them,
yet they desired his Answer within five days; else he might expect that they
would consider what was next to be done.

August the seventh, A great Misfortune occasioned by Lightning at Mechelin.
a very fair Town in Brabant, belonging to the Emperor, a Magazin of Gunpowder
taking fire by Lightning, blew up the Tower on the Wall it was kept in from the
very Foundation, spoiled all the Buildings about, within and without the City,
to above five hundred Yards distance, whereof some were set on fire, many
overthrown, some shattered and shaken, the Roofs of many thrown down, and the
Glass windows in all the Streets shattered and broken, so that the whole City
was in a manner ruined and defaced: Huge great Stones, all split and scorched,
were by the violence of the Blow carried at least six hundred Yards off, and
many Trees also forced up by the Roots, and burnt. In this sad Disaster about
two hundred Persons perished, being partly burnt in the Fire, and partly
smothered under the Ruins, besides a vast number of others who were grievously
wounded, but escaped Death at that time; of whom many, two or three, and some
four days after, were dug out of Cellars under Ground, most part starved to
death or stifled, and some alive, who had made a shift to live upon what
Victuals they found there. A great many Horses, and other Beasts also, were
burnt in the Stables; and at that part where the Tower stood, two hundred yards
of the Town-wall was levelled with the Ground.

The Suitzers meet again at Baden, August the tenth, and four days after the
Popish Cantons give their Answer to the Protestant Ambassadors, The Suitzers
Answer to the Protestants.
whom they had appointed then to attend: That they were heartily sorry for the
War that was broken out betwixt the Emperor and them, nor was there any thing
that they more wished for, or desired, than Peace: That therefore they would
not meddle in that War, but stand Neuter, and, as much as lay in their power,
hinder Foreigners from entering and passing through their Country, and keep
their own People at home: That in order thereunto, they had already set forth a
severe Proclamation, that none of their Subjects should enter into any Foreign
Service, but all expect the Orders of their Magistrates, and be in readiness
for the defense of their Country: That nevertheless many had listed themselves
in their Service, which they took very ill; and that therefore they entreated
them, that they would dismiss them, and suffer them to return home. Besides the
Demands that the Protestants had formerly made to them, they then required
also, That they would not enter into the League with the Pope and Emperor, The
Protestants Demand of the Suitzers.
nor send them any Supplies of Soldiers, which the Pope chiefly urged; but that
they would aid and assist them, who were forced in their own defense to resist
an unjust War: And having enlarged much upon the Pope's Injustice, who would
both preside and be Judge in the Council, which he held in a place commodious
for him to do mischief, they take occasion to mention the Murder of John Diaz,
showing them, that so horrid a Crime was not only not punished to this very
day, but that a great many commended it as a meritorious Action: That that was
a warning to them, how unadvised and unsafe it would be for them to come to
those places where their Adversaries ruled all; and amongst them, the lately
created Cardinal of Trent, who was upon many accounts the Pope's most humble
Servant.

Because the Protestants were now with all their Forces upon the Danube, as we
said, the Emperor, who was not as yet in a readiness, leaving Ratisbonne with
a Garrison, in the beginning of August,marches to Landishurst, a Town belonging
to the Duke of Bavaria, upon the Iser, and encamps under the Walls. From
Donawert,the Duke of Saxony, Landgrave, and the Confederates, August the
eleventh, send him a Letter of Defiance, according to the manner and Law of
Arms. We wrote to you last Month, The Protestants declare War against the
Emperor.
say they, Emperor Charles, and justified our selves from those things whereof
we stand accused; and though, as it was but reasonable, you should have either
desisted from your Warlike Preparations, or at least declared the Cause of the
War, and having mutually heard us, treated us according to the Custom of the
Empire, and your Coronation Oath: Nevertheless, since you still go on, we also
are constrained to take up Arms, that we may defend our selves against that
unjust Violence which is unworthy your Person and Character. Your Actions
clearly demonstrate, that it is your Design both to oppress the Reformed
Religion, and the Liberty of the Empire. For you your self know, what Projects
for these many years you have been carrying on, with the Antichrist of Rome,
and Foreign Princes, that you might either make them your Friends, or our
Enemies. Besides, without the Advice of the College of the Princes and States,
you have made a Truce with the Turk, quite contrary to your Promise; for when
two years since Germany gave you Assistance against the King of France, you
passed your Word, that so soon as that War were ended, you would go in Person
with an Army against the Turk; but now have you patched up a Truce with him, to
the end only that you might more conventently accomplish what you had designed
against us. And now, in the Diet of Ratisbonne, you have put a color and new
face upon the matter, having enlarged much upon your Affection and good
Intentions toward Germany our common Country, and upon the Contumacy of some
Persons, which you did with a design of dividing us, who were Confederated upon
the Account of Religion: For you are not able to make out against us any Crime
of Undutifulness or Disobedience; and distrusting your Cause, you cited not the
Accused to answer before the Diet of the Empire, nor, indeed, did so much as
name them: Whereas, in the mean time, by Letters to several Princes and Free
Towns, you cunningly pretended, that the War you designed was not for Religion,
but for repressing the Contumacy and Stubbornness of some Men: Nevertheless,
that Religion is the thing you strike at, it is even apparent from this, that
you have procured a Council from the Pope, wherein none but his Vassals and
Creatures have any place. Some there were, indeed, in that Assembly, a little
more free in their Speech; but ways were found out that they should be recalled
and turned out, and worse Men put into their places. It is also well known to
all, what sort of Decrees they are which the Fathers atTrent have already made
in some Sessions. It is not then the Council so often promised in the Diets, as
we declared unto you a year ago at Worms; and what we then alleged, we would
have now again here repeated. That it is your Design also to compel us to
approve the Council, will easily appear from the Pope's Letters sent lately to
theSuitzers, wherein he heavily complains of many in Germany, who slight the
Dignity. of the Council; and that, he says, is the reason why he was willing to
undertake a War: And because you also had resolved, for the same reason, to try
the Effect of your Arms, he says, that that had happened very luckily for his
purpose, and that therefore he would employ not only his own, but also all the
Force and Treasure of the Roman Church. Since then the Pope has discovered
that Purpose of yours, which you would have cloaked under another Disguise, who
can any longer doubt but that our Religion is struck at? For we, indeed, are
conscious to our selves of no Fact, for which we should either refuse a Public
Trial, or that we cannot justify our selves in: But it was your Duty to have
brought us before the College of the Princes, according to ancient Custom, and
heard our Reasons and Defenses. Nor did it become you thus to use us, to call
us to a Diet, to propound Public Affairs, to ask our Counsel and Advice, and,
in the mean time, to be projecting a War against us. For, what, indeed, can be
the meaning of this, to leave the Turk, and turn all the Rage of the War
against us, as if we were a great deal worse than he? But our Hope and
Confidence is in God, that he will hinder and put a stop to so base an
Undertaking. For if you, and King Ferdinand your Brother, entertained any
Grudge or Dispeasure against us, that was wholly removed at Cadam, Vienna,
Ratisbonne, and Spire; so that you may gloss and varnish the Matter as you
please, we are still certain, that there is no other Cause for this War, but
that with the suppression of the true Religion, Germany may lose its Liberty.
You write, indeed, to several Persons, and endeavor to persuade them, that you
are very desirous the Doctrine of the Gospel should be propagated; but the
Decisions of the University of Louvaine confirmed by you, the Punishments
inflicted upon good and pious Men within your Dominions, and that Confederacy
made with the Roman Antichrist, sufficiently declare, that it is your intention
to restore Popery in its full extent, and to extirpate the Religion which we
professed at Ausbourg. And since it is so, and that we made a League to live
and die in this Religion, and with united Forces to defend it, whatsoever
Quarrel or Provocation may be by any pretended against any of us, it
necessarily behoved us to undertake our own Defense, which the Law both of God
and Nature allows us. And although, by reason of this your Design against us,
we are freed from all Obligation unto you, so that we needed not to have
declared to you our Resolutions in the Matter; yet for the greater security, we
hereby renounce all Allegiance, Homage, and Duty, that we were any ways bound
to perform to you; not as if thereby we impeached the Rights and Prerogatives
of the Empire, but rather that we may assert and defend the same. Wherefore we
openly and solemnly declare, That it is our Purpose and Resolution to defend
our selves by way of Arms, against the Hostilities of you and your
Confederates: For the Cause is too good and just, that we should be afraid of
any Danger.

This Letter they send by a young Gentleman and a Trumpeter, as the Custom is,
to the Emperor, in his Camp at Landishut: But he was so far from receiving it,
The Emperor refuses to receive the Protestants Letters.
that, upon pain of Death, he commands them to carry it back to their Masters;
adding withal, That if any Man should for the future come from them to him, in
stead of a Present and Gold Chain, he should have the Reward of a Halter. Then
he gave them the Instrument of Proscription abovementioned, and strictly
charges them to deliver it to their Princes. The Emperor's Answer to the
Protestants Messenger.


Before this Letter was sent, it was debated, what Title was to be given to the
Emperor; and the Duke of Saxony was of opinion, that he was not to be called
Emperor, for that then it was not lawful to make War against him: But the
Landgrave was of another mind; A Dispute about what Title should be given to
the Emperor.
and both had those that approved them: At length they hit upon this Expedient,
that they should call him The Pretended Emperor. Then they consult whither
they should march: Some were for going straight to Landishut, where the
Emperor was; but when they were told by those who knew the Country, That they
had Fens to pass, where the Ways were so narrow, that for a Mile or two a pair
of Horses could not go abreast, they change their mind, The Protestants march
to Ratisbonne.
and resolve to march to Ratisbonne, where the Emperor had left both a
Garrison and Artillery, for that there they might choose a convenient Ground to
encamp in, and if the Emperor came to the Relief of the Besieged, they might
hazard a Battle. Having then removed their Camp, they advance, but with a very
slow March; and about the same time, to wit, the thirteenth of August, The
Pope's Forces come to the Emperor.
the Italian or Popish Forces arrive at Landishut, to the great satisfaction of
the Emperor; who having intelligence of the approach of the Confederates, had
by several Messengers entreated them to hasten their March. They consisted of
Ten thousand Foot, and Five hundred Light-Horsemen, who were commanded by
Octavio Farnese, the Pope's own Grandson, whom he made their General. Several
famous Officers served under him, as Alexander Vitelli, John Baptista Savelli,
Sfortia Palavicini, Frederick Savelli, Paolo Vitellio, The Officers of the
Pope's Army.
Julio Ursini, Alexio Lascaris, Jerome of Pisa, John Maria of Padoua, Nicolao
Piumbino, Nicolao Petiliano, and others. With these Cosmo de Medices Duke of
Florence sent Two hundred Horse, The Horse of the Duke of Florence and Ferrara.
under the Conduct of Rudolph Balione; and Hercules Duke of Ferrara an hundred,
Commanded by Alfonso his Bastard-brother. To Octavio the Pope joined his
Brother Cardinal Alexander Farnese, to be a kind of Spy over the Emperor's
Counsels, and to incite and spur him on to Action. Upon Farnese's departure out
of Italy, he is said to have boasted, That he would make such Slaughter in
Germany, A bloody Saying of Farnese.
that his Horse might swim in the Lutherans Blood. Not long after came also the
Spaniards whom the Emperor had sent for out of Milan and Naples, to the number
of about Six thousand, all old Soldiers. The Commanders of the Emperor's Army.
Some of the Chief Officers were, Philip Lanoio Prince of Sulmona, Alvaro de
Sandi, Alphonso Vivas, and James Acre; over whom was Ferdinando de Toledo Duke
of Alva, the Emperor's Lieutenant General; and next to him, John Baptista
Castaldo. The Cardinal of Ausbourg was Commissary-General. German Princes in
the Emperor's Camp.
In the Emperor's Service were also, Maximilian Archduke of Austria, Emanuel
Philibert, Son to the Duke of Savoy, Erick Duke of Brunswick, and Philip the
Son of Duke Henry who was Prisoner, George Duke of Meckleburg, George Duke of
Brunswick, Duke Henry's Brother a Churchman, Ferderick Count of Furstemberg,
The Princes in the Protestants Camp.
Renard Count of Solmes, and many others. In the Protestant Camp were, John
Ernest Duke of Saxony, the Elector's Brother, John Frederick the Elector's Son,
Philip Duke of Brunswick, with his four Sons, Ernest, Albert, John, and
Wolfgang, Francis Duke of Lunenburg, Wolfgang Prince of Anhalt, Christopher
Count Henneberg, George Count Wirtemberg, Albert Count Mansfield, with his two
Sons John and Volrat, Louis Count Oetinghen, with his Son of the same Name,
William Count Furstenberg, Christopher Count Oldenburg, Hubert Count Bichling,
and Count Heideck, besides Record, Rifeberg, and eight Ensigns of Suitzers. All
the Forces being then Rendezvoused, except those which the Count of Buren was
bringing from the Lower Germany, The Emperor marches to Ratisbonne.
the Emperor decamped, and marched toward Ratisbonne. So soon as that was
known, some began to suspect that his Design was upon Misnia and Saxony; and
therefore the Confederates having caused Bridges to be made, pass their Army
over the Danube: But having advanced a little toward Nortgow, Advice comes
from Ratisbonne, that the Emperor was marching to Ingolstadt: That made them
change their March, and by rough and stony Ways return again to the Danube,
lest the Emperor should possess himself of Newburg, three Miles above
Ingolstadt, and of Donawert, and by that means have an open Passage into the
Duchy of Wirtemberg. Next day after they were come to Nassefels, the Landgrave
advanced with a small Party of Men, that he might view Ingolstadt, not knowing
that the Emperor's Forces were there; for he had heard but of a few Spaniards
in Garrison, and those he intended to provoke to a Skirmish: A Skirmish betwixt
the Landgrave's Men and the Spanish Garrison.
But as he was advancing, a Party of the Prince of Sulmona's Horse sally out,
and charging the Landgrave, some were killed on both sides, and many wounded:
Prisoners also were taken, who gave intelligence, that the Emperor was that
day to encamp at Ingolstadt. The Elector of Saxony was highly displeased at
that Action of the Landgrave, and threatened to leave the Army, if any such
thing for the future were done without his knowledge. The whole Army in the
mean time was drawn out; but after they had for some time stood to their Arms,
in posture of giving Battle, they retreated again to their Camp. The Spaniards
break into the Protestants Camp.
In the forepart of the Night following, the Spaniards break into Count
Heideck's Quarters, who commanded under the Duke of Saxony, and kill him an
hundred Foot-Soldiers: Some of their own Men they lost also; so that there was
a great Tumult in the Camp, which was much increased by the darkness of the
Night. The day following, being the twenty ninth of August, some Captains of
Horse and Foot were sent out to view the Situation of the Enemies Camp. Those,
some Italian Horse who were in Ambush, suddenly charge, and many being killed
on both sides, the Protestants were fain to retreat to their Camp, without any
Success: Wherefore next day the Landgrave himself marches out with a small
Party of chosen Men, to try if he could make any sure Discovery; and having
found a Foard, though the Scouts that had been sent out before him said there
was none, he returns to the Duke of Saxony, and acquaints him, that the Horse
might pass the River. On the last of August then they resolved to march by
break of day, and possess themselves of a higher Ground, where the Beacon of
Ingolstadt sometime stood, and from thence play upon the Enemies Camp with
their Ordnance, that so perhaps they might draw the Emperor out to Battle.
When the Night was far gone, the Duke of Saxony sends word to the Landgrave at
two several times, That the Emperor was gone, and that his Camp was all in a
Smoke: But he giving no credit to that Report, orders out five Troops of Horse,
under the command of William Schacht, to possess themselves of the Foard, and
to make Bridges for passing over the Infantry and Artillery. A little after, he
himself follows in great haste, with the rest of his Forces, and whole Train of
Artillery. When he was come to the River, Schacht tells him, That the Emperor
was not removed; which News he sent to the Duke of Saxony, and marching
forwards, made himself Master of the Hill we mentioned, and planted some
Fieldpieces upon it. His Men also he posted on the right and left, which also
the Duke of Saxony did, as soon as he arrived.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XVIII.
The CONTENTS.
The Landgrave's Advice to fall upon the Enemy is not approved. The Suitzers
will not join in this War. Wherefore the Landgrave and Duke of Saxony solicit
the Bohemians; and fully answer the Emperor's Accusations. They remove their
Camp, that they may hinder the passage of the Count of Buren. Peter Stroza
promises to lend them Money, but basely disappoints them. Donawert is
surrendered to the Emperor. In the mean time, Duke Maurice assembles all the
States of his Dominions against the Duke of Saxony: to these the Landgrave
makes answer. The Bohemians and Hungarians invade the Territories of the Duke
of Saxony, and there spoils, plunder, satiate their unlawful Lusts, and put all
to Fire and Sword. Duke Maurice takes most part of his Towns by surrender. At
Meaux fourteen are burnt for professing the Reformed Doctrine. The Protestants
having raised their Camp, are pursued by the Enemy. The Duke of Wirtemberg and
some Towns are reconciled to the Emperor. The Fathers of the Council of Trent
make a Decree concerning Man's Justification. The Duke of Saxony puts a
Garrison into Leipsick, and beats Duke Maurice out of his Towns. Henry King of
England dies, and then the Reformation gets footing in that Kingdom. Marquess
Albert of Brandenburg is made Prisoner by the Duke of Saxony.

MAximilian Count of Buren, The Count of Buren marches with his Forces to join
the Emperor.
whom we mentioned before, having completed his Army, which consisted of four
thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot, amongst whom were some Spanish and
Italian Troops, that had served the King of England against the French, in the
Month of August marched out of the Low Countries, and past the Rhine above and
below Mentz, wherever Boats could be had, though the Protestants had planted
Forces on the other side, under the Command of Christopher Count Oldenburg and
Rifeberg, to have disputed their passage. The Archbishop of Mentz, was thought
to have had a great hand in that matter. So soon as the whole Protestant Army
was come to the place we spoke of, they began with all their Ordnance to play
most furiously into the Emperor's Camp. And then in a Council of War held in
presence of the Duke of Saxony, The Landgrave's bold and good Advice.
the Landgrave spoke to this purpose: Had I, said he, now the sole Power and
Command of the Army, as I had when I restored the Duke of Wirtemberg, I would
attack the Enemy at first, with two Regiments of Foot, only set the Pioneers to
throw down their Works, The oversight of the Protestants, in not laying hold on
their oppertunity, was the beginning of their miscarriage in the War.
and then fall on with the whole Army. But whilst some dissuaded from that, as
a most dangerous Enterprise,; and others did not dislike it, provided they
could be secured from the great shot of Ingoldstat, and that the Horse engaged
in the very beginning of the Fight: in this diversity of opinions nothing was
done, which was a thing so much found fault with by many, that the cause and
beginning of their Calamity, and the Emperor's Victory, is imputed to that
miscarriage: for they far exceeded the Enemy in Horse; and the Emperor's Camp
was then defended but by a very low Trench. The Emperor then having born the
brunt and thunder of that day's action, so fortified his Camp next night, that
with more convenience and security he might act and receive all the impressions
his Enemies could make. And, indeed, the Emperor is said to have behaved
himself with incredible resolution in this so great danger, The Emperor's
great Courage.
whilst he did not only not show the least sign of fear or apprehension, but
also encouraged his men, by his readiness to run the same fortune with them.

That the Emperor by his Treasurer of Burgundy solicited the Suitzers, we
told you in the last Book: to his Demands they gave their Answer in that
Assembly which, The Answer of the Suitzers to the Emperor.
as has been said, was in the Month of August held at Baden, That they would
not infringe the League which they had with the Houses of Austria and Burgundy:
and that they would recall those of their Subjects that were already gone to
serve in the War, and punish them as they deserved, if they obeyed not. Now
this was the Answer of the Nine Cantons, who, as we told you, were of the
Popish Religion: but the Cantons of Zurich, Bern, Basle, and Schafhausen,
finding that the Letters of the Pope and Emperor, The Pope and Emperor
pretended not the same Cause for the War of Germany
did not both assign the same Cause of the War; and then that the Copy of the
League betwixt the Pope and Emperor, which was showed them by the the Pope's
Nuncio, plainly declared, that the War was undertaken for extirpating the
Protestant Religion: they told the Emperor's Ambassador, That they would take
time to consider what they should answer, The Emperor's Letter to the
Protestant Suitzers.
and stay till the Emperor satisfied them, whether or not he would leave them
the full liberty and exercise of their Religion.

So soon as the Emperor had Advice of this, August the twenty-seventh, he
wrote to them from the Camp before Ingolstadt, That he saw no reason, why they
should differ in their Answer from the rest, and looked upon it as an effect of
the artifice and subtilty of his Adversaries: for that he heard how in the
former Assembly at Baden, they had endeavored to persuade them, that this War
was not undertaken for the quelling of Rebellious Princes; but that it was
intended against some Free Towns, to the end, that with the Pope's assistance,
the Reformed Religion and Liberty of Germany might be oppressed: that he had
heard also, how they had solicited them not only for aid against him, but also
to enter into a League with them, whereof he understood they had some hopes
given them, and that they were to have a positive Answer in the next Assembly.
That it was not now needful to repeat what the Cause of the War was, since they
had understood that both from his private Letters to them, and his public
Declarations. That it could not be made out, that he had molested any man for
the sake of Religion, or given any cause of a Rebellion: but that from the very
beginning of his Preparations for War, he had used most of them lovingly and
graciously, and more too than did either become his Character, or their Quality
and Condition: Nor was it an excuse for their Rebellion, that the Pope assisted
him, since not only of Italy, but some Princes of Germany also, and a great
many of the Nobility, descended of most honorable Families, and some of them
of the Augustan Confession too, assisted them, and ventured their Life and
Blood in this War: which certainly they would never do, if matters stood, as
the Seditious falsely affirm. But now that it has been their drift all along,
under a cloak of Religion, to baffle the Supreme Magistrate, and having
trampled upon the Religion and Liberty of Germany, to bring the rest of the
States into Servitude and Bondage, is so notorious from many of their actions,
that it would be altogether needless to enlarge upon the proof of the same:
that in this manner, under the sweet Name of Religion, they had allured the
chief Cities of Germany into a League with them, and being provided with their
Forces and Money, had invaded the Territories and Estates of other Men: that
they did now also, carry all before them, compel the Subjects of other Princes
to join with them, disturb many in the Exercise of their Religion, and force
them to undertake another course of Life, cast men also into Bonds and Prison,
whom they threatened most grievously; and after all, spoil and rob God's
Churches; which was a manifest argument, that the reason why they solicited
them to a League was, that by such an accession of strength, they might the
more easily bring to pass what they had before projected: that he made no
doubt, but they saw these things themselves, and well understood what advantage
or disadvantage, was to be expected from any Confederacy with them. That since
it was so then, and that they were convinced of his Intentions, and of the
Cause of the War, he was very confident that they would reject their League;
keep their Men at home; recall those that were already in the Service, under
severe Penalties, and in nothing act contrary to the ancient Leagues and
Alliances, but according to the example of the rest, be still, and live in
peace and friendship; which would redound to their own praise, and be very
acceptable to him. To these Letters they make Answer in the same manner, as we
said before, they answered the Ambassador, The Protestant Cantons Answer to
the Emperor.
and beseech his Majesty to take in good part their delay: and that because he
assures them, that by that War there was nothing intended against the Liberty
of their Country and their Religion; they also on their parts would do what was
fit and becoming them: that if any were gone from amongst them to the Wars, it
was in no ways by permission from them, but that they went privately, as many
times they had done before: however, that it was not their Custom, to recall
those who went into foreign Service without their privity and consent, but to
punish them when they came home again. The Landgrave and Duke of Saxony, The
Protestants Address to the Bohemians.
solicited the Bohemians as well as the Suitzers: but these answer in such a
manner, that it might easily appear their minds were already prepossessed with
the Calumnies of King Ferdinand. When the Protestants perceived that by their
Letters, they write an Answer about the latter end of August, assuring them,
That Religion was the thing aimed at by the War; they send them also the
Declarations published by them upon that subject, desire of them that they
would commit no Hostilities against them, and that they would signify unto
them what their Intentions and Inclinations were. At the same time also they
publish a Declaration, importing, that they were informed by credible Persons,
that the Pope, that Roman Antichrist, the Instrument of Satan, and the Author
of this War, who caused many places to be set on Fire in Saxony, The
Protestants Declaration concerning Incendiaries, and Poysoners, sent out by the
Pope.
had now suborned Poysoners to infect their Wells and Standing-waters, that
what Fire and Sword did not, Poison might destroy. Wherefore they give warning
to all, especially to their own Subjects, to use all endeavors to Take and
Apprehend those Emissaries, put them to the Rack, and punish them severely,
when their Crime should be made out. Some days after, the Elector's Son, John
William, by public Letters, warns his Countrymen, that they have a special
care of themselves, for that at Weimur, a Town in Thuringe, an Italian had been
lately apprehended upon suspicion, who had confessed, That he, and some others,
had received Money at Rome, in the Pope's Name, to do all the Mischief they
could in Germany, by Fire and Poison.

We spoke of the Proscription and Imperial Ban before, and how that a Copy of
the Instrument thereof was sent to the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave. So soon
then, as they had received this from the Camp at Ingolstadt, for their Honor
and Reputation sake, The Protestants Answer to the Instrument of Proscription.
they frame a large Answer, which they published on the second of September.
That he so highly commended his Zeal and Affection toward Germany, was nothing
but dissimulation; for that from the very time of his Inauguration, it had been
his whole design to bring it into Bondage. That that, indeed, was the reason
why leaving Spain and his other Provinces, he had so often returned into
Germany, and been at so vast Charges: that what he said of Religion was of the
same sort: it having been always his purpose, with the first opportunity of
time, to suppress the true and Reformed Doctrine. So often, say they, as he
has given Peace to us and our Religion, it was cunningly done by him, to serve
a turn, only till we had contributed Money for the public Concerns of the
Empire: that afterward he had called the Decrees that were made in question,
and kept the matter in suspense, until, in the mean time, he might make Peace
with France, and a Truce with the Turk, and till the Pope and he, waiting for a
fit opportunity, might call that same Council of Trent, and enter into League
together. We will now give some instances for the proof of this: Five years
since he made a Decree at Ratisbonne concerning Religion; and when that Decree
did not satisfy us in very many things, he declared his mind more fully, and
for our security and satisfaction, gave us an explanation of it in Writing;
which afterward his Commissioners, and King Ferdinand, confirmed in another
Diet: but when two years ago, mention was made of that in the Diet of Spire, he
did not call to mind, he said, that Declaration. In the Diet of Worms, the
year before, the Bishop of Hildeshe^^ said openly, in presence of the Princes,
That he had past his Word to the Catholics, That the Decree of Spire should be
of no force after the War with France were over. Some Months since, when he was
going to the Diet at Ratisbonne, Granvell told me in presence of the Elector
Palatine, some Counselors of mine, and of the Duke of Wirtemberg's
Ambassadors, said the Landgrave, That that Decree of Spire was accommodated
only to the times: but that now the Emperor could not justify it to the rest
of the States. Six years ago, when King Ferdinand declared his Instructions to
the Catholic States at Haguenaw, he said, That no Decrees were to be observed
to us: for that they were made in time of the Turkish War, when there was need
of our assistances. What! Does not this seem to be a pretty fetch, for
circumventing us and our associates? they themselves confess it to have been a
trick, whereby they squeezed Money from us. It is plain then, that he has
always been contriving the destruction of our Religion, as the League lately
made demonstrates, and that he waited only for a fit opportunity of
accomplishing it. Now that he might seem to have a lawful pretext, he always
dealt with us, that we would submit to the Council: but why we could not do so,
our printed Papers sufficiently declare. It was all along his design to
maintain the Decrees of the Council, and to put them in execution; for the
accomplishment whereof, he long before solicited the assistance of some
Foreign Princes: but fearing lest by that means he might stir up against him
all that espoused the Cause of Religion, he devised another color, and feigned
a Rebellion, that he might divide the Confederates, and having suppressed the
chief of them, constrain the rest, afterward, to submit to his pleasure. And
though he and his Brother labored with great Care to conceal this their
cunning and crafty Councels, yet through God's great blessing, it came more and
more to light daily: for the Pope himself, by his Nuncio, informed the Suitzers
both of the Cause of the War, and gave them a Copy of the League: whence it is
evident, that not only we, but all those also who profess the Reformed Religion
are in danger; and that the great Design in hand is wholly to re-establish
Popery. Let all men judge then of the fairness of their Proceedings, when in
the late Diet at Ratisbonne, they endeavored to persuade, and solemnly
averred, that they would use only lawful and peaceful Remedies, for healing the
breaches of Religion. Lately, said the Landgrave, he told me at Spire, That he
was not engaged in any League with the Pope: the same also said Granvell. This
then is that Fatherly Affection, that Zeal for, and Love of Peace, whereof they
so much brag, and so often. Was ever the like heard, that they should endeavor
to persuade Princes of one thing, and in the mean time resolve the quite
contrary? We are sensible enough of the Duty of the Princes to the Emperor,
and what on the other hand he is engaged to perform: as we stand obliged to
him, so is he mutually to us. Now that he Proscribes and Outlaws us without a
fair hearing, and endeavors to turn us out of all; he therein dissolves the
Obligation in Law, whereby the Lord or Superior is mutually bound to his
Tenant or Vassal. That he objects to us the Crime of Rebellion, it is a mere
sham also, and he himself knows that he does us wrong in that: For not long
since, said the Landgrave, he gave me Thanks at Spire, that I had used my
utmost diligence to compose the Differences about Religion. Now, whereas, he
says, that I prepared for War, and exacted Money of some States, I do not,
indeed, deny it, and weighty reasons I had too for making Preparations. But it
is publicly known, that by the mediation of Louis the Elector Palatine, and of
Richard Archbishop of Traves, that whole matter was hushed: nay he himself
acquainted me by his Letters, that though he had been highly displeased with me
for what I had done, yet because I had laid down Arms he required no more:
besides, when sixteen years ago, he spoke to me of the same Affair at Ausbourg,
I justified my self so well in presence of King Ferdinand, Frederick Prince
Palatine, and some others, that he was satisfied therewith: he cannot then make
that any part of his present quarrel. That I assisted Ulrick Duke of
Wirtemberg; at the intercession of the Duke of Saxony, and George Archbishop of
Mentz, that matter was also taken up, and I received again into favor; which
transaction he himself ratified, and afterward, at Ratisbonne, fully pardoned
me upon his Royal Word. He now also speaks of the War of Brunswick, but the
cause of that we made manifest by a public Declaration, and two years since
gave a fuller account of the same in a most frequent Diet of the Empire, where
he was present. Duke Henry did indeed answer then; but the Emperor refused to
hear our Replies. Now the reason why he did not bring the Trial to a full
issue, and with the Advice of the rest of the Princes, give Sentence therein at
that time, was, forsooth, because demanding then Supplies against the French
and Turks, he purposely put a stop to the Suit, and ordered a Sequestration;
wherein we also condescended to him at Worms, though we were not obliged, and
it was agreed on both hands, that Frederick Prince Palatine, and his Cousin
John Prince Palatine of Simmeren, should hold and govern the Province which we
had taken, until the Cause should be brought to a final decision according to
Law: this being done, he past his Word to us, that the Duke of Brunswick should
likewise comply; and by Letters strictly enjoined him to do so; but he
slighting the Orders, raised War against us, and therein was made Prisoner, as
appears by a Declaration published by me and Duke Maurice. In this War then we
did nothing undutifully, nothing contrary to Law, and appeal to impartial
Judgment. But from that very thing it will easily appear what his Intentions
are as to our Religion: For though Duke Henry most sawcily despised his Orders,
and when he heard of the Sequestration, reviled him in very reproachful
Language; yet because he is an implacable Enemy to our Religion, he was never
called to any Account for it. Where he says, That we have brought some under
subjection to us; it is far otherwise and has been answered by us several times
before. But that may be truly said of him, who has reduced some Provinces and
Bishoprics of the Empire under his Jurisdiction, and against this War has had
in many places Meetings of Nobles, that he might to our destruction engage them
to himself. This we acknowledge, indeed, That we have received some into our
Protection, upon account that if they should incur any danger for professing
the Gospel, we might stand by and defend them; and that we look upon to be our
duty, since God commands us to help the afflicted. Now for many Years past, and
at this time especially, none stand more in need of Help and Protection, than
they who are reckoned Lutherans: In other things that related not to Religion,
we never gave them any Countenance, but always exhorted them to give the
Magistrate his due. He objects to us also, That we dissuaded others from
repairing to the Diet; but that is very impertinent, since on the first of
April last we sent Orders to our Deputies, who met at Worms when he was going
to Ratisbonne, That waving all other Business, they should repair to that Diet;
and that we either came in Person, or sent our Deputies to all the other Diets
of the Empire. What he says of the Imperial Chamber, and the interruption of
Justice, has been many times refuted already. He moreover brings an Instance
of the Heathen Magistrates, to show, That it is not lawful to resist him:
Whereas we have not only done our Duty, but more also than either we ought, or
our Forefathers were accustomed to do, to our own great loss and prejudice; and
that upon that account he has not the least cause of complaint, it will appear
by what shall be said hereafter. A certain Ambassador lately sent to him from
the French King, happened occasionally to speak of this War, telling him, That he
undertook a Matter of very great concern; That he would do well to consider
with himself how powerful Germany was, and how dangerous the Attempt; That if
one or two, perhaps, had offended, a Course might be taken to accommodate the
Matter without a War. Whereunto he is said to have made this Answer; The
Emperor's Expression about the subduing of Germany.
That there was no need of an Accommodation; That he would subdue Germany, or
put all to the risque, for that the Strength thereof was not so very great,
that he needed to be afraid of it; That it was now above twenty years since he
had laid down his Measures for accomplishing that Design; That in several Wars
they had given him frequent Supplies, and lately too against the King his own
Master; That they had been at great Charges in several Diets; That they had
lost much of their Military Force also in many Wars; and that he had brought
about all these things, that Germany might be weakened in strength and brought
low; so that this was then a very fit time for Actin. An honest and worthy
Gentleman, who had this Speech from the Ambassdor's own Mouth, told us all. Why
does he then lay the Cause of the War at our Door, seeing it is so long since
he himself projected it, when we were no more but private Persons, and as yet
wallowed in the Puddle of Popery? Now had he stood to his Covenants and
Decrees, we also would have done our Duty: But because he has broken them, and
that God is to be obeyed rather than Man, let him even take the Blame to
himself. For since he contrives the Ruin of our Religion and Liberty, he gives
us a lawful Ground to oppose him with a good Conscience; and in the
Circumstances we now stand in, it is lawful to resist, as may be made out both
by Sacred and Profane History. For God is not the Author of Violence and
Injustice, nor are we any other way obliged to him, than according as he
fulfils the Conditions upon which he was created Emperor. He confesses, That
he has privately transacted with us; which we are very glad to hear: Why then
should he raise a War for those Matters which have been once fairly
accommodated? For it can no ways be made out, that we have been guilty of any
Rebellion, either before or since these Transactions. But the Case stands
thus. Five and twenty years since he made a Decree at Worms, and published an
Edict, with most severe Penalties, against Luther, and all that followed his
Doctrine. Now it is his Design by this War to put that Edict in execution. We
never aspired to his Scepter nor Crown, being content with our own Lands and
Revenues, which, we pray God, we may be allowed peaceably to enjoy. If what he
says be true, why did we so often give him assistance, and but two years ago
against the French King also? For which good Office he ought to forget any
small Offense we might have committed, even though no Accommodation had been
made. We never spoke irreverently of him, but rather always extolled him for
the Opinion we had of his Virtues. No scandalous or infamous Libels nor
Pictures were ever published by our Divines, or any others, against him: On the
contrary, our Divines and Learned Men gave him always very high
Commendadations, in their Sermons exhorted the People to do the like, and made
public Prayers for his Health and Prosperity. Perhaps, indeed, they published
some against Popery; and we had no reason to forbid them. But how sawcily and
ignominiously Cochleus Hadomar and the Carmelite of Cologne inveighed against
us, our Associates, and Divines, even when they met at Ratisbonne for settling
of Differences, is notoriously known. He objects to us Conspiracies and
Conventicles; and in that, as in all things else, he does us great injury: For
we are true Germans born and bred, very averse and great Strangers to such
Tricks and Artifices, as having been for many Years past contrived against us,
now at length discover themselves. That we might, indeed, defend our selves
against unjust Violence, we entered into a League, we deny not, and did it only
to secure our selves, but not to offend any Man, as in another Declaration we
have already made it appear. And five Years since, says the Landgrave, when I
transacted with the Emperor in the Diet at Ratisbonne, Granvell assured me and
my Chancellor at that time, That the Emperor was not at all offended at that
League, but could be content that we brought over as many as we could to join
with us. Afterward he has some blind Hints, as if we had invited the Turk into
Germany; which certainly falls of it self: For we both contributed Assistance
at all times against the Turk, even greater than any of our Ancestors had done;
and did do so also when we were no ways obliged to it, because of
nonperformance of Conditions, and when some other that had promised
Assistance, gave none at all: But it has been talked on long ago, how he and
his Brother dealt with the Turk, to make an Invasion, and subdue us and our
Associates only. Supplies were lately given him against the French King by
public Decree: He then promised, That so soon as he concluded that War, he
would forthwith march against the Turk: He afterward made Peace with the
Enemy, without the consent of those with whose Money he carried on the War, and
now he bends all his Force against us. Is it not a rare Spectacle to see great
Guns brought out of Austria to serve in this War, and in the mean time
neighboring Hungary wasted by a most cruel Enemy? The Crimes he lays to our
Charge, Seditions, Conspiracies, High Treasons, and what not, are all
imaginary; nor is there any other Cause of War, than what we have often already
mentioned. He says, That he has condescended more to us than became him, and
connived at many things, not without grief and trouble of Conscience: But that
is mere Hypocrisy also: For it was his desire long since to have made War
against us, but was hindered by the Times, and was forced to delay it till now,
that he had Peace with the Duke of Cleve, the King of France, and the Turk.
What his Inclinations have been, the sad and grievous Punishments inflicted
upon harmless and pious Men, throughout his Dominions, sufficiently declare:
And that he heretofore transacted with us also, we find now to have been done
only, that all other Affairs dispatched, he might have nothing to mind but only
this War. A thing that I could never have suspected, says the Landgrave,
considering the extraordinary Kindness and Civility wherewith he lately treated
me at Spire; at which time also Naves dealt with my Chancellor, that that
Conference might be kept secret. Now the scope of this his Accusation is, that
he may divide our Confederates from us; and therefore he charges us with
Tyranny, Rapine, and Disturbance of the Government, but very unjustly: For we
severely punish Rapine and Robbery within our Territories, and upon that
account have purchased to our selves no small Hatred. However, John Diaz, a
most innocent Man, was in a horrid and unparalleled manner robbed of his Life,
and murdered; the Parricide, his Brother, was taken and indicted; the Princes
earnestly moved, that such a barbarous Villainy should be punished: But what
came on it all? The Thing speaks it self. He casts the Blame of all the Troubles
and Stirs upon us; but it is his own Edict of Worms that has raised all the
Commotions; for though he has been often and earnestly solicited by us, yet
would he never abrogate it; and our Adversaries have always rested upon it, as
upon a firm Foundation; especially Henry Duke of Brunswick, who entered into a
League with some before the Diet of Ausbourg; and it is publicly known what
the end of that Diet was, and the Decree that past therein. Truly the bitter
Words that were then spoken, gave us ground afterward of entering into an
Association, and the present League. In all Diets every where the Papists were
troublesome to us, and would have compelled us to abstain from Meats, and
observe what Holy Days themselves had invented. We complied also with the
Emperor at Ausbourg, when he largely promised, That he would appoint Teachers
of the People: But it is well known how ignorant and vicious the Men were whom
he employed in that Office. It is an ancient Custom of the Empire, That when
any Prince has a mind to return home from the Diet, he may do it with the
Emperor's leave: But when my Father, says the Elector of Saxony, was at the
Diet of Ausbourg, he could not obtain from him leave to be gone; and had notice
given him more times than once, That if he intended to depart, he would be
detained whether he would or not. And though my Uncle Who had refused the
Empire when it was offered unto him.
Frederick had deserved very well at his Hands, yet so long as my Father lived,
he refused to give him the usual Investiture into his own Principality, only
because of his Religion, and of the Edict of Worms. Besides, when he consulted
with the rest of the Princes at Ausbourg, about substituting his Brother
Ferdinand in the Empire, my Father was wholly excluded from that Deliberation;
which Action, as being disgraceful, and very injurious to our Family, we could
not but resent. And though for just reasons we might thereafter absent our
selves from Public Assemblies, especially from those wherein Ferdinand acted
as King of the Romans; nevertheless, lest we might seem to neglect the Affairs
of the Public, we always came in Person, or sent Deputies to them in our Name.
Since then the Cause of the War is manifest, we adjure all our Countrymen, not
to give credit to any contrary Relation, but that they would join with us in
the Defense of our common Country; for as for our Subjects and Vassals, whom he
releases from their Oath of Allegiance, we make no doubt but that they will
faithfully discharge their Duty toward us.

The Protestants having continued three days longer in their Camp, after that
they had let slip the Occasion of fighting at Ingolstadt, during which time the
Emperor had fortified himself with good Works and Ditches, on the fourth of
September they decamped, The Protestants raise their Camp.
that they might intercept the Passage of the Count of Buren; though some were
against that, alleging, That they needed not go to look for an Enemy a great
way off, when they had one under their Nose. They encamped next at Newburgh,
which they had before strengthened with a Garrison, and two days after came to
Donawert. December the tenth they encamp near Wenden, a Town belonging to Count
Oetinghen, and sent out some Scouts to get Intelligence of the Count of Buren.
The Emperor was not ignorant of that; and Buren having advice of it from him,
The Count of Buren joins the Emperor.
turns aside out of the way, and marching from Norimberg to Ratisbonne, joins
the Emperor in good condition at Ingolstadt. Being disappointed then of their
expectation, the third day after they return to Donawert. Hither came to them
Christopher Count Oldenburg, and Frederick Refeberb, with two Regiments, and
Count Bichling with five Companies of Foot. In the mean time the Emperor
raised his Camp, and marched to Newburg, where no Relief appearing, the
Garrison surrendered the Place. The Emperor pardoned them all, upon promise
that for the future they would not carry Arms against him. There being
afterward a flying Report, that the Emperor intended to march to Ausbourg,
the Confederates re-pass the Danube, that they might dispute his Passage; but
seeing after he had put a Garrison into Newburg, he marched to Marxheim, they
returned to their former Camp. We told you before, that they had sent
Ambassadors into France and England for Succors, but it proved in vain: The
French King refused to send the Protestants Assistance.
And the French King excused himself, that he could not, being at peace with
the Emperor; nevertheless, because he was not willing that he should increase
too much in Power, he entreated Peter Stroza a Florentine, a very rich Soldier,
to lend them Three hundred thousand Crowns; and that he might do it the more
conveniently, he paid him a considerable Sum of Money which he owed him. Stroza
did not refuse, because the Cities of Strasbourg, Ausbourg, and Ulm offered to
be bound for it; but went to wait upon the Princes in their Camp, which was
then at Donawert, in company of John Sturmey, who had been sent Ambassador into
France. When he came there, he was magnificently treated, and departed as if he
had been fully resolved to lend the Money; but at the day when it was to have
been done, The Protestants grossly deceived by Stroza an Italian.
there was no news to be heard of him in France. This was looked upon by many
to have been a Trick of the Cardinal of Tournons; for he, in hatred of their
Religion, wished no good to the Protestants, and was then chiefly in favor
with the King.

About the end of September the Confederates write again to the Cantons of
Zurich, The Protestants write to the Reformed Suitzers.
Berne, Basle, and Schafhawsen, acquainting them with the Emperor's
Intentions, and with the Danger they were in if he should prevail; and wishing
them to consider, if it would not be for their Interests to declare War against
the Emperor and Pope, and then to invade the adjoining Countries belonging to
the Emperor; which if they did, they promised them all Aid and Assistance.
Whereunto they afterward made answer, The Suitzers Answer.
That not only they, but the rest of the Suitzers also, had an Hereditary
Alliance with the Houses of Austria and Burgundy, which Countries supplied them
all with Corn and Wine; so that should they rashly break that League, the other
Cantons who are of a different Religion, and unwilling likewise to have their
Provisions intercepted, would have good reason to assist the Emperor and King
Ferdinand, lay open those Passages through the Alps, which with great labor
and pains they had shut up, and also join in the League with them. Besides,
that Winter now approached, so that if they would, they were not able to do any
thing to purpose; and that if they should march out of their own Country, there
was danger lest others might come and take possession of it; That it was far
better then for them to stay at home, for by that means they would hinder the
other Cantons from stirring; That they wished them very well, and prayed for
their good Success, as they had formerly manifested by their Actions; but that
they did not at all think it prudent, to run themselves into so great a danger:
Wherefore they entreated them to take their Answer in good part.

The Emperor marches from Marxheim to Donawert; but finding no convenient
Ground to encamp in, he strikes off to the Right, and October the third marches
to Monheim. It happened then to be foggy Weather, and the Scouts that were sent
out from the Protestant Camp, to learn News of the Emperor's March, gave
various Reports. At length, when Louis Count Oetingen brought them
intelligence, that with a great part of his Army he was already passed the
River Wernitz, they presently decamp and follow, about two of the Clock in the
Afternoon, The Catholic and Protestant Camps near one another.
and toward the Evening encamp within half a Mile of the Emperor. Hither came
Deputies to them from the City of Nordlingen, desiring their Assistance now
that the Imperialists were so near; to whom they gave a civil and obliging
Answer. The next day proved foggy also. The Duke of Saxony commanded the Van,
the Landgrave the Main Body, and George Malspurg and Rifeberg the Rear. The
Duke of Saxony advancing with five Regiments of Foot, and several Troops of
Horse, draws near the Enemy, and skirmishes and pickeers a little with them.
The Fog being cleared up, so soon as the Emperor perceived the Van marching in
the way to Nordlingen, and that the Rear appeared not as yet, he drew out all
his Army, as if he intended to give Battle. The Landgrave then, who was in the
middle, and had the Enemy fronting him, called a Council of War, wherein some
were for following the Duke of Saxony; but because the Rear was at a great
distance still behind, which he knew would by his absence be exposed to present
danger, he did not think fit to leave them: but having dispatched Messengers to
bid them make all haste, and to recall the Duke of Saxony, he stood his Ground
upon the little Hills he had possessed himself of. Between the two Armies run
the River of Egra, The River Egra.
which was but small indeed, but hard to be passed, especially by the Emperor,
if he intended to come to a Battle. The Count of Buren was already advanced
with his Men as far as that River; but seeing they were like to come to an
Engagement, the Emperor called him back, and strictly charged him not to
advance any further. Thus the Imperialists returned into their former Camp, and
the Protestants pitched not far from Nordlingen. Next day some Troops of
Imperial Horse advance toward the Enemy, and come to a sharp Conflict with
them. In this Action Albert of Brunswick, Albert of Brunswick dies of his
wounds.
the Son of Duke Philip, heedlesly rushing out in his Cups to the Charge, was
wounded in the Mouth; and being carried off to Nordlingen, not long after died.
Whilst the Emperor continued in Camp there for some days, he detaches Octavio
Farnese with his own Forces, some German Foot, and a Train of Artillery, to
take Donawert. Fortune favored this man's Project, for marching in the
nightime that he might be there, as indeed he was, by break of day; so soon
as he offered a Scaladoe, Donawert surrendered to the Emperor.
the Towns-people surrendered; but the Garrison fled for it: whereupon the
Emperor marched to Donawert. The design of the Protestants was to have set
upon his Camp, but the case was altered by his departure; and it was thought
the Emperor had intelligence of that given him. At that time the Duke of Alva
sent to demand of the Landgrave, The Duke of Alva insults over the Landgrave.
why he kept so much upon Hills and Mountains? Why he did not come down into
the plain Fields and venture a little? To whom the Landgrave made answer, that
he and his Associates had for five days together kept in the Plains before
Ingoldstadt, and desired a Battle; why then did he not fight? And why did he
not now do it at Nordlingen, where he had staid for him the whole day?

Whilst these things past in Schwabenland, there happens a great turn of
Affairs in Saxony. A change of affairs in Saxony.
How the Emperor treated with Duke Maurice at Ratisbonne, and King Ferdinand
at Prague, and how the Emperor commanded him to seize into his hands the
Provinces of the Elector Frederick and the Landgrave, it has been mentioned
before. Now Duke Maurice returning home from Ratisbonne, in the beginning of
the War, called a Convention of States at Chemnitz to consult what was to be
done. They advise him to know positively of the Emperor first, if he will
suffer them to enjoy their Religion; in the next place, that he and the Elector
of Brandenbourg, Duke Maurice consults against the Protestants.
mediate a Reconciliation: but that if Religion should be secure, and no hopes
of any Mediation, they counsel him, since in all things, besides Religion, he
is bound to obey the Emperor, to be quiet, and raise men for the defense of
his Country: As to that they promise him supplies, and assign him twelve of
their number, whom they chose to be his Counselors in all affairs. But when
the Orders, we speak of, were brought him from the Emperor, and King Ferdinand
had called his Forces out of Hungary, and raised men in Bohemia; he again, on
the tenth of October, assembled the States at Friburg. There he relates what
past in the former Convention, how that according to their counsel, he and the
Elector of Brandenbourg had solicited the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave, that
they would suffer them to be Mediators; and advised them to consider seriously
how dangerous a matter it was they had in hand: but that as yet they had
received no satisfactory Answer from them, on the contrary, that they had
published Declarations, were already in Arms, and had had some small Conflicts
with the Enemy: and that though they had often desired assistance from him, yet
because the Emperor had given him full assurance as to Religion, he had
therefore taken their counsel, and kept quiet; that he had hitherto maintained
Soldiers for the defense of his Religion, and communicated Councils with those
they had chosen: But that now the times were so doubtful and dangerous, that
the Counselors thought it a burden too heavy for them to bear, and that
therefore he had called this Convention at their desire. For that he had
received Orders from the Emperor, which he would show to them, weighty Orders
indeed, and of great moment, nay of such a nature too, that should they be
neglected, the whole Province would thereby be in great danger: besides, that
the Bohemians and their Confederates were preparing for War, and were already
marched out of their own Country, in order to the invading of the Elector
Frederick's Province: and that though he had endeavored first by Letters, then
by Ambassadors, and afterward made a Journey himself in person, to pacify
King Ferdinand, yet he could obtain nothing at his hands; nor indeed, since he
believed it to be done by the Emperor's command, durst he, if he were able,
withstand it: that he earnestly wished, the Civil Wars were composed, that they
might make head against the Invasion of the Turks; but that they themselves
knew how nearly the Dominions of both were related to one another, and linked
together in the right of Succession, and that he had Silver-Mines in common
with his Cousin the Elector: that it would be a grievous thing for him, to
suffer all these to be snatched away from the House of Saxony, and to fall into
the hands of strangers: that besides, their Rights and Properties were so
interwoven all over the Country, that if Foreigners should invade his Cousin's
Lands, his own Province was in danger of suffering greatly thereby: that they
themselves knew how unsafe it was, that strangers should get footing in those
places: That in consideration of all those things, he desired both in his own
and his Brother Augustus his name, that they would seriously weigh the matter,
and assist him with their Aid and Counsel; he on his part assuring them, that
what lay in his power, according to his duty, he would do for them. The matter
being debated, it was concluded, that the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave
should be made acquainted with the Emperor's Commands, and King Ferdinand's
Preparations, and that both should be dealt with, that for the avoiding the
calamities of War, they would suffer their Provinces to be possessed by Duke
Maurice; which seemed to be all that could be done with honor and safety. The
Letters of Duke Maurice's Friends to the Protestants.
Therefore, October the 11th, they write to both separatly, relating all that
had past; the Counsel they had given in the beginning of the War; the Commands
of the Emperor; the Preparations of King Ferdinand and the Bohemians; what
Duke Maurice had done to take off King Ferdinand; and then acquaint them that
foreign Soldiers being now upon the Borders of Saxony, the Country was in
extreme danger: that they heartily lamented the present state of affairs; but
that since they understood that all was done by the Emperor's order, who had
secured them as to their Religion, they could not resist him, who was chief
Magistrate over all: that since then they were so closely linked together in
interest, that if any injury were done to the one, the other must needs suffer
by it, they had long considered the matter, and thought that the only safe way
and expedient that now remained, would be for them to suffer Duke Maurice to
take possession of their Provinces; for that by that means a foreign War would
be staved off, Religion secured, and when all things were again in peace and
quiet, they would far more easily recover them from him, than out of the hands
of others: That they would therefore seriously weigh the matter with
themselves, and comply with this Advice, which was the best that could be given
in these troublesome and distracted times. They likewise by Letters besought
the Landgrave, that he would persuade the Elector to embrace the counsel. Duke
Maurice writes to the Landgrave to the same purpose.
Duke Maurice wrote also to the Landgrave his Father-in-law to the same
purpose; and that because foreign Soldiers were at hand, it behoved him to
take care that Saxony should not be wasted. He then expresses a great deal of
friendship and good will toward him, assuring him, That he coveted nothing of
what was his: that the King of Poland offered also to intercede with the
Emperor, as his Ambassador had informed him: that he begged of him therefore
to comply, and not suffer himself to be exasperated by any words; that he would
incline the Elector of Saxony to do the like, and not refuse to submit to the
Emperor: that this was the only Door left open for reconciliation, and that he
would not be wanting to contribute all that lay in his power to bring things to
happy issue. John William, Son to the Elector of Saxony, The Embassy of John
William of Saxony to Duke Maurice.
hearing of the Preparations of King Ferdinand, sent Ambassadors to the
Convention of States at Friburg, desiring of Duke Maurice, that upon account of
their Hereditary Alliance, he would join in Arms with him to free their common
Country from danger. Duke Maurice made answer, That he had spared no pains in
endeavoring to accommodate matters; but seeing that his labor was in vain,
and that now his Neighbors were in Arms, he could not act any thing against
the chief Magistrate, who was excepted in that ancient Alliance.

It was late before the Confederates had intelligence of the Emperor's
marching to Donawert, which we spoke of before. Next day they resolve to march,
and that in the nightime too, to Lawgingen, which is a Town upon the Danube,
three miles above Donawert. But it being uncertain whether the Emperor was
marched or not, and that if they went to Lawgingen, and he at their back, some
said there was danger lest he should take Nordlingen, and then by Remserthal
fall into the Duchy of Wertemberg, they altered their resolution, and
continued a day longer where they were. Scherteline leaves the Protestant Camp.
Scherteline was displeased at this, and some things else; wherefore going to
Ausbourg from whence he was sent out into the War, he carries off the Garrison
that was at Lawgingen, and returned no more to the Camp. In the mean time the
Emperor removing from Donawert, has Dilingen and Hochsterit, and shortly after
Lawgingen and Gundelfinghen, upon the River Brent, surrendered unto him. The
Emperor Master of the Danube.
So that being Master of the Danube, he had many advantages for action, and
leaving a Garrison in Lawgingen, he past the Brent, and encamped near the
Village of Southeim in his way to Ulm, three miles distant. When the
Protestants had intelligence that the Emperor was marching to Ulm, they remove
their Camp at length, October the 13th, and next day come to Gienghen, a Town
upon the same River, not far above Southeim, so that the River run betwixt the
two Armies. So soon as they had halted, but not as yet pitched their Tents
there, they discover some Horse upon a neighboring Hill. Amongst these was the
Emperor himself, who with the Duke of Alva was come out to view the Enemy. The
Duke of Saxony commanded the Van that day, and with all have makes toward the
enemy, sending the Landgrave word instantly to follow after: but seeing the
Enemy retreated, he slackened his pace, and waited for the Landgrave upon the
Hill. There again, as it was thought, they lost a fair opportunity of doing
their work, for the River could not be foarded over, and there was but one
Bridge thereabouts; The Protestants lose an opportunity of taking the Emperor.
so that though the Emperor might perhaps have escaped, yet the chief Officers
would have been hard put to it, which they themselves, as it is said,
afterward confessed. But the Emperor now altering his mind of marching to
Ulm, lest the Enemy being left behind his back, he might lose the advantage of
the Danube, A Stratagem.
took another course, and October the 15th, planted an Ambush of three hundred
Musketeers in a neighboring Wood. The Prince of Sulmona was afterward sent out
with some light Horse to skirmish, who having engaged a Party of the Enemy, and
feigning to fly, he drew them into the Ambush, so that the Musketeers rushing
forth out of the Wood, began to ply them very warmly. The Landgrave observing
that, A Skirmish betwixt the Landgrave and Prince of Sulmona.
hastened to the relief of his Party, which consisted but of four Troops of
Horse, and so both were engaged in a brisk Dispute, which lasted till night,
the great Guns all the while playing also. In the mean time the Duke of Saxony
staid with the Army, that he might defend the Camp, if the Emperor should in
that Hurly-burly offer to attack them. Another Stratagem used by the Emperor.
This first Stratagem not succeeding, the Emperor orders another to be
attempted in the nightime: A parcel of stout Fellows, German and Spanish
Foot, are picked out of the whole Army, and commanded to put on white Shirts
over their Arms: With these and a party of Horse the Duke of Alva is sent out
in the beginning of the night, with orders to march in all silence toward the
Enemy, whilst the Emperor himself should follow presently after with the rest
of his Forces. When the Duke of Alva was come near the Enemies Camp, he found
their Guards doubled, and them in arms. So that this attempt was likewise in
vain, for some hours before they had got notice of it from a Spy. The Plague in
the Emperors Camp.
And now by reason of the want of Forage and Provisions, and the continual
Rains of the Season, not only the Plague broke out in the Emperor's Camp,
Farnese with some Troops returns home.
but at the same time also Cardinal Farnese, with some Italian Troops, left
them. For the very same reason the Emperor was forced to change his ground,
and on the last of October, to return to his old Camp near Lawgingen.

October the 20th the Landgrave wrote an Answer to the Letter of the Nobility
and States of Duke Maurice, The Landgrave's Answer to the Mauricians.
as we said before, were sent from Friburg the 11th of the same month: That he
was heartily sorry that the War was carried into those Countries, but much
more, that in time of common danger, they would not join their Forces according
to the manner and custom of their Ancestors: that it seemed very strange to
him, above all things, that they should not perceive this to be a War mainly
designed against their Religion, since both the Popes Letter to the Suitzers,
and the League that he has made with the Emperor, which by his order was
produced and shown to the Cantons, make it manifest even past all doubt: for
after that that League was concluded, many Troops came from the Pope to the
Emperor; and those Italians that by chance were made Prisoners, unanimously
affirm, That the end they were sent for, was to fight against the Lutherans:
That, moreover, the Confederates for Religion suffered more grievously in this
War than all others, having their houses plundered and burnt, their Wives and
Daughters basely ravished, the hands of their young Children and Infants cut
off, and that merely for hatered to their Religion: That whereas they say the
Emperor has given them security as to their Religion, it is no more but a
sham; for should he be asked, whether or not it were his pleasure, that the
Lutheran Religion should be subjected to the Authority and Decrees of the
Popish Council; no doubt, the Artifice would soon discover it self: that they
did not do well then to trust to that promise. That, besides he wondered very
much, they should be startled at that proscription of the Emperors, since they
themselves know that he has no right to do so, unless they had been first
cited and judicially convicted; but that it was a thing extremely to be
lamented, to see that most noble Family and the people of Saxony so divided,
whereas if they joined their Forces, and were unanimously resolved to defend
their Country, the danger they now feared so much might easily be removed: That
he had indeed discoursed the Elector, but found him wholly averse from the
Expedient they proposed to him. For if he should in another turn of Fortunes
Wheel demand any such thing of Duke Maurice, he made no doubt but that he would
refuse, and they themselves dissuade him from it: That therefore he did not
like their counsel, and the rather, that Duke Maurice had lately written to
both of them, acquainting them that he was grieved at the discourses of some
men, who gave it out that he was lying at the catch for his Cousins Province;
for that they did him an injury, and prayed them not to give credit to such
reports: That upon the receipt of those Letters, they were satisfied with his
excuse, and troubled themselves no more about any such matter; but that if he
should now take possession of his Lands, they themselves were sensible what
judgment men would pass thereupon: That he therefore desired them to put a stop
to it, or else they were to expect not only a Foreign, but a Civil War also;
for if upon the account of the Proscription any violence be used against him,
that both he himself and the rest of the Confederates, who are in the same
condition, must needs join in his assistance; and that what the issue of that
may prove, may be easily foreseen: That they should therefore endeavor that
the Houses of Saxony and Hesse be not divided, but that Duke Maurice assist him
and his Confederates, which would redound greatly both to his honor and
safety. He wrote the same day to Duke Maurice much to the same purpose, The
Landgrave's Letter to Duke Maurice's Son-in-Law.
and advises him not to be moved at the Emperors Edicts and Proscription, but
to call to mind the good Offices that both he and his Father had received from
the Elector and him: That he himself was sensible what kindnesses his Father
and he received from them both, when his Uncle Duke George by his last Will and
Testament provided, that the Emperor should keep possession of his whole
Province, until his Brother should forsake the Protestant Religion: That
besides, since Duke George having given his Father a yearly Pension, and it
being to be feared left out of hatered to the Religion, he might withdraw it.
The Protestants at that time promised him, that if any such thing should
happen, they would bountifully contribute, and give him the same yearly
Allowance: That he should therefore desist from his Enterprise, and not attempt
any thing in the Province of the Elector of Saxony, contrary to his will and
pleasure; for that otherwise the assistance of the Confederates would not be
wanting unto him: That the Ambassadors of Poland had been with the Emperor in
the Camp, indeed, and given the Duke of Saxony and him an account of what they
had done; but that the Conditions were such, The Letter of the Council of War
to Duke Maurice.
as made not for Peace. The Council of War wrote much in the same strain to
Duke Maurice and the States of his Country, protesting that if any violence
were used toward the Duke of Saxony, they would stand by him, and not slight
the Injury: but the Elector himself gave them no Answer at that time, as will
appear more fully hereafter.

The same day the Landgrave and Council of War wrote to the Cities of
Magdeburg, The Protestants Letters from the Camp, to some Imperial Cities and
Princes.
Brunswick, Bremen, Hamburg, Goslar, Hildesheim, Gottingen, Hanover, Embden,
Minden, to the Duke of Pomerania, the Dukes of Lunenburg, and the Prince of
Anhalt, and informed them of the great danger that threatened Saxony, and
chiefly the Elector, to whose Borders the Enemy was already advanced: That the
work was begun by King Ferdinand, who had drawn the Bohemians into this War:
That besides, Duke Maurice joined with him, pretending for his reason, that he
was outlawed by the Emperor; but that they had sent word to Duke Maurice, that
he should desist from Hostility, else the Duke of Saxony would not be destitute
of assistance. Since then that whole Country was exposed to present danger, and
that the Elector importuned them for help, they could not but assist him: that
they had resolved, indeed, to have given him part of the Army they had; but
because the Enemy lay near them, and that they were in hopes to bring the
matter shortly to the decision of a Battle, wherein all their safety consisted.
It had not been thought convenient that they should weaken themselves by
lessening their number at such a time; that that was the thing the Enemy
expected, that being diverted and employed in other places, they could not
bring their whole strength against them: That since that was the case then,
they prayed them, that upon the public account they would with all expedition
send some supplies of Foot to Wittemberg and Weimar, and that what money they
were still owing by virtue of the League, they would pay it all in to the
Electors Son and Counselors. For that the common cause lay at stake, and that
if their Confederates should once be run down, it would be their own case next.

Mention has been made of the Bohemians before. The Bohemians invade Saxony
unwillingly.
These served King Ferdinand in his Wars indeed, but much against their will,
because of an ancient League they had with the House of Saxony: and then also,
because in their opinion there was no necessity for the War, and that it was
generally thought that the Elector had wrong done him. But King Ferdinand
overperswaded them, and sent for Soldiers out of Hungary and Silesia, that he
might constrain them to it whether they would or not. Hussars Hungarian Horse.
The Hungarian Horse are commonly called Hussars, a rapacious and fierce sort
of Men. When these Forces were now mustered, and ready to march out of their
own Country, Sebastian Weittemall their General, on the twentieth of October,
Ferdinand's General denounces War against the Saxons.
proclaims War against the People of the Duke of Saxony, for that some years
since their Prince had seized into his Hands the Abbey of Dobrilugh; and that he
had lately renounced his Allegiance to the Emperor and his Allies, thereby
violating the League that was made betwixt the Bohemians and House of Saxony:
And although there was no need of a Denunciation of War, in respect that he
stood Outlawed by the Emperor; yet lest any thing should seem to be omitted,
he was willing by this Intimation to discharge his Duty. At this time the
Deputies of the Confederates met at Ulm, A Convention of the Confederate
Deputies at Vlm.
that they might consult about their common Affairs; and seeing frequent
Advices came from Saxony of the present State of Affairs there, the Elector,
October the twenty seventh, wrote to his Representatives at Ulm, That they
should lay the whole Matter before the Confederates, and desire them that they
would consider his Case, since he had spared no Labor nor Danger, that he
might keep that Storm from falling upon the Upper Germany: That the Council of
War had indeed some days past sent word to the Cities, and others within the
Circle of Saxony, that they should assist him; but that it was uncertain what
they would do; and that though they should do it, yet he was apprehensive that
they would be over-matched by the Multitude of the Enemies, and that there was
danger lest before they could be in a readiness, the Enemy might have already
invaded the Country: That they should therefore demand these things of the
Protestant Deputies, in the first place, That because it would be a great
Trouble and Inconvenience to him, The Duke of Saxony's Demands from the
Protestants.
in this Extremity, to be any longer absent from his Wife, Children, and
People, they would give them their Advice as to that Particular: In the next
place, That they would grant him more ample Supplies, which the Landgrave and
Council of War had already put him in good hopes: Lastly, That they would not
make Peace with the Enemy, till all that were taken from him should first be
restored.

The Deputies give a generous and frank Answer to these Proposals; The Answer
of the Deputies.
and in the first place beseech him to stay with the Army, until the Emperor
should send his Soldiers into Winter Quarters; laying before him, how dangerous
a thing it would be if he should leave them; That if King Ferdinand and Duke
Maurice used any violence against him, they promised Assistances; seeing it is
not to be doubted, say they, but that the Confederate Princes and States will
be true to him, and stand by him, as by their League they are obliged, and make
no Peace before he be restored to all his own: That if he thought it fit, they
would also, as the Landgrave and Council of War had done, signify the same to
Duke Maurice: That they were also most confident, that the Confederate States
of the Circle of Saxony would do their Duty in that particular. The same day we
mentioned, Duke Maurice his Letters to the Elector.
to wit, the twenty seventh of October, Duke Maurice writes to the Elector from
Dresden, That he had been lately informed by the States of his Dominion, what
Orders he had received from the Emperor, and in what danger his Affairs were;
but now that the Emperor had given him and his People security as to their
Religion, he had therefore, with the Advice of his Council, resolved to take
such a Course, as that he may both satisfy the Emperor, and secure his own
Right and Property, lest his Lands and Country should fall into the Hands of
Strangers; and that therefore he signified so much to him, both in his own and
Brother Augustus his Name: His Letters also to the same purpose to the
Elector's Son.
That if he chance hereafter to be reconciled to the Emperor and King
Ferdinand, he shall not refuse, provided they be willing, that the States of
his Dominion determine any Debate that may be betwixt them. An Irruption into
the Province of the Elector of Saxony.
He writes almost in the same words to John William the Elector's Son, willing
him to take care that the Letters he had written might be transmitted to his
Father.

In the mean time the Bohemians and Hussars, make an Incursion into Voetland,
the next Land belonging to the Elector, The Bohemians depart.
and commit all sorts of Villainies, burn, slay, The Hungarians join Duke
Maurice.
plunder, and ravish: But the Bohemians made but a short stay; for seeing, as
we said, they served unwillingly, November the eleventh they forsake their
Colors, and return home. The Hungarians however, and King Ferdinand's
mercinary Soldiers, Most of the Towns of Saxony fall into the hands of Duke
Maurice.
join Duke Maurice, who takes by Surrender Zuirkau, and afterward Schneberg
and Aldenburg, and most of the rest of the Elector's Towns, whom he forced to
swear Fealty to him, except Gothen, Isenach, and Wittemberg. When this News was
brought into the Emperor's Camp, it caused great Rejoicing, which was
expressed by the discharging of Great Guns, as the Custom is.

At the same time the Emperor removes his Camp, The Emperor removes his Camp.
for the same Cause as before, choosing a drier and more commodious Ground, that
he might refresh the Soldiers, who were extremely harassed, and supply the want
of Provisions. Most part were of opinion, that the Soldiers should be sent into
Winter Quarters; but he himself alone, who had viewed the Places before,
resolved to keep the Army together, Duke Maurice ill spoken of.
and pursue the War. Duke Maurice was generally blamed by all Men, That he
should have so ungratefully served him whom he ought to have honored as his
Father, and who was, in a manner, the sole Author of all his Fortune; so that
many very invective Libels and Copies of Verses were published against him,
Pasquils against Duke Maurice.
wherein, to his reproach and ignominy, he was accused of breach of Faith,
betraying of his Religion, and highest Ingratitude; and the more, that neither
the Entreaties of his Wife, nor Father-in-Law, could any way prevail with him.
When this came to his knowledge, Duke Maurice justifies himself by a public
Manifesto.
he published a Manifesto in his own justification, declaring what the Religion
was that was professed in his Territories, what he himself had promised to his
People, and how that for the promoting of Religion he had founded and endowed
public Schools. Then he alleges, That the Emperor had given all Assurances
to him and his People; and not to him only, but to other Princes also,
concerning their Religion, and of his own Resolution to maintain the Liberty of
Germany, that nothing should be done by Force and Violence, but that the Cause
should be tried and decided according to Law, and many Imperial Decrees made
for that effect; That therefore he gives credit to his Promises and Letters,
according to the Example of those Princes who now serve under him, and yet
profess their own Religion, not only in their own Houses at home, but also
abroad in the Camp and Army; That those who are familiarly known to him, and
daily conversant with him, may easily discover his Mind; and that doubtless, if
they found any such Resolution in him, they would not remain with him: And that
whereas the Pope assists him, it is because the War is made against those who
chiefly withstand his Errors and usurped Power; but that it ought to be
considered, not what moves him, but what the Intentions of the Emperor are,
who carries on the War: That it does not neither increase the Suspicion, that
the Emperor retains the Popish Religion also in his Provinces; seeing that is
left to his own discretion, and no Rules can be imposed upon him as to that,
there being no Prince nor Magistrate that in that matter will suffer himself to
be prescribed to by others: That since Religion then was secured, he sees no
reason, why in all other things he should not obey the Emperor, seeing it was
Christ's Command, That we should render unto God the things that are Gods, and
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: That it was not unknown to the
Emperor, King Ferdinand, and many others, what care and pains he had taken,
that these sad Differences might have been amicably composed; nor was it his
fault that they were not: That if he had had no other Reason to make him
desirous of Peace, but that by Civil War the Turk increased both in Power and
Confidence, as the History of Greece alone might sufficiently convince all Men;
yet that that was more than enough to incline him to it: But that when there
was no more talk of Peace, and that strict Orders were brought him from the
Emperor that he should seize into his Hands the Lands and Goods of John
Frederick, and that King Ferdinand was already hovering over that Country, not
only with his Bohemians, but also with Austrians and Hungarians raised for this
War, it was not lawful for him to resist the Magistrate, who is excepted in all
Leagues and Confederations: That what is said of him, as if he coveted all the
Lands of his Cousin, was an injury done unto him; and that he justified himself
in that a good while ago, by Letters to the Landgrave his Father-in-Law, and to
the Duke of Saxony himself: That he wished Matters were now in the same
Condition as they were when he wrote so unto them, and that there were none who
endeavored to appropriate to themselves his Possessions; but now, that the
State of Affairs was much altered, that King Ferdinand was not to be entreated,
but would pursue his Point by an Army; that his Forces which came from Bohemia
had already possessed themselves of some Silver Mines which are in common to
him with his Cousin; it necessarily behoved him to take care, that they might
not invade the rest also, and make greater Progresses; and that he had
acquainted the Landgrave and his Cousin with his Design before: That in
consideration of all which, it was his earnest desire, no Man would
misinterpret his Actions, nor give credit to those things which probably might
be reported of him abroad; seeing he resolved to be constant in the defense of
his Religion, and had no other aim, but that the Lands and Dignities of the
House of Saxony should not fall into the Hands of Strangers.

Now again were the Persecutions in France revived. The Persecution of Meaux in
France.
William Brissonet, who some years before had been Bishop of Meaux, a Town ten
Miles from Paris, being a great Lover of the Reformed Religion, debarred the
Monks and Friars, and appointed fit Pastors to instruct the People: William
Bri^sonet.
But when for his so doing the Divines of the Sorbonne began to be troublesome
unto him, and to threaten him with Danger, his Constancy failed him, and he
fell off from his Enterprise: Nevertheless, the Remains of that Doctrine stuck
in the Minds of many; and this year at length about threescore of the
Towns-people, having laid their Heads together, chose to themselves a Minister,
and meeting in Houses privately, on certain Days after Sermon, took the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the Institution of the Gospel. That
could not be long kept secret, especially since some came from the Country also
to the Meetings. Wherefore being all apprehended together, they are cast into
Prison, and after they were examined, carried to Paris in Carts. Fourteen burnt.
Being there condemned to die, and brought home again, fourteen of them were
burnt alive at so many Stakes: The rest were partly whipped, and partly
banished. As they were returning home from Paris, a certain Person met them
from the next Village upon the Road, and exhorted them to Perseverance; for
which he was laid hold on, and suffered the same Punishment as they did. Before
they were burnt, they were put to the Rack, to make them discover their
Companions and Fellows in Religion; but nothing could be extorted from them.
Many were of opinion, that this was done on purpose at the Instigation of some,
to break off the Treaty that then was on foot betwixt the King and the
Confederates of Smalcalde. The Letters of Duke Maurice, wherein he defied the
Duke of Saxony, were on the sixth of November delivered in the Camp.

In the former Book we gave you an Account, That the Pope having on the
sixteenth of April pronounced Sentence against the Archbishop of Cologne,
excommunicated him, and deprived him of all his Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Preferments. The Archbishop of Cologne appeals to a Council.
Some days after that he had certain notice of this, which was the fourth day
of November, as he himself said, he published a Paper, wherein having given the
Reasons why he acknowledged not the Pope for his Judge, as being long ago
accused of Heresy and Idolatry, he appealed from that Sentence to a lawful
Council of Germany, wherein, so soon as it should commence, he promised to
bring his Action against the Pope. The Protestant Deputies, who, as has been
said, met at Ulm toward the latter end of October, disagreeing in their
Opinions, went in November to the Camp at Giengen, that there they might
deliberate more freely. There it was proposed, That because their Neighbors of
the same Religion gave no Assistance, that, of the Confederates, the Duke of
Lunenbourg and Pomerania, and some others, contributed nothing at all; and that
the other States and Cities in the Circle of Saxony, but very little; that they
were disappointed from France, and that because of the Season of the Year, and
other Hardships, the Army was much diminished, by the daily running away of the
Soldiers; one of three things was to be chosen; either to hazard a Battle, or
to quit the Field, and put the Army into Winter Quarters, or else to make a
Peace or Truce. The Matter being debated, it was concluded, That a Proposal of
Peace was the best Course they could take; and for that end employed Adam
Trott, who in behalf of the Elector of Brandenbourg had free access to his
Brother Marquess John. But when the Emperor, who knew their Minds, and the
Streights they were reduced unto, by sure Signs and good Intelligence, and had
lately received glad Tidings out of Saxony, required of them very hard
Conditions, it was resolved upon, That the rest of their Forces marching into
Saxony, a thousand Horse and eight thousand Foot should be left there, to take
Winter Quarters in the Country about, at the Charge of the Duke of Wertemberg,
and the Free Cities of Upper Germany. On the twenty third of November then they
break up, after they had past a Vote, That another Embassy should be sent into
France and England, An Embassy into France and England.
and that they should meet again at Frankfurt the twelfth of January. And thus
was the War but unluckily managed, which was chiefly imputed to this, That the
Supreme and Absolute Power was not in the Hands of one Man: For whereas the
Duke of Saxony and the Landgrave were equal in Authority, it happened oftener than
once, that whilst they were debating, fit Opportunities were lost. What was
likewise resolved upon about distributing the Soldiers into Garrisons and
Winter Quarters, had no effect neither, because some refused to contribute any
longer. So soon as the Emperor had notice of their departure, he presently
sent out some Parties of Horse, to learn what way they took; and shortly after
orders the Duke of Alva and Count of Buren to follow after; nay he himself also
marched out with the German Horse, leaving the Foot behind, to stay there till
further Orders. The Protestant Confederates were now for most part in the Camp,
where they were to lodge all night: And though the Landgrave led the Van that
day, yet he staid behind with the Duke of Saxony, and both of them had no more
but ten Cornets of Horse, and about five hundred Musketeers with them. With
these they halted upon a Hill, securing themselves with what Fieldpieces they
had left, till the Emperor retreating with his Men in the Evening, they also
marched forward with great silence. and came to the Camp near Heidenheim, a
Town belonging to the Duke of Wirtemberg, The Duke of Saxony and Landgrave in
great danger.
having so escaped a very present Danger. For if the Emperor had charged them,
they being far inferior in number, they must all have been either taken or
slain, as they themselves afterward acknowledged. But the Emperor, who was
ignorant of their number, and took them to be many more than they were, acted
cautiously, and the same night sent Orders to the Foot to march and follow him,
with a purpose to fall upon them next day: However, as we told you, they gave
him the slip in the nightime, and got safely to the rest of the Army in the
Camp. Wherefore the Emperor returned to his Camp, and staid two days there to
refresh his Soldiers: But afterward conjecturing that their Design was to take
their Winter Quarters in Franconia, a spacious and rich Province, he resolved
to prevent them: Wherefore having upon Surrender taken Bophinghen, Bophinghen,
Nordlingen, Oetinghen, and Dinkespiel, surrender to the Emperor.
Nordlinghen, the Country of Oetinghen and Dinkespiel, he marches in great
haste to Rotenburg, an Imperial Town upon the River Tauber. The Landgrave
having left the Charge of his Men to the Duke of Saxony, made a Progress to
Wirtemberg, from thence returned home, and came on the first of December to
Frankfurt. But the Duke of Saxony, though he was destitute of the Sinews of
War, The Duke of Saxony raises Money of the Papists.
yet marching forwards with his Forces, he batters Gemund a Town in Schwabia,
which being surrendered unto him, he exacts a Sum of Money of the Magistrates,
that was collected by a Poll. Afterward he came to Frankfurt, on the twelfth
of December, and of them got Nine thousand Ducats: He asseseth Mentz at Forty
thousand; and then advancing forwards, takes the same Course with the Abbot of
Fulde, who was very rich, and some others of the Popish Religion. The
Landgrave's Letter to Duke, Maurice his Son-in-law.
When the Landgrave was come home, he wrote to Duke Maurice his Son-in-Law,
That he would come to him, provided he would give him a Safe Conduct; for he
had a Design to have negotiated a Peace betwixt him and the Duke of Saxony.
Duke Maurice sent him, indeed, a Safe Conduct, but stinted with so many and
such kind of Conditions, that he not thinking it safe to go himself, sent his
Ambassadors, Herman Hundelsuse and Henry Lersner. These did, indeed, very
earnestly solicit the Affair, but nothing could he done, since both Duke
Maurice alleged that he could not treat without the Emperor's leave, and the
Duke of Saxony, who had Forces in readiness to fight, would grant no Cessation
of Arms. There being no hopes, then, of a Peace, the Landgrave' Soldiers return
home: But Recrod, who brought the German Foot out of France, as we have already
mentioned, tarried with the Duke of Saxony. When the Emperor was at Rotenburg,
he dispatched the Count of Buren, with Orders to use some Means or other to
suprise Frankfurt. From thence afterward he wrote also to Ulrick Duke of
Wertemberg, The Emperor's Letter to the Duke of Wirtemberg.
on the thirteenth of December, to this purpose. Though because of the War,
said he, which some Years ago you and the Landgrave waged against our Brother
King Ferdinand, and the seizing of the Duchy of Wirtemberg, it was but just,
that we should have exemplarily punished both him and you; yet we fully
pardoned you the Offense, and received you into Favor again: And though
lately, in the beginning of this War, when you deserved no such thing, (since
you tyrannized not only over your own People, but also over the Neighboring
States of the Empire, and would submit to no Law nor Justice) we sent a Person
of Quality as Ambassador to you, to acquaint you with the Reason why we
undertook this War, and to desire you to live in Peace and Quiet, whereby you
might expect all Favor from us: Nevertheless, setting light by all these
things, and having no regard to the Allegiance you owe to us, you have espoused
the Cause of the Outlawed Princes and their Confederates, fallen into the same
Crime of Rebellion with them, and with Men of your Faction surprised, first,
some Towns belonging to our Brother King Ferdinand and other States, and
afterward some within our Dominions also: Nor content with all this, you have
with extraordinary boldness declared War against us, and with opprobrious and
scurrilous Language bespattered our Fame and Reputation, have endeavored to
deprive us of our Crown and Dignity, renounced your Allegiance to us, and have
had the boldness with the rest of your Conspirators, to appear against us with
an Army in the Field, doing Outrage to a great many of the Dependents and
Vassals of our Brother King Ferdinand and us: For all which you have incurred
the Penalty due to Outlawed Persons, and those that are guilty of High Treason.
Now though this be your Case, and that we have weighty and just Causes
wherefore we should most severely punish you according to your Deserts;
nevertheless, out of our accustomed Grace and Clemency, and that a wretched
Multitude of People may not be ruined, The Emperor commands the Duke of
Wirtemberg to deliver up himself, and all his, into his hands.
we strictly command and charge you, That upon receipt of these our Letters,
you forthwith deliver up your self, your whole Province, Goods, and Fortune,
and whatever you can call your own, without any Condition or Restriction, into
our hands, to be disposed of at our pleasure; certifying you, That unless you
obey, we will with Fire and Sword pursue you and yours to the last. For the
Letter which four days since you wrote to us in your own justification, does
not at all satisfy, nor is it sufficient to excuse you, or atone for your
Crime. A Copy of that Letter he sent at the same time to his Subjects, And his
Subjects not to obey him.
commanding them not to obey him for the future, but send Deputies to him, the
Emperor, to know what they were to do, and absolving them from their Oath of
Allegiance unto him: Which if they did do, he promises to take care that they
may live with more ease and safety for the future; but if not, he threatens
them with the same Penalty that he would inflict upon their Duke. When the
Emperor wrote this Letter, his Forces under the Command of the Duke of Alva
were upon the Borders of the Duchy of Wirtemberg. Duke Ulrick in the mean time
betakes himself to the Castle of Tuel, seated out of his Country, upon a very
high and steep Hill; and having received the Emperor's Letters upon the Road,
on the twentieth of December he wrote to him in a supplicant and very
submissive manner: Wirtemberg's supplicatory Letters to the Emperor.
That it extremely grieved him he had so far incurred his Displeasure, nor
would any Accident in the World have more afflicted him; but that since some
had interceded for him, and that he himself had earnestly begged Pardon for his
Fault, he had conceived good hopes that his Anger would have been appeased:
That he entertained still the same hopes, since he was convinced by Experience
of the Clemency which he used to show to humble Supplicants; of which many
Instances might be given, and those but a few years since manifested to some of
the Quality of Princes, who, perhaps, had given him much greater cause of
Offense than he had done: That he made no doubt, but that if he would have
heard his Ambassadors, he would have written much more mildly unto him: That
therefore he implored his Mercy, and begged that for Christ's sake he would
pardon him, and not use the Rigor against him a poor wretched Prince, nor
against his miserable Subjects.

At this time there came a Recruit to the Emperor, Neopolitan Cuirossiers come
to the Emperor.
of about Five hundred Neopolitan Cuirassiers, under the Command of John
Baptista Spinelli; and not long after his Imperial Majesty went to Hall, a Town
in Schwabia lately reconciled unto him, Frederick Elector Palatine is
reconciled to the Emperor.
and thither the Elector Palatine Frederick came to wait on him. He had sent
Four hundred Horse to the Assistance of the Confederate Protestants, when they
were at Ingolstadt; and therefore it was his Business with the Emperor to
persuade him, that he had not sent those Troops to fight against him, but only
because he was bound to do so to the Duke of Wirtemberg, by virtue of a private
League that was betwixt them. The Emperor took him up very sharply, and having
reckoned up the Favors he had done him, severely chid him: However he pardoned
him, wishing him to make amends for that Fault, by a more exact Fidelity for
the future. When in the beginning of the War the Elector Palatine had thoughts
of reforming the Church within his Territories, Paulus Fagius called to
Heidleberg.
he sent for Paulus Fagius, an eloquent and learned Man, to come to him from
Strasbourg to Heidelberg, that he might be a Guide in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and show the way to others: But the good Fortune and Success of the
Emperor overturned all the Fabric which was there begun to be reared. The
City of Vlm reconciled to the Emperor.
Some days after the Deputies of Ulm come to the Emperor, and upon a humble
Acknowledgment of their Fault, are received into Grace. This is the chief City
of all Schwabia for Power and Authority, so that the dismembring of them from
the rest of the Confederates, was a matter of great moment: But about the
latter end of December, they acquaint their Friends by Letters, That the Reason
why they did so, was because the Emperor intended presently to have besieged
the Town, and that they were in a miserable condition deserted by their
Friends, and had no appearance of any humane help to defend them against so
great a power: And then also because some of the Confederates of best quality,
were seeking privately to make their peace with the Emperor. They were
adjudged to pay to the Emperor an hundred thousand Florins, furnish him with
twelve pieces of Ordnance, and to receive a Garrison of ten Companies of Foot.
The Landgrave's Country harassed by the Imperialists.
In the mean time the Count of Buren entering the Country of the Landgrave that
is above Frankfurt, took the Town of Darmstadt, partly by force, and partly by
composition, burnt the Castle, and spared the people. The place was only
defended by the Inhabitants and a Rout gathered together out of the Country.
Buren takes Darmstadt.
Afterward he proceeds beyond Frankfurt; and having no hopes of taking it by
force, especially at that time of the year, and when the Soldiers were out of
order, he orders part of his Forces to pass the Rhine, and to stay for him at
Mentz: and when there was nothing less in his thoughts, being about to return
home, unexpected by the people of Frankfurt, sent Deputies to surrender the
Town, Frankfurt surrenders to Buren.
and promise to obey what Commands should be laid upon them. Without delay he
marches thither, and entering the Town with his Army, brings them into
subjection to the Emperor. He was a Gentlemen of an open and free humor, His
free Jest that he put upon them.
and therefore when he was feasted by the Senate, he is said to have played
upon them, for their cowardly and easy surrendering of the place, telling
them, that Darmstadt-men deserved to live in Frankfurt, and that they ought to
be transplanted to Darmstadt; for that Town, in respect of Frankfurt, is no
more in a manner than a Village. But the reason why they did so, The cause of
the surrender.
was, amongst others, because they saw that the City of Ulm and Duke of
Wirtemberg were endeavoring to make their peace: and then because they were
afraid that their Fair might be removed to some other place, for all their
Wealth consists in that: nor were they ignorant that both Mentz and Worms made
their several applications to the Emperor for obtaining it. Frankfurt is
reconciled to the Emperor, and is fined.
Having afterward sent Deputies to the Emperor, they are received into
favor, but at the cost of fourscore thousand Florins.

When the Duke of Saxony came with his Army to his own Frontiers, The Elector
of Saxony's Letter to the States of Duke Maurice.
December the 22th, he wrote to the States of Duke Maurice, to this effect. I
purposely made no answer, says he, to your Letter of the 11th of October,
because I had a mind to see the event; but what has been now done in the
interim, is publicly known. The truth is though, by reason of the Kindred,
Amity, and League whereby we are linked together, and of what I have deserved
at your Princes hands, I expected no such thing from him, nor from you neither;
nor did it so much as enter my thoughts, that he would ever have used me and my
people after this manner: and much less that you should have been the Authors
and Devisers of such Counsels as must needs tend to the detriment of the whole
Country, and your own prejudice also. But this, I suppose, seemed to you to be
a fit time for bringing upon the Stage the crafty and treacherous purposes,
which many years ago have been hatched by some of your States, but hitherto by
Gods goodness prevented: for consider with your selves a little, what kind of
act that of yours was, when you advised Duke George to disinherit his own
Brother and Brothers Sons, for a difference in Religion, and appoint the
Emperor and King Ferdinand to be his Heirs, unless they would profess and
restore the Popish Religion. Now that without any regard to that will, the
whole Inheritance was conveyed to his Brother Henry, and the Protestant
Religion retained, it was brought about by means of me and my Associates. And
though he professed our Religion, and entered into the League also, having
signed and sealed Writings to that effect, both in his own and his Sons name;
yet ye, because you were disappointed of your first hopes, wrought upon him so
as to make him forfeit his Engagements: and after his death that his Sons
followed the footsteps of their Father, was doubtless the effect of your
Councils also. And as that Inheritance fell to Henry and his Sons, much against
your will, so also it was no small grief to you, to see the friendship that was
betwixt Duke Henry and me, which you many times attempted to have dissolved:
nor indeed were your endeavors altogether in vain, for what you could not
accomplish whilst he was alive, you have now at length effected with his Sons,
especially Duke Maurice, of whom I had conceived the greatest opinion and hopes
of virtue and Friendship: for five years ago almost, not long after he had
entered into the Government, ye stirred him up against me undeservedly, and in
such a manner too, as it was like to have proved a very dangerous matter. And
though that Storm by the mediation of the Landgrave was allayed, and security
given that no such thing should be done for the future, but that in every thing
the ancient League should be a standing Rule to both our actions; yet ye
advised him and his Brother Augustus, that in my absence he should invade and
take possession of my Province, whereat I am the more troubled, that in the
intercourse of most friendly Letters that past betwixt us, he gave me not the
least intimation of any such thing; and that the intercession of the Landgrave
and other Associates, had no influence upon him as to that particular. I am
exceedingly grieved at the calamity of an innocent multitude of my poor people,
whom he has plagued with an Army of foreign, cruel, and barbarous Soldiers,
that make havoc of all they have: it grieves me also, that in most places the
Ministers of the Gospel are turned out and forced to fly, and Virgins and
Matrons ravished; which outrageous Villainies, I make no doubt but God will
sometime or other punish. But above all I am grieved and troubled at his
perfidious and unexpected Hostility, whereunto I make no doubt but he has been
advised by you, who like the Traitor Judas, are bought and sold for money. He
gives a pretext for his invading my Lands, That, forsooeth, the Emperor so
commanded, and King Ferdinand urged him to it: But the nearness of Blood and
Relation, the League and Alliance that is betwixt the two Families, ought to
have been preferred far before their Edicts: for it is long ago since all
differences, excepting that of Religion, which the Emperor or King Ferdinand
had with me, were taken up and ended; the Crimes that are laid to our charge,
are all forged, and we are only persecuted for Religion. If his Command move
you, why are you not rather moved at the baseness of the fact? Why did you not
consider, whether or not it was lawful for your Prince to execute so unjust and
unreasonable an Order? But you brought to Council with you a corrupt mind, long
ago depraved with prejudices and passions, and your Prince and you were more
taken with my Dukedom, than with Equity and Justice. For otherwise Reason it
self would have told you, that since we were condemned without a Trial, the
Proscription it self is against all Law and Justice, and contrary to the Oath
and Promises wherein he stands obliged to the Empire. Duke Maurice also might
have easily perceived that it was not lawful for him to obey so wicked and
arbitrary a Command; and he ought to have had greater regard to the Welfare of
his Country: but he chose rather to follow the footsteps of accursed Doeg, and
cloak his Crime with a feigned pretext of necessary Duty. Nor is it to the
purpose, what you say, that he would have done no such thing, had not King
Ferdinand come with an Army upon my Frontiers. For the matter is far otherwise,
and I have it from credible persons, first, that you your selves and Duke
Maurice, craftily started the thing, and had Cabals and secret Treaties about
it with the Emperor and King Ferdinand, both at Ratisbonne and Prague, as will
appear all in good time: and then that it was not with the advice and consent
of all, but of a few chosen out of the rest of the States that so villainous a
purpose was contrived. Since therefore I am now, by Gods blessing, come with an
Army to my own Borders again, I am fully resolved to be even with your Prince,
and to use all necessary means for the defense and recovery of my Country; and
in so doing I shall endeavor by a just Revenge, to make you also, especially
the Authors of such damnable Counsels, truly sensible, how heinous an injury it
is, that I have received. It troubles me, indeed, that matters are brought to
such a pass, and I am sorry for the Calamities of our common Country; but since
you gave the beginning to them, and that I am necessitated to free my Country
from unjust Violence and Oppression, I protest, that all the Evils that may
thereupon ensue, are not to be imputed to me. Such of you also as have had no
hand in this Crime, and are ready to make your innocence appear to me, may
freely do it, and be graciously received.

The King of Denmark, The King of Denmark sent no aid to the Protestants.
though a Confederate, sent no assistance to the Protestants. The Emperor
removing from Hall to Hailbrun, and having received the Towns-people into
favor, sent the Duke of Alva into the Country of Wirtemberg, as we said
before, The Duke of Alva invades the Duchy of Wirtemberg.
who having taken some places upon capitulation, did a great deal of damage
there. But at the solicitation of the Prince Palatine, on the third of January
the Duke of Wirtemberg made his Peace on these terms. That by reason of is his
sickness he send Ambassadors to make his submission, and humbly beg the
Emperor's pardon: 1547.
That within six weeks time, he would do the same in person: That he observe
the Emperor's public Decrees: That he give no assistance to the Duke of
Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, The Conditions upon which the Duke of Wirtemberg
is reconciled to the Emperor.
but aid the Emperor, in putting into execution the Outlawry published against
them: That he suffer not the Emperor's Enemies to have any Commerce within his
Territories: That he make no League wherein the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and
the House of Austria, shall not be comprehended: If any of his Subjects bear
Arms against the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and House of Austria, he punish them
severely: That he take an Oath of his Nobility not to serve in any such Wars.
That he give free and open passage to the Emperor, whenever it shall please
him to march through his Country: That he deliver up all the Ammunition and
Ordnance, which the Confederates have left in his Country: That for the charges
of the War, he pay three hundred thousand Florins, one half in hand, and the
rest within five and twenty days. That for security Achsperg, Kirchen, and
Schortendorff, shall be put into the Emperor's hands as cautionary Towns, to
be garrisoned by him at his pleasure: That he compound with those whom he has
damnified in this War; and if he cannot, that he stand to the Emperor's Award:
That both he and his Son shall submit to the Court of high Burgundy, when they
go to law in those places: That he punish none of his Subjects, who surrendered
themselves to the Emperor: That King Ferdinand retain his whole Right and
Title: That within six weeks his Son Christopher and his people ratify and
confirm the Articles; and that his Brother George enjoy not the benefit of this
Peace. January the third, as we said, these Articles were drawn up in writing,
and five days after the Ambassadors of Duke Ulrick, Balthazar Gultling,
Lodovick Fravenburg, and John Fesler a Lawyer, came to Hailbrun, and falling at
the Emperor's feet, told his Majesty, that their Prince being by sickness
hindered from coming in person, had sent them to make his excuse: That he did
openly confess his fault, was heartily sorry for the Crime he had committed,
and by all that was sacred, begged to be received again into favor, and that
the utmost rigor might not be used against him and his people: for that he
both ratified the Articles of Peace, and so soon as his health did permit,
would come in person to beg his Pardon, and would never be unmindful of so
great a favor. To this Naves makes answer in the Emperor's name, The
Emperor's Answer to the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg.
That he was satisfied with his confession of his fault, and begging pardon for
the same; and that in mercy and compassion, he was willing to spare the
multitude, and forgive him, provided he perform the Conditions of Pacification,
and be diligent in doing his duty for the future. The Protestant Cities of
Memmingen, Bibrach, Ravensburg, Kempen, and Isne, are reconciled to the Emperor.
After them came the Ambassadors of Memmingen, Bibrach, Ravensburg, Kempen,
and Isne, and humbly confessed their fault and begged pardon that they had
offended him; to which they said, they were induced partly by their own error,
and partly by the inticement of others; but that they fled to him, as to a
Fountain of Mercy, beseeching him to forgive, and restore them to their former
state and condition, without any diminution of their ancient Liberties and
Privileges. The Emperor thereupon takes an Oath of them, That they would be
faithful to him for the future; obey the same Laws as the rest of the States
did; renounce the League they had entered into with the Duke of Saxony and
Landgrave, and no ways assist them, and that thenceforward they should engage
in no League against him. Upon these Conditions he receives them again into
favor, and fines the City of Memmingen in fifty thousand Florins. Memmingen
fined.
Before they appeared in the Emperor's presence, they desired to have
assurance given them that their Religion should not be altered: But Naves, whom
the Emperor made use of then as his chief Spokes man in those affairs, bid
them have a special care not to mention any such thing; for that otherwise he
would look upon it as a sign that they distrusted him; especially since he had
sufficiently declared himself as to that particular in the beginning of the
War: That therefore they should rest content, and require no further security.
And this was thought to have been done, lest that if it had been refused them,
it would have seemed that other things were aimed at, than what the Emperor
had professed in his public Declarations, and that if it had been granted in
express terms, it would have offended the Pope, whose design was, that by this
War the Protestant Religion should be utterly extirpated.

At that time a Sedition broke forth in Genoa against the Family of Doria, A
Sedition in Genoa against the Family of Doria.
the Head of which was then Andrea, the ablest Sea-Commander living, who by the
Emperor's interest was advanced to be the Leading-man in that Commonwealth.
The chief Ringleader of this Tumult was the Count of Fieschi, and in the
Scuffle Joannin Doria, Joannin Doria killed.
a Relation of Andrea's, a man of great valor, was amongst others killed. And
had not the Count of Fieschi dropped into the Sea and perished there, it was
thought much mischief would have been done, and the Republic been in very
great danger; but he being taken off, the rest of the Conspirators slunk away,
and so a great calm presently succeeded that storm. The Emperor accused the
Farneses as the Authors of this Enterprise, and especially Petro Aloisio Duke
of Piacenza, of which, more in its proper place.

The Session of the Council of Trent, which was to have been held about the
latter end of July, the year before, was put off till this time, and January
the 13th the Fathers, A Decree of the Council of Trent, concerning
Justification.
as their custom was, meeting in the Cathedral-Church, make a Decree about Man's
Justification, and condemn all those who say, That by the fall of Adam man lost
his Free Will; that man is justified by Faith alone, and the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ; that Justification is nothing else but a confidence in
the mercy of God, who forgiveth sins for Christ's sake; that it is necessary
that a Man firmly believe and doubt not, that his Sins are forgiven, and that
he is of the number of the Elect; that no Man can keep the Commandments of
God, not though he be justified; that Justification received, is not preserved
and increased by Good Works; that after Baptism, Justification that is lost may
be recovered by Faith alone, without the Sacrament of Penance; that a penitent
Sinner has his Offense wholly forgiven him, and that there remains no
Punishment to be endured for the same, neither in this Life, nor in the Life to
come in Purgatory; and that these Decrees derogate from God's Glory and
Christ's Merit.

Upon the Elector of Saxony's approach with his Army, The Siege of Leipsick.
Duke Maurice puts a Garrison into Leipsick, and burns the Suburbs. At the same
time above a thousand Hungarian Horse came thither; so January the thirteenth
the Place began to be besieged: But the Towns-people making a slout Resistance,
about the end of the same Month the Siege was raised without any Success.
Nevertheless, the Town was miserably shattered and defaced by the Batteries of
great Guns that continually played upon it. The Duke of Saxony recovers his own,
and takes Duke Maurice's Towns.
The Duke of Saxony marching from thence, not only recovered what he had lost
in Thuringe and Misnia, but took all Duke Maurice's Towns also, except Leipsick
and Dresden. He gained likewise the Bishopric of Magdenburg, and Haberstadt,
having compounded therefore with John Albert the Bishop. The day before he laid
Siege to Leipsick, King Ferdinand commanded the Bohemians to take Arms, The
Bohemians refuse to take Arms against the Duke of Saxony.
and march to the Assistance of Duke Maurice: they obeyed, indeed; but
afterward returned home again without Orders; wherefore about the end of
January King Ferdinand renews the same Command: But the Inhabitants of Prague,
who have the Chief Authority in those Places, make application to the Senate,
that they would use their Endeavors with the King, and prevail with him to
recall his Order, because it was inconsistent with their Liberty, and they could
not honestly obey it; for that there was no reason why they should take Arms
against the Elector of Saxony; that in many things their Religion agreed with
his; and that besides, he had been always very forward and instrumental in
beating off the Armies of the Turk. King Ferdinand's Answer to the Bohemians
Demands.
Whereunto King Ferdinand, amongst other things, said in answer, That they did
not make War against him upon the account of Religion, but Rebellion; and that
what was alleged of his giving Aid against the Turks, was quite otherwise: for
that some Months before he had by Envoys solicited the Turk to make War upon
Hungary and Bohemia, to grant no longer Truce, and to break that which he had
made; and that he had promised, for the better Success in the Attempt, to fall
upon them on the other side.

When the Emperor was made acquainted with the State of Saxony, Marquess
Albert of Brandenburg is sent with assistance to Duke Maurice.
and had been solicited by frequent Letters from Duke Maurice, he sent him
Supplies of Horse and Foot, under the Command of Albert of Brandenburg, and
then orders the Spanish and Italian Forces to follow, under the Conduct of de
Sandi and Marigan. January the ninth Marquess Albert marched with his Troops
from Hailbrun. The Emperor departing also from thence, went to Ulm, and in his
Progress receives into Favor the Cities of Lindaw and Esling. The Emperor
goes to Vlm.


It has been mentioned before, that the Pope pronounced Sentence of
Excommunication against the Archbishop of Cologne, Lindaw and Esling are
received into his Favor.
and deprived him of his Dignity and Function. At the same time he did that, he
conferred all his Right and Authority upon Adolph Count Schavenburg, whom some
years before the Archbishop had amongst all others chosen to be his Coadjutor.
Adolph Count Schavenburg is put in the place of Herman Archbishop of Cologne.
Wherefore the Pope by a Bull enjoins all the States of the Country to own and
accept of him as their Prelate, and moves the Emperor withal to see the
Sentence put into execution. But when the Archbishop, being several times
admonished to dimit his Charge, had answered, That he could not do it with a
safe Conscience; the Emperor, who had now conquered all in a manner, sends to
Cologne his Ambassadors, Philip Laleing Governor of Guelderland, The
Emperor's Ambassadors persuade the States to relinquish Herman, and accept of
Schavenburg for their Archbishop.
and Viglius of Zuichem a Lawyer. By them he enjoins all the Orders of the
Province, whom he had ordered to meet at a certain Day there, to shake off
their Allegiance to Archbishop Herman, and to tender their Fidelity and Duty to
him who had been their Coadjutor, as to their lawful Prelate. It was no
difficult matter to obtain that from the Clergy; for they had been the Authors
of the Revolution: But the Nobility, and of them many of the chiefest Quality,
with the Deputies of the Towns, remonstrate, That they could not make defection
from him whom they had so long obeyed, whom for so many years they had found to
be a very good Prince, and to whom they had bound themselves by an Oath of
Allegiance. This Difficulty being started, the Duke of Cleve, their very next
Neighbor, for avoiding greater trouble, sent some of his Counselors thither
to mediate; The Duke of Cleve mediates, and gets Herman to divest himself of
his Bishopric.
who after a long and serious Debate, obtained at length of the Clergy, that
they would be quiet, until the other States should fairly represent the Case to
the Archbishop. To him therefore were sent Theoderick Count Manderscheyt and
William Count Nouenar, the chief of all the Nobility, who by their Dexterity,
and the Interest they had with him, persuade him, that in compassion to the
People, and that the whole Province might not be undone by a War, Herman
resigns the Bishopric of Cologne.
he would comply, and resign his Place. Accordingly he released all his
Subjects from their Oaths and Allegiance; and so the Coadjutor whom we named,
who had been always as dear to him as dear to him as a Brother, succeeds,
Frederick, Herman's Brother, turned out of the Provostship of Bonne, which was
given to Gropper.
and takes possession of his Dignity, January the twenty fifth. The Archbishop
had a Brother, Frederick, who, as we told you in the Tenth Book, had been
Bishop of Munster, and was now Provost, as they call it, of the Church of Bonn;
but he was turned out of that Office, and Gropper had it for his Share. Count
Stolberg, Dean of Cologne, who had constantly stood up for the Archbishop, met
with the same Fate. Presently after, by Orders from the new Archbishop, there
was a Change made in Religion, and all Bucer's Reformation overthrown.

When the Ambassadors of the Protestant Confederates had been with the French
King, they went to the King of England, to negotiate the same thing with both.
But King Henry was then on his Deathbed; The Death of Henry King of England,
to whom his Son Prince Edward succeeds.
for his Sickness growing upon him, about the latter end of January he died, in
the eight and thirtieth year of his Reign, having by his last Will left Prince
Edward, a Child of nine years of age, his Heir, and to him substituted the Lady
Mary, whom he had by his first Queen, and the Lady Elizabeth, by the second.
But before he died, he condemned Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Severity against
Norfolk.
a Peer of great Authority, to perpetual Imprisonment; and beheaded his Son the
Earl of Surrey, for some suspicious Words he had spoken during the King's
Sickness: after whose Death, a Change in Religion happened, Henry detested the
Pope, not his Doctrine.
as will appear hereafter. For though he had shaken off the Pope's Authority in
all his Dominions, and had made it Death for any Man to own him for Head of the
Church; nay, though in the Public Prayers of the Church he detested him, as
the Bane of Religion, and Antichrist; yet he still retained the Popish
Doctrine, Henry left Guardians to his Son.
as has been said before. He had caused his Son to be well educated from his
Childhood, and upon his Deathbed left him sixteen Guardians, and amonst these,
Edward Earl of Herford, the young Prince's Uncle. To him the rest of the
Guardians afterward committed the chief Care and Tuition of the King, as
thinking he would be the most faithful to him of any, and gave him the
Honorable Title of Protector of the King and Kingdom. The King also made him
afterward Duke of Somerset. He was both a Friend to the Reformed Religion
himself, and used his Endeavors also that it might be publicly received,
Thomas Cranmer Primate of England.
having persuaded the King his Pupil to embrace the same; wherein he was
chiefly assisted by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of All
England, a Man of singular Learning. About the same time died also Queen Anne,
Wife to King Ferdinand, the Mother of many Children, whose Funerals the
Emperor solemnized at Ulm.

In the mean time the Citizens of Ausbourg, They of Ausbourg capitulate with
the Emperor.
moved by the Example of their Associates and their own Danger, and having got
proper Mediators, amongst whom was Anthony Fuggher, made their Peace, and were
received into the Emperor's Favor again; but upon condition that they should
pay a Fine of an hundred and fifty thousand Florins, furnish twelve Pieces of
Cannon, and receive a Garrison of ten Companies of Foot. Scheterline odious to
the Emperor.
Scherteline lived in the Town, and for many years had served under them, and
taken their Pay; one that the Emperor and King Ferdinand could not endure,
because he had taken the Castle of Erenberg: Wherefore though the Senate
interceded earnestly for him, yet because the Emperor was so stiff that
otherwise he would not treat with them, he was forced to fly the Country, and
with his Wife and Family to remove to Constance, a Town bordering upon
Suitzerland.

During the Siege of Leipsick the Elector of Brandenburg interposes, The
Elector of Brandenburg Interposes for Peace.
and having sent Ambassadors to both, desires that they would refer the Matter
to him. The Elector was not unwilling; but Duke Maurice blaming him exceedingly
for pursuing the War so hotly, six days after, when he saw the Town was not
likely to be taken, began to answer coldly, and be off on it. Brandenburg
therefore presently acquaints the Landgrave with it, and with the Landgrave too.
praying him to persuade Duke Maurice; and that because the intestine War of
Saxony could hardly be taken up, unless the Public War with the Emperor were
also ended, he entreats him to bend his Mind that way. The better to persuade,
he lays open before him the great danger he was in; That most of his
Confederates were already reconciled to the Emperor, and that the Duke of
Wertemberg was fain to capitulate upon very hard Terms: That the Emperor was
preparing fresh Forces; and that seeing he was not able alone long to resist so
great a Power as was against him, he advises him not to think ill to submit,
but to capitulate upon the Conditions which he himself had drawn up, and now
sent to him by his Ambassadors: For seeing the Emperor's Mind was for many
Reasons much exasperated, the thing it self required, that with a kind of
humble Submissision he should beg Pardon: That he should therefore turn his
Eyes upon himself and Children, and upon the promiscuous Multitude, and not
drive on things to the utmost extremity. He wrote also to the Elector to the
same purpose. A little before the Protestants in the Month of November broke
up, The Emperor raises new Forces against Saxony.
and quitted the Field. The Emperor gave Commissions to some, that they should
forthwith raise new Forces, and carry the War into those Places which bordered
upon Saxony, that the States and Towns of those Quarters might not be able to
give the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave any Assistance.

The Command of these Forces, consisting of one and twenty Ensigns of Foot, and
twelve hundred Horse, he gave to Joyce Grunning Governor of Zeelandt. These
put Conrade Count Teckelbourg, Joyce Grunning compels Count Deckelburg, the
town of Minden, and others, to obey and take Orders from him Saxony's Letters
to those of Strasbourg.
one of the Protestant Confederates the Towns of Osnaburg and Minden, the Count
of Lip, and some others in those places, under Contribution, and compel them
to take Orders from them. They also take the Castle of Ritberg, and from thence
fall in upon Bremen. Here served under the Emperor, Philip Count Eberstein,
Christopher Vrisberger, and Frederick Speed.

The Elector of Saxony being informed of the Emperor's Success, February the
thirteenth wrote to the Senate and Council of Strasburg, giving them an
Account, how that he had recovered his own, and taken from Duke Maurice most
part of what belonged to him in Thuringe and Misnia; That he had made the
Nobility and Gentry of his Territories swear Fidelity to him; and that he had
added to all the Bishopric of Magdeburg: But that Ulrick Duke of Wirtemberg,
and most of the Free Towns of Upper Germany, should have capitulated upon so
very hard Conditions, and without mentioning their Religion, and promised the
Emperor Assistance against him and the rest of the Confederates, was a thing
that had fallen out quite contrary to his expectation, and was wholly repugnant
to the Tenor of the League: That he heard well of them, in that they continued
constant, which had been acceptable News to him: That they should go on then,
and not faint, acting as became Confederates; and if they were harder put to
it, that they should defend themselves with the Aid of the Suitzers and King of
France: That it was his hearty desire he could give them all Testimonies of his
Love and Fidelity; but that he was hindered by a Domestic War; which if it
would please God to put an end to, to his advantage, he would not then be
wanting unto them: That the Deputies of the States and Free Towns of Saxony
were now met at Magdeburg: That he treated with them there about those Affairs
for which the Convention was called at Frankfurt, and that he was in hopes they
would perform their Duties, especially the Free Towns, and not be prevailed
upon to forsake their League.

February the thirteenth an Ambassador came from the French King to Strasbourg,
Mendoza the French Ambassador to Strasbourg.
one Mendoza an exiled Spaniard, who made large Offers and Promises in his
Master's Name: But the Senate had already concluded to send Deputies to the
Emperor to treat of Peace; so that he departed without any Success in his
Negotiation. The City of Strasbourg send an Embassy to the Emperor.
The Deputies they sent to the Emperor were James Sturmey, Matthias Pharrer,
and Mark Hagie. Their Instructions were to go to Ulm, and learn for a certain
what the Conditions were that the Emperor would be pleased to accept of in
Capitulating. Anthony Bishop of Arras was then of the Emperor's Council; Naves
dies.
for his Father Granvell was gone to Besanzon, and about the same time Naves
died; George Seldom succeeds.
to whose Place one George Seldom, a Civilian, afterward succeeded, who,
because of the multiplicity of the Affairs of Germany, had John Marquard of
Baden, John Marquard. Henry Hasen.
and Henry Hasen who had formerly been Counselor to the Prince Palatine, and
lately to the Duke of Deux ponts, a Man very well versed in the Affairs of
Germany, assigned him for Colleagues and Assistants. King Ferdinand, that he
might encourage the Bohemians, who, as I told you, declined the War, February
the sixth, undertook a Progress with his Son young Ferdinand, and came to
Leutmeritz, a Town upon the Borders of Bohemia. He staid there a day or two
before the Nobility and States came; and at their Meeting made a long Speech to
them, King Ferdinand's Demands to the Bohemians.
telling them, amongst other things, That since Duke Maurice implored his Aid,
he entreated them to take Arms, both in respect of the ancient Alliance betwixt
the two Nations, as that they were the Emperors Vassals also: And that because
some gave it out, that by so doing their Liberties would be infringed, he
promised to give them Security, that it should not be made a President in time
to come. The States then present alleged, That they could not make any public
Resolution, without the Consent of the rest; and therefore they desire, that he
would call a Convention of States as soon as he could. Some others promised him
their Service and Obedience; and these were the Governors of Towns, whom he
therefore thanked, telling the others at large, That this was not a time for
debating, but that the Occasion required present Help against the Enemy: That
so soon as the War was over, he would not refuse to call a Convention of
States, nor was he resolved to inpair the Liberties of any man: That therefore
he desired them to comply and follow him. At length fearing the King's
displeasure, seeing he had spoken with some heat, they condescend, and promise,
that if they did not serve in the Field themselves, they would find others. The
Nobility and Citizens of Prague desire a Convention of States to be called.
But about the thirteenth day of February, the Nobility and the Citizens of
Prague write to the King, and beseech him, That since he insisted upon new and
unprecedented Orders, he would call a Convention of States to meet at Prague
the twentieth day of March; but that if he could not, they beg of him not to
take it ill, if they themselves should meet, and determine what was to be done.
In answer he represents to them what was done at Leutmeritz, and promises to
call a Convention by the eighteenth of April; charging them not to meet, nor
attempt any thing in the mean time. However, within four days after he had
written to them to that purpose, The League of the Bohemians.
they make a League and Covenant for the Defense of their Liberty.

When Marquess Albert was come into Saxony, Duke Maurice assigned him the Town
of Rochlitz for his Head-quarter, Rochliez kept out by Marquess Albert.
which was the Dowry of the Landgrave's Sister, a Widow, Duke George's
Daughter-in-law. The Elector John Frederick, who then lay at Aldenburg three
Miles distant, having notice of this, March the first, sends before, in the
nightime, Ernest Duke of Lunenburg and Volrate Count Mansfield, with some
Troops of Horse, and Record with his Regiment of Foot, till he himself should
come up with the rest of his Forces. The Duke of Saxony takes Rochiltz by
Storm, and carries off the Enemies Ordnance.
Next morning before it was day, a few Horse being sent out upon the Scout,
fall upon the Out-guards of the Enemy, of whom some were taken, and the rest
fled to the Town. There was four Companies of Foot in the Suburbs, who with a
Party of Marquess Albert's Horse sallied out by break of day, and came to an
Engagement with the Saxonians, who put them so to it, that they were beat back,
and forced to retreat into the Suburbs. But when the Elector, who led the main
Body, was come, and from an adjoining Hill played with his great Guns into the
Town, his Foot at the same time having entered the Suburbs and fired it, the
four Companies of Foot we mentioned betake themselves to flight over the
Bridge, as the Horse did, foarding over the River Muldaw. The Foot then, who
were now Masters of the Suburbs, boldly advance, take the Town by Assault,
plunder it, and carry away the great Guns. In the heat of the Action, Marquess
Albert bethinks himself of flying and makes for the Bridge; Marquess Albert
made Prisoner.
but being in his way taken by Ernest Duke of Lunenburg, he is brought Prisoner
to the Elector. There was a Garrison of six Companies of Foot, besides Horse,
in the Town, who drawing together into a Body, resolved to defend themselves;
but being overpowred by number, they yield, and being disarmed, promise not to
carry Arms against the Duke of Saxony and his Confederates for six Months time,
and so are dismissed, The Horse went in pursuit of those four Companies of
Foot, which, as we said, fled over the Bridge, and killed most of them, and
amongst these, many Italians and Spaniards. Marquess Albert had (what of King
Ferdinand, and what of the Emperor) about fifteen hundred Horse, ten Companies
of Foot, and fourteen Pieces of Ordnance. The Conflict lasted from break of day
till noon, wherein the Elector did not lose many Men, Wolf Theodorick dies of
his Wounds.
but amongst those, Wolf Theoderick, a Man of great Courage, who died of a Shot
he had received, some days after the Action. Of the Imperialists were killed in
the Town a thousand, and without and in the River three hundred. After the
Conflict the Elector returned to Aldenburg with his Prisoner; and afterward
made the whole matter known in Bohemia, assuring the States that he would not
attempt any thing contrary to their League, and demanding Justice to be done
upon those who had invaded his Country, and put all to Fire and Sword.

The Duke of Wirtemberg had stipulated, The Duke of Wirtemberg makes his
Submission to the Emperor.
That as soon as his Health did permit, he would come and beg the Emperor's
Pardon. He came, then, to Ulm in the Month of March, though very weak still in
Body, and sitting in a Chair, with the Emperor's leave, because he was not
able to move nor stir himself, he ordered some of his Counselors to beg Pardon
for him on their Knees, promising all Duty and Obedience for the future. The
Emperor having given him a frank and generous Answer, immediately departed,
and because of the Saxon-War went to Nordlingen. Whilst the Duke of Wirtemberg
performed this Ceremony of Submission, there was a vast Crowd of People got
together, who being told of it before, flocked thither to see the Show. In
those three Places we named before, of the Duchy of Wirtemberg, the Emperor
had already placed Garrisons, and chiefly Spaniards.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XIX.
The CONTENTS.
The Seventh Session of the Council of Trent is held. When the City of
Strasbourg had captitulated, and made Peace with the Emperor, he orders his
Army to advance. Shortly after the Death of the King of England, Francis King
of France dies. The Fathers that were at Trent go to Bolonia. The Duke of
Saxony is taken in Battle; and though he was condemned to die, yet with
undaunted Courage he professed the Reformed Religion. Wirtemberg being
surrendered, the University is dissolved. Duke Maurice and the Elector of
Brandenburg earnestly intercede for the Landgrave; who being come to wait on
the Emperor, is detained Prisoner. King Ferdinand, by Letters to those of
Prague, appoints a Convention of States. A great Commotion raised at Naples,
because of the Spanish Inquisition, as they call it. Henry King of France is
Crowned, and the Solemnity of the Coronation described. The Emperor by
Proclamation puts the City of Magdenburg to the Ban of the Empire. He sollicits
the Suitzers to enter into a new League. A Diet is held at Ausburg. Petro
Aloisio, the Pope's Son, is assassinated in his own House. The English overcome
the Scots in a great Battle. The Protestant Electors are prevailed with, and
the Free Towns terrified. A Contention arises about the Imprisonment of the
Landgrave. Means are used for recalling the Fathers to Trent, but they who had
removed to Bolonia firmly persist in their Opinion and Resolution; so that
there is nothing but Confusion in the Council of Trent.

THE Seventh Session of the Council of Trent was held the third day of March.
The Seventh Session of the Council of Trent, concerning the Sacraments.
In it were condemned all who maintain, either that the Sacraments of the
Church were fewer than Seven, or that they were not all instituted by Christ;
who deny that one is of more Dignity than another; who affirm, that they are
only outward Signs of Grace, or Righteousness received by Christ; who deny,
that they confer Grace; who hold, that no spiritual and indelible Character or
Mark is by Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders, stamped upon the Soul, and that
all have like power to administer them, or that the usual Ceremonies of the
Church may be omitted or altered in the Administration of the same; who say,
that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the Mother and Mistress of all others,
concerning Baptism, is not sincere: That Vows made after Baptism are of no
force, and derogate from the Faith they have professed; who assert, That
Confirmation is but an idle Ceremony, and was no more in ancient Times but an
Instruction of Youth; who deny the Virtue and Influence of the Holy Ghost to be
conferred in Confirmation; and who assign the Office of Confirmation not to
Bishops solely, but indifferently also to any Priest. Then they make Decrees
concerning Ecclesiastical Benefices, That Bishops and other Rulers of the
Church be lawfully begotten, And also concerning Ecclesiastical Benefices.
of due Age, and conspicuous for Good Manners and Learning: That no Man, of
what Quality he be, do by any Title whatsoever possess more than one
Bishopric; and that such as have Pluralities, keep which of them they please,
and resign the others within a Year: That those who have the Cure of Souls
reside upon the Place, and substitute no others to officiate for them, unless
for a time, and so as that they have made appear to their Bishop that they had
a lawful cause of Absence, which is to be allowed of by him, who is to take
care that the People be not neglected, that the Faults of Priests be punished,
and what is amiss amongst them reformed. And then the one and twentieth of
April is appointed for the Day of the next Session.

King Ferdinand being at Dresden with Duke Maurice, King Ferdinand's Letters to
the Bohemians.
on the eighth day of March writes to the Bohemians, acquainting them, That
Duke John Frederick was resolved to invade them: That therefore they should be
upon their Guard, and obey Sebastian Weittemull, whom he had appointed to be
his Vicegerent in his absence.

The Deputies of Strasbourg, who, as we told you, went to Ulm, being come back
with the Conditions prescribed by the Emperor, which the Senate did not
dislike, are sent back again to transact and make a final Conclusion. Setting
out upon their Journey, then, they find the Emperor at Nordlingen, taken ill
of the Gout, Strasburg's Pacification with the Emperor.
and having, March the one and twentieth, made their Submission, are received
into Favor. They had pretty tolerable Conditions; for the Emperor put no
Garrison upon them, was satisfied with Thirty thousand Florins, Their Fine.
and did not exact above twelve Pieces of Ordnance of them. The Elector of
Brandenburg in the mean time bestirred himself affectionately in behalf of the
Landgrave, and applied himself also to King Ferdinand: But very hard Conditions
were proposed, The Conditions proposed to the Landgrave.
which were these: That he approve, without exception, all the future Decrees
of the Diet of the Empire: That he give one of his Sons in Hostage: That he
dismiss Duke Henry of Brunswick, and his Son, and submit to the Emperor's
Decision as to the Difference betwixt them: That he send the Emperor a Supply
of some Troops of Horse, and eight Companies of Foot, against the Elector of
Saxony and the Confederates; and that he pay them for six Months: That he
submit himself to the Emperor, and openly confess his Crimes. The Landgrave
rejects them.
But he rejected the Conditions, and acquainted his Friends by Letters, That
unless they were mitigated, he had rather, seeing he could not in Honor
condescend to them, undergo the worst of Fortunes.

The day the Emperor transacted with the Strasburgers, he parted from
Nordlingen to go to Norimberg: And next day upon the Road having dispatched
Letters to the States of Duke Maurice, The Emperor's Letters to the States of
Duke Maurice.
he tells them, That forasmuch as that Outlaw John Frederick flying to his own
Home, had not only regained what the Prince Elector Maurice had by his Orders
taken from him, but those Places also which King Ferdinand his Brother
possessed in that Country, as Dependents on Bohemia, he was now upon the march,
to come and repress his Boldness: Wherefore he charged them, in the first
place, that they should take care, that in those Places through which he was to
march with his Army, nothing might be wanting that was necessary, and that the
Soldiers might be kindly used: In the next place, That they should despise the
Threats of John Frederick, and show all Love and Duty to their Prince, as they
had hitherto done; since the main Design of the present War was to daunt his
insolent Fierceness, and to settle Peace and Quietness amongst them. The very
same day he wrote to the Council and Magistrates of Prague, As also to those of
Prague.
That it was his intent to come and punish John Frederick according to his
Deserts; and that therefore they should take care to send Provisions into his
Camp.

March the four and twentieth, those Nobles and Cities of Bohemia who had
lately entered into a League and Confederation, as has been said, met at Prague,
and there settled a Military Discipline, Caspar Pflug Head of the Bohemian
Confederates.
and such Laws as might be necessary for carrying on a War, if occasion
required; and committed the Chief Government to Caspar Pflug. About that time,
King Ferdinand, Duke Maurice, and his Brother Augustus, The Bohemians Letters
to King Ferdinand and Duke Maurice.
came with their Forces to Brux. The Bohemians took it very ill, that they had
already entered their Country; wherefore they write to King Ferdinand, praying
him not to suffer Foreigners to be brought in amongst them; for that it was a
new thing, and of dangerous consequence: But to Duke Maurice and his Brother
Augustus they write, That they should with all speed march out of their Country
as Friends; for that otherwise they would consider on it, and take the best
course they could* Ferdinand answers the Bohemians.
King Ferdinand writes back to them, March the twenty sixth, That they needed
not be afraid, since he was only come to those places, that he might be ready
to join the Emperor, who now drew nigh: And then writes to the Citizens of
Prague, That they should not put themselves to any unnecessary Charge; for that
the Duke of Saxony was retreated. Saxony's Ambassador to the Bohemians.
This Duke had sent Nicholas Minquitz Ambassador to Bohemia, to renew the
ancient League; but he falling sick by the way, and not being able to reach
Prague, wrote to the Bohemians, earnestly desiring that they would
commissionate some trusty Persons with whom he might negotiate the Affair. The
Bohemian Nobles having received these Letters on the twenty eighth day of
March, write to the Duke of Saxony from Prague, and acquaint him with what
Minquitz had desired of them: That, moreover, they earnestly desired they could
gratify him, as they did acknowledge it was but just it should be so; but that
they were hindered by dangerous Times and present Troubles; for that Duke
Maurice and his Brother were, at the instigation of King Ferdinand, ready with
an Army to fall upon them: That however, they desired he would not so
understand them, as if they were unwilling to renew the League; for that they
were resolved indeed to keep it, and to persist in their ancient Friendship, no
less than if it were no renewed: That they would also endeavor to confirm it
with the first opportunity; for that Forces were levied therefore, and
Hostilities intended against them, because they stuck to their League, and
refused to serve in the Wars: That therefore it was their Request to him, That
if Duke Maurice should proceed, he would assist them; which if he did, there
was no kind of danger but they would undergo to serve him: That King Ferdinand
was now at Brux, and would from thence march with his Forces into
Joachimschall, as it was reported by some: That if it proved so, they were
resolved within a few days after to march with their whole Army whither it
should seem necessary and expedient. The Bohemians Letter to the Moravians.
March the thirtieth, they write to the Nobility of Moravia, entreating them,
That according to their mutual League, they would arm and join them with all
expedition, that their common Country might be defended from that Sodomitical
kind of Men the Spaniards and Hussars, whom the Emperor and King Ferdinand
were bringing against them.

Francis King of France died the last of March, Francis the French King dies,
to whom Henry succeeds.
in the two and thirtieth year of his Reign, at Rambolet, a days Journey from
Paris: His Successor was Henry his Son, a young man of about twenty eight years
of age. He presently recalled the Constable Anne of Momorencie, who had now
lived privately for almost six years, as has been said before, restored him to
his former Charge, and had him in great esteem. A change of Affairs in the
French Court.
They who had been chief Courtiers before, fall partly into disgrace, and are
partly removed and cast into Prison. These were the Cardinal of Tournon,
Anebaud the Admiral, Grinian Governor of Provence, the Duke of Longueville,
Bayardus, Poulin, and especially Madam d'Estampes, who had been the King's
Darling. The Death of King Francis was fatal to learned and studious men;
Francis the Mecenas of Scholars.
for no man was a greater Lover nor more bountiful Promoter of Liberal Arts and
Sciences. He had by long Conversation acquired a great deal of Knowledge: For
at Dinner and Supper his chief delight was to talk of Learning, entertaining
for that end one James Gollin, a knowing man, and veay eloquent in his Mother
tongue; and next to him, Peter de Castellane. From them he had all the Learning
of the Poets, Historians, and Cosmographers: What Aristotle, His Learning.
Theophrastus, Pliny, and others, had written of Plants, Herbs, Animals,
Metals, Precious Stones, etc. he had, as has been said, by frequent and daily
Converse and Repetition, rendered familiar to him. He discoursed often also of
Mathematics and Divinity. His Table was always surrounded by great men of all
Professions, and as it was usual to discourse there of various Subjects, it was
odds but that one or other would start some curious matter; and that every one
might do, provided they were any way known. The King's Example and Inclination
incited many to diligence and pains, that with greater applause they might
reason and discourse before him. In his own Language he was always reckoned
very eloquent and grave. He entertained men in Italy and Greece, to find out
and transcribe for him the Writings of old Authors; and he erected a most
copious Library of which de Castellane was the Keeper, that furnished the
public afterward with some famous pieces. A little before he departed this
life, A famous Library.
he sent to the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave, to each an hundred thousand
Crowns for carrying on the War, His liberality toward the Duke of Saxony and
Landgrave.
and that Money was scarcely delivered when he died. About the same time the
Ambassadors of the Protestants returned from England into France, that they
might dispatch the rest of their business; and as after they went thither they
found King Henry, so when they returned from thence, they also found King
Francis at the point of death. So that this also was a great accession to the
Emperors fortune, The death of the Kings of England and France, advantageous
to the Emperor.
that two most powerful Kings, who neither wanted opportunity, nor, as most men
thought, inclination to hinder and retard his designs, died much about the same
time. Those Imperial Forces, which having reduced some great men, and taken
Minden, marched to Bremen, as we said, about the end of this month met with a
check, The overthrow of an Imperial Army.
having lost their General Grunning Governor of Zelandt. And seeing the Forces
of Bremen were increased by the conjunction of the Hamburghers, Urisberger, who
by his death fell to be Commander in chief, removed his Camp, and fetching a
long compass about, Grunning dies,
because of Marshes that interposed, Bremen besieged.
began to besiege the Town at another place. Not long after Duke Erick of
Brunswick, whom on the 15th of March the Emperor dismissed at Nordligen, that
he might go and raise fresh Troops, came thither also, bringing his new Forces
with him. The Emperor, leaving Nordlingen, went to Norimberg, and from thence
to Egra, a Town belonging to King Ferdinand, upon the skirts of Bohemia. The
King had several times commanded those of Prague to lay down their arms; and
the rest of the States being by them informed of this, April the fourth they
write back to him. That the reason why they had taken up Arms, and marched with
their Forces, was that they might stand upon their own and Countries defense
against any unjust Invasion, The Bohemians Letter to King Ferdinand.
especially now that he was absent: In the mean time they begged of him, that
he would intercede with the Emperor not to pursue the War against the Duke of
Saxony, but refer the matter to an amicable Arbitration: they also desire that
he would call a Convention of States as he had promised.

Much about this time the Emperor came to Egra, The Emperors Letter to the
States of Bohemia.
and April the 7th, the day after King Ferdinand and Duke Maurice arrived
there, wrote to all the States of Bohemia, and having repeated what he wrote
the month before, he told them that his design was only against the Duke of
Saxony: that therefore they should supply him with Provisions, furnish him
Corn, and return home; for that otherwise, both he and his Brother King
Ferdinand would take it very ill: That they needed not to be in any
apprehensions, as concerning the matter of Religion; for that during the whole
War he had molested no man for his Conscience. The Bohemians prepare for War
against King Ferdinand's Forces.
At the same time the Commissioners who were at Prague, send Letters again into
all parts, earnestly importuning the States, that they would in all have arm
and come to the defense of their Country; which was now in extreme danger. King
Ferdinand, April the 11th, answers their last Letters from Egra, writing much
to the same effect that the Emperor had done: King Ferdinand writes to his
Bohemians.
That they would therefore desist from their Enterprise; if not, that he would
take a course to bridle that rashness of theirs: That he wondered exceedingly
they should intercede for the Duke of Saxony, since he deserved no such thing
neither of the Emperor, nor of himself, nor yet of Bohemia: That as to the
Convention of States they desired, Saxony takes some Towns from Duke Maurice.
he should do what was fitting as to that. In the mean time the Duke of Saxony
advancing, takes Friburg, and Meisen, a Town lying upon the Elbe, from Duke
Maurice.

About this time also the Fathers of Trent remove to Bolonia, Some of the
Fathers of the Council of Trent go to Bohemia.
and made no more Decrees after that Session wherein they treated of the
Sacraments as we mentioned before. The cause of their departure was given out
to be the unwholsomness of the Air of the place, in the judgment of Jerome
Fracastorius of Verona, who was Physician to the Council, and had a Salary from
the Pope of threescore Dukats a month. The Emperor was highly offended at the
matter, and commanded the Bishops and Divines of his Dominions not to stir a
foot from Trent. So that the Council was divided, one part of it being at
Trent, and the other at Bolonia. The Count of Buren holds Francfurt.
When the Emperor came to Norimberg from Nordlingen, Maximilian Count of Buren
who kept Franckfurt with a Garrison of twelve Companies of Foot, and about four
hundred Horse, being sent for, came thither to him; and returning afterward to
Franckfurt again, April the 12th he caused two persons to be put to death; of
whom one, named William Verden, was a Townsman, Two men put to death at
Franckfurt.
but the other, John Gelluse, a Subject of the Landgraves. The reason why they
were put to death was, that they were said to have been suborned by the
Landgrave, to get a Smith to make and sell them the Keys of one of the Gates;
to set fire to the Town in four several places; to nail up the Canon; by the
help of their Associates to kill the Count of Buren, his Friends and
Attendants, the Consul and Senate of the Town, in the hurry and confusion of
the fire; and to poison the Fountains and Wells of the Town, and especially
that which served the Count of Buren's Kitchen, and another in the Court.
Afterward there was a Writing published, declaring that they had confessed the
Conspiracy in Prison, and owned the same at the place of execution. But the
Landgrave purged himself, The Landgrave's Justification.
affirming, that since Franckfurt fell into the Emperors hands, he had never
attempted any thing, and confuting the Crimes objected against him by many and
weighty reasons. That sometimes, indeed, he had ordered John Gelluse, to inform
himself what way the Emperor and Count of Buren marched with their Forces, and
that that was all. Now if through the violent pain they suffered on the Rack,
they confessed what was false, and thereby wronged not only others, but himself
also, he hoped that no man would therefore entertain the worse opinion of him;
that it was dangerous and unsafe to lay any stress upon what was extorted from
men by over-rigorous torture; whereof this was a proof, that they themselves
when they were brought to execution, declared those very persons innocent, whom
they had named before as Accomplices in the Conspiracy. The Bohemians friends to
the Duke of Saxony.
April the 13th the Commissioners at Prague writ again to the States of the
Kingdom, and earnestly advise them to fulfill the League which they had with the
House of Saxony: they complain also that it has been already infringed by
some, and therefore command that it be punctually observed by all for the
future. King Ferdinand's Commissioners to the Convention of the Bohemians.
The same day they write to King Ferdinand, praying that he nor the Emperor
would not be offended at these their military proceedings, nor attack the
Elector of Saxony; first, because of the League they are mutually bound in, and
then because he was desirous the Cause might be brought to a fair trial. The
very same day also, King Ferdinand sent John Bishop of Olmuntz, and some other
Counselors, to the Convention of States at Prague, which was appointed to meet
the 18th day of April. By them he excuses himself that he could not come in
person; and then demands of them, that they would annul the League they lately
made, and lay down their Arms; for that otherwise there could be no free
Convention. If this were denied, the Commissioners had instructions to treat no
farther: but if they obeyed, then to proceed in course, however to determine
nothing, but refer all to him. Ferdinand's Army.
The Emperor the same day set out from Egra, accompanied by his Brother King
Ferdinand, who had with him six hundred Cuirassiers, a thousand Hussars, and
ten Ensigns of foot. Duke Maurice and his Brother Augustus, were also there,
with as many men. At length, after ten days continual march, on the 22th of
April he came near to Meisen, where the Duke of Saxony then was; who having
intelligence of this, drew out of the Town, burnt the wooden Bridge, The
Emperor's Expedition against the Duke of Saxony.
and encamped near to Mulberg upon the Elbe. But the Emperor fearing that he
might retreat to Wittemberg, a strong well-garrisoned Town, and the Capital of
that Province, he thought it was his best way to use diligence; ordering the
Army then, after a days rest, to march forward, April the 24th, he came in the
morning to the Elbe. On the other side of the River the Duke of Saxony had
placed several bodies of men with Fieldpieces, to hinder the Emperor from
making a Bridge or foarding over the River, and also to defend the Bridge of
Boats which he himself had. But when they saw that the Emperor was upon them
with his whole Army, and that a body of about a thousand Spaniards that leaped
into the water above the middle, fired thick and furiously upon them, they set
fire to the Boats, which burnt part of them, and by little and little fell off
from the Bank. With that some Spanish Foot threw themselves naked into the
River, with their Swords in their mouths, and swimming over to the other side,
stopped those Boats, which, after the Saxons had broken them off from the rest of
the Bridge, were carried down with the stream; and though they were fired at
from all hands, brought them off. Afterward a Bridge was made of them and some
other Boats which came along with the Imperial Army in Wagons, for passing
over the Foot and Baggage. In this juncture of affairs, the Duke of Saxony, who
then was hearing a Sermon, having sent his Baggage and Carriages away first,
follows after himself, and directs his march to Wittemberg. But the Emperor
who perceived that all depended on diligence and dispatch, having found out a
Foard, orders the Hussars and Light-horsemen first to pass over the River, and
then he himself follows with the Cuirassiers, and past it without danger.
Wherefore not thinking it convenient to stay till the Foot and Carriage were
got over, he advances, and three miles beyond the Elbe finds the Duke of Saxony
at the Forest of Lochawer; The Emperors celerity in overtaking the Saxons.
there having made a short Speech to encourage his Soldiers, he engages the
Enemy. The Army, which consisted wholly of Cavalry, were divided into two
bodies. In the Van were the Duke of Alva, Lanoy, Antonio Tolerano, Baptista
Spinelli, and Duke Maurice; the other and main Body was commanded by the
Emperor in person, King Ferdinand and his two Sons, and the Son of the Duke of
Savoy. The Duke of Saxony might have made his part good against all that Force,
and perhaps had the better on it too, if all his Army had been together. But he
had left considerable Garrisons in Wittemberg, and here and there all over the
Country, and William Thunsern, with the Forces under his command, was absent,
nor could they all be got together in time, considering what have the Emperor
made. So that after a bloody fight, which lasted till night, he was at length
over-powred by number, and having received a wound in the left cheek, whilst he
bravely defended himself, was taken and brought to the Duke of Alva first, and
then carried before the Emperor. The Elector of Saxony made Prisoner.
So soon as he came into his presence, I yield my self your Prisoner, most
gracious Sovereign, said he, and pray you that I may be kept and used like a
Prince. To whom the Emperor, Am I now your Sovereign then, said he? you shall
be used as you deserve. But King Ferdinand was a little more sharp upon him,
and upbraided him for having attempted to out him and his Children of all they
had. Duke Ernest of Brunswick, Duke Ernest of Brunswick taken.
the Son of Duke Philip, was taken with him; but the Elector's eldest Son being
wounded, escaped to Wittemberg. There was a vast number of Prisoners taken; and
about four hundred escaped by flight, and came to Wittemberg, amongst whom were
Count Bichling and Recrode. The Horse that pursued the Fugitives, got a vast
deal of Booty, and took all the Artillery and Ammunition that the Duke of
Saxony, as we said, had sent before. The day that the Emperor came near to
Meisen which was the 22th of April, as also the next day, the day he past the
River and fought, and some days after the Sun looked very dull, obscure and
pale, and as if it had been environed with a kind of Mist, so that most people
who lived very far from Saxony, A Prodigy of the Sun.
and were ignorant of what was doing, judged that some great matter was thereby
portended. Nor was that only observed in Germany, but in France and England
also, as many thousands of people can witness.

Mention has been made before of the Commissioners of King Ferdinand that were
sent to the Convention of States at Prague; King Ferdinand's Commissioners to
the Bohemians, and their Deputies to him.
but the Peers of the Realm having heard their demands, return answer, That in
making a League and taking up Arms, they had done nothing amiss, nor contrary
to the custom of Bohemia. They next resolve that Deputies should be sent to
King Ferdinand, to represent the same thing to him, and to beseech him to
intercede with the Emperor for the Duke of Saxony. But before the Deputies
were dispatched, a Courier from King Ferdinand brought the news of the
Emperor's Victory, and of the taking of the Duke. Then changing their
resolution, they promise to furnish Provisions and Corn, and beseech King
Ferdinand to use his interest with the Emperor, that all that Army might be
led into Hungary against the Turk, of whose approach they had frequent reports:
that other Kings might also be moved to join in the War; and if that succeeded,
that they should not be the last. The Duke of Saxony being taken, the Emperor
marches to Wittemberg, and arrived there with his whole Army the 4th of May.
The Duke of Saxony condemned to death by the Emperor.
There, three days after he condemns John Frederick to death for Rebellion, as
he said: When this came to his ears, he showed no sign of a dejected mind,
only made answer, That he did not expect the Emperor would have used him in
that manner: That nevertheless if he were firmly resolved it should be so, The
great fortitude of Saxony.
he desired to be certainly informed of it, that he might have time to order
some affairs relating to his Wife and Children. But the Elector of Brandenburg
having received news of the Battle, Brandenburg's intercession for Saxony.
immediately set out upon his Journey, and arriving at the Camp on the sixth of
May, mitigated the Emperor, and prevailed with him to alter his Sentence, and
save the Duke of Saxony's life. The Emperor thereupon propounded Conditions,
which being accepted and ratified by the Duke, he redeemed his life. Amongst
other Conditions prescribed unto him, The Conditions proposed by the Emperor
to Saxony.
this was one: That he should approve whatever the Council or Emperor did
decree concerning Religion; but when he would by no means consent to that,
persevering in his resolution in spite of all danger, the Emperor commanded
that Article to be struck out. The other Conditions were, That he renounce the
Electoral Dignity both for himself and Children, and refer it to the Emperor
to be disposed of at his pleasure: That he deliver up to the Emperor,
Wittemberg and Gothen, the other Bulwark of the Country, yet so, as he may
carry out all the Furniture and Provisions, except a third part of the
Artillery and Victuals; the Emperor suffering the Garrisons to march out, but
without Colors. Albert of Brandenburg, and Ernest of Brunswick, set at liberty.
That Saxony give Marquess Albert of Brandenburg his liberty without a ransom,
and restore all that was taken from him; and the Emperor, on the other hand,
dismisses Duke Ernest of Brunswick, having first made him promise fidelity.
That the Duke of Saxony restore what has been taken in this War from those of
Mansfield, the Master of Prussia, and the people of Solms: That he renounce all
title to Magdenburg, Halberstadt, and Hall: That he promise to submit to the
Imperial Chamber, which the Emperor shall constitute, and contribute to the
charges thereof: That he give his consent to the releasing of Henry Duke of
Brunswick and his Son, and commence no action against them: That he forsake all
Leagues made against the Emperor and King Ferdinand, and make none for the
future, wherein they, their Provinces and Allies shall not be comprehended:
That all his Goods and Chattels be confiscated to the Emperor, which he
bestows upon his Brother King Ferdinand and Duke Maurice; but so, that Duke
Maurice give him and his Children a yearly Pension of fifty thousand Florins:
That if it seem good to the Emperor, the Duke of Saxony shall, by Duke
Maurice's permission, retain the Town and Castle of Gothen, with all the
Profits thereof, but that he shall dismantle the Castle, and not fortify the
Town. That because the Duke of Saxony was greatly in debt, Duke Maurice shall,
for the payment of those Debts that were contracted before the League of
Smalcalde, give his Children a Supply of an hundred thousand Florins: Again,
that he shall pay all the other Debts wherewith the confiscated Lands given him
by the Emperor, are asserted; so that all the Suits and Controversies betwixt
them may by this means be ended: That the Duke attempt nothing against any who
served the Emperor, nor against the King of Denmark neither: That he shall
observe the Decrees of the Emperor and States of the Empire: That since the
Emperor has pardoned his life, he shall for the future remain Prisoner, and be
in the custody of the Emperor, or of his Son the Prince of Spain: That his
Children enjoy those Goods, as has been said, provided they and the people of
the Country approve and ratify the Conditions of Peace. Who were excluded out
of the Peace.
That Albert Count Mansfield and his Children, Count Bichling, the Rhingrave,
Recrode, and Thumsern be excepted out of the Peace; though the last, if within
a month he disband his Forces, shall be comprehended. Before these things were
transacted, the Emperor from his Camp before Wittemberg, May the sixth,
summons the States of the Empire to meet at Ulm the 15th of June, in order to
the entering into a League. The Deputies he sent thither were, A Diet of the
Empire at Ulm.
the Cardinal of Ausburg, Marquess John of Brandenburg, De Lire, and Henry
Hasin. King Ferdinand sent also Ambassadors thither.

To what the Commissioners at Prague lately said, King Ferdinand's Letter to
the Bohemians.
that in making of a League, they had done nothing new, or contrary to the
custom of the Country, King Ferdinand gives his Answer from the Camp before
Wittemberg, May the 15th, that it was a thing altogether strange and new, and
done in prejudice and contempt of his authority: Then he lays before them what
they had acted in his absence, how many ways they had rebelled, and by variety
of Arguments endeavors to prove that that League was made against the Emperor
and him: He charges them therefore to abolish and rescind the same, to deliver
to every one their Seals back again, and to put the draught of the League into
the hands of his Commissioners; which if they did not, that he should advise
what was to be done. Though the Emperor had capitulated with the Duke of
Saxony, as we told you, yet the Garrison of Wittemberg consisting of about 3000
men, and the Citizens also refused to surrender the place, unless their Prince
himself would command them: for the Towns-people were extremely terrified at
the licentiousness of the Soldiery, when from the very Walls they could see
what mischief was done in the Country about, especially by the Spaniards and
Hungarians. Therefore when on the one and twentieth day of May the Brother and
Son of the Duke of Saxony, The Duke of Saxony discharges the Soldiers in
Wittemberg of their Military Oath, and then they surrender the Place to the
Emperor.
with some Counselors, who were come from the Town to him in the Camp, he
discharges them of their Military Oath, and orders them within three days to
depart, and leave the Place. The Towns-people having received these Orders,
beseech the Emperor, that he would not suffer the Foreign Soldiers to enter
the Town. He promised it to them, and made good his word, giving them power to
keep out all who should offer to press in without express Orders from him. The
Town being then surrendered, the Duchess of Saxony, Sibylla of Cleve, attended
by her Son and Brother-in-law, came into the Camp, where falling upon her Knees
before the Emperor, with Floods of Tears she begged Favor for her Husband.
The Duchess of Saxony makes intercession to the Emperor for her Husband.
The Emperor received her most graciously, and comforted her, giving the Duke
leave also to go into the Town, and spend a whole Week with his Wife and
Children. The same day that the Garrison marched out by the Duke of Saxony's
order, the Emperor sent in some German Foot, under the Command of Nicholas
Madruccio. Two days after, King Ferdinand, with his Sons, the Elector of
Brandenburg, and Duke Maurice, went into the Town, only to see it; and after a
short stay there, returned again to the Camp. In the afternoon the Emperor
also entered the Town, and going into the Castle, saluted the Duchess of
Saxony, again comforting her, and bidding her take heart, and not be
discouraged.

We spoke before the Death of Francis King of France, The Funeral of King
Francis.
who on the twenty-fourth of May was buried in the Church of St. Denis, the
Burying-place of their Kings, and with him two of his Sons, Francis and
Charles; of whom the first died eleven years, and the other two years before,
but were kept unburied till now. In the mean time, whilst Preparations were
making for the Funerals of King Francis, for some days his Effigies, in most
rich Apparel, with his Crown, Scepter, and other Regal Ornaments, lay upon a
Bed of State, and at certain Hours Dinner and Supper was served up before it,
with the very same Solemnity as was commonly performed when he was alive. When
the Regal Ornaments were taken off, they clothed the Effigies in Mourning; and
eight and forty Mendicant Friars were always present, who continually sung
Masses and Diriges for the Soul departed. About the Corpse were placed fourteen
great Wax Tapers, and over against it two Altars, on which from Daylight to
Noon Masses were said; besides what were said in an adjoining Chapel also,
full of Tapers and other Lights. Four and twenty Monks, with Wax Tapers in
their Hands, were ranked about the Hearse wherein the Corpse was carried, and
before it marched fifty poor men in Mourning, every one with a Taper in his
Hand. Amongst other Nobles, there was eleven Cardinals present. Peter Castelan
Bishop of Mascon, whom we mentioned before, preached the Funeral Sermon; and
amongst many other things said in praise of the King, he told the Hearers, That
he intended to have erected a College, wherein all Arts and Languages were to
have been taught, and six hundred Students entertained; for which end it should
have been endowed with a yearly Revenue of Fifty thousand Crowns.

Mention has been made before of Duke Erick of Brunswick; Duke Erick of
Brunswick defeated.
but now, that he might defend his own Lands, he leaves the Siege of Bremen:
Urisberger, who commanded the other part of the Army, did the like, and both
together appointed a place where they should join their Forces again. But Duke
Erick fell in with an Enemy; and that was the Hamburghers, who were coming to
the Relief of Bremen. It was obstinately fought on both Hands, even till Night;
but Duke Erick being at length put to flight, and forced with his Cavalry into
the River of Weser, lost a great many of his Men, besides all his Ordnance.
However, he escaped safe, and came to the Emperor; to whom he excuse himself,
laying all the blame upon Urisberger, who did not come to his assistance. With
the Bremers were Albert Count Mansfield, Count Heideck, Thumsern, Conrad
Pheninghen, The Intercession of Duke Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg for
the Landgrave.
and many more; but after the Duke of Saxony had made his Peace with the
Emperor, all these Forces were scattered.

Whilst these things were a doing, Duke Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg
earnestly intercede for the Landgrave: And that the matter might be managed
with more convenience, they invite him to come to Leipsick. But when the
Emperor stood positively upon this, That he should render himself up without
any Condition, and put all his Castles and Ammunition into his Hands, he went
home again without Success, and that day got as far as Weisefels, four German
miles from Leipsick. Next day discoursing on the Road about the Conditions
proposed, Christopher Eblben
and his own Fortune, with Christopher Ebleben; Were I but sure, said he, that
the Emperor would be entreated, suffer me to return home, and let me have but
one of my Castle furnished with Guns, I should not refuse, for Peace sake, to
demolish all the rest, and deliver up the Ordnance. Then said Ebleben, I Will not
fail to inform Duke Maurice of what you say; and within a few days you shall
either see me again, or hear from me: In the mean time I beseech you not to
think of taking any other Course. Having been to wait upon Duke Maurice then,
he returned shortly after, bringing with him Letters both from Duke Maurice and
the Elector of Brandenburg, dated at the Camp before Wittemberg the fourth day
of June, Duke Maurice's Letter to the Landgrave.
which were to this purpose: That so soon as they had understood more of his
mind from Ebleben, they had acquainted the Emperor with it: That he might see
what they had obtained, in the Draught of the Articles of Peace which Ebleben
brought along with him; and that they doubted not, since the Conditions were
tolerable, but that he would embrace them, especially seeing he was sensible of
the greatness of his own Danger: That he should not then refuse them, but
submit himself to the Emperor without any Condition: That he had no reason to
fear, that the Emperor would impose any heavier Burden upon him, or detain him
Prisoner; for that they would become Sureties that he should not, and that if
any thing should be demanded of him more than what was contained in the
Articles now sent by Ebleben, or if he should be detained Prisoner, they would
not refuse to undergo the same Fortune, and be ready to give all satisfaction
to his Children, when demanded of them: That as to his Religion, he should have
the same Security that they and Marquess John already had; which being so, and
seeing that this Pacification tended not only to his own private Advantage, but
to the good of the Public also, they most earnestly desired him, that he would
come with all expedition, bringing with him Henry Duke of Brunswick and his
Son, and rely upon their Word of Honor for his Safety: That he needed not
fear Brunswick might be taken from him by force on the Road; for that they
would take all the danger upon them; and that so soon as he did set out upon
his Journey, a Party of Horse should meet him on the way, and guard him from
all Attempts.

These were the Articles of Peace: The Articles of Peace.
That he surrender his Person and Province into the Emperor's Hands without
any Condition: That he come himself and humbly beg the Emperor's Pardon: That
for the future he behave himself obediently and dutifully toward the Emperor:
That he observe the Decrees which the Emperor shall make for the Public Good:
That he shall submit to the Sentence of the Imperial Chamber to be established
by the Emperor, and be at a proportionable part of the Charges of it: That ^e
depart from all Leagues, chiefly that of Smalcalde, and put all the Writings he
has of that kind into the Emperor's Hands: That he shall never make any
League, wherein the Emperor and King Ferdinand are not comprehended: That he
banish the Emperor's Enemies his Country: That if the Emperor think ^it to
punish any man, he shall in no ways undertake to defend him: That he give the
Emperor free Passage through his Territories, when there shall be occasion for
it: That he severely punish those under his Jurisdiction, who shall serve
against the Emperor or King Ferdinand: That these who are now in actual
Service, he recall, and command them to depart from their Colors within a
Fortnight, upon pain of Confiscation of all their Goods and Chattels, which
shall in that case fall to the Emperor: That for the Charges of the War, he
pay an hundred and fifty thousand Florins to the Emperor within four Months:
That he raze to the Ground all the Castles and Forts he has, except Zeigenheim
or Cassell; and that he make the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrisons that he
shall put into the same, take an Oath to be true to the Emperor: That he shall
not hereafter fortify any Place, without the Emperor's leave: That he
forthwith deliver up all his Artillery and Ammunition into the Emperor's
hands; of which the Emperor shall bestow upon him as much as shall be thought
sufficient for the defense of that Place which the Emperor is to give him:
That he set at liberty Henry Duke of Brunswick and his Son, and restore to Duke
Henry his Province, discharging his People of the Oath of Fidelity they took to
him, and compounding with the Duke for the Damage done unto him: That he make
Restitution of what he violently took from the Master of Prussia and the rest:
That he attempt nothing against the King of Danemark, or any else, upon account
that they did not assist him, or were on the Emperor's side: That he discharge
all Prisoners who served the Emperor without any Ransom: That he shall appear
and answer to all Suits of Law that may be brought against him by any man: That
his Children ratify these Conditions: The same shall his Nobility, and other
his Subjects do also; and that if he observe not his Convents, they shall
apprehend him, and deliver him up to the Emperor: That for his performance of
all these Conditions, the Elector of Brandenburg, Duke Maurice, and Wolffgang
the Prince Palatine's Son-in-law, shall be his Sureties, and, unless he obey,
promise to employ all their Force against him, and compel him to perform his
Articles.

After the Landgrave had received these Articles, The Landgrave accepts the
Conditions.
with the common Consent and Assent of his States, he accepted them; yet so as
that he desired a fuller Explication to be made to him as to some Points. The
Emperor being now about to remove his Camp, June the sixth, draws the Garrison
of his Soldiers out of Wittemberg. Immediately thereupon, Wittemberg falls to
Duke Maurice.
Duke Maurice puts one of his own in their place, and having the same day sent
for the Burgomasters and Council into the Castle, he assures them, that he will
not in the least diminish their Privileges and Liberty; and at the same time
takes an Oath of them, that they shall be true and faithful to him. For
Wittemberg is the chief Town of the Electorate, which the Emperor lately
conferred upon Duke Maurice, when all the Goods and Chattels of John Frederick
were confiscated, as has been said. Then the Towns-people and Nobility
entreated Duke Maurice, that he would repair their University, which in the
tumult and hurry of War was broken up and run into decay: That he promised to
do, and at the same time ordered, that the Boors who had fled should be called
home again, promising to supply them with Materials for Building, and Corn for
Seed and Sustenance, the poorer sort gratis, and the rest to be paid again. He
afterward re-settles Julius Pflug in the possession of the Bishopric of
Naumburg, and turns out Nicholas Amstorst, who, as we said in the Fourteenth
Book, had been put in by John Frederick. Moreover, Lazarus Schuendi was by the
Emperor sent with a Party of Soldiers, Lazarus Schuendi razes Gothen.
to raze the Castle of Gothen, and set at liberty Marquels Albert of
Brandenburg, who was there kept Prisoner. The Winter before the Archbishop of
Magdenburg had transacted with John Frederick, as we said, and resigned to him
the Province: but now, in this Turn of Fortune, both the Emperor and Clergy
being vexed at it, Frederick Son to the Elector of Brandenburg was put upon him
to be his Coadjutor.

King Ferdinand returning from the Camp at Wittemberg to Bohemia, stopped at
Leutmevitz, a Town upon the Borders of it: From thence in the beginning of June
he writes to all the States of Bohemia, King Ferdinand's Letter to the
Bohemians.
complaining again of the League, which he said was made in opposition to him:
Wherefore he charges them to depart from it, and to write to him severally what
their Resolution was as to that: That he knew many had been drawn in, and had
erred through ignorance, whom he purposed to pardon, and intended not to call
any to account but such as had wilfully impeached his Authority.

When the States were met at Ulm, What was done at the Diet of Vlm.
the Emperor's Commissioners, whom we named, represent to them at large, how
great care the Emperor and King Ferdinand had always had of the Peace and
Quiet of Germany, in all their Actions, as well public as private: But that
without any regard thereunto had, the Duke of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse had
not only rebelled themselves, but forced others also to do the like, and
slighting all Law and Justice, had put all Germany into confusion and disorder:
That therefore the Emperor was necessitated, for the support of his Dignity
and Authority, to take up Arms, and make War, to the great danger of his
Person, and prejudice to his Exchequer: That it was very well known what damage
those Rebels and Outlaws had done to the Territories of Mentz, Magdenburg,
Halberstadt, Aichstadt, Ausburg, Fulde, to the People of Stolberg, Mansfield,
and the City of Gem^nd; and that since the Emperor bent all his thoughts to
the keeping of Germany in peace, it seemed very requisite unto him, that some
League should be made for that purpose: That King Ferdinand was of the same
mind; and that both would enter into the Association, that so not only the
present Troubles, but any other also that should perhaps arise hereafter, might
be easily quelled: So that they being resolved to use their utmost diligence
and endeavors for the welfare of the common Country, they expected the like
mutually from them. But the Plague breaking out at Ulm, superceded their
Consultations, and made them adjourn themselves to Ausbourg; This Diet is
adjourned to Ausbourg.
where the Emperor intended to hold a great Assembly of the Empire, as shall
be said hereafter. All affairs being now settled at Wittemberg, the Emperor
removes to Hall in Saxony, a Town lying upon the River Saal; intending from
thence to march into Hesse, if the Landgrave did not make his Peace.

The Landgrave being now in these streights, and there being no other course
for him to take, he resolved to rely upon the promises and assurances given him
by Duke Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg, The Landgrave comes to the
Emperor at Hall.
and so setting out on his Journey, June the 18th, in the evening he arrived at
Hall, riding on horseback betwixt Duke Maurice and Brandenburg, who went to
meet him as far as Naumburg. About an hour after came also Henry Duke of
Brunswick, with his Son Charles Victor, that had been Prisoner, his other Son
Philip, and Duke Erick of Brunswick, who after the overthrow which he received
in battle, as has been said, was lately come thither. Next morning,
Christopher Carlebitz coming to the Landgrave, presents him the Articles of
Peace to be signed, to which a new Clause was added, That all the heads and
points therein contained, should be understood according to the Emperors
meaning and interpretation. A Draught of the Articles of Peace presented to the
Landgrave, different from that which he had received.
Wherefore because that Clause was not inserted in the Draught which Duke
Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg sent, the Landgrave sends word to the
Bishop of Arras, that he could not sign it. The Bishop cast the blame upon the
negligence and omission of the Clerk that transcribed them, and again urged him
to sign, which then he did. The Bishop of Arras put it to him besides, that
since he would have the same security as to Religion, that Duke Maurice and the
Elector of Brandenburg had, he should on his part also engage and promise to
the Emperor, to submit to the Decrees of the Council of Trent. To which he
made answer, That no such thing had been mentioned to him before, nor was it
specified in the Articles of Peace; and that he had rather be without that
security from the Emperor, than be obliged to give any such Promise. But after
a long debate about the matter, and some threats too, when he was told that the
Emperor had already taken his seat in the Hall, expecting him, and was
displeased with his delay, that therefore he should make have, lest in might go
worse with him; at length he thus subscribed: That he would submit to the
Decrees of a free, holy, and General Council, wherein both Head and Members
might be reformed, as Duke Maurice and Brandenburg should do; for they had
promised him not to recede from the Augustane Confession. The Landgrave signs
the Articles of Peace.
This being done, and the Emperor set on a Throne in his own Lodgings, the two
Electors I named, introduce the Landgrave, who approaching the Emperor, fell
upon his knees, and next to him his Chancellor Guntherod, who read aloud a
Writing, to this purpose. Forasmuch, The Landgrave begs Pardon of the Emperor.
most mighty Emperor, as in the late War the Landgrave has grievously offended
your Majesty, so as that you may justly punish him with utmost rigor, he is
most heartily sorry for it, and therefore, as he promised before, wholly refers
himself to your Majesty's will and pleasure, and prays you by all that is
sacred, that according to your wonted clemency you would pardon his Fault,
reverse the Outlawry he has incurred, restore him to his former state, and
take him and all his into your Majesty's protection: This he will look upon as
the highest favor that can be conferred upon him, and be from henceforward
loyal, dutiful, and obedient to your Majesty in all things. The Emperor after
some deliberation, ordered George Seldom to give his answer: The Emperor's
Answer to the Landgrave, by the mouth of his Chancellor.
That though he had deserved the severest of punishments, as was publicly
known, and appeared also by his own confession; yet he was content, out of his
own generosity, and because some Princes had interceded for him, that he should
be acquitted of the proscription and punishment he had deserved; and that he
should suffer no more, neither by imprisonment nor fine, than what was
prescribed by the Articles of Peace: That he also pardoned his Nobility,
Gentry, and Commons, provided they kept their Engagements, and hereafter
acknowledged this his so gracious favor toward them. There were present at
this solemn submission and pacification, Maximilian Archduke of Austria,
Philibert Prince of Piedmont, the Duke of Alva, the Master of Prussia, the
Bishops of Arras, Naumburg, and Heildesseim, Henry Erick, Charles and Philip
Dukes of Brunswick, the Popes Nuncio, and the Ambassadors and Deputies of
Bohemia, Denmark, Cleve, The Landgrave rises from off his knees unbidden.
and of some free Sea-port-Towns, besides many of the Nobility. The Landgrave
thinking all safe, and well, thanked the Emperor; but having kneeled a little
too long, and the Emperor marking him no sign to rise, he rose unbidden. A
little after the Elector of Brandenburg approached, and told him, that he must
sup with Duke Maurice and him at the Duke of Alva's Lodgings: nor could he all
this while smell out any thing for all that. They went then to the Duke of
Alva's and supt. After Supper Duke Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg fall
into discourse with the Duke of Alva and Bishop of Arras, and the Landgrave, in
the mean time, The Landgrave's Captivity.
for diversion played at Dice. When it was now late in the night, Duke Maurice
and Brandenburg call him to them aside, and bid Eustace and Eccleben let him
know in their names, That all their lifetime they had behaved themselves as
became Princes and Men of Honor, and faithfully performed whatever they
promised: That they had expected the same fidelity and honest dealing from
others; but that now the Duke of Alva and Bishop of Arras had told them, that
he must lodge there that night, and have a Guard set over him; which was the
greatest grief and trouble that ever befell them: but that they would speak with
the Emperor himself, and were in good hopes that he would not be detained. To
which he made answer, That that was the thing in the world he least expected:
that upon their word and assurance he had come thither; and that they knew well
enough how they had bound themselves to him and his Children, and that
therefore they might look to it, how they would satisfy their Promise and
Obligation. However, since there was a necessity of staying, Duke Maurice, and
some of Brandenburg's Counselors tarried with him all night. Next day they
waited upon the Emperor, The Remonstrance of Duke Maurice and Brandenburg's
Counselors to the Emperor.
and made a heavy complaint to him, showing him how much their Honor lay at
stake: for that if there had been but the least suspicion of such a thing,
neither would they have advised him to come thither, nor would he have come to
that place where he was to lose his liberty. They therefore beseech his
Majesty, that he would have regard to those who had mediated, and give him
leave to be gone, since they had engaged their Faith and Honor unto him, that
it should be so. The Emperor told them, That he had, indeed, past his word,
not that he should not at all be detained, but that he should not be made a
perpetual Prisoner, and that was all he meant. From the Emperor they went to
his Counselors, and chiefly to the Bishop of Arras: After a long and brisk
Debate, they send the Landgrave word, that he had liberty to be gone if he
pleased: With all my heart, replied he, provided I may be conducted home in
safety. Here again his two Friends intercede, but all in vain: for two days
after he had notice given him, that he should prepare to go along with the
Emperor; but that he flatly refused, declaring that he would not budge, unless
he were dragged by force. There again Duke Maurice and Brandenburg earnestly
besought and adjured him not to refuse; and the more to encourage him, gave him
their hands, in presence of some Noblemen, that they would not depart from the
Emperor's Court, till he had his liberty. Having gone with him then to
Naumburg, they went afterward to solicit his affair with the Emperor. But
three days after, to wit, June the 26th, they send Carlebitz to him, to pray
him that he would not take it ill that they waited not upon the Emperor any
longer, for that he had plainly charged them not to do it; and that if they
should do otherwise, he would be sent away into Spain: That nevertheless they
understood, that if he would pay in the hundred and fifty thousand Florins, and
faithfully promise to fulfill the rest of the Conditions, he would be set at
liberty within a fortnight: that they were to go shortly to the Diet at
Ausbourg, where they would bestir themselves in his Cause with all zeal,
fidelity, and diligence. The Landgrave who suffered his confinement very
impatiently, made answer, That he would take care the money should be paid,
and his Castles demolished, and therefore trusted that what they had put him in
hopes of would be fulfilled. Afterward, when he was come out of the Borders of
Thuringe, and arrived at Grevetall with his Spaniards, he showed the Duke of
Alva his Letters of safe conduct, and obligation of surety: But Alva told him
that the Emperor had promised nothing to the Mediators, but that he should not
be kept in perpetual imprisonment. And what is to be the term and period of
this Captivity then, said the Landgrave, or by what space of time is it to be
limited? Though the Emperor should detain you for the space of fourteen years
or more, said Alva, yet he would do nothing contrary to his promise. The
Landgrave then, that he might recover his liberty as soon as he could, paid in
all the Money not long after, razed his Castles, and delivered up his
Artillery. Now the Emperor had got a vast number of great Guns, partly from
him, partly from the Dukes of Saxony and Wirtemberg, and the Free Towns, which,
as they say, amounted to Fifty in number. Of these he sent some to Milan, some
to Naples, others to Spain, and the rest he distributed in the Low Countries,
The number of great Guns taken from the Protestants.
there to be kept as the Monuments and Trophies of his Victory. Ebleben, a
worthy Gentleman, who, as we said, had been the Messenger and Truchman in
negotiating the Landgrave's Pacification, took his Captivity extremely ill, and
shortly after died for grief of it, as most People thought. Ebleben dies for
grief.


The Emperor had resolved to fall upon the City of Magdenburg, The City of
Magdeburg alone did not satisfy the Emperor.
which lies upon the Elbe, two days Journey below Wittemberg; for they were the
only People that stood it out; but at the very same time Henry King of France
employed Sebastian Vogelsbergh to raise Men in Germany, to the number of ten
Ensigns; Sebastian Vogelsberg raising Men in Germany.
a thing the Emperor began to be jealous of: Wherefore partly for this cause,
and partly because he thought he had another way to humble them, leaving Hall,
he marched into Upper Germany, and June the seven and twentieth sent the
Marquess of Matignan with an Aid of eight Ensigns of German Foot to his Brother
King Ferdinand. Ferdinand was then at Leutmeritz, expecting an Opportunity of
Action; and so soon as he had received Intelligence of the Emperor's Success,
and the taking of the Landgrave, he wrote to those of Prague, July the first,
commanding them to appear before him in the Castle of Prague, the sixth of the
same Month, to answer for what they had done. Being come thither with his
Forces, King Ferdinand calls before him the Citizens of Prague in the Castle of
Prague, and there severely expostulates with them.
he lays open before them in a public Assembly all the past Transactions, and
how many ways they had offended him, accusing them of High Treason, and bidding
them answer to every Particular. There they humbly submit to his Will and
Pleasure, beseeching him not to use the Rigor of Law against them. Wherefore
at the Intercession of young Ferdinand the Son, Augustus the Brother of Duke
Maurice, and some other great men, the King on the tenth of July proposes these
Conditions unto them: That in the next Convention of States they wholly annul
the League they had entered into, The Bohemians subdued and fined by King
Ferdinand.
by cancelling it, and breaking all the Seals: That they deliver up to him all
their Charters and Writings of Liberties and Privileges, to the intent he may
reform some of them, and grant and confirm to them anew such as he shall think
fit: That they also resign all the Charters of Liberties and Immunities granted
to Companies and Incorporations, because some of them did give occasion to
Stirs and Commotions: That in like manner they give up their Castles, and
renounce all Jurisdiction and Customs, as also all Instruments of Leagues, and
especially of that Association which they made amongst themselves, and of that
Alliance they had entered into with John Frederick: That they pay for ever the
Excise of Beer, which had been granted him only for three years: That they
bring all their Artillery and Ammunition into the Castle, and all their private
Arms into the Townhouse. If they thus do, he promises to spare the Multitude,
excepting some few, whom he resolved to punish as they deserved, and keep
Prisoners for the Public Good. The People being acquainted with this, and
fifty Prisoners set at liberty, the Conditions were accepted and agreed unto.
Some of the Nobility being cited, and not appearing at the day, were sentenced
to have forfeited Honor, Life, and Goods; so that some other Cities and Nobles
submitted without any Condition, Caspar Pflug condemned of High Treason.
as Prague had done. But Caspar Pflug, whom the Confederates had made their
General, as we said, was condemned of High Treason, and a Reward of Five
thousand Florins set upon his Head. Afterward, in the Convention of States,
the League was abrogated and cancelled, and the King obtained from them every
thing almost that he had demanded.

Whilst the Emperor is triumphing in Germany, A Sedition at Naples because of
the Spanish Inquisition.
a dangerous Sedition broke out at Naples: The Cause of it was, That the
Viceroy, Peter of Toledo, would after the Spanish manner inquire into their
Faith and Religion. The Citizens murmured heavily at this, and being weary of
the Spanish Government, rose in Arms: But after a great deal of Butchery and
Bloodshed committed in the City, the Spaniards, who were Masters of the Forts
and Castles, got the better on it: So that some of the Seditious being fined,
the rest were banished.

Now the Spanish Inquisition, The Reason of the first Institution of the
Spanish Inquisition.
which makes such a noise now adays, was heretofore set up in those Places by
King Ferdinand and Isabel against the Jews, who after Baptism observed their
own Rites and Laws: But now that Luther's Name was up, it was promiscuously
practiced, and that with great Severity and short Process too, against all who
were in the least supected. At the very same time the French King sends seven
Cardinals to Rome, commanding them to stay there till fresh Orders. That was
thought to have been done, that by their means the Pope might be wholly
inclined to the Amity and Friendship of the King, and that if he chanced to
die, being now fourscore years of age, they might procure another to be chosen
that was no Enemy to his Majesty. Nor were there wanting some who gave it out,
that it was done by the advice and interest of the Constable, that they being
out of the way, he might alone do all with the King; The Pope's Legate in France
grants many things.
for generally they all followed the Court, whithersoever the King went. A
little before the Pope had sent a Legate into France, Jerome Roman a Cardinal,
with a most ample Commission to dispense with many things prohibited both by
the Laws and Decrees of Councils. At that time also he created Charles the Son
of Claude Duke of Guise and Archbishop of Reims, Charles of Guise made Cardinal.
Cardinal, as knowing him to be the King's Favorite. On the other hand, the
King of France, to ingratiate himself the more, The Pope and King of France
make a Match between their Bastards.
promises his Natural Daughter, a young Lady of nine years of age, in Marriage
to Horatio Farnese, the Pope's Grandchild by his Son.

The Emperor leaving Hall, came to Bamberg, that at so near a distance he
might awe the Bohemians the more, and give Strength and as it were Sinews to
his Brother King Ferdinand. Whilst he was here, on the third day of July, he
called a Diet of the Empire, A Diet at Ausburg.
commanding all to meet the first of September at Ausburg, the Princes in
Person, and all the rest by Deputies, with full Power and Commission; and
declaring, That the War had hindered him from holding a Diet at Ratisbonne the
first of February past, as he had intended; but that now the Troubles being
over, and the Authors of the Commotions in his power, he would no longer delay,
but use means to heal the corrupt Members of the Commonwealth; and that the
same Matters were to be brought into deliberation, which should have been
treated of at Worms, and a year before at Ratisbonne. This Diet was to have
been held at Ulm; but by reason of the Plague the Place was changed, as we
intimated before. From Bamberg he goes next to Norimberg: Some Towns of Saxony
are reconciled to the Emperor.
Being there, he received some Towns of Saxony into Favor; and July the
sixteenth by Proclamation he declares upon what Terms he had transacted with
the Landgrave and pardoned him; and that seeing he was concerned lest some out
of ignorance might use Force upon his Lands and Subjects, The Emperor
publishes his Pacification with the Landgrave.
he therefore, at his Request, charged all Men to desist, and that those who
had any Action or Suit against him should try it fairly by Law. At the very
same time Duke Maurice sent for Melanchthon, Pomerane, and Couriger, Divines of
Wittemberg, Duke Maurice graciously receives the Divines of Wittemberg.
to Leipsick, treated them very civilly there, and having made a large
Profession of his Zeal for Religion, committed to them the Care and
Administration both of the Church and University, exhorted them to proceed in
their wonted manner, settled Salaries upon them, and, as they themselves write,
dismissed them with Presents: For in a Book afterward published, Pomerane
highly commends his Goodness and Liberality.

The King of France who succeeded to his Father, The manner of the French
King's Coronation.
July the twenty fifth in the afternoon, came to Reims to be Crowned; and being
received at the Door of the Cathedral Church by three Cardinals, he was by them
conducted to the High Altar, where having kissed the Relics of the Saints in
Golden Shrines, and assisted at Vespers, he went to Supper. After Supper he
came back again, and having said his Prayers, and confessed his Sins to a
Priest, went home to Bed. Next day he sent some Nobles to entreat the Abbot of
St. Remy that he would bring the Viol of Holy Oil, which, they say, came down
from Heaven. Afterward they who are called the Peers of France, met in the
Church, Twelve Peers of France.
to the number of twelve; the Bishops of Reims, Laon, Langres, Beauvais, Noyon,
and Chaalons; then the King of Navarr, the Dukes of Vendosme, Guise, Niverne,
Mompensier, and Aumale, who represented the Dukes of Burgundy, Normandy, and
Aquitaine; the Earls of Tolouse, Flanders, and Champaigne. The Bishops of
Langres and Beauvais, with two Cardinals, were chosen to go and wait upon the
King to the Church: When these were come into the Bedchamber, and said some
Prayers, they lifted up the King, who, as the Ceremony requires, was lying upon
the Bed, and attended by a multitude of Priests, lead him to the Church, the
Constable carrying before him the Sword drawn. The King having said his Prayers
at the High Altar, was by the Bishops led to his Seat, and in the mean time,
whilst the Sacred Viol is a coming, the Archbishop of Rheims, having made an
end of the Prayers that are contained in the Book of Ceremonies, sprinkled the
King and all the rest with Holy Water. And when word was brought that the
Sacred Viol was now coming, which in absence of the Abbot, the Prior of the
Monks brought, riding on a White Steed, and accompanied by all his Monks, and
those Noblemen who were sent by the King, as we said before. The Archbishop,
with some other Bishops, went to meet him as far as the Porch of the Church,
with the Cross carried before him, and there received the Viol from him, upon
Security given that he should restore it again; and as he came back to the High
Altar, the King rising out of his Seat made him a Bow. Afterward the
Archbishop went into the Vestry, and from thence coming out in his Pontificals,
he took the Oath of Fidelity of him, wherein, by ancient Custom, as they say,
Kings are bound to the Church. Then the King was led by two Bishops to the High
Altar, where putting on other Apparel, he kneeled, and was girt with a Sword
which the Archbishop had consecrated, as they call it, by many Prayers. This
Ceremony being over, the Archbishop fitted and prepared the Oil, and whilst the
rest of the Priests sang aloud their Service, he prayed softly with the King,
both prostrate on the Ground. Then he anointed the King's Head and Breast, both
his Shoulders, and the Joints of his two Arms at the bending of the Elbow,
saying the usual Prayers in the mean time. This being done, the King was
clothed in new Garments, as if he had been a Minister of the Church, and
anointed in the Palms of his Hands; then he laid his two Hands on his Breast,
and put on Consecrated Gloves, as they call them. The Archbishop also put a
Ring upon his Finger, and the Scepter into his Hand; and at the same time the
Chancellor calls forth those who are named the Peers. They being present, the
Archbishop took from the Altar the Crown of Charlemaigne, and after the Peers
had touched it, put it upon the King's Head, leading his Majesty to a Throne
erected in a higher place, and all the Nobles following after, where having
said some Prayers, he kissed him. The Nobles did the same, and then with loud
Acclamations and the Sound of Trumpets, all cried, God save the King. After
that, Gold and Silver Medals were thrown promiscuously amongst the People. Then
the Archbishop began Mass, and when the Gospel was read, the King offered at
the Altar some pieces of Gold, Silver, Bread, and Wine, and after Mass received
the Sacrament with the rest: And then all went to Dinner. The King would have
had it thought, that he raised those German Foot under the Conduct of
Vogelsberg, as has been mentioned, for this purpose only, that none might dare
to disturb the Ceremony of his Coronation.

In the mean time the Emperor demands Money of the rest of the Orders of the
Empire, The Emperor squeezes Money from the States of the Empire.
for defraying the Charges of the War, which he said was undertaken chiefly for
their sakes, and for the preservation of Germany. All the Nobility also, and
they who had served the Confederates, are fined all over Germany: The Sum of
Money which the Emperor got.
And the Money which at that time the Emperor raised from the Princes and Free
Towns, both Catholic and Lutheran, was thought to amount to the Sum of above
Sixteen hundred thousand Florins, as appeared by the Public Accounts. Some
also the Emperor wholly excluded from his Grace, as being more notorious
Rebels; Counts whom the Emperor would not pardon.
and amongst these were Duke George of Wirtemberg, Albert Count Mansfield, John
Count Heideck, and the Counts of Oetinghen, Father and Son: For this last he
punished so severely, that he gave all his Lands and Possessions to his other
Sons, Frederick and Wolffgang, who had been true and faithful unto him; so that
he being banished, and stripped of all, came with his Wife and Children to
Strasbourg, and went wandering about from place to place many years after, until
there happening a new Change of Affairs, the Emperor pardoned them, as shall be
said hereafter. The Emperor puts the City of Magdenburg also to the Ban of the
Empire; Magdenburg proscribed.
nay, and King Ferdinand too, King Ferdinand and the Cardinal of Ausburg obtain
vast Sums of Money from the Free Towns.
because the War had been carried into his Dominions, demands Money from the
Protestant Confederates, especially the Free Towns, and obtains a vast Sum from
Ausburg and Ulm: Besides, he commences a Suit against Ulrick Duke of Wirtemberg
for his whole Dukedom, as if he had broken his Promise, and the Articles of
Agreement made in years past; nor did it any way avail him, that he had lately
bought his Peace of the Emperor upon very hard Conditions. Moreover, the
Cardinal of Ausburg also extorts from the City a vast Sum of Gold; nay, the
Cardinal of Trent was upon them likewise for Money, pretending that he had sent
Soldiers to the Assistance of King Ferdinand, for regaining that Pass in the
Alps, that, as we said, was taken by Scherteline.

The Emperor again sollicits the Suitzers to enter into a new League; The
Emperor sollicits the Suitzers into a League.
but he exempts the Cantons of Basle, Zurick, Schafhausen, and some others,
because, as he said, they belonged to the Empire. They unanimously make answer,
That they had a League already with the Houses of Austria and Burgundy, which
they firmly observed, so that there was no need they should enter into any new
Alliance; and they expected he also would do the like. About the end of June
the Emperor came to Ausburg, with his Prisoner the Duke of Saxony; but he left
the Landgrave at Donavert, under a Guard of Spaniards, who did many things
daily in contempt and scorn of him. An Armed Diet at Ausburg.
This was an Armed Diet; for there was a Garrison before of ten Ensigns of Foot
in the Town, and in the Country about were the Spanish and Italian Forces; to
be free from whom, the Town of Memmingen gave thirty thousand, and Kempen
twenty thousand Florins. There came besides about six hundred Horse from Lower
Germany, whom the Emperor quartered in the Country about. Twelve Ensigns of
Spaniards, who had for some time wintered at Bibrach, were led into the Country
bordering upon the Lake Britannine; and at Weissemburg, a Town in Nortgow,
seven hundred Neopolitan Horse lay in Garrison. Gerard Feltwig, A Truce between
the Emperor and Turk.
who, as we said in the seventeenth Book, went Envoy to the Turk, came back to
the Emperor on the twelfth day of August, with a Truce concluded for five
years. When the Emperor came to Ausburg he took the Cathedral and some other
Churches for his own use, leaving the rest to the Magistrates and People of the
Town: The Expiation of Churches.
But the Priests, before they would officiate in their Churches, with certain
Ceremonies purged and consecrated them anew, as being polluted by Lutheranism.
The Emperor appointed Michael Sidonius, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Mentz,
to preach in the Cathedral Church. Amongst others, Michael Sidonius a Champion
for the Mass.
he preached many Sermons upon the Sacrifice of the Mass, which he afterward
published in Print. But their Churches being very empty of Citizens, the
Catholics are said to have given Money to the poorer sort of People, to
persuade them to repair to them. This was a most full Diet; all the Electors
were present, and amongst these, Adolph Elector of Cologne, and Duke Maurice
Elector of Saxony: Thither came also King Ferdinand, the Cardinal of Trent,
Henry Duke of Brunswick, the Duke of Cleve, the Lady Mary the Emperor's
Sister, and his Niece the Duchess Dowager of Lorrain. The Diet opened the
first of September, The Opening of the Diet at Ausburg.
where Maximilian the Archduke of Austria having made a short preliminary
Speech, the Emperor made his Secretary, as the Custom is, declare his Mind
from a written Paper; who having spoken first of his great Love and tender Care
toward their common Country, told them, That two years before he had held a
Diet at Worms, for the composing of all Differences; but that few being
present, he had adjourned the whole Debate to Ratisbonne, whither he came the
first of all, though at that time he was much indisposed in Health; and that
when he had expected the coming of others, to whom he had written to that
purpose, but very few came, and of these some went away without acquainting
him: That when he came to know of it, he also dismissed the rest; so that that
Diet had had no effect, but proved abortive, to the shame of many: That when he
came to understand that the Craft and Calumnies of some was the cause of these
Miscarriages, it behoved him necessarily to apply a Remedy; and that therefore
he had long ago signified by Letters, what his design was, and how he would
have that Difference about Religion to be adjusted: But now that God had
blessed his Counsels with happy Success, he had called a Diet, that with their
unanimous Advice and Consent he might enact what might be for the Public Good:
That however, since the Dissension about Religion was the Cause of all the
Troubles of Germany, and that no Peace could be had unless it were removed;
since also that by his procurement chiefly, a Council was called and begun at
Trent, the thing they had so often importuned him about, it was therefore his
will and pleasure, that that should be the chief Matter first debated of: That
for keeping of the Peace, Decrees were already made; however, if they thought
it needful to have any thing amended, or more fully explained in them, that he
was very willing to hear their Reasons: That Justice also should be
administered, was a thing chiefly to be minded; for that it was a Disgrace and
great Prejudice to Germany, that now for some time the Laws had been silent
there, and a stop put to Justice: That it was true, a Decree had been made
before, concerning the Constitution of the Imperial Chamber; but that some
things had intervened, which had hindered the accomplishment of it: That some
Princes and Free Towns had lately engaged to him, that they would stand to the
Judgment which he should pronounce, and be at some Charges also in the matter:
That therefore he desired they would refer the Management of that Point to his
Care, and every one contribute their proportionable share of the Expenses: That
he would make it his Business, that fit Men should be admitted into that
Judicature, who should take a solemn Oath to determine all Matters according to
Law and Equity: And that because, through the intermission of Justice for some
time, the number of Actions and Lawsuits was mightily increased, he thought it
might be expedient, that for a Supplement, ten Judges extraordinary should be
added to the usual number: That he himself would hear and judge of the
Complaints of the Churchmen, concerning the loss and deprivation of their
Jurisdictions and Lands, and right all Trespasses, if it lay in his Power: That
it was his will and pleasure, that nothing should be moved about Supplies
against the Turk, until his Brother King Ferdinand should come, who might
satisfy them as to the Truce made, and what was fitting to be done for the
future. Lastly, That he did not like the private Deliberations and Cabals of
some; for that they were a hinderance to public Transactions, many by private
Suggestions and Persuasions being often diverted from the Opinion and
Resolution they had conceived; a thing undecent, and not to be suffered in the
public Diets of the Empire, since every one ought to speak what he thinks
freely, and in open Assembly: That these were the Matters he thought fit to lay
before them, desiring them to take them into their speedy Consideration, and
give him their Resolutions concerning the same.

On the tenth of this Month, Pietro Aloisio, the Pope's Son, is assassinated at
Piacenza.
Pietro Aloisio, the Son of Paul III. was assassinated in his own House at
Piacenza; and shortly after Ferdinando Gonzaga, Governor of Milan for the
Emperor, takes possession of the Town. The News of this came within few days
to Ausburg; and because it was given out, that the Emperor was told of it, a
Relation of the whole Matter was communicated to the Princes in writing. Now
the whole Narrative tends to the infamy and disgrace of Pietro Alosio; and this
is the Substance of it, as it is set down in that Writing. When, by an Exchange
made, Pietro Aloisio was invested Duke of Piacenza and Parma, he acted many
things contrary to Law and Equity, by his ruggedness and ill nature offending
all sorts of people, as amongst the rest he did Jerome Palavicini, Jerome
Palavicini turned out of House and Lands.
whom he turned out of all; and because the poor man, for avoiding of danger,
had fled to Crema, a Town in the Dominions of the State of Venice, he cast his
Wife and Children into Prison. Now when the matter seemed to tend to some
greater Commotion, the Cardinal of Trent, who favored the Family of the
Farneses, mediates by Letters; but Aloisio answered frowardly.

Afterward, when Octavio came from the Emperors Camp to Trent upon his way
home: the Cardinal acquainted him with the whole matter, and entreated him to
intercede with his Father. He having done so, sends back word, that Jerome
might be received into favor, provided he would come in person, and humbly beg
forgiveness. But it being to be feared, lest contrary to Faith and Promise,
some greater mischief might be done unto him, the Cardinal with a small Retinue
goes to Crema, and sends for Jerome: But he fearing some treachery, would not
come, till he was assured that it was the Cardinal who sent for him. After they
had discoursed and taken counsel together, and the Cardinal had promised to do
him all the good Offices he could, they both take Journey in company. In the
mean time the Cardinal sent one or two of his Servants before to acquaint
Aloisio that he and Jerome were coming to wait upon him. But he, contrary to
what his Son Octavio had before signified, sends back word, that he cannot
restore him: And though the Messengers that were sent, wise and discreet men,
said many things to have appeased his anger, yet he persisted in the same mind.
So that the Cardinal of Trent having brought Palavicini safely back again to
Crema, returns home. Now before this, some of the Nobility who hated Aloisio,
had conspired his death, and having for that end hired some Ruffians, they
waited for an occasion. That they appeared severally abroad now and then with
their Banditi about them, pretending that they were only upon their guard,
because of private Quarrels: but in the mean time every one of them puts the
question privately to their men, if they would faithfully serve them in
revenging an injury which they had received, as they said, from the Steward of
Aloisio: They briskly promise not only to serve them faithfully in that matter,
but if they pleased, Pope Paul III. an Astrologer and Necromancer.
in killing his Lord himself. About the same time Paul the Third writes to his
Son Aloisio, bidding him have a care of the tenth day of December; for that the
Stars foretold him some extraordinary misfortune that day. Now Pope Paul was
not only much addicted to Astrology, but, as it is affirmed for certain, to
Necromancy also. Upon the receipt of this Letter, Aloisio grew very anxious and
apprehensive: However, when the day came, he went abroad out of the Castle in a
Sedan well attended, to view the Fortifications of the Town that he had begun.
The Conspirators also were there; but finding that they could not then put
their design in execution, they stop, and as he was returning home, wait upon
him, officiously walking before his Chair, to the number of twenty six. So soon
as his Chair was within the Castle, they pull up the Drawbridge, that no body
might come after; so immediately appooaching him with their drawn Swords, they
first bitterly revile the Tyrant, and then kill him in his Chair; murdering at
the same time his Confessor, Gentleman of the Horse, and five Germans that
guarded him. Afterward they run up and down the Castle, ransack and plunder
all they meet with, and seize a great deal of money which he had designed for
the Fortification of the Town. In the mean time a vast concourse of people
gathered about the Castle, enquiring what the matter was, that they heard so
much noise and clamor within? The Murderers make answer from above, That they
had killed the Tyrant, and retrived the ancient liberty of the City. But when
they could hardly be believed, they capitulate with the Citizens, and upon
security given them that they should be pardoned, hang the dead body in a Chain
over the Wall, which for some short time they swung too and again, and then let
it fall into the Ditch. With that the people came running in, and with their
Daggers and Feet stabbed and stamped upon it, so great and implorable was their
hatred to their Duke. Having afterward consulted what was to be done, Those of
Piacenza submit to the Emperor.
they post away an Express to acquaint Ferdinando Gonzaga with the matter,
throw themselves into the Emperors protection, and desire assistance to be
sent them with all speed. Gonzaga presently sent them a Garrison, and having
taken possession of the Town, made them swear Fealty to the Emperor; and then
informs him by Letter of what he had done, desiring to know his will and
pleasure therein. The Inhabitants of Parma were also solicited to submit
themselves to the Emperor; but they having wrote to the Pope, assured him,
that they would continue faithful to him, and not refuse Octavio for their
Prince, since now his Father was killed. This is the sum of the account that
the Emperors familiar Friends said was sent to him, and which was communicated
to the States: but others give a far different Relation of the matter, saying,
That it was a laid Design, and that within a few hours after the slaughter,
Gonzaga was at the Gates with a Garrison; but I cannot affirm any thing
positively. However it be, all men confess that Pietro Aloisio was an impious
and lewd man; and there are some Italian Pamphlets extant, that reckon up his
flagitious Lusts; amongst which, The detestable wickedness of Aloisio the
Pope's Bastard.
the most memorable is, That in an unnatural manner he forced the Body of Cosmo
Cherio Bishop of Fano, having made his Servants hold him by violence till he
did the Fact; which abominable Villainy lay so heavy upon the poor man's Heart,
that it is said he died of grief. Nor are there wanting some, who think he was
poisoned by him, lest he should have informed the Emperor of that detestable
Sodomy. Pope Paul nevertheless tenderly loved this Bastard, making it his whole
care to promote him; and when sometimes he was told of his lewd Practices, he
is reported not to have been much troubled thereat, but only to have usually
said, That he had not learn those Vices of him.

We mentioned before, The Council of Trent divided.
that the Fathers of the Council leaving Trent, had removed to Bolonia: This
the Emperor was highly displeased at, and when he came now to Ausburg, he
moved the College of the Princes to represent the matter to the Pope. The
German Bishops Letter to the Pope.
Wherefore, September the fourteenth, the Bishops wrote to him, representing
the State and Danger of Germany, which, they say, might have been prevented, if
a timely Remedy had been applied to the growing Distemper, to wit, a Public
Council, wherein they had several times importuned the Emperor, that he would
procure it to be held within the Limits of Germany, that so the Bishops of that
Country, who were most concerned, might be present; for seeing their
Jurisdiction wa^ of ample extent, it was not expedient for them, especially at
that time, to be at a great distance from their own Charge: That at length,
when no man would repair to Mantua or Vicenza, a Council indeed was by the
diligence and care of the Emperor got to be called and begun, but without the
Bounds of Germany still, to wit, at Trent, which belongs rather to Italy: That
for that reason also not many of the Germans had come to it; nor, indeed, could
they, especially in time of War, when the Ways were every where beset and
intercepted; but that now the Storm being over, when the Vessel was brought
almost into Harbor, and all men were in good hopes, contrary to all
expectation, the Council, wherein the Public Safety wholly consisted, should
be translated to another Place, or rather, indeed, divided, was a thing that
exceedingly grieved them, because of the danger it threatened; for that Germany
had now no less than these six and twenty years struggled with new and
pernicious Doctrines and Sects, that the Bishops had lost almost all their
Authority, and that in this ^esolation and Confusion innumerable thousands of
men endangered the Salvation of their Souls: That, in short, whatever was
formerly sound and sincere, was by that pestilent Contagion spoiled and
corrupted; and that the States of the Empire being rent asunder, had lost all
mutual Love and Correspondence: That in these their so great Calamities, they
had no Refuge but to the Apostolic Church: That therefore they most earnestly
begged, he would restore the Council; which if he did, he might expect any
thing from them; but if not, that they could not tell where to look for Help;
for that noise of stormy Winds and Tempests was heard on all hands, against
which God had appointed the Church of Rome to be as a strong Bulwark and firm
Rock of Defense: That he should then have regard to their Demands, and reject
with himself, that if he had not a care, other Course may be taken, to set
things to rights: That after all, they prayed him to take these things in good
part; for that both the necessity of the Times, and the obligation of their
Duty, had constrained them to write.

About this very time, A Victory of the English over the Scots.
also, the English obtain a great Victory over the Scots, under the Conduct of
the Duke of Somerset the King's Uncle. The Cause of the War was the same that
was before in the time of King Henry his Father, to wit, because the Scots
would not give their Queen in Marriage to King Edward, as it had been agreed
upon. After this Victory, the English took many Places in Scotland, and
advanced a great way into that Country.

All the Diet was not of the same mind as to the Emperor's Demands; The
Opinions of the Catholics and Protestants differ about the Council of Trent.
for the Ecclesiastical Electors urged the Council of Trent without any
Limitation or Condition: And again, the Deputies of the Elector Palatine, Duke
Maurice, and Brandenburg, did not refuse it, provided it were free and holy,
wherein the Pope should not preside, but should absolve the Bishops from the
Oath they had taken to him; wherein their Divines might also have a decisive
Vote, and the past Decrees be recalled. However, the rest of the Princes and
States urged the Continuation of the Council, and that the Protestants might
have Safe Conduct to go thither and be heard, and then be compelled to submit
to and obey its Decrees.

The Emperor being informed of all their Opinions, The Protestants are
solicited to submit to the Council.
gave his Answer October the eighteenth, desires them all to submit to the
Council, and deals privately with the Elector Palatine and Duke Maurice that
they would assent. The Prince Palatine besides was overawed, because of the
late Offense he had given the year before, Some Protestants, drawn in or
overawed, assent to the Council.
as we said, that Sore not being as yet well skinned over. Duke Maurice, who
was both desirous that the Landgrave his Father-in-law might be set at liberty,
and had been lately highly promoted by the Emperor, thought himself obliged to
do somewhat. Wherefore the Emperor having by Messengers given them large
Assurances of his Favor and Good Will, and put it to them, that they would
refer themselves to his Faith and Promise, at length, October the twenty
fourth, The Free Towns scrupulous to assent to the Council.
they give their Assent. There remained no more now but the Free Towns, who
thought it a matter of great danger, to submit themselves indifferently to the
Decrees of the Council. These did Granvell and Hasen industriously manage; and
in the mean time a Report went over the Town, that they were stubborn, in
refusing that which all the Princes had already approved: Some Threats were
also let fall, that they should be far more severely dealt with than formerly.
At length they found a way both to satisfy the Emperor, and to secure
themselves. Being therefore called before his Imperial Majesty, they told him,
that it was not their part to correct the Answers of the Princes, but at the
same time present a Paper to him, declaring the Conditions upon which they were
willing to approve the Council. The Emperor having heard their Speech, The
Emperor's Answer to the Speech of the low Towns.
makes them an Answer by the mouth of Seldom, That he was very well satisfied,
that after the example of others, they referred the matter to him, and gave
their consent with the rest. So that he attributed more unto them, than they
were desirous of: for they had not consented with the rest; but that they might
give no cause of offense, were unwilling to censure the Judgment of the
Princes; and nevertheless, that they might not afterward be concluded, thought
fit to give in writing the Conditions upon which they accepted the Council,
that so they might leave to Posterity some Monument of their sincere
intentions. This happened about the latter end of October, and at the same time
King Ferdinand came thither, The Emperor's Embassy to the Pope for the
continuation of the Council.
as shortly after the Elector of Brandenburg did: wherefore the Emperor sent
the Cardinal of Trent in all have to Rome, in the beginning of November, that
he might move the Pope to recall the Council of Trent.

In the month of November; Christina Wife to the Landgrave, his Sons, and some
select Counselors, wrote Letters to all the Princes and States of the Empire,
acquainting them, Letters to the States in behalf of the Landgrave.
How he was made Prisoner, when under safe conduct he came to Hall: And that
seeing all the Conditions prescribed by the Emperor, which then could or ought
to be performed, were fulfilled; his Fine being paid; Duke Henry of Brunswick
and his Sons set at liberty; all the Letters of the Confederates delivered up;
the Nobility sworn, and the Obligation of the Sureties given; all the Ordnance
given up, and the Castles and Forts demolished; and that then seeing they
themselves were willing to be Hostages for him, till all the rest should be
performed, they could not but with great grief and sorrow of heart, look upon
this his sad fate and shameful captivity: for that when he went to Hall his
affairs were not in so desperate a condition, but that he might for some time
have kept out his Castles against the force of the Enemy; the truth of which
could be attested even by the Commissioners whom the Emperor sent afterward
into those parts; but that in compassion to the people, he had preferred Peace
before War: That it was therefore their most earnest desire, that they would
intercede wi^^ the Emperor, and use all endeavors that he might be set at
liberty and suffered to return home, since that if he should be longer
detained, it would extremely endanger his health. Now the more effectually to
solicit this affair, the Landgrave 's Wife came to Ausburg, and both her self
in person, and by the intervention of Duke Maurice and the Elector of
Brandenburg, solicited the Princes to interpose. When this came to the
Emperors knowledge, The Emperor's Excuse to the States concerning the
Captivity of the Landgrave.
before any intercession was made, November the 25th, he represents to the
States, that he heard what suggestions were made unto them; and that because
various Reports were spread abroad, and the Discourses of men were different,
he would give them a plain and true account of the whole matter. And in the
first place, said he, when last year the Confederate Protestants were encamped
near Giengen, the Landgrave sent Adam Trot, who by means of the Elector of
Brandenburg, might solicit his Peace; but he had this answer from me, That
there was no other terms to be expected, than that he should come in person,
and without any capitulation surrender himself to me. When he was returned home
after that flight, he made frequent applications to me by the mediation of Duke
Maurice, at several places, as Hailbrun, Ulm, Nordlingen and Egra, treating
only for himself, without any mention of John Frederick or the Confederates:
nay he continued to urge the same thing, when I was upon my march into Saxony.
To all this, I made answer to Duke Maurice, That because the Landgrave had
offended me so much and so often, no severity could satisfy me, unless he came
and presented himself in person, and delivered all his Castles and strong Holds
into my hands. But when the Duke of Saxony was taken, and that he saw the whole
stress of the War like to be turned against him, he came to Leipsick, and there
propounded some unsatisfactory Conditions. Duke Maurice and the Elector of
Brandenburg did intercede for him, indeed, and offered to be bound body for
body for him, that he should perform the Conditions; but thinking it base and
unjust, that they whom I had always found faithful and true to me, should put
themselves in danger for another man, I rejected that security, and demanded
his own person. Not long after, when the War of Saxony was over, and I had
repassed the Elbe, he left Leipsick, and sending one of his Nobles into the
Camp, by the mediation of Duke Maurice and Brandenburg, propounds these
Conditions, That he would without any limitation surrender himself unto me,
demolish his Castles, and deliver up all his Ordnance: He only desired that he
might be allowed to keep one of his Forts, either Zengheim or Cassel, and then
as many great Guns as might be sufficient for the defense of one place.
Thereupon Duke Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg desiring to know, that if
he so surrendered himself, what the effect of it would be, and how far it might
reach? they were fairly and ingenuously told, that he should suffer neither any
corporal punishment, be kept perpetual Prisoner, nor be farther fined, than was
agreed upon by the Articles of Pacification; but it was likewise added that the
Landgrave should not be made acquainted with this; which was also put in
writing in their presence: and no other hopes given at that time, as I think
they themselves can bear me witness. So then he came to Hall, and having made
his submission to me, the Elector of Brandenburg asked me, if I would not speak
with him, and give him my hand, as I had done to others whom I had received
into favor? I answered, That it was not fit I should do that, before he had
his full liberty. I afterward gave the Duke of Alva orders that he should
carry him to the Castle, and set a Guard over him. He invites Duke Maurice, the
Elector of Brandenburg, and the Landgrave, to Supper; and when afterward he
stopped him, a Dispute arose, and many words were exchanged. When this came to my
ears, the first question that I desired might be put as to that affair, was,
Whether or not they thought I did justly or unjustly, in keeping him Prisoner?
I plainly told them also, That rather than the sincerity of my words should be
made liable to any suspicion, I was content to set aside all the Treaty, and
suffer the Landgrave to return home; that so I might take the course with him I
intended. Then did Duke Maurice and Brandenburg confess, That I had done
nothing unjustly, and that they would maintain it, if any man should offer to
speak to the contrary: only they prayed and interceded, that his imprisonment
might not be too long. To this their Request, I made answer, That I would first
consider and see, whether or not he stood to his Promise, and performed his
Articles. But now, though I did believe he might fulfill the Conditions, yet it
is no slight matter that I have still to charge him with; for neither has he
produced the Papers, and discovered all the secrets of the Smalcaldick League,
as he promised, nor has he neither demolished his Castles as they ought to be;
and not long since too, he has tampered with his Keepers, that contrary to
their duty to me, they would obey him. This is the plain and naked truth of the
whole matter; which I thought fit to acquaint you with, for my own
Justification.

The very same day the States give Duke Maurice and the Elector of Brandenburg
an account of this Relation of the Emperors; The States acquaint Maurice and
Brandenburg with the Emperor's Relation.
whereunto they next day make answer, to this effect: That they now confess
what hitherto they had always done, that they had no cause to accuse or find
fault with the Emperor in this particular; but that nevertheless, they had had
several and private Negotiations with King Ferdinand, before he went home from
the Camp before Wittemberg, and with some of the Emperors Counselors, though
not many: and that perhaps through a slip of Tongue some mistake might have
happened, which they will not much contend about: That however it be, they had
for the preservation of the innocent Multitude, and that Germany might recover
its long wished for Peace, advised the Landgrave, when he had not the least
apprehension of Custody or Confinement, to come to Hall, beg the Emperors
Pardon, and accept of the Conditions of Peace. But now that he had lost his
liberty, and was still kept Prisoner, to the great danger of his health, was a
thing that no man but must see, did extremely reflect upon their Honor and
Reputation: That therefore they did most earnestly desire them, that they would
join with them in an Address to the Emperor, and beseech his Majesty, that it
would please him to have more regard to them who had faithfully served the
Empire, than to the Landgrave's Offense, and not to suffer them to be any
longer exposed to Obloquy and Censure, but to restore him to his liberty,
especially since all the Conditions were in a manner fulfilled, and that the
Emperor had most ample security for the performance of them to the least
title. So then an Intercession was made in the common name of all: and the
Landgrave 's Wife prevailed with the Lady Mary the Emperor's Sister, The
Emperor is not wrought upon by Intercessions.
to second it; but it was all in vain. And because Duke Maurice and the Elector
of Brandenburg said, that they had past their promise, and obliged themselves
by Bond to the Landgrave 's Sons, so long as he should be detained Prisoner;
the Emperor sent John de Lire to the Landgrave, De Lire sent to the Landgrave,
desires up all Obligatory Letters that he had.
who then was at Nordlingen, being removed thither lately by the Spaniards,
requiring him to deliver up all his Writings, and amongst the rest, also the
Letters of safe Conduct and obligation of Security. He told him, That they were
not in his keeping, but that his Sons and Counselors had them: That although
he should write to them, it would be to no purpose; for that they had told him
at parting that they would not deliver them up, before he were set at liberty:
That nevertheless, if he might have assurance from the Emperor of the time of
his enlargement, he would do what lay in his power to persuade them to deliver
all up. The Emperor dissatisfied with that Answer, shortly after removed his
Servants from him, allowing him but one or two at most.

About the latter end of November, Peter Martyr goes into England.
Peter Martyr, a Florentine, who had for five years with great applause taught
at Strasburg, went now with leave from the Senate into England, whither he had
been invited by the Archbishop of Canterbury in the King's Name, and was made
Professor of Divinity in Oxford. His Companion that went along with him was
Bernardine Ochino of Siena; who being in high esteem in Italy for his
Eloquence, and the opinion Men had of his Virtue, forsook his Monastic Life,
and embraced the Reformed Religion; and going first to Geneva, The Reformation
of the Church in England.
and from thence afterward to Ausburg, published some Sermons of his in print.
Much about this time King Henry's Laws about Religion, which we mentioned in
the twelfth Book, are by public Proclamation abolished all over England, and
Images and Pictures removed out of the Churches, The Cardinal of Trent's Speech
to the Pope in the Consistory of Cardinals.
which was the beginning of the Reformation there. On the ninth day of
December, the Cardinal of Trent discharged the Commission the Emperor had
entrusted him with, in a full Consistory of Cardinals, where the Pope himself
presided, representing in an elaborate Speech what Pains and Danger the
Emperor had undergone for the sake of the Council, and that now, through his
Diligence and Authority, Matters were brought to that pass, that all the States
were willing to obey and submit to its Decrees: That therefore by all that was
Sacred he besought the Pope, in name of the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and the
whole Empire, first, That he would order the Fathers at Bolonia to return to
Trent, there to perfect the Work begun, which was so very necessary for the
Public Good: next, That he would send a Legate or two into Germany, that with
their Advice and Counsel some Rules of Good-living might be established, until
the Council should be ended, and that the Clergy might be reformed: Lastly,
That he would also consider and determine, that if the Pope should happen to
die during the sitting of the Council, whether or not the power of Election
ought to lie in the Fathers of the Council, or in the Cardinals; lest if the
Case should happen, it might give occasion to new Commotions. Five days after
the Cardinal of Trent had had his Audience, The Speech of the Emperor's
Ambassador to the Pope.
James Mendoza, by Orders from the Emperor, spoke in the same Auditory to the
same purpose; and besides, That if the Pope did make any delay or excuse, he
said, he was commanded by his Master, to join with the Ambassadors of other
Kings and Princes, and openly protest against the Council. The very same day,
which was the fourteenth of December, the Archbishop of Rheims, who, as we said
already, was made Cardinal the Summer before, being by the French King sent to
Rome, makes an Harangue to the Pope and Cardinals. The Cardinal of Lorrain's
Harangue to the Pope.
In the beginning, he commends the late King Francis, that, amongst other his
Virtues, he was so tender of the Rights and Liberties even of other Princes,
that upon that account he never declined Danger nor Cost: That his Son King
Henry did in no ways degenerate from him in Manners and Inclination; who so
soon as he was seated on the Throne, and had performed his last Duty to his
deceased Father, had nothing more in his thoughts, than how to make appear his
Zeal and Duty toward the Sea of Rome, therein treading the Steps of his
Ancestors the Kings of France, who had given so many and illustrious Instances
of their Affection toward the Popes of Rome, that they were justly reckoned
the first, and went before all other Nations in that Character: And that since
now adays there was a Race of froward and saucy People sprung up, that opposed
and railed against the Majesty of that Place, it was a matter of greatest
moment, that at the same time a most potent King did, as it became the eldest
Son of the Church, and Chief Captain of Christian People, submit himself and
all he had to the same Church, for the maintenance and defense of whose Dignity
he was ready to employ and sacrifice all that was near and dear unto him: That
it was his greatest Wish, indeed, he might in Person have made this
Declaration, and beheld the most Sacred and August Countenance of his dearest
Father; but that he had been hitherto so taken up about many and various
Affairs, that he could neither come himself, nor sooner send another to do his
Duty for him: That they should therefore seriously weigh these things, and so
demean themselves, that the King his Master might be convinced of their Love
and Friendship; for that since Commonwealths subsisted by Reward and
Punishment, they ought to take care, that by Kindness and Favor they might
retain pious and good Princes in their Duty; but, on the other hand, so repress
the Insolence and Boldness of such as they knew did attempt either to lessen or
undermine their Dignity, that they should be made sensible, that the Sword
which God had put into their Hands, was not dulled nor blunted: That he would
not be so understood neither, as if he had any doubt of their Severity and
Prudence, or that he intended to raise in their Minds a Suspicion of any
Person; but that by exciting in them a laudable Emulation in Well-doing, the
King's Good Will toward them might be the more conspicuous: That by the Canons
it was provided, That so soon as the Popes of Rome were promoted to the Papacy,
they should send their Legates into France, for settling a Friendship betwixt
them; and that so likewise it had been the King's Resolution, upon his entry
into the Government, to dignifie this most holy See with the like reciprocal
Civility: That his Holiness, then, was desired to admit of the most Christian
King into the Bosom of the Church, from whom he might expect all Friendship and
Fidelity; and that after all, he would use his Endeavors that the Church
should receive no detriment: That he himself knew very well, from how small
Beginnings Factions had broke out of old, when no man set himself to it to
oppose the Attempts of ill men: That Instances of that might be seen in Pope
John XIII. in Gregory VII. in Paschal III. and many others, who fell into the
greatest Calamities, until the Popes that came after them, by the Assistance of
the Kings of France, recovered their lost Dignity; and amongst these, Alexander
III. who forced the Emperor Frederick of Suabia to accept a Peace, and
retrived the Liberty of the Church, and Rights of choosing the Pope. The French
King, who knew that the Pope was extremely vexed at the Murder of Pietro
Aloisio, and perceived that his Displeasure was heightened by the Translation of
the Council to Trent, The French King hunts after a fit occasion.
thought this a proper time to be laid hold on for his own Advantage:
Wherefore, by frequent Embassies sent to the Pope, and ample promises of his
Assistance, he encouraged and confirmed him in his Discontents.

When the Pope had heard the Demands of the Cardinal of Trent and Mendoza, The
Pope's Answer to the Cardinal of Trent and Mendoza.
he said, That he would advise with the Father that were at Bolonia, and
acquaint the rest of the Christian Princes with the Matter. Since the Cardinal
of Trent then could have no other Answer from him, he returned home, leaving
behind him Mendoza, to whom the Emperor had sent Orders to dispatch what
remained to be done. But the Pope on the sixteenth of December wrote to
Cardinal John Maria de Monte, The Pope's Letter to his Legate in the Council.
his Chief Legate in the Council, to this effect. The Cardinal of Trent, says
he, told me the other day in the Emperor's Name, how that all Germany had
submitted to the Council: Wherefore he demanded of me, in the Name of the
Emperor, King Ferdinand, and of the whole Empire, that I would take care that
the Council should be continued at Trent. The same thing James Mendoza also
demanded, in presence of the Ambassadors of other Princes whom he had invited
to join with him, and pressed that it might be done without delay; but having
communicated the matter to the Cardinals, I thought it proper to advise with
the Fathers of the Council, that nothing might be done rashly; and that the
Decrees already made, as well that of the Translation of the Council, as the
rest might remain inviolate. Seeing then I am very much concerned for the
Welfare of Germany, and for the Emperor's sake unwilling to make any delay, I
command you, that having implored the assistance of the Holy Ghost, you declare
the whole matter to the Fathers, and with all speed write me word what answer
you think fit to be given to the Emperor. The Cardinal de Monte, according to
his Instructions, brings the matter into the Council, and afterward writes
back to this purpose: The Legat's Answer to the Pope.
Although the Council of Trent was lawfully translated from Trent to Bolonia,
though all the Fathers had notice given them publicly in the Session, the day
that the Decree was made for the translation of the same, that they should
repair to Bolonia; and although he himself and the rest of the Fathers had
written to Trent, exhorting them lovingly to come to Bolonia, yet many remained
there still to this very day; which was a thing that tended to the contempt of
the Council, and gave offense to many. The Fathers therefore do not see how,
with the Dignity and Reputation of the Council, they can think of returning:
Let those who are at Trent, first come to Bolonia, join with the rest, and
acknowledge the Power of the Council. Again, it is necessary that the Fathers
have assurance given them that Germany will submit to the Council, and approve
the Decrees thereof, both which are already made, and which may be made
hereafter, so that they be cavilled at by no man. Besides, since there has been
a hot Report abroad, that it was to be a Popular Council, the Fathers desire
also to have assurance given them as to that first: for if that should take
place, all the order and method of Councils from the age of the Apostles, down
to this very time, would be inverted. They also desire to know how they are to
be secured, that they may live there with safety and freedom, and when they
think fit, depart thence without let or molestation. And lastly, that it is a
necessary Caution also, that they may have assurance given them, that when for
some reasons it may seem convenient to the major part to remove the Council,
they may have liberty to do so: as also when it shall appear that the reasons
for which the Council was called are satisfied, it may be free to the Fathers
to put an end to it and desist. That these were the things the Fathers, after
much Deliberation, and Invocation of the Holy Ghost, had to answer to his
Demands; which they entreated he would take in good part. When the Pope had
received this Letter, December the 27th, he sends for Mendoza the Emperor's
Ambassador, to the Consistory of Cardinals, acquaints him with what the
Council of Bolonia had answered, and assures him, That neither he nor the
College of Cardinals disliked their Opinion, The Pope's Answer to the
Emperor's Ambassador.
as being consonant to Right: That for his own part, there was nothing but what
he was willing to do for the sake of Germany; and in that he could appeal to
the Emperor's own Testimony: That he had omitted nothing which belonged to the
Office of a good Shepherd and most loving Father: That he saw indeed what it
was, that the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and the States of the Empire demanded;
but that still he thought they desired it so, as that it might consist with the
Good and Peace of all other Nations, and the Liberty of the Church. When
Mendoza perceived that the Pope took that Assembly at Bolonia for a Council, he
resolved to have protested against it upon the spot; but the Dean of the Sacred
College, Mendoza sends the Pope's Answer to the Emperor.
and some Cardinals interposing, he was persuaded to send that Answer to the
Emperor, wait for Instructions from him, and to put off the Protestation until
the 20th day. When Mendoza then wrote an account of the whole matter to the
Emperor, the Pope also on the first of January writes an Answer to the Letter
of the German Bishops, 1548.
which we mentioned before, wherein having commended them for their Piety, he
tells them, The Pope's Answer to the Bishops of Germany.
That they had good and lawful cause to be concerned for the Public, amidst
those Stirs of heretical and seditious men, for that he himself was extremely
affected thereat; and that because it was a matter which concerned his Pastoral
Office, it was continually in his thoughts, how to find a Remedy for it: That
for that reason also, so soon as he was promoted to the Pontificate, he had
betaken himself to the Refuge which they themselves mentioned, and of his own
accord had called a Council first at Mantua, and then at Vicenza; but seeing
that proved unsuccessful, he had pitched upon Trent, a Town on the very Borders
of Germany, whither they might come without danger: and that a War breaking
forth about the same time, which hindered free access to the place, though his
Legates had been already sent thither, he was necessarily obliged to defer the
matter till another opportunity, which happening by the Peace that was
afterward made, he had again called the Council, and acquainted all Princes
and States therewith by Letters: That though a year and more had intervened
betwixt that time and the last War, yet none of them came to it, nor indeed,
excepting one or two, sent their Deputies neither: for though perhaps, because
of the danger of neighboring Heretics, it was not fit they should have come
so far, and left their own charges at home; nevertheless they might have been
present by their Proxies, as he himself had dispensed with him in his Bulls:
That a great number of Bishops and other Prelates came to Trent, not only from
Italy, but from more distant Provinces also; and that by their unanimous and
harmonious consent, Decrees had past there, as well concerning Religion as
Discipline, wherein a great part of those wicked Doctrines that are maintained
by the Heretics of these times, are refuted and condemned; which was to him
indeed matter of great joy, and gave him cause not to dislike that place
wherein sat an Assembly so useful to the Christian World: Now that it was
removed from thence, it was done without his knowledge, and the news thereof
brought to him, before he suspected any such thing; but that there was no
doubt, that the Council had power to do so, and that therefore he did believe
they had a lawful cause for doing it, unless he were sure of the contrary: and
that thought some few had left the Council, yet it was not therefore divided;
for what the greater part did, was to be considered. That moreover, it was not
translated into a Town, which was either too far distant from Trent, or unsafe
and inconvenient; for that the interval was not too great, and then it was a
place highly commended, both for the wholsomness of the Air, and also for
plenty of all Provisions, and good Accommodation and Lodging: That that City,
as being under the Jurisdiction of the Church, ought not to seem the more
unsafe to Germany, which had received long ago not only the Christian Faith and
Religion from the Church, but many other Monuments also of Bounty and
Liberality: That besides, it was to be considered that the Neighboring Princes
and People were under the Emperor's Jurisdiction: That though this was the
case, yet he was not much concerned in what place chiefly the Council should be
held; but that if any other place were chosen by the common consent of the
Fathers, he should not oppose it, provided the Fathers might have their
freedom, and be under no constraint there: That the reason that was urged why
they desired and wished them to return to Trent, was, that the Germans might
come to the Council more willingly: That he commended, indeed, this desire and
endeavor of theirs, nor doubted he but that for their parts, they were not
very anxious about the place, but that they might know by the Letter of the
Fathers at Bolonia, what sort of Obstacles they were that lay in the way: That
the reason why he was so slow in answering them, was, that not long after he
had received their Letter, the Cardinal of Trent came to him from the Emperor;
and that seeing the Demands which both he and the Ambassador Mendoza made to
him, jumped exactly with their Letter, he did not think fit to answer them,
till he had first answered the Emperor: That since they had treated that
Affair with him not only privately, but also publicly, and often in the
Consistory of the Cardinals, he had by an Express sent and consulted the
Fathers assembled at Bolonia, and afterward communicated their Answer to
Mendoza, when the Cardinal of Trent was gone, a Copy of which Answer he now
sent them, that they might see what was first to be done, before there could be
any thought of returning: That therefore he prayed them to have regard to the
Peace of the Church, and come to Bolonia with the rest, either in Person, or
send their Proxies thither to continue the Council, or if the place should not
seem so fit, that they should there debate the matter with the rest of the
Fathers: That now in the close of their Letter they hinted, that it was to be
feared lest if he neglected his duty, other courses would be taken, he was not
at all moved thereat, seeing he had omitted no duty in that Station and Dignity
wherein God Almighty had placed him, as in a Watchtower, to take care of the
whole Flock, but especially of those who had gone astray from the rest: That
seeing nothing was wanting to him then, and that it was publicly known how
much he tendered the Welfare of Germany, he was the less apprehensive of any
Accident, but rested satisfied in the Conscience of his own Integrity and
honest Endeavors: That as for themselves, and the Emperor, of whose Constancy
and Sincerity there was no doubt to be made, he thought they would do nothing
rashly: That yet it was not in his power to hinder, but that other things might
be done, and new designs hatched against the Authority of the Sea of Rome;
seeing when Christ himself the Architect laid the foundation of that Church, he
foretold Storms and Tempests to come; but that he did not at all fear that such
Attempts would prove successful, or that any gust of Wind could overturn the
Fabric built by Christ, because it stood upon a most firm Rock: That that had
been oftener than once attempted by others heretofore, but that their designs
being disappointed, God had made an example of them visible to all men, as both
ancient and modern Histories made appear: That if there were any, then, at
present, who were not moved nor terrified by the Calamities and Judgments of
others which they had before their eyes, he heartily pitied their condition,
and chiefly for the Miseries that were hanging over their heads: But to
conclude, that he earnestly exhorted and required them to persevere in that
Religion and Fidelity which they had always professed, and not suffer those
Councils which were consistent with the Dignity of the Church, to have any
place in their Assemblies.

The Pope and Synods of Bolonia persisting then in their resolution, The
Emperor's Ambassadors sent to Bolonia.
the Emperor's Ambassadors Francisco de Vargas and Martino Velasco, who had
been purposely sent to Bolonia, having desired Audience of the Council, January
the 16th, came into the Session. There were at that time present the Cardinal
de Monte, and about forty Bishops and other Prelates: Then de Vargas read the
Credentials granted by the Emperor to him and his Colleague, whereby he
empowered them to act, and so was about to speak; but the Cardinal de Monte
interrupting; told him, The Pope's Legate to the Emperor's Ambassador.
That in those Credentials, the Emperor called them not the Council, but the
Convention at Bolonia: And though, said he, this Congregation be not obliged to
hear any Speech from you, inasmuch as the Commission exhibited does not relate
to this holy Council, yet that no man may have any cause to complain, we do not
refuse to hear you, but upon this condition, that it be without Prejudice to
us, or advantage to you; and that it may be lawful for us still to continue the
Council, and proceed to sentence against those who are contumacious and
refractory, and to inflict such punishments upon them as are appointed by the
Canons of the Church. After that de Vargas the Emperor's Ambassador, protests
that it may be entered into the public Act, that he was hindered from speaking
first, De Vargas, the Emperor's Ambassador, his Speech to the Fathers.
and then goes on in this manner: Since you have seen, said he, the Emperor's
Credential Letters, I Will now tell you what our Instructions are. We come hither
before you to treat of a matter of greatest importance, and not only we, but
all Christendom also, with earnest Prayers do beg and beseech you, that you
would do therein what is reasonable; for all men are of opinion, that if you
too obstinately persist in a Resolution, which you have too rashly once
undertaken, it will prove very fatal to the Public; but that if you desist,
and comply with the Emperor, all will be well: and that this may be understood
by all men, we will trace the matter a little more backwards; for so it will
plainly appear both how foully you will err, if you change not your mind, and
also how laudably the Emperor stands affected toward the public Concern of
Christendom: and herein we shall not speak one word of our own heads, but stick
close to the Orders we have received. The sawciness of the Cardinal de Monte.
Here the Cardinal de Monte again interrupting him, I am here, said he,
President of this Sacred Council, the Legate of Paul III. Successor to St.
Peter, and the Vicar of Christ upon Earth, and here are these most holy Fathers
to proceed in the Couneil lawfully translated from Trent, to the Glory of God,
and Salvation of Mankind. Wherefore we beseech the Emperor, that he would
change his Resolution, and herein assist us, by restraining the Disturbers of
the Council: for he is not ignorant that they who hinder or obstruct Holy
Councils, whoever they be, are liable to the severest Penalties imposed by the
Canons; but happen what will, and whatsoever terrors are threatened, yet will
we not abandon the Honor and Dignity of the Church and Council, nor our own
neither. The form of the Protestation against the Council.
When de Vargas had then openly read their Commission, his Colleague Velasco
read the Protestation. It began with an account, How the Emperor being
earnestly pressed by the Germans, had often importuned Pope Leo, Adrian,
Clement, and lastly Paul III to call a Council: How that Paul III. had called
one first at Mantua, then at Nicenza, and lastly, when it could not be had in
those places, at Trent, with consent of the Emperor and the rest of the
States, because it was a place very commodious for the Italians, Spaniards,
French and Germans, and not destitute of Provisions and other Necessaries: That
when this place was then chosen for holding the Council, the Pope, says he,
sent thither his Legates the Cardinals Parisio, Mocono, and Pool; as likewise
the Bishop of Arras, his Father Granvell and Mendoza, came from the Emperor;
but when neither that seemed to the Pope to be a time fit enough, the matter
was delayed, and new Legatees sent from Rome, the Cardinals de Monte, Santamore
and Pool, and from the Emperor the same Mendoza and Francisco de Toledo: The
Ambassadors of other Princes came also, and People from all hands flocked in
great numbers to Trent. Now at the same time the Emperor had Arms in Germany
chiefly for the defense and propagation of Religion, that whom he could not
persuade, he might compel: And when by his prosperous success in the War, he
had brought into the way again those who had slighted the Council, you who take
to your selves the Title of Legates of the Sea of Rome, suddenly, and without
acquainting the Pope, as you your selves say, for I know not what pretended
cause, propose the translation of the Council, and scarcely allowing time for
consultation, break up in a hurry, and depart from Trent, contrary to the
advice and consent of many excellent and virtuos Fathers, who said it was an
unreasonable removal, and that they would not stir from Trent. In the mean time
the Emperor marching into Saxony, overcame the Enemy at the Elb, and took the
two Heads and Generals of the War; and nevertheless, both before and after the
War, he often solicited the Pope by Letters and Messengers, that he would
order the Fathers to return from Bolonia to Trent; for that it was very
dangerous if it should be otherwise. Afterward he called a Diet at Ausburg,
wherein at the Emperor's request all the Princes and States, with great
consent, approved the Council of Trent, and promised, without any Condition, to
obey it. When he had obtained that, he presently sent the Cardinal of Trent to
Rome, to acquaint the Pope and College of Cardinals therewith, and in name of
the whole Empire to demand the continuation of the Council at Trent. He ordered
Mendoza also to do the same: but the Pope took time to consider of it, and
having thought fit to consult you about the matter, obtained from you a
dubious, crafty, and captious Answer. Besides, he answers the Emperor oddly,
and shows sufficiently by his tergiversation, that he is little concerned for
the Public: for the cause of the removal ought to have been proved by credible
Witnesses. The Emperor, King Ferdinand, and the Princes, by Letters and most
ample Embassies, declared what the mind of the States was concerning the
Council; but the Pope believed and preferred the Report of some mean and base
People, before the Testimony of all these. How many tedious and irksome
Journeys has the Emperor made upon the account of the Council? What Charges
and Expenses has he been at? And must all these be lost? For most weighty and
necessary causes was the Council both called and begun at Trent, the Emperor
and Germans demanding it, and all other Christian Princes consenting thereunto;
so that unless the public Authority of all States intervene, it cannot be
translated to another place: for indeed there was no cause for the Translation,
only something invented for an excuse, as some slight Fever, and badness of
Air, forsooth; and for that purpose some Physicians were suborned, but chiefly
Serving-Maids and Cooks. Now what a trifling cause that was, the thing it self,
and the event, declared. You say, that you went away without the Pope's
knowledge and advice; but the Letter he wrote to you, and the Answer he gave
the Emperor, imply the quite contrary. Certainly you ought not to have
departed, nor changed the place, but with consent of the Emperor, to whom it
belongs to protect all Councils; but you posted away in so much haste, that ye
rejected the Opinion of those who said, that the Emperor and Pope ought first
to be consulted. Now if you must needs have been removing, ye ought to have
observed at least the Decrees of the Holy Councils, and remained within the
bounds of Germany, that the Germans, for whose cause chiefly the Council was
called, might safely come to it: but now ye have chosen Bolonia, a Town seated
in the heart of Italy, and under the Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome,
whither it is certain the Germans will not come; and therefore have you chosen
it, that to the great prejudice and disgrace of Christendom, the Council may be
either dissolved, or managed at your pleasure. The Emperor therefore
requires, and that most earnestly, that you return to that place which pleased
all before, especially since all things are now safe and quiet, and no more
cause of any fear remains. But if this you refuse, I do here in the name, and
by command of the Emperor, protest against this Translation of the Council, as
frivolous and unlawful, and that all that has been done or shall be done
therein, is of no force nor effect. I also publicly declare, That that Answer
of yours is silly and full of Lies, and that the prejudice and inconveniences
which hereafter shall ensue to the Public, are not to be imputed to the
Emperor, but to you, affirming withal, that you have no Power nor Authority to
remove the Council: And because you neglect the public Welfare, the Emperor,
as Protector of the Church, will take the care of that upon himself, in so far
as it is lawful for him by Law, and the Canons of Holy Church. When he had read
over that Protestation, he delivered a written Copy of it, and desired it to be
entered upon Record. With that the Cardinal de Monte having highly commended
the pious intentions of the Fathers, called God to witness, that they had wrong
done them, saying, They were ready to suffer death, rather than that such a
practice should be brought into the Church, that the Civil Magistrate might
call or control a Council when and how he pleased. That the Emperor was
indeed a Son of the Church, but not the Lord and Master: That he and his
Colleagues were the Legates of the Apostolic See, and did not refuse even then
to render first to God, and then to the Pope, an account of their Commission:
That after all, within a few days they should have an Answer to their
Protestation. Much about the same time Mendoza having received Instructions
from the Emperor, made a Protestantion to the same effect at Rome, before the
Pope and College of Cardinals, and in presence of all the Foreign
Ambassadors, whom, according to his Instructions, he had invited to be
Witnesses of it.

THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH.
BOOK XX.
THE CONTENTS.
In the beginning it is hotly disputed, whether Prussia belong to the King of
Poland, or rather to the Empire. The Pope makes a large Answer to the Harangue
that Mendoza made before. The Emperor being informed of that, and seeing but
very little hopes of a Council, causes the Book, which is called the Interim,
to be made. The Protector of England in a very long Letter to the Scots
counsels them to Peace, and demands their Queen. Vogelsberg is beheaded. The
Emperor invests Duke Maurice in the Electorship, which he had bestowed upon
him in the Camp before Wittemberg. Bucer refuses to subscribe to the Interim:
The Pope also publishes a Censure of it: which many of the Electors and Princes
also did; and many refuse it, though it was published by the Emperor. The Duke
of Saxony, though a Prisoner, with great magnanimity rejects it. The Landgrave,
by Letters which were published from the Emperors Court, seems to approve it,
that he may obtain his freedom. Whilst the Mass is abolished in England by Act
of Parliament, the free Towns of Germany are solicited to accept of the
Interim, and especially Strasburg, which is pressed by Threats to do it.

WE have shown in the former Books, that Marquess Albert of Brandenburg did
Homage to the King of Poland, and altered the Government of Prussia, for which
he was Outlawed by the Imperial Chamber: As also, that the King of Poland had
several times solicited the Emperor and rest of the States, in the Public
Diets, to reverse that Outlawry, because he was his Vassal and under his
Protection: But since to this day nothing could be obtained, and that by this
Victory of the Emperors, The King of Polands Embassy in behalf of Albert of
Brandenburg.
some greater danger seemed to be threatened; the King of Poland sends an
Embassy to this Diet, whereof the chief was Stanislaus Alaski. He in the month
of January delivered to the Emperor and College of the Princes, a Speech in
Writing, whereof the substance was: That the Cause of Prussia had been some
times already debated, The Harangue of the Polish Ambassador in the Diet of
Ausburg.
but because it had been always put off to other Diets, he was commanded to
open it again; that the King was in good hopes, because of the civil Answers he
had often received from them, and of the equity of his Cause, they would
Consider his Affair; yet not as Judges, but as Honorable and Worthy Prince.
The Institution of the Teutonick Order.
And in the first place, says he, for clearing of the matter, I am to speak
some things of the Prutenick Order. The Kings of Poland made over a good part
of Prussia to this Order, which is commonly called the Teutonick Order, upon
condition, that they would serve them in the Wars against Infidels and the
Enemies of Christendom: But they, having most ungratefully rebelled, turned
their Arms against their own Sovereigns: So that many times they had Wars
together, and many times in Treaties the Conditions were renewed, which, by
reason of their antiquity, it is to no purpose to relate: And I shall only
mention that, which happened almost in our memory.

King Casimire, Casimire King of Poland subdues the Teutonicks.
the Father of Sigismund, having overcome them in a great Battle, forced them
to accept of Conditions of Peace. Amongst other things, it was agreed upon at
that time, that, for the future, they should acknowledge the King of Poland for
their chief Magistrate, and swear Allegiance unto him. But there were some
Masters of that Order afterward, who violated the Conditions, and put
themselves under the Protection of others. Albert of Brandenburg refuses to do
Homage to the King of Poland.
Amongst these was Albert of Brandenburg for one, who, being by his Tenure
obliged to do Homage to the King his Uncle within six months, refused to do it;
so that the King, who was a great lover of peace, was forced to make War
against him. And though it never came to a pitched Battle betwixt them, yet much
mischief was done by Inrodes, plundering, burning of Houses, and smaller
skirmishes; in so much, that Albert being overpowred, came to make a Truce with
the King. At the very same time, some forces came to his assistance out of
Germany; which made him depart without concluding any thing, and begin the War
again afresh: But being forsaken of them not long after, he was now forced to
do in good earnest, what he had only pretended to do before, that he might
obtain a Peace. So that by the mediation of some, Peace was at length
concluded, upon these Conditions, That he should swear Allegiance to the King,
Albert makes Peace with the King of Poland.
and perform all those things, that a true and faithful Vassal ought to do to
his Liege Lord. It is certain, then, That Prussia has, time out of mind, and
ever since the Christian Religion was planted there, both by the Law of Arms,
and by Mutual Compacts and Agreements, belonged to the Crown of Poland; for if
any others have claimed right to it, that has been done by the Insolence and
Injustice of the Masters of the Order; who being, by the permission of our
Kings, Natives of Germany, have often attempted to bring Prussia under the
Dominion of Strangers, which has occasioned many broils and quarrels betwixt
the Poles and Germans, and was the cause of the Decree whereby Albert stands
proscribed; But what power had they, who proscribed him, over the Vassal of
another? For that he did not appear in Judgment, when he was cited by those who
were not competent Judges, he did so by the Kings Command, on whom the whole
blame is to be laid, if any there be: Now if he be outlawed for acknowledging
the King to be his chief Magistrate; it is really very unjust, that a Man
should be punished for doing his Duty: Wherefore it is the earnest Suit of the
King my Master to you, most Triumphant Emperor, and most Noble States, that
that unjust and unlawful Decree of Proscription may be abolished. Nor is it to
be thought, that the King out of any ambitious or covetous design intends to
enlarge his Dominions by the accession of Prussia: For how can he be suspected
of any such thing, who has refused most ample Provinces offered unto him? And,
indeed, he values not this Country so much, but that, if he could do it with
his Honor, he could easily dispense with it; but since it properly belongs to
his Dominions, as it has been already often made out, he can do no otherwise;
for that there have been frequent strifes and contentions about it, it has
been always the fault of the Masters of the Order, as has been said, whom God
failed not, now and then, to punish for their Audacious Crimes. Your
Grandfather Maximilian, most mighty Emperor, and King Ferdinand, knew this
very well, who being mindful of the injuries, which both he and his Father
Frederick had received from them, made a solemn promise to King Sigismund, when
they had an Interview at Vienna; and this Promise he made too, both in his own
and your Names, that he would never give any assistance to that Order. Now
Maximilian in this did no new thing, but therein followed the footsteps of his
Ancestors; for both Sigismund the Emperor, in an Interview with Ladislaus my
Masters Grandfather, promised not only as much, but also to give assistance
against them; and your Great Grandfather Frederick the Emperor joined Forces
and Arms with Casimire the Father of King Sigismund, against Matthias King of
Hungary, and the Order we now speak of, who were at that time Confederates. And
though King Casimire, being entangled in the War of this Order, could not send
Auxiliaries to the Emperor Frederick, yet he supplied him with the Money that
he owed him by virtue of their League and Agreement. So that it plainly
appears, that this Order has been always an Enemy to the House of Austria,
which has ever been most closely united to Poland by the Bonds of Leagues and
Alliances; and that King Sigismund now refers to your serious Consideration.
For if there be any of that Order, that look upon themselves as bound to fight
for the Christian Religion, there is nothing for them to do in Prussia; since
all Neighboring States profess the Faith of Christ. They are to look for other
places then, where they may employ themselves; and indeed Jerusalem for some
Ages now has been in the possession of a harbarous Enemy, for the defense of
which place, this Order is said to have been instituted: Constantinople also is
in the hands of the same People: Here is work enough cut out for them, if they
have a mind to be doing. Or, if they think the pretension too old, and the
place too far distant, there have been many strong Holds of Christendom lately
taken, why do not the Order march thither, that either they may regain what is
lost, or defend what remains from the Enemy? But if they delight more in Civil
War, any Man may then judge, how ill they deserve their Name. This, indeed, is
the Case, It is an Order that has always been out of order. And therefore they
were not only driven out of Prussia, but, an hundred years ago, out of Bohemia
also; nor has any Man as yet sued for a Donation of those places in Bohemia
out of which they were expulsed, as being public and vacant: Poland alone is
thought fit to be molested that way, whereas it ought most of all to have been
favored; for, though that Order is offensive to many, yet none has suffered so
much from it, as Poland does: Because, excepting some few, and those too the
first Masters, hardly any of the rest ever did their Duty: Nay, for the most
part, letting the Barbarians alone, they turned their Arms against their own
Sovereign, the King of Poland: And not only so, but they Negotiated also a
League with the Tartars, a cruel sort of Men, and implacable Enemies to the
Christians, as it is reported of Michael Cochmester. So that if one should
reckon up the Labors, Perils, Charges, Wars, Tumults, Battles, Slaughters and
Desolations, that this Order, above all others, has been the cause of, he will
find it to be hardly worth so much. Now it is the Kings desire, that, once for
all, an end may be put to these Evils; for if any make War against Albert Duke
of Prussia, the King cannot sit still and see him wronged, because he is both
his Uncle and Patron. The threatenings of some fly about, and are brought to
the Kings Ears, and he is very much troubled thereat, for he loves peace and
quietness, and above all, the Concord of Christendom: However, if any offer
Violence, it will be against his will, indeed, to take up Arms, but for all
that, he will do it for the defense of him and his. He desires the friendship
of all Princes, but yours especially, most mighty Emperor, and King Ferdinand,
and wishes it may be perpetual; therefore he has often interceded with you by
Letters and Messengers, that the Decree of Proscription against Albert might be
recalled: And that it has not as yet been done, he imputes it not so much to
you, as to the troublesome times: But now, that all rubs and impediments are
removed out of your way, he thinks it is now in your power to accomplish what
sometimes you generously promised; when in more Letters than one you assured
him, that you wanted ability rather than good will to gratify his desires. Now
in case the Order will not be quiet, but raise Stirs and War, he is very
confident that you will observe the Articles and Compacts of your Predecessors,
the Emperors, Maximilian and Frederick. One thing more I have in my
Instructions, and that concerns the Cities of Dantzick and Elwang. Though these
are under the Dominion of Poland, yet are they called to the Diets of the
Empire; the King therefore desires, that no such thing may be done for the
future, and since no Man, but he, has any right to them, that henceforward
they may be suffered to enjoy their own Laws. When the Emperor had heard his
Demands, he made a Report of them to the Diet of the Empire, The Master of
Prussia's Answer to the Speech of the Polish Ambassador.
and gave a Copy of the Speech to Wolfgang, Master of Prussia; who, January the
Twenty third, made an Answer to it in the vulgar Language; and having begun
with a little Preface: The Hinge of the whole Controversy turns upon this,
says he, Whether Prussia belong to the Dominion of Poland or to the Empire?
and if I make out the last, the decision will be very easy. The State of the
Case then, most Triumphant Emperor, most Potent King, most Noble Princes and
States, is thus, as I am about to show you.

About four hundred years since, when a public War was undertaken against the
Barbarians, The Original of the Tuetenick Order.
who exceedingly distressed those of our Religion in Asia and Africa, the Order
we now speak of was instituted, by Emperors afterward bountifully endowed, and
by Popes confirmed. The Knights of that Order, for some years after, sustained
most difficult and dangerous Wars in those parts for the good of Christendom;
but, at length having received a great overthrow, they were scattered and
dispersed into several places. It happened about that time, that Conrade Duke
of Muscovy was sadly put to it by the Prussians, Conrade Duke of Muscovy
afflicted by the Prussians.
who were then Enemies to the Christian Religion; He, being unable to defend
himself any longer against them, implored first the Pope of Rome, that, as the
Custom was, he would publish a Croisadoe, and by promises of Heavenly Rewards
encourage Men to become Soldiers: Then next he joined to himself this Order of
mine, bestowing upon them all the Country of Culm, bordering upon Prussia; and
the more to excite them, afterward all Prussia it self. The Emperor Frederick
II. confirmed this Donation, and made a promise to Horman Salcie then Master of
the Order, That if he would make War against the Prussians, and overcome them,
their Land should be his for ever. This was in the year 1226. so that my Order
having by the help of the Emperors, Popes, and Princes of the Empire carried
on a continual War against the Prussians, for almost filty three years, at
length they subdued Prussia, and converted it to the Christian Religion,
Prussia converted to the Christian Religion.
adorning it with some Bishoprics and Colleges, and strengthening it by
Castles and Towns, which they built, that for the future, that Country might be
as a Wall and Bariere to the Empire, and a Sanctuary for the Nobility of
Germany. Thus one part of that Country continued in our hands, until the year
1450. and the other till the time of Albert of Brandenburg. When in process of
time afterward, the Lithuanians, joining with the Tartars, made War against
the Poles and Muscovites, our Knights, being mindful of their Order and
Institution, took Arms, totally routed the Lithuanians, and invaded their
Country. So that we had a lasting Peace and Amity with the Poles, until a
certain Prince of Lithuania was chosen King of Poland. He, to revenge the loss
and affront that his Country had received, suddenly set upon us, and with the
Assistance of the Barbarians did us much hurt: But being by our Men forced to
retreat, and stripped of a considerable part of his own Dominions, he made but an
unlucky end of the War, so that he preferred his Grievances to the Council of
Constance; whereupon a Decree was made, That our Order should restore that part
of Poland, which they held by the Law of Arms. Having in this manner recovered
what he had lost, he forgot the kindness that was done him, and renewed the
War, pretending that some Provinces of our Order belonged to the Dominion of
Poland. And though by the Mediation of the Kings of Hungary and Bohemia the
matter was taken up, yet the sore broke out again, and at length the Cause was
brought before Sigismund the Emperor, who approved the former Composition that
was made by the two Kings. However the King of Poland could not rest thus, but
raised another War, which lasted till twenty four years after; in the Reign of
Lad^slaus, it was made an end of at Torn. In which Pacification, he quits all
Claim and Title, calls not himself Lord or Inheritor of Prussia; and obliges
all his Successors, that within a year after they come to the Crown, they swear
to Ratify that Peace, A Pacification betwixt the King of Poland and Matter of
Prussia.
make the Bishops and other States of the Kingdom take the same Oath, and that
every tenth year the same be renewed. It was then also Stipulated, that if
thenceforward any King of Poland should wage War against the Masters of
Prussia, his Subjects should not be obliged to obey or aid him, but that they
should mutually entertain a perpetual Peace. And this same Pacification was
sealed with about two hundred Seals, as it may be made appear; nevertheless
that peace lasted not above fourteen years. For in the year 1450, the People
rebelled and conspired against the Master, and although the Pope
Excommunicated, The King of Poland takes 70 Towns from the Master of Prussia.
and the Emperor Frederick the Third Proscribed them; although the Master was
willing to submit to a fair Trial, yet they were so far from being reclaimed,
that about seventy Towns and Castles made a desertion in one day: Casimire King
of Poland, the Father of Sigismund, struck in with this Conspiracy, and reduced
us to such streights, that Lewis Erlinsuse, who was then Master of the Order,
forced by fear of the present danger, which may affect even the stoutest of
Men, that he might both retain the Province, and live securely therein,
Capitulated with him upon most unreasonable Conditions, without the Authority
of Pope, Emperor, The Articles of the Peace betwixt Casimire King of Poland
and the Master of Prussia.
or States of the Empire. Amongst others, these are the Conditions of this
Peace, That henceforward the Masters of Prussia, within six months after they
enter into the Government, shall come to the King of Poland, and by Oath
acknowledge him for their Sovereign, whom they shall aid and assist against all
Men: That they shall receive Poles as well as Germans into their Order, and
admit them to Perferments, and that what Lands and Possessions they shall
acquire for the future, the same they shall hold in fee of the King of Poland.
Now these are Conditions, which tend not only to the private loss and prejudice
of my Order, but also to the public detriment and disgrace of the Empire and
Nobility of Germany. And therefore there have been Masters since, who,
perceiving the injustice of the thing, made sad Complaints of it to the Popes
and Emperors, but, for all that, they have been forced to Swear. And Prussia
continued indeed, in Vassalage to the Empire, until Frederick Duke of Saxony,
and Marquess Albert of Brandenburg became Masters of the Order. How long
Prussia continued under the Empire.
For these would not swear Allegiance to the Kings of Poland, because that
neither the Pope nor Emperor had ratified that Transaction of Casimire's: and
that in the year 1500, the Emperor Maximilian, by a Decree made in the Diet of
Ausburg, commanded them to do Homage only to the Empire. And when afterward for
settling the Controversy, Maximilian had appointed a Meeting at Passaw, in the
year 1510. whither Ambassadors were sent, yet nothing could be concluded;
whence this last War arose; besides Albert himself was four and twenty years
since at the Diet of Norimberg, where he took his place amongst others as a
Prince of the Empire, and signed the Decree that past there. It is manifest
then, that neither the King of Poland had any right to Prussia, nor Albert any
color of Law to do Homage and Swear Allegiance to him. Now whereas the
Ambassador reproacheth my Order with ingratitude and breach of Treaties, he
does us an injury, and it may be made out by Authentic Records, that the King
of Poland seldom or never kept faith to us. Was there ever any public
Instrument seen, to which more Seals were put, than that which was made with
King Ladislaus? Can greater security be given? And nevertheless, that Writing
being cancelled, and the Seals broken, the War was again renewed against us:
and this was the Thanks we had, for restoring unto them Tartary and a good part
of Lithuania. He names some Emperors of former times, who, he says, were
offended with my Order; but the matter is far otherwise. For Sigismund not only
determined the Controversy, and judged in our favors, as was said a little
before, but also sent us Aids against our Enemy. Then again, Frederick, at that
time when the People rebelled, as we have already mentioned, showed us not only
all friendship and favor, but also proscribed the Conspirators, and for that
end held a Diet of the Empire at Norimberg, in which Diet, a Decree past for
sending us Succors. The same were the good Intentions of Maximilian toward
us; for neither would he have us to swear Allegiance to the King of Poland; but
sent several Letters upon that account to King Sigismund, both in his own Name,
and Name of the Empire, and made then an Honorable Decree in our Favors. The
Orator goes on, and in a facetious manner plays upon us; asking, Why we do not
recover Jerusalem, and such other places? I am not so wholly a Stranger to
Affairs, but that I could could retort many things upon him; but in Reverence
to this August Assembly I forbear, and shall only ask one Question again of
him; First, Why the King of Poland does not recover the places, which some
years ago the Duke of Muscovy took from him? and which are as large in extent,
as all Prussia is: And then, why in this his prosperous fortune, he defends not
his borders against those daily incursions of the Tartars? These now are
punishments for his breach of faith. He says, that heretofore our whole Order
was driven out of Bohemia: What reason he had to allege that, I cannot tell,
unless he intended to prove by Example, that it was lawful to rob and spoil us
also of our Lands and Possessions. For the Calamity of that time reached not
only our Order, but also overspread all Bohemia, plagueing those chiefly who
adhered to the Religion of their Forefathers, when grievous troubles arose
about the Doctrine of John Huss. My Order, I confess, have had Wars with the
Kings of Poland, but that they were the Causes of the War, I utterly deny: Nor
did they ever take up Arms, unless it were to defend or recover their own
Right. He says, we made a League with the Tartars, but that had more truly
been said of themselves; it being notoriously known, that they have made use of
their helps against those that professed the Christian Religion: Besides, it
may be easily gathered from the situation of the Countries, whether, by reason
of propinquity, the Tartars are more for their turns, or ours. Lastly, what he
says of Dantzick and Elwang, has no reason to support it; for both are Cities
within our Jurisdiction, and belong to the Empire of Germany, nor has the King
of Poland any other Right or Title to them, but what he has made to himself by
the treachery and desertion of the Citizens, as might be made out by many
proofs. Wherefore, in consideration of all these things, I humbly beg, most
Triumphant Emperor, most Powerful King, and most Noble States, that the
Sentence already pronounced may be put in execution. For the Justice of the
Cause, the Dignity of the Empire, the State of Religion, and the Honor and
Profit of the Nobility of Germany, all these things, I say, ought and do plead
for this at your Hands.

The Ambassador of Poland had, indeed, prepared a Reply to this Speech, but
did not give it in; for the Reasons of both Parties being heard, a Committee
out of the whole Diet was chosen to consider of the Matter. The Result of their
Deliberation was, That the Sentence past against Albert should stand good; but
nevertheless, because they saw, that it would prove a most difficult Business
to put it in execution, they refer the whole Matter to the Emperor. Some time
after King Sigismund died at a great Age, after he had Reigned Two and forty
years. The death of Sigismund King of Poland.
Casimire, as has been said, was his Father. He had three Brothers, of whom
Ladislaus was King of Hungary and Bohemia, the Father of King Louis and Anne;
John, Albert, and Alexander having successively Reigned after their Father
Casimire, died without Children, and left the Government to their youngest
Brother Sigismund; to whom succeeded his Son of the same Name, and Son in Law
to Ferdinand King of the Romans.

It has been said in the former Book, that Mendoza protested against the
Council at Rome. To that, the Pope, having called a Consistory of Cardinals
February the first, The Popes haughty Speech to the Emperors Ambassador.
made this Answer. When you told Us, said he, my Lord Ambassador, that you had
Orders from the Emperor, to protest against the Council, you struck us all
with great grief: But when afterward we diligently considered your Commission,
we took heart again; and first, I will say somewhat to the cause of our Grief.
And it is, because that kind of protesting is a thing of bad Example, made use
of chiefly by those, who have either wholly shaken off their Obedience, or have
begun to waver in it. Wherefore it grieved me exceedingly, who have always born
a Fatherly Love toward the Emperor, and, as it becomes the Pastor of the
Church, studied Peace and Concord. And it grieved both me and the College of
Cardinals the more, that at this time, it was the thing we least expected;
since the Emperor when he made War against his and the Churches Enemies, had
Aid and Assistance from me. And though, my Lord Ambassador, you seem to make
but small account of this, yet it ought to be reckoned as a singular favor:
For the Aid, I sent, was very great, so as it even exceeded the reach of the
Apostolical Chamber, and came besides in a most seasonable time. What could
have been less expected then, than that after a Victory, and lately obtained
too, the Emperor should render unto me such fruits of his Faith and
Benevolence? Such, I say, as that the end of the War should be the beginning of
protesting against me. I have now found by Experience, what the Prophet
complains of, That I looked for good Grapes, but found none but sower Grapes.
From my entrance into the Popedom, I have, with much care, cherished the
Emperor, as a most noble Plant, that some time or other I might reap a most
plentiful Vintage; but this attempt of his has made me almost despair of any
fruit. You have heard the cause of our Grief, now you shall know what it is
that has given us Comfort. The Pope taxes Mendoza as having transgressed his
Commission.
You have used that Authority, which, you think, has been given you, of
protesting against me and this sacred College, in a manner as was neither
Honorable to us, nor becoming the Character of the Emperor: But in your
Letters of Instructions there is not one word, which shows it to have been the
Emperors will, that you should have acted so: I say, not one word, that you
may the better understand me, that gives you power to do so. The Emperor,
indeed, Commands his Agents at Bolonia, that they should so protest before our
Legates there, who changed the place of the Council; and when you found that
that was done there, you would needs use the same form of Protestation here
with us; but in that you have transgressed the bounds of your Commission. If,
my Lord Ambassador, you were not sensible of that before, take now Admonition
and acknowledge it. For the Emperor's Orders are, not that you should protest
against us, but that you should do it in this our Consistory, against the
Legates, who were the Authors of the Translation* Wherefore the Emperor in that
did the Duty of a most modest Prince, who confined himself within those limits,
and would have that Protestation to be made before me, whom he knew to be the
only lawful Judge of the whole Matter. Had I, indeed, refused to take
cognizance of the Affair, then would he have had a cause of Protestation; but
you, taking another course than you ought to have done, made no application to
me, that I should examine the Matter, but made use of a certain Prejudice,
demanding, that I should annul the Decree made for translating the Council, and
enjoin the greatest part of the Fathers to give place to a few, who remained at
Trent. And what could more enervate all the Authority of the Council, than
that? Had it not been much more reasonable, that if the small number which is
at Trent had had any cause of Complaint against the rest, who are at Bolonia,
they should have brought it before me: I would not then, truly, have rejected
their demands, nor would I neither now reject them* Since, then, it is certain,
that your way of acting is not consonant to the Emperors Intentions, we have
cause to thank God, who thus disposes his Mind and Purposes; we have cause to
Congratulate, and you also to Rejoice, in your Princes behalf. And though by
what we have said, the foundation of your Plea and Proceeding is wholly
overturned, so that there is no need of making Answer to your Protestation;
nevertheless, that I may not by my silence seem to acknowledge the truth of
your Accusations, and thereby offend many, especially the weaker sort, I will
refute them severally. And in the first place, therefore, You seem to have
proposed this Scope to your self, that you may expose me as negligent, a
Shuffler, and Starter of Delays, to baffle the sitting of the Council, and make
the Emperor appear on the other hand, to be a vigilant and active Prince,
sollicitous for the public good, and wholly bent upon the sitting of the
Council. Truly, I do not, nor ought I, envy the Emperors Praises; and had you
stopped there, and gone no farther, I should have nothing to answer; but, because
you so extol him, as to depress me; so celebrate his Praises, as to render me
in some sort Contemptible; whilst you say, that he urged not only me, but my
Predecessors, Popes of Rome, to call a Council; the Thing it self requires,
that I should answer you, The Popes Expressions concerning his perpetual
resolution of calling a Council.
as to these things. Wherefore, if it has been always the Emperors mind and
desire, that a Council should be held, I have ever been of the same mind, as
well as he: And besides, as I am older than he, so also have I wished for this
sooner than he, which the most eminent Cardinals, who were then of this
College, can testify. When I was made Pope, I persevered in the same mind,
and upon the very least occasion that offered, I called a Council, first at
Mantua, and afterward at Vicenza; but thither hardly any, and hither but a
few, came: And the Legates, that I sent, for six months stayed, expecting the
rest of the Bishops, whom I called, by Letters and Messengers sent unto all
Parts. Now, you say, that these Towns were not fit for Men of different Nations
to meet in, but Trent, with you, is a proper place. And yet all Men know, that
Trent is not to be compared with them, either for bigness, or plenty of all
things. It was not the inconvenience of the place, then, but the Wars of
Princes that was the hindrance. His comparing himself with the Emperor.
Tell me, then, now, which of the two was most zealous in this particular; the
Emperor, who by Wars and Commotions hindered the Council; or the Pope, who was
always a Lover and Promoter of Peace, who never sided with any Prince but the
Emperor alone, and that too, only in that War which seemed to secure a way for
a Council? Whether the Emperor was forced upon War, and unwillingly engaged in
it, or not, I shall not dispute; but, it is certainly known, that the Wars put
a stop to the progress of the Council. I enter not willingly unto this
Comparison, because it is a contending for the praise of Virtue and Goodness;
which is all to be ascribed unto God; but you have put me upon it, my Lord
Ambassador. However, I will not insist any longer, only advise you, to reflect
seriously on the several years of my Pontificate, and attentively consider,
what care and pains we have taken. And, indeed, the two things, The singular
purpose of the Pope.
which I always proposed to my self, were, that I might entertain peace amongst
Princes, and call a Council, wherein I have spared neither cost nor labor,
though I be stricken in years; but neither do you find fault with any thing
that preceded the Council, and only accuse the Legates, that, without my
knowledge, they removed to Bolonia: Then it offends you too, that I call the
Assembly of the Fathers at Bolonia, a Council, and you think, that therein I do
an injury to those who are at Trent; but what hurt is there in that? for so all
Men speak; The Council is translated from Trent to Bolonia. Wherefore, if I
would do the duty of a just Judge, I cannot but call it so, till I be otherwise
convinced by contrary Evidences, especially since the greater part of the
Bishops went thither with my Legates. Nor ought the smaller part, as you affirm,
but the greater, to be reckoned the sounder, in a dubious case. And it is
certain, that it is in the Councils power to remove to another place; but
whether or not it be lawfully removed, which is the thing in controversy, I
reserve that to my own Judgment, to which it is referred, and, in the mean time
give the name of Council to that Assembly. But you say, that the Authors of the
Translation are devoted to me: Do you think, that is to be found fault with,
then? You consequently praise those, who remained at Trent, because they are
not so complaisant. Consider, what danger there is in that; for Schisms and
Dissentions, that are very pernicious to the Church, commonly spring from this,
when Bishops withdraw themselves from their obedience to the Pope. But if, by
being addicted to me, you mean Factious Men, that right or wrong take my part,
I own no such. For I have no other private Concerns, but those of a Father
toward his Children, and of a Pastor toward his Flock; nor has there any
such Controversy been as yet started in the Council, that I should stand in
need of any such addicted and pre-engaged Creatures; but I chiefly required of
the Bishops, that they have regard to the liberty of their Conscience, and I
laid strict Injunctions on my Legates, when they departed from me, to the
Council, that they should take special care, that the Fathers might have no
cause to complain, that they were not allowed the freedom of speaking their
Judgments. You find fault also, that I will not be prevailed with by the
Entreaties neither of the Emperor, King Ferdinand, nor of the States of the
Empire, to recall the Fathers to Trent, and from thence gather, that I take no
care of Germany; especially seeing, with great pains and trouble, the Emperor
has brought it about, that those, who heretofore were fallen off from the
Church, would not now refuse the Decrees of the Council, provided it were
continued at Trent. Truly, I never refused in positive terms, but that they
might return to Trent, if it might be done lawfully, and without giving offense
to other Nations. Now, how desirous I am of the welfare of Germany, is manifest
from this, that I have called the Council there twice already, and twice sent
my Legates, where the Cardinals Pairizio, Morono and Pool, in the first
Legation, stayed the space of seven Months, expecting the coming particularly
of the Germans, and yet you your self know, that none came then. There came,
indeed from the Emperor, Granvell, the Bishop of Arras, and you your self, my
Lord Ambassador, and you can bear witness, with how much patience our Legates
expected the rest. But what was the issue? Ye your selves did not tarry, and
though my Legates prayed, that one of you three, at least, might stay, because
it would be an example to others, nevertheless you alleged a certain kind of
excuse, and a few days after departed. Then two years after, being, indeed, a
more convenient time, there was a second meeting there, and I sent Legates, the
Cardinals de Monte, Santacruce, and Pool; whither you also, and Don Francesco
de Toledo came. But you may call to mind, what a tedious expectation there was,
and how many Months spent in vain, before any thing was done. Nay more, after
that they had fallen to Business, and many useful Decrees were made, you know,
how few of those came, who chiefly wanted that Remedy. Not any of the Bishops
came; some few sent their Proxy's; and in short, they gave no hopeful signs,
that they would admit of any Remedy. For when many flocked thither out of
Spain, France, Italy and more remote Provinces, scarcely one came from Germany,
which is the next of all. But the state of Affairs is now much altered, you
say, and the Emperor, whose Power and Authority is now much increased, will
engage, that if the Council return to Trent, all the Germans shall submit to
its Decrees. Good, my Lord Ambassador, if what you say be true, and if the
Germans be in that mind, why do not they absolutely submit to the Council,
wherever it be? Yet I would not be so understood neither, as if it much
concerned me, in what place the Council be held. But you stick so close to
Trent, that, you say, Germany is lost, unless it be finished in the same place
where it was begun. But take heed what you say. For whilst you fasten us to
the Walls of one City, you do an injury to the Holy Ghost. God of old set apart
Jerusalem as the peculiar place of his Worship; so it pleased him then: But
when our Savior Christ Jesus, that Sun of Righteousness, shone forth,
dispelling the Mists and Shadows of Legal Ceremonies, he would be Adored in all
places. You introduce, then, a new Bondage, when you insist so much upon one
place. But seeing Germany is to be healed, it is necessary, that the Council be
kept there: What then, if the Danes, Goths, and Britans, were sick of the same
Diseases? Must every one of them have a General Council held within their own
Countries? No, not so: and in calling of Councils, regard is had not so much to
those for whom Laws are made, as to them who make and prescribe them; which are
the Bishops, and other Fathers, whose convenience is most minded. It may be
made out by many instances, that Councils have been often held without those
Provinces, where Heresies were broached. Would it not be a very unjust thing,
that the Germans should take upon them, to appoint a place for a public
Council wherever they pleased, and rob all other Nations of the right and
privilege of election? And this is enough to show and convince you, that there
was no need of that pert Protestation of yours: But now I proceed to the rest.
The Answer, you say, which we gave to the Emperor, was unlawful, full of Lies,
and grounded neither upon Right nor Reason. Modester words would not have been
so injurious, but, because you give no Reasons to back what you say, I cannot
distinctly answer you: Nevertheless, it troubles you, I doubt, that we demand,
that the Decrees may be ratified; that fit security may be given to those, who
come to the Council; that the same order and method of proceeding be observed,
which from the Age of the Apostles downwards to this very time, has been always
retained in the Church; And, lastly, that nothing may be wanting in the safe
Conduct. Now there is nothing new or unreasonable in these Demands, and they
are matters commonly provided for not only in the Canon, but Civil Law. But
what you further say, That whatsoever damage or inconvenience ensue hereafter,
the Emperor will impute it to me; and at the same time, whilst I am
negligent, take the care of the Church upon himself. Really, so far as I am
able, by the Grace of God, I will give no just cause to any Man, to think me
negligent in the concerns of the Church; Nevertheless, if it should prove so,
as all Men are frail, I shall not take it ill, if my negligence can stir up and
put an edge upon the Emperors diligence, to succor the Church; still,
provided, he keep within the limits you have staked out to him, to wit, that
therein he follow the Rule of Right, the Canons of the Church, and the consent
of the Christian World. Which, if he do, I make no doubt but that both our
Functions, though different and distinct, will prove profitable to the Church.
Lastly, As to that part of your Protestation, where you allege, that the
translation of the Council is unlawful; because the stress of the Controversy
rests there, according to the power I am invested with, I take upon my self the
decision of that Point, committing the examination thereof to their Eminencies,
the Cardinals Parisio, Burgos, Pool, and Crescentio, and, in the mean time,
whilst they are taken up in bringing the Matter to an issue, I charge all Men
not to attempt any thing to the contrary. In like manner, I command the
Fathers, as well those that are at Bolonia as at Trent, that if they have any
thing to say in this Matter, they do it within a Month. And that I may not any
way seem to slight the Interests of Germany, I shall not refuse to send Legates
thither to cure the infirmities of that People, when I am satisfied, that it
will not be ungrateful to the Emperor and them. After all, if it appear upon
trial, that it was not well done to remove the Council to Bolonia, I shall by
all means take care, that it be continued at Trent: And, in few words, I Will
omit nothing that can be done, for restoring the ancient Religion of Germany.

The Cardinal of Trent was before this returned to Ausburg, as we said; when
the Emperor, The Emperor's Report to the States.
then, from his Discourse, and Mendoza's Letters dated at Rome about the end of
December, perceived there was but small hopes of a Council; January the
Fourteenth, he acquaints the States with the whole Affair, telling them, That
he had sent Orders to his Ambassador Mendoza, to protest against the
Translation of the Council, at Rome; that, so soon as it is done, he will give
them a Copy of it to be transcribed; and, that although all hopes of a Council
are not to be laid aside, yet, because it is like to be delayed somewhat too
long, it seemed to him very requisite, that, in the mean time, some course
should be taken, that might contribute to the Peace of Germany; that, it was
true, the care of that Matter was committed to him, but that he thought it
expedient, that some few good and Learned Men should be chosen out of the whole
Body of the Diet, to manage that Affair; That he would also appoint some to
consult with them; That therefore he required them, that they would seriously
apply themselves to this, and, laying aside all prejudices, consider, how much
it concerned the Public and every Man's private Interest, that some
Reconciliation were made; That they would consider, that before that unhappy
Dissension, Germany was one of the most flourishing Countries in the World; and
as a Pattern that attracted the Eyes of all People: That they would consider,
moreover, that all the pains and trouble he had taken, to get the Council
continued at Trent, had been to discharge himself of his Duty, and to show the
singular Affection he bore to his Country. Some Commissioners were therefore
chosen to Treat of the Matter; but they not agreeing among themselves, the
whole Cause was referred to the Emperor. Wherefore he appointed some Persons
to draw up Heads of Doctrine, Ceremonies, and of the Reformation of the Clergy.
These were Julius Pflug, Bishop of Naumburg, Michael Sidonius, and John
Islebius Agricola, who, Eighteen years before, had, with Melancthon and
Brentius, defended the Confession of the Protestant Doctrine, as we mentioned
in the Seventh Book. They therefore Compile a Book of Doctrines, but very
secretly; and when they had spent much time about it, The Interim is made.
and viewed and reviewed it many times, they at length present it to the
Emperor. Joachim Elector of Brandenburg, who was very desirous of a
Reconciliation, Bucer, being sent for by the Elector of Brandenburg, comes to
Ausburg.
having consulted with James Sturmey, wrote to the Senate of Strasburg,
entreating them, that, for the sake of Religion, they would send Bucer unto
him; for that the Pope declining the Council, the Emperor had taken another
course, and that therefore there was great hopes of Reformation. Bucer is
therefore sent, who taking his Journey privately, about the end of Janaury,
stopped, not far from Ausburg, to stay there, till the Prince should send for him.

Mention has been made in former Books, how the English had given the Scots a
great overthrow in Battle; The English Declaration to the Scots.
Nevertheless, the Scots persisting still in their Resolution, and relying on
the Promises of the French King; Somerset, the Protector of England, and the
rest of the Privy Council, published a very long Declaration and Letter, dated
February the Fifth, exhorting them to Peace, in this manner: Although, say
they, the thing it self required, that ye, who have the worst on it, both in
your Cause and the Defense of it, should have made the first step; and although
we are now possessed of a large part of your Country, yet, we cannot but give
you a friendly warning to consult your own safety. Before the Battle that was
fought last year, we invited you to Peace and Friendship, and declared our
minds unto you; but that Paper was suppressed by the great Men and Regent of
the Kingdom, and never delivered unto you; for they are such, that if matters
go well with themselves, they are but little concerned, what becomes of you.
Wherefore, if they use the same arts still, and will not suffer you to be
informed of our Purpose and Desire, we openly declare by these Presents, that
we have neglected no Duty that was incumbent on us. Many and most bloody Wars
have been often carried on betwixt the English and Scots; and it is not to be
doubted, but that they, who read History, or hear of public Affairs, do much
wonder, that People, of the same Country and Language, should entertain such
bitter Dissentions and Animosities amongst themselves, and do not think it a
most desirable thing, that some way were found out, whereby the whole Island
might be united, and subjected to one Government; but that the most expedient
way that can be thought on for that, is Marriage, all Men confess. Now God, in
his great mercy, has pointed out this way unto you* and dropped, as it were,
into your Lap, the fairest occasion that may be. Your King, after he had broken
his Promise, having lost a Battle, shortly after died, whether of grief, or
some other cause, we determine not. He had three Children, two Sons and a
Daughter; and the Sons, indeed, might have stood in one way, of any Condition
betwixt us, but both of them God removed almost in one day, when they were
Infants, and left you, for Heiress, a young Daughter, born a little before her
Fathers death: He has given us a most hopeful King, Edward, the Son and Heir
of King Henry. What? Do'nt you see a Bond of a perpetual and immortal
friendship, betwixt us, prepared to your hands? Such occasion has been often
wished for, indeed, but for these Eight hundred years never offered before. Nor
can they themselves, who, amongst you, hinder the Peace, deny the truth of
this; but allege, that we would, by this means, get the chief Rule and
Government into our own hands, and bring you into bondage and slavery: But in a
Declaration we directed to you a year ago, we sufficiently refuted that, and
now take God to witness, that the Kings mind is, to join with you in the
closest and most indissoluble bond of Friendship; but, if you refuse, and by
your obstinacy move us to War again, consider, pray, who is like to bear the
blame of all the common Evils that may ensue? You promised, in full Parliament,
your young Queen in Marriage to our King, Contracts and Writings were thereupon
made, and sealed with the great Seal of the Kingdoms: Many Cautions and
Securities were given, nay, and Hostages too, until both were come to the Age
of Maturity: These your public Writings we have, and they are a standing
Evidence against you; and (...) Earl of Arran, the Regent of your Country, was
not only present when the Matter was transacted, but had also a chief hand in
carrying it on; though afterward, when the Cardinal of St. Andrews, and some
other Prelates, had suggested to him fears and jealousies, and put him in great
hopes, he fell off from the Agreement, and violated his Faith. Him, now ye are
to blame, for all the mischief that is befallen you; that ye have lost so many
Towns and Castles; that so many have been killed in Battle; and that we have
advanced so far into your Country, it is all to be imputed to him. But what
end, after all, do ye expect of this obstinacy and perfidiousness? We are
Conquerours, and yet offer you Peace: We are in possession of a good part of
your Kingdom, and yet invite you into England: The disgrace that is commonly
imposed upon the vanquished, that when they are united to a Conquering People,
they should forsake and lose the name of their own Nation, we willingly spare
you, and are content to take the ancient name of Britians, which is common to
both. For the love of God, what is it that we can do more? Will not all Men
say, that we had a just cause of War, when they find, that such generous, just
and Honorable, Conditions have been rejected by you? We lay open unto you all
the ways of entering into friendship, and drive not your Queen out of her
Kingdom, but will Establish her and her Daughter in England: Again, it is not
our thoughts to alter your Laws; for both England, and France, and the
Emperors Dominions also, are governed by different Laws. They who endeavor to
obstruct the Peace, scare you with such Bugbears; but it is their own profit
and pleasure, and not your welfare they seek. Turn your Eyes, and Thoughts
then, off them, and weigh with your selves the State of your Country: Ye have a
young Princess and Heiress to a Kingdom; some time or other, surely, she must
be Married; and that either to one of your own Country, or to some Foreign
Prince. If at home, our Right and Claim is still good, and it will be a thing
that will occasion Domestic Troubles and Envy: If you take any Foreigner, you
will both have us for perpetual Enemies, and must truckle under the wretched
Bondage of Strangers. Succors you must seek from a far, and it is not to be
expressed, what hurt and damage you will receive from the Forces that may be sent
you, and with what Pride and Insolence they will domineer over you. For they will
be persuaded, that your safety and preservation depends wholly on their Arms
and Protection. What Is more, they will take from you both your Queen and
Princess, and carry them whither they please; and if they happen to have War on
any other hand, which is not impossible, their whole care will be to defend
their own, and they will leave you in prey to us. But if they send only Officers
and no Soldiers; these will imperiously give Laws to you, and if any thing
succeed prosperously, all the glory must be theirs, but if any disaster happen,
the whole Storm will fall on you, who venture your Lives, and spend your
dearest Blood. You may be convinced also of the danger there is, in making use
of Foreign Aids, by a Domestic Instance. The Britains, who were the ancient
People of this Island, heretofore called in the Saxons to their Aid, and by the
same were afterward driven out of their Country, and forced into the Mountains
and Bogs. Betwixt the English and Scots formerly lived the Picts, a sturdy and
Warlike People; the Scots having some time defended them against their Enemies,
at length so utterly subdued them, that the very Name of them is at this day
extinct. Did not the same thing happen to the Gauls from the Francks or French;
to the Greeks, in former times, and to the Hungarians in our own memory, when
they made use of the Assistance of the Turks? Did not the Goths, by the same
means, anciently, gain Italy; and the Lombards all Insubria, since called
Lombardy? Do not long, if you be wise, to have a trial of the Pride and
Insolence of Foreign Soldiers; but, put an end to all these Wars and Troubles,
by Marriage and Honorable Alliance, and in that follow the Custom and Example
of Neighboring Nations. The Emperor Charles V. by this means, holds now,
Spain and Burgundy: And the French King in the same manner, purchased to
himself Bretanny: The like do all other Nations. For there are but two ways of
putting an end to Wars, either by force and Conquest, or by Marriage-Alliance.
If you hate to be forced, why do you not comply and embrace the Marriage that
is offered, and to which you formerly agreed? We are not ignorant, who they are
that dissuade you from wholesome Counsel. They are some Churchmen, and the
Regent of the Kingdom himself; but look to it, that they, who have so often
violated their Faith, do not betray your Liberty; that, being corrupted by
Bribes, the Reward of Treason, they deliver not up your Castles and Forts into
the hands of Strangers. Which, when they do, they will pretend, that it is to
defend them from us, but their true design is, that, being supported by them,
they themselves may curb you as they list: And then, who is so blind as not to
see, what your Condition, and what the State of the Kingdom will be? O wretched
and pernicious Stubbornness! We are on all hands environed by the Ocean, as
with a most strong Rampart and Wall: Nothing is wanting to make us happy, but
an Union and Conjunction of Minds, and then we might make one of the most
flourishing Monarchies in the World. Now if this cannot work upon you, let the
Calamity that is already fallen upon, and the Misery that still hangs over,
your heads, move you at least: Let the fear of God move you; for he is the
Avenger of the Breach of Promises and Covenants, and detesteth the desire of
War, which he most severely punishes. We demand your Queen, who is betrothed
unto our King, and follow that way of Peace, which God, in his infinite
goodness, has showed unto us, entreating you also to walk in the same steps;
and if we cannot prevail, we protest, that we are necessitated to make War, and
by Gods assistance, whose Word and Voice ye despise, we will pursue our Right
by Sword and Fire. Wherefore, if there be any good Men among you, who are
grieved at the Calamities of their Country, who think, that Faith and Promise
is to be kept, let them come over to us, and whoever they be, we will show them
all Love and Favor. The King has also, by Proclamation, lately granted a free
Trade betwixt us, as a sign of his good will toward you. And if he find his
Kindness well bestowed, he intends to do greater matters for you; and has
commanded us to declare these things unto you in his Name.

In the former Book we spoke of Sebastian Vogelsberg, Sebastian Vogelsberg is
condemned to die, and two Captains with him.
who brought to the King of France ten Ensigns of Foot from Germany; and who,
having disbanded his Men, returned home in Autumn. The Emperor took it
heinously, that he had served the French King, and, waiting his opportunity,
gave Orders to Lazarus Schuendy to apprehend him, who coming to Weissemburg,
where he had a Habitation, took him and brought him to Ausburg. Presently he is
put to the Rack, and Examined about some who were before suspected of having
entered into a French Confederacy; and though, with great constancy both of Body
and Mind, he had endured the Torture without any Confession, yet, because he
was accused of having sided with Rebels, that he had offended against the
Emperors Edicts, and that he had carried on Treacherous Designs, he was
condemned to die, and with him two Captains, James Mantell and Wolf Thomas.
Therefore on the Seventh of February, four days after he came thither, he was
brought out into the Market Place, where some Companies of Foot were drawn up,
and a vast multitude of Spectators gathered together. When he was come to the
place of Execution, which was higher than the rest, looking abuot him, with a
present and undaunted Mind, and perceiving Persons of great Quality placed in
the Windows and adjoining Houses to see, he civilly addressed himself to them,
and gave them an account of his past life, telling them, that he had formerly
served the Emperor, in the Wars, and that the Crime for which he was now to
die, was only, that, the year before, he had carried some Forces to the French
King, at the time of his Coronation Vogelsberg was a proper handsome Man, who,
not showing the least sign of fear and terror, attracted toward him the Eyes
of all the Spectators. After him, the two Captains also, whom we mentioned,
were beheaded. The Sentence was given against them by two Judges, who followed
the Court and Camp of the Emperor, the one a Spaniard, Briviesca, and the
other a German, Nicholas Zinner, both Lawyers. Vogelsberg had accused Schuendy
as having entrapped and circumvented him; but these publish a Paper, showing
the cause why he was condemned, and justify Schuendy, as having acted nothing
but by the Emperors Order, protesting, that the Accusation was false.

At this time, all over France, but chiefly at Paris, Lutheranisme is again
persecuted with Fire and Faggot, A Persecution in France.
whilst, in the mean time, the public Deliberations in England tend to the
utter abolishing of the Popish Mass.

The Emperor, as we said before, had in the Camp before Wittenberg bestowed
upon Duke Maurice the honor of Electorship, The Ce^emony of Investing Duke
M^^rice into the Electorship.
and greatest part of the Territories of John Frederick: But in this Diet, he
put him, as it were, in possession of it, by a public and solemn Ceremony, as
he had promised; this was done on the Four and twentieth of February, which was
the Emperor's Birth Day. Now the manner of the Ceremony was thus: There was a
large and open Pavillion made of Boards in the Market place, with an ascent up
to it by Steps: Thither came the Emperor about three in the Afternoon,
attended by the Electors; from thence he went into an adjoining House, and put
on his Robes; and coming out again afterward with the Electors, went and
placed himself on his Throne: So did the Electors also, every one according to
his Degree behind him: And over the Emperor the Trumpeters were placed on a
kind of Stage. Then advanced Duke Maurice's first Squadron, and putting Spurs
to their Horses came gallopping toward the Pavillion, as the Custom is. Duke
Maurice himself, in the mean time, with his other Squadron, was posted over
against them, accompanied by a crowd of Princes and Great Men, and twelve
Trumpeters were ranked immediately before him. Out of that Company presently
advanced Henry Duke of Brunswick, Wolffgang Brother to the Elector Palatine,
and Duke Albert of Bavaria, who, having gallopped their Horses to the place,
alighted, and going up to the Emperor, humbly begged his Imperial Majesty,
that it would please him to confer upon Duke Maurice the public Investiture
and Ensigns of Principality and Electorship. The Emperor, consulting with the
Electors, answered by the Mouth of the Archbishop of Mentz, That he was
willing, provided he came and demanded it in person. When Duke Maurice had
received this Answer, he speeded forward with the whole Body: Before him were
carried ten Banners, with the Arms of so many Countries, as he desired to be
Invested in. So having alighted, and kneeling down before the Emperor, he
begged the same thing, as also did Hoier Count Mansfield in name of his Brother
Augustus. The Emperor therefore made answer by the Mouth of the Archbishop of
Mentz: That seeing they had both done him faithful Service, he gave to Duke
Maurice, and his Male-Issue, or if he had none, to his Brother Augustus, and
the Heirs of his Body, the Electorship of Saxony, and all the Lands and
Possessions of John Frederick, except so much as had been before made over to
his Children. Then the Archbishop of Mentz read over the Oath which the
Electors take; and when Duke Maurice had said it over after him, and taken it,
the Emperor gave him a Sword and by that Ceremony put him, in a manner, into
possession: He returned him thanks, promising him all Fidelity and Obedience.
Afterward the Emperor gave Duke Maurice the Banners we mentioned, which were
immediately thrown amongst the people, as it is customary. John Frederick might
have seen, and indeed did behold, all this Ceremony, from the House where he
lodged, for it stood in the same Market place.

Bucer, who was sent for, as we have already said, came at length to Ausburg,
and was entertained at the Elector of Brandenburg's Court. And now the Book
about Religion, which, as it is mentioned before, was ordered to be Complied,
was Finished. Bucer rejects the Interim.
The Elector of Brandenburg presents it, as it was written, to Bucer, and
desires him to Subscribe to it, but, upon perusal, finding, that the Popish
Doctrine was therein established, he made answer, That he could not approve it.
The Elector of Brandenburg took that very ill, Brandenburg angry with Bucer.
and was extremely angry with him; for he looked upon it to be a moderate Book,
as Islebius had persuaded him. Granvel pressed him to it also by Messengers,
and promised him large rewards, if he would approve it: But when he could not
prevail by fair promises, he began to threaten, which made Bucer return home,
but not without danger; for there were Garrisons of Spaniards all over the
Duchy of Wirtemberg, as has been said before.

In the Month of April, The Archbiship of Cologne's first Mass.
the Archbishop of Cologne, who was lately made a Priest, said his first Mass.
The Emperor, King Ferdinand, and a great many Princes were present, whom
afterward he entertained at a most Magnificent Dinner.

At this time, The King of T^nis comes to Ausburg.
Muleasses King of Tunis, whom thirteen years before the Emperor had restored
to his Kingdom, having expelled Barbarossa, as has been said in the ninth Book,
came to Ausberg. His Eldest Son had invaded his Kingdom, and put out his Eyes:
And therefore the poor banished Prince came out of Africa, to implore the
Emperors help; as not long after, another of his Sons came also.

That Book, which was made concerning Religion, treats first of the State of
Man, both before and since his Fall, of Redemption by Christ, of Charity and
good Works, The Heads of the Book called the Interim.
of the assurance of the Remission of Sins, of the Church, of Vows, of
Authority, of the Ministers of the Church, of the Pope, of the Sacraments, of
the Sacrifice of the Mass, of the Commemoration, Invocation, and Intercession
of Saints, of the Remembrance of those who are dead in the Faith, of the
Communion to be joined with the Sacrifice, of Ceremonies, and the use of the
Sacraments. Now amongst other things, there are these Doctrines in it, that
those Works which are more than what God commands, and commonly called Works of
Supererogation, are to be commanded: That Man cannot without doubting believe,
that his Sins are forgiven him: That the Church has the Power of interpreting
Scriptures, of drawing and explaining Doctrines from them, the Power of
Jurisdiction, of deciding in doubtful Cases by a Council, and of making Canons:
That there is one Head over the rest, to wit, the Pope, by Virtue of the
Prerogative granted to Peter: That the Government of the Universal Church is
committed to him by Christ; yet so, as that the rest of the Bishops have a
share in that Cure, every one in his own Church: That by Confirmation and
Chrism, the Holy Ghost is received, to enable us to resist the temptations of
the Devil, the World and the Flesh, and that a Bishop is the only Minister of
that Sacrament: That the Sins, which we remember, are to be confessed to a
Priest: That by satisfaction, which consists in the Fruits of Repentance,
especially in Fasting, Almsdeeds, and Prayer, the causes of Sin are rooted out,
and Temporal Punishments either taken quite away, or mitigated: That extreme
Unction has been in the Church ever since the Apostles time, that it might
either relieve the Body, or fortify the Mind it self against the fiery Darts
of the Devil: That then it is to be administered, when the hour of Death seems
to draw nigh: That Marriage contracted without the Parents consent ought to
stand good, but that Children are in Sermons to be admonished, to ask the
advice of their Parents: That Christ at his last Supper instituted the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood: First, that it should be received by
Believers, as the saving Food of their Souls, and then, that it should be
offered up in memory of his Death and Passion. For that there are in all, two
Sacrifices of Christ; one a bloody Sacrifice upon the Cross, and another,
wherein under the form of Bread and Wine, he offered up his own Body and Blood
to the Father, and afterward commanded his Apostles, and their Successors, to
do the same in remembrance of him to the end of the World: That by the first,
Mankind was reconciled to God the Father; but by this unbloody Sacrifice,
Christ is offered up and represented to the Father, not that he may again make
satisfaction for Sins, but that by Faith we may apply to our selves the
Redemption purchased to us by his Death: That in this Sacrifice, wherein we
commemorate the Death of Christ, the memory of the Saints is to be celebrated,
that they may intercede with God the Father for us, and help us by their
Merits: That we must also remember the Dead, and pray to God for them. In the
next place it is enjoined, that all the ancient Ceremonies, which are commonly
used in Baptism, Exorcism, Abrenunciation, Confession of Faith and Chrism, be
retained, and that nothing be changed neither in the Ceremonies used at Mass:
That in every Town, and every Church, two Masses a day, at least, be said; but
in Country Parishes and Villages, one, especially on Holy Days: That nothing at
all be altered in the Canon of the Mass, and that all the rest be observed,
according to ancient command; but that if any thing have crept in, which may
give occasion to Superstition, it be taken away: That Vestments, Ornaments,
Vessels, Crosses, Altars, Candles and Images, be still kept as certain
Monuments: That the usual Prayers, and that holy singing of Psalms be not taken
away, and where they are taken away, that they be restored: That the Obsequies
and Funerals of the Dead, be performed after the manner of the ancient Church,
and that the Saints Holy Days, and those others also, wherein Prayers are
appointed to be said, be observed: That on Easter Eve, and Whitsunday Eve, the
Water in the Font be Consecrated: That, for subduing Lusts, and exhorting the
Mind to the duties of Piety, on certain days men abstain from eating of Flesh,
and fast: That lastly, though it were to be wished, that there might be found
many Ministers of the Church, who would live chastely, nevertheless, since many
up and down have Wives, whom they would not turn away: And that that cannot,
without great troubles, now be altered, a Decree of Council concerning that be
expected: That the same course be held with those, who receive the Sacrament in
both kinds, yet so still, as that they censure not those who do otherwis for
that the whole Body and Blood of Christ is contained under either kind. After
this manner the Book was, The Interim often reviewed and corrected before it
could pass.
indeed, published, as you shall hear hereafter, but it was not so compiled at
first: For it was often Reviewed and Corrected, as has been said, and the Copy
which was showed to Bucer was somewhat foster. After it had been for a long
time, then, tossed to and again amongst the States, privately, it was also sent
to Rome. The Interim sent to Rome.
For though all the Points of Popery, in a manner, were established in it, yet
because some things were granted to their Adversaries, it was thought fit, The
Popes Animadversions upon it.
first to consult the Pope about it. His Holiness afterward sent the Emperor
by Cardinal Sfondrato some Animadversions thereupon, which were these: That a
Priest in Orders should marry a Wife, and still execute his Priestly Office,
was never heard of: That the Custom of receiving the Sacrament in both kinds
was abrogated; and in those two things, no man had power to dispense, but the
Pope and Council. That the Followers of the Old Religion were not to be
astricted to these Positions; but that, if there were any Lutherans that would
forsake their new Opinions, they were not to be rejected: That the singing of
Psalms ought to be restored in all places; that on Holy Days the Commemoration
of the Patron of every Church was to be Celebrated: That they who are now, or
shall hereafter be, Priests, must abstain from Marriage: That a speedy
restitution must be made of Church-goods, and Jurisdictions; for seeing the
Robbery and Invasion was manifest, the usual forms of Process were not to be
observed, but, as in a self-evident Case, it was to be done by an high Hand,
and Imperial Authority. This Censure being interposed, the Electors of Mentz,
Treves and Cologne, to whom it was communicated, answer the Emperor in the
very same manner, urge chiefly Restitution, and conclude it to be absolutely
necessary, if the Christian Religion ought to be preserved, The Elector's
opinions about the Interim vary.
and recovered again in those places where it was abolished; and that peace
also could no other ways be settled: That therefore care was to be taken in the
first place, that Churches, and Religious Houses, should be completely
restored: And that because the Usurpation and Robbery was manifest, it was to
be done brevi manu, that the Worship of God might with all expedition be
restored: Finally, they prayed his Majesty to take these things in good part,
and defend the Members of the Church by his Power and Protection. But the other
three Electors were not of that Opinion, chiefly the Prince Palatine and Duke
Maurice: However, they had both very good cause, not to stand too stiffly to it
with the Emperor. The rest of the Princes, who were for the most part Bishops,
answered in the same manner, as the Elector of Mentz, and his Colleagues had
done; and as for the free Towns, no great account was made of them. Wherefore
on the fifteenth of May, the Emperor called all the States before him, and
having premised a few Things of his Love and Affection toward Germany; I have
found by manifest and clear Arguments, said he, and the thing it self speaks
it, that no Peace can be had, nor Justice done, before an end be made of that
Controversy about Religion, which now for many years has caused various
Quarrels and Animosities, much Hatred, Dissension and War in the Empire. This
has been the cause, why, in frequent Dyets, and by several Conferences, I
often sought for a Cure: But, in the mean time, the Contagion not only
overspread all Germany, but infected also other Christian People, so that no
presenter remedy could be thought on, than the calling of a General Council.
This, at your earnest solicitation, I procured, after much ado, to be called at
Trent, and in like manner advised you, at the opening of this Diet, that you
would submit to the Authority thereof, and leave it to my care, in the mean
time, to find out some pious Expedient, whereby Germany might live in peace;
and, indeed, your compliance therein, and confidence in me, was then, and is
still, very acceptable unto me. Being then wholly intent upon so necessary a
Design, and having demanded your Opinions, to my great grief and sorrow I
found, that difference in Religion had not only been the cause all our past
Evils, but, unless prevented, would be so also for the future. And therefore, I
thought it not good to leave things in that troublesome state, until a Decree
should be past in Council, but to bring them to some moderation, and the rather
for that new Sects did here and there spring up. Whilst I was pondering these
things, some Persons of eminent Rank and Quality, Friends to Peace, and Lovers
of the Public, presented to me their thoughts of Religion, drawn up in
writing, and promised to observe them. Now so soon as that Writing was put into
my Hands, I referred it to some good and learned Divines, to peruse it
diligently, and examine the Contents thereof. When they had considered it, they
made me this Report, That, if rightly understood, it was not inconsistent to
the Catholic Religion, nor with the Doctrines, Canons, and Constitutions of
the Church, except only in two Points, the one, concerning the Marriage of
Priests; and the other, touching the Lords Supper: But that it was a proper
Expedient in its kind for establishing the Peace of Germany; the thing I most
wish for: For what would be more agreeable, than to see all the States
unanimous in following one and the same form of Religion? Which being so, I
require those, who have hitherto, to their praise, observed the Laws and Rites
of the Catholic Church, that they continue in the same, without wavering, or
starting of any Innovations, as they have heretofore promised unto me; and I
earnestly desire those, who have changed their Religion, that they would either
come over to the rest of the States, and join with them in the Profession of
the same Religion, or moderate their Doctrine according to the Prescript of
this Book, and in every Point make it their Pattern: Nor would I have them
alter or add any thing to it, but contain themselves within the limitation
therein prescribed, and, neither in their Writings nor Sermons, publish or vent
any thing to the contrary, but obediently expect the Decree of the Council,
which, I shall endeavor, shall be called as soon as possibly may be. In the
mean time, it is my whole care, that a Form of regulation be conceived for
reformation of the Clergy. When he had thus spoken by the Mouth of his
Secretary, as the Custom is, he commanded the Book to be read. So soon as that
was done, The Archbishop of Mentzs his craft in approving the Interim, and
giving thanks to the Empe^^^.
the Archbishop of Mentz, who has the first place amongst the Electors, without
consulting the rest of the States, started up, and, as in name of the whole
Diet, gave the Emperor most hearty thanks for the great labor and pains he
had been at, for his care and diligence, and for the zeal and affection he had
for his Country: And that seeing they had formerly referred the Matter to his
prudent and faithful management, and that now he had labored to bring it to
effect, It was but just and reasonable, said he, that, with most thankful
hearts, they should acknowledge so great favors, and dutifully submit to the
Decree. The Emperor took the thanks for a public consent and confirmation,
nor would he afterward admit of any excuse, as shall be said hereafter, and
commanded the Book to be printed, both in Latin, and in the Vulgar Tongue. Four
days after, he represented to the States the great labor and charges he had
been at in restoring Peace to Germany: And that because the thing it self
required, The Emperor desires Money to be raised, and put into a public
Treasury.
that the same should be secured for the future, it therefore seemed to him
very necessary, that some considerable sum of Money should be raised, and in
certain places kept in a public Bank, that if any Commotions should happen to
arise within or without the Empire, there must be a remedy ready at hand. Some
few days after that, King Ferdinand also represented to the States, that for
necessary causes and considerations, King Ferdinand craves Money from the
States.
which were not unknown to them, and needed not to be related, he had by his
Ambassador made a Truce with the Turks for five years, which had begun the
year before: And that though the Turk had charged his Subjects, that they
should act nothing to the contrary, yet he nevertheless desired, that they
would contribute the Aids, which they had promised before, that if he should
chance to break the truce, he might be in a condition to make head against him:
That besides, since the Turk fortified his frontier places with strong
Garrisons, it concerned him not to be negligent: And that therefore he had
resolved to fortify all proper places, and keep Garrisons in them: But that,
because of the great charges he had been at in the late Wars, he was not able
long to support so great a burden: That therefore he entreated them, that they
would give him a yearly Subsidy for those uses, during the continuance of the
truce: For that that concerned the quiet, Maximilian marries his own Cousin
german.
and safety of them all in general.

In the mean time, Maximilian, the Son of King Ferdinand, went from Ausburg to
Spain, to celebrate his Marriage with the Lady Mary, the Emperors eldest
Daughter, and his own first Cousin. The Cardinal of Trent was sent with him,
and the Duke of Alva went some Months before, The Naapolitan Horse are a great
burden to the people about Strasburg.
about the later end of May. The Neapolitan Horse, who had before quartered in
Nortgow, came into the Country about Strasburg, and continued almost three
Months there, behaving themselves with incredible insolence: They came now and
then into the Town, which created no small suspicion. Duke Maurice, not long
after the publication of the Emperors Decree, Marquess John of Brandenburg
approves not the Interim.
departed: But Marquess John of Brandenburg, Brother to the Elector Joachim,
waited upon the Emperor, and, in presence of King Ferdinand, humbly begged
that he would spare him as to that Decree, and having taken a little notice of
the services he had rendered him, told him, that it was chiefly the confidence
he had in the Emperors promise, concerning the free exercise of his Religion,
that made him serve in the late Wars. The Emperor made answer, That the Decree
was made with the consent of the States of the Empire, and therefore not to be
dispensed with: He, on the other hand, cried, that all had not assented, nor
could he with a good Conscience approve that Decree, and challenged the
Emperors Word and Promise. When the Emperor perceived, there was nothing to
be done with him, he bad him be gone, and it was thought he did so, that, by
his Example or Discourse, he might not confirm the minds of others. Wherefore,
the same day toward the Evening, he set out on his Journey homewards, and made
no alteration in all his Country. His Brother, The Electors of Brandenburg and
Palatine receive the Interim.
the Elector, who had made it always his study to please the Emperor, showed
no resistance: Nor the Elector Palatine neither, who, otherwise, was not much
in favor at that time with the Emperor. When the Decree was put to the
Deputies of the Cities that were of the Augustane Confession, they prayed, that
they might have leave to consult their Principals about the Matter, that
afterward they might answer according to their minds, which was granted them.
Wolfgang Duke of Deux-ponts, The constancy of the Duke of Deux-Ponts.
of the House Palatine, had his Deputies there, but the Emperor commanded him
to come before him in Person; which being done, he pressed him to approve the
Decree. He made Answer, That he knew no other Religion, but that wherein he had
been born and bred to that very day; wherefore, he prayed his Majesty, to have
some Consideration for him, promising to do therein, whatever he could with a
safe Conscience. At that time the Emperor did, indeed, dismiss him, but plied
him sharply afterward by Messengers and Letters, as shall be said in its
proper place. Whilst the Senate and Council of Ausburg are consulting, the
Emperor posts Soldiers all over the City. Musculus went from Ausburg to Bern.
Here lived at that time one Wolfgang Musculus, an eminent Minister of the
Church. He, finding Affairs in a staggering condition, the Senate timorous, and
that he could not approve the Book, departed, and went to Bern in Switzerland.
John Brentius was at Hall in Schwabia, The labors and dangers of Brentius.
and had been in great danger two years before, when, upon the breaking up of
the Protestants Camp, the Emperor came to Hall; but was now in far greater.
For at that time, a little before the Emperors coming, which was in the
beginning of December, some of the Spanish Guards, having entered the Town,
march straight to his House, and desire to be let in, else they threaten
grievously. Being admitted, they grew very insolent and saucy. Wherefore,
having no other place of refuge, he sends his Wife and Family to the Town
Hospital, and follows himself shortly after, leaving a Man at home to supply
them with Victuals and all things necessary. Next day after, comes a Noble
Spaniard of the Dignified Clergy, who, turning out the others, takes the whole
House to himself, and going into the Study, makes a diligent search there.
Having there found some familiar Letters written to Brentius by some of his
Friends, concerning the sad troubles of the Times, he endeavors to expose him
to the hatred of his Countrymen and Party, by divulging the Letters. By the
Advice of his Friends, then, in a sharp and cold Winter Night, he removes to a
Neighboring Place in the Country, that his presence might not be prejudicial
to the Citizens. But when the Emperor arrived at Hall, and behaved himself
graciously, not seeming to take any offense at the Doctrine and Worship of the
place; Brentius returned home thither again, and discharged the Office of his
Ministry, until this time, that the Emperor would have the Decree made about
Religion, to be received indifferently by all. For he, Brentius his Judgment of
the Interim.
as all the Learned Men throughout Germany were, being commanded to give his
Judgment of that Book: Though he was sensible of his own danger, yet, that he
might discharge his Duty toward his Church, he affirmed it to be contrary to
the holy Scriptures, and proved it so in Writing. This Piece coming into the
Papists hands, Granvell sends Orders to the Deputies of Hall, in the Emperors
Name, as he said, that they should use their endeavors to have him brought in
Chains to Ausburg. But he, having notice of this from his Friends, withdrew
into a Neighboring Country: Nor was it long after, before a Troop of Spaniards
came to Hall, The ingratitude of the People of Hall, who banish Brentius and
his Family.
whose Commander went straight to Brentius his House, where he carefully hunted
up and down in search of Booty, if any were to be got; but most part of the
Household Furniture had been already removed by the Neighbors. So then, the
poor Man, after he had preached amongst them, and taught them for the space of
six and twenty years, is now banished: Nay, his Wife also, though at that time
afflicted with a dangerous Sickness, whereof not long after she died, was
banished too; so that the poor Wretch was forced to wander up and down with six
Children, not knowing what to do, or whither to go for Relief and Shelter, in
so great consternation were all Men because of the Spaniards: And, to increase
her sorrows at the same time, she knew not what was become of her Husband. The
Duke of Wirtemberg secretly received Brentius.
However, when Ulrick Duke of Wirtemberg came to be informed of the Calamity of
Brentius, though he was in very great danger himself, yet he harbored him and
his Family privately.

Now most of the Cities of Schwabia submitting to the Emperors Authority,
promised to obey his Commands. The Preachers are forced to fly.
Wherefore the Preachers every where removed, that they might not do any thing
unsuitable to their profession. Andrew Osiander therefore left Norimberg, and
went to Prussia. Spire and Worms had each but one Preacher, who also fled for
safety. William, Count of Nassaw, suffered Erasmus Sancerius to depart, for the
same reason: The Duke of Wirtemberg also, whose Country was full of Spanish
Garrisons, Wirtemberg receives the Interim.
as has been said, having received the Emperors Orders, causes the Book that
now was published, to be read in the Churches, and, by Proclamation, commands,
that no Man presume to act contrary to it; gives liberty for any that pleased,
to say Mass for the future; charges his Subjects not to molest or disturb any
Priest, and turns away from about him those Ministers that did not submit to
the Decree, amongst whom was Erard Schnepfius. The Emperor sets Granvell, and
the Bishop of Arras, upon the Duke of Saxony Prisoner, to persuade him to obey
the Decree, and to follow the Doctrine of the published Book. The constancy of
Saxony, the Prisoner.
And though they tempted him with promises, and gave him some hopes of liberty,
yet he constantly persevered in his opinion. Why, said he, last year, when the
Emperor proposed Conditions unto me, this was also one, that I should approve
both his and the Councils future Decrees concerning Religion; but finding, that
I was not to be moved by terror, or any fear of danger, to consent thereunto,
he waved that Condition, and never after mentioned any thing of Religion unto
me* This, I then looked upon as a very singular favor, and, being eased of
that importunity, as of a very heavy burden, I bore more easily, and with a
more cheerful Mind, all the other Conditions, whereby the Emperor disposed of
me and my Fortune at his pleasure; hoping, that my Religion, at least, might be
my own: But now, that he again urges and commands me to subscribe to the Decree
that has been made, I here protest, that I have been so brought up from my
Youth, and then, by the reading of holy Books, have been so confirmed, that I
do believe this Doctrine to be altogether consonant to the Writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, and that it cannot be convicted of any Error. And, it
was upon this very ground, that my Father and I, and some other Princes,
heretofroe exhibited a Confession of that Doctrine in Writing, and referred it
to a lawful Council. Since, then, God has enlightened me with the knowledge of
his Word, I cannot forsake the known Truth, unless I would purchase to my self
Eternal Damnation; wherefore, if I should admit of that Decree, which in many
and most material Points disagrees with the holy Scriptures, I should condemn
the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, which I have hitherto professed, and in words and
speech approve, what I know to be Impious and Erroneous. But what would that be
else, than, with gaudy and painted words, first, to m^^k God, and then, the
Emperor? And, can there be any greater Crime, than that? For, it is no less
than the Sin against the Holy Ghost, of which Christ so earnestly admonishes us
to have a care, and which is never to be pardoned. These things being so, and
seeing my Conscience is in this manner tied up, I, most earnestly, and by the
Mercies of God, that by the offering up of his own Son, he bestowed upon
Mankind; pray and beseech the Emperor, not to be offended with me for my
refusal. That I retain the Doctrine of the Augustane Confession, I do it for
the Salvation of my Soul, and slighting all worldly things, it is now my whole
study, how, after this painful and miserable Life is ended, I may be made
partaker of the Blessed Joys of Life Everlasting. It is reported to the
Emperor, by some, as I hear, that it is not Religion I regard, in what I do,
but vainglory, and I know not what other by-end: Good now, what worldly thing
is it, that could be more desirable to me, especially being of a gross and
unweildly Body, than my liberty, than to return to my Wife and Children, than
quiet and rest at home? I call God to witness now, and will do then, when he
shall call us to an account for all we have done in the Flesh, that I had no
other thing before my Eyes, than that in serving and worshipping of him truly,
I might attain to the enjoyment of the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven.
And it is my hearty desire to the Emperor, that he would think, and believe,
so of me. In every thing else I have always been, and ever shall be, ready to
serve him, and will discharge the Duty and Fidelity I promised him, as it
becomes an honest Man, and one of my quality. After all, I beseech him, that he
would pardon all my offenses, and free me, at length, from this tedious
Captivity, that I may not of all Princes be the first, who may be said, to have
lived and died his Prisoner. When they saw that he persisted firm and
immovable in his Resolution, they began to use him a little more harshly;
Severity toward captive Saxony.
all holy Books were taken from him, and he was enjoined to abstain from Flesh
on days forbidden. The Preacher also, whom, till now, the Emperor had suffered
to be with him, finding himself in imminent danger, privately slipped away in
disguise. Letters were then published, and these out of the Imperial Court too,
Letters spread abroad in the Landgrave's Name.
which the Landgrave was said to have written to the Emperor. In these Letters
he says, that he had sent Orders to his Wife and Counselors, that they should
fulfill the rest of the Conditions, and satisfy those who had any cause of
Grievance, because of the past War: Then, that he had read the Book that was
written about Religion; and though there were some things in it, which he did
not thoroughly understand, and could not prove from the holy Scriptures, yet,
because they were backed by Antiquity, and the Authority of the holy Fathers,
he would not be wiser than they, but had approved the Writing, and would also
take care, that it should be observed by his Subjects. After that, he offers
him his faithful service, whether he should have War, with the Turk, Pope,
other Kings, or the Switzers, or else if he pleased to make use of him in
Germany: But prayed him, for Christ's and all his Saints sake, that he would
forget his Offenses, and give him his Liberty: That now he had been a whole
year Prisoner, wherein he had endured punishment enough, and was redacted to
great hardships: Moreover, that, for greater security, he would give his two
Sons Hostages, until he should be fully satisfied, and that he would readily
submit to what he pleased to enjoin him. Nevertheless, all these Prayers did
not prevail, for he was by his Spanish Keepers carried about from place to
place at every turn; first, from Donawert to Wordlingen, then to Hailbrun, and
last, to Hall in Swabia.

Whilst the Emperor is busied in carrying on these Exploits in Germany,
Whilst the Mass triumphs in Germany, it is run down in England.
the Mass, is, by Act of Parliament, abolished in England; and, not long after,
Stephen Bishop of Winchester is apprehended, for maintaining, that the Laws
made during the nonage of the King, were of no force. He had been confined to
his House the year before; The Bishop of Winchester is committed to Prison.
but being lately enlarged, when it was thought he had changed his Opinion, he
made a Sermon before the King and his Nobles, wherein, having told them his
mind plainly, he is committed to Prison.

The Emperor caused the Form of Reformation, The Emperors Ecclesiastical
Reformation.
as they called it, to be read over to the Churchmen, June the Fourteenth.
These were the Heads of it, Of Ordination, of the Duties of Ecclesiastical
Orders, of Monasteries, of Schools, of Hospitals, of the Dispensation of Gods
Word, of the Administration of the Sacraments, of the Ceremonies of the Mass,
of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, of the Discipline of the Clergy and People, of
the Pluralities of Benefices, of Visitation, of Synods, and of Excommunication.
The Matters therein enjoined, amongst others, are chiefly these; That they who
sue for Holy Orders, be diligently Examined, as to their Faith, Manners and
Learning, especially as to the Heresies most in vogue at that time, and, if
they believe as the Roman, Catholic and Apostolic Church believes: The
Inquisition into Manners is commanded to be made according to the Pattern set
down by Paul, in the third Chapter of the first Apostle to Timothy; but, that
which St. Paul amongst other things advises, That a Minister of the Church be
the Husband of one Wife, who rules his own House well, and has obedient
Children, is left out: That no Man be admitted to the Office of a Bishop,
unless he be a Priest, or promise to take the rest of Orders with the first
opportunity: That Bishops take care of their own Flocks, feeding them with
sound Doctrine and the Sacraments: That they now and then visit their Churches,
and be careful, that the other Ministers do their Duty, lest the Wolves break
in among the Flock: That the Monastic Life be again established in those
places, where it has been discontinued: That nothing be taught in Schools, but
what agrees with Catholic Doctrine: That the Latin Tongue be retained in the
Administration of the Sacraments and Ceremonies, lest they should fall into
contempt, if the People understood the Language: That that which is commonly
called the Canon of the Mass, remain entire, and be pronounced with a low
Voice, that the dignity of those dreadful Mysteries may be kept up: That
nothing be changed in the usual Ceremonies: That Salt, Water, Herbs, the
Paschal Lamb, New Fruits, also Churches, Chalices, Altars, Copes, Vestments and
Vessels be Consecrated by Prayer against the Snares of the Devil and Charms:
That Wax Tapers also be lighted, and Incense offered in Churches: That Prayers
also be made in Churches and Chapels dedicated to Saints: That the Clergy live
Temperately and Soberly, and avoid Fornication: That they put away their
Concubines, or be punished: That the Civil Magistrate assist the Bishops in
reforming Discipline and Manners, and preserving entire the Liberties of the
Church: That Diocesan Synods be brought into use again, and held twice a year,
and that in them the Manners and Vices of every one be enquired into: That
those, who cannot otherwise be reformed, be Excommunicated: That all Men do
avoid their Speech and Company: And, that they be not admitted again to
Communion, before they humbly beg forgiveness, The Bishops approve this
Regulation.
and promise amendment. This Formulary being read over, as I said before, was
by the Bishops, after some deliberation, approved, and they promised to call
Synods within a little time after they were returned home: Nevertheless, they
desired that the Pope might be moved to give his assent to some things in it.
This Book was Printed also afterward. Mention was made before, that the
Deputies of the Cities sent home to consult their Principals about the Decree.
But when the Strasburghers, Those of Strasburg are urged to receive the Interim.
who were the chief, were a little backward in answering; the Emperor orders
Granvell to press them to it. He therefore, June the Twenty eighth, sends for
the Deputies, of whom James Sturmey was the Principal, and speaking to them by
Henry Hasen, who then was his Interpreter, he told them, that they themselves
knew, how the States had begged of the Emperor, and referred it to his care,
to devise some Expedient, that might be observed till the sitting of the
Council: That he had done it, and that a Form was drawn up by good and Learned
Men, which all the Princes, except some few, and the chief Cities had approved.
Now, seeing they and some others had besought the Emperor, that they might
have leave to consult their Principals, which he granted, and in the mean time
waited for their Answer, he took it ill, that hitherto they had made him none;
and, that therefore, he had commanded him to learn, what their mind was. When
the Deputies had told the reason of their Silence, The Answer of those of
Strasburg.
they produce a Letter directed to the Emperor from the Senate, wherein they
tell his Majesty: That they desired nothing more, than to be able to gratify
him in all things; but, that they and all their Citizens were fully persuaded,
that if they should at all admit of that Decree, they should wound their own
Consciences, grievously offend God, and endanger their own salvation: That
since he, in his own Wisdom, knew, how heinous a thing that was, they begged
for Christ's sake, that in so nice a point, which concerned not Lands nor Goods,
but the salvation of their Souls and Eternal Happiness, he would have some
regard to them, and as he allowed others, of a different Persuasion, the free
use of their Religion, so he would suffer them to enjoy that of the Augustane
Confession, until a Decree should pass in Council, as it had been often enacted
in Dyets, and that he would not compel them, to say with their Mouth, what
their Heart did not think: That they again, on their parts, should take all
imaginable care, that nothing should be done tumultuously or irreligiously in
their City; that no wicked and pernicious Principles or Doctrines should be
suffered among them, nor no cause of Complaint given to their Neighbors.
Granvell's Speech to the Strasburghers.
When Granvell had heard the Letter read, he told them, that the Emperor had
always had a good opinion of their City; and, that since all generally
commended and approved the Decree, they must not expect to be exempted; for
they had Orders to admit of no such Answer; that it was in vain then to
Petition, but that they should tell positively, The Strasburgh^^s Answer to
Granvell.
what the Resolution of the Senate was. To which they Reply, That when the
matter was referred to the Emperor, they and the other Deputies had always
understood it of the Civil, but not Religious, Concerns, that they thought the
last had been referred to a Council, where, upon hearing of the Parties, the
Controversy should be decided; but, that in this Book, almost all the Points
of Doctrine, in dispute, were determined; that if they should now receive them
without any previous Disquisition, or the Learned Men of their Party being
heard, they would no longer remain Controverted, nor stand in need of the
Authority of a Coucncil: That it was no wonder, that most part of the Princes
and States approved the Decree, since it was for their own advantage; all being
left whole and entire to them, but a manner of Religion prescribed to the
Protestants, and commands laid upon them, to forsake those Doctrines that had
been always disputed, without so much as a hearing, whereas, nevertheless, in
all the Dyets, the whole Cause was referred to a Council: That to force any Man
to act contrary to his own Conscience, though it were erroneous, was a very
grievous thing, unless the Error were first made appear: That they believed,
there were a great many good Men on both sides, that nevertheless differed
among themselves in Judgment and Opinion: That no constraint ought to be put
upon such, but that they should be convinced by Reason, Truth and Arguments:
That since then, in all Matters not relating to Religion, they were ready to
give unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's, they prayed him to recommend to
his Imperial Majesty these humble Demands of the Senate: That they were not
ignorant of the Emperors great power, nor of the danger they now incurred, if
he should think fit to make use of force: That therefore, if they were not
fully persuaded, that, by the approbation of this Decree, God was greatly
offended, it would be the greatest madness in the world, not to comply with the
Emperor. Granvell's Reply.
Here again Granvell, having repeated what he had said before, told them, that
they themselves, when they were received again into the Emperors favor, had
promised to observe, what he should appoint for the welfare of the Empire: That
of this nature was the Decree, made with the Counsel and Advice of Learned Men,
and by the greater part approved: That therefore it could not be refused,
because it was consonant to the Doctrine of the Church: Did they arrogate so
much to themselves, as to think, they saw more than the Universal Church, that
they should make a separation from the rest? That it was not lawful for them to
change Religion, without the common consent of the whole World. That therefore,
if they had no other Instructions, they should inform themselves from their
Senate, whether they intended to obey, or not? That, as to what they alleged,
that they had only understood it of Civil Affairs, when the Matter was referred
to the Emperor, it was no matter how they understood it, The Strasburghers
insist.
but how the major part of the States did. The Deputies again represent, that
they and the rest of the Deputies of their State, had, in a manner, been
excluded from all Deliberations; nay, and, that they had not been then
consulted, when the matter was referred to the Emperor; so that they had
understood it no otherwise than as they told him: Yea, and that some Princes
had also understood it so; for that, when they made their peace with the
Emperor, they would not promise absolute obedience, for fear it might be some
time or other extended to Religion; that his own Son, the Bishop of Arras, knew
this to be true, who then promised in the Emperors Name, that the whole Cause
of Religion should be referred to a Lawful Council: That, whereas he said, that
Decree ought to be received as a public Statute of the Empire, they refused
not to undergo any burden, that should be imposed upon them by the Empire; but,
that the present Case concerned the Salvation of their Souls and Life Eternal:
That, besides, the whole weight of the Decree fell upon good and Pious Men;
for, that the Multitude and Rabble, who slighted Religion, cared not what was,
or might be, enacted; though, no Man was to be compelled to embrace Faith: That
they doubted not, but the Emperor was a Lover of Peace and Concord; but, that,
however, if this course should be taken, and Men be forced, both to think and
speak contrary to their Judgment, it was very much to be feared, lest such and
so sudden a change might occasion great Stirs and Commotions: That that Book
had been framed by Learned Men, of whom some had the knowledge of the truth, as
was apparent enough; but, that some others had soisted in many things, that did
not at all agree with the holy Scriptures and the Doctrine of the Fathers, as
might, indeed, be demonstrated, if Men were allowed to speak. That they had
made no separation from the rest; but, that in the chief and fundamental Points
of Doctrine, they agreed with the true Church: That therefore, they again
desire him to deliver the Letter to the Emperor, that accordingly, they may
acquaint the Senate, for that they had no other Instructions. Upon that, he
began to speak a little more huffingly, and urged home the Decree upon them;
then he made a Digression to other Matters, and told them, how it was talked
amongst the great Men in France, that the People of Strasburg would not admit
of the Decree: However, that the short and the long of the Matter was, that the
Emperor expected a clear and positive Answer: That no Man, indeed, was to be
compelled to profess any Faith; but that, that was to be understood of those,
who were not Christians; since they, who deny the Faith that they have once
received, might be compelled by Fire and Faggot. To these things the Deputies
made Answer, That they knew not what the French might talk, but, that there was
no public Act, as yet, past in the Senate, nor any thing else done in that
Affair, but what they were not discoursing about: That, seeing then, they would
not report these things to the Emperor, it was to no purpose to insist any
longer; and they would acquaint the Senate with what they had done: That a Man
might, indeed, be burnt to death, but, that he could not be forced to believe
otherwise than he did. The other Cities are also urged.
And here ended the Conference. The Deputies of the other Cities had been
before dealt with, much after the same manner; they had been besides threatened,
a day prefixed to them, by which they should bring their Answer, and commanded
to tarry, till it should come from their Principals: But no such thing was
imposed upon those of Strasburg. As to the Money, which the Emperor desired
might be raised for future Contingencies, the States, though they said it would
lie heavy upon them, yet assented to it: They promised King Ferdinand also a
Subsidy of an Hundred thousand Florins a year, during the time of the Truce: On
the other hand, they desired the Emperor, that he would remove his Garrisons,
and, all things being now peaceable and quiet, disband his Forces that lay
quartered up and down, and did much hurt both in Town and Country, whereby he
would relieve the poor People, who made sad complaints thereof. The Emperors
Answer to the States about the disbanding of the Soldiers.
The Emperor made Answer, That, for weighty Considerations, he could not, at
that time, dismiss his Forces; that, as for any hurt that was done, it was not
with his knowledge nor allowance; for, since they were duly paid by him, it was
not reasonable they should wrong any body, and, that they knew to be his will
and pleasure: That something of that nature had already been brought to his
Ears, but, that upon inquiry, hardly any thing could be made out of it; that,
nevertheless, he would use all means, that he might be certainly informed of
the matter; and that no Man should go unpunished, if he were found to be
guilty. The States consent to the Constitution of the Imperial Chamber.
The States also refer it to the Emperor, to Constitute the Imperial Chamber
at that time, and to add some more Judges to the number, at his pleasure, they
themselves promising, to defray the Charges of it. This was the issue of the
League, which had been projected, as was said before. That all the Emperors
Provinces in Germany and the Low Countries, be under the Protection and Defense
of the Empire, and contribute to all public Exigencies, yet so, as that they
enjoy their own Laws and Jurisdiction; and, that, on the other hand, Germany
may expect the same Help and Defense from the Provinces of the Emperor.

THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH.
BOOK XXI.
The CONTENTS.
The Authors of the Book called the Interim, are rewarded by the Emperor:
Many, nevertheless, do impugn it, and upon that account the Duke of Saxony is
accused. Those of Constance are urged to receive that Book now published:
Ambushes laid to surprise the City, which at length is forced to receive it.
The Strasburghers write to the Emperor about the Interim, and at length admit
of it. A Sedition arises at Bourdeaux. A Relation of the Despair of Francis
Spira: And the strange Conversion of Vergerio to the Reformed Religion. The
Queen of Scots is carried into France. Magdenburg is, by the Emperor, offered
as a prey to the strongest hand. The State of England begins to be turbulent.
The Protector of the Kingdom is sentenced to death and beheaded: The Citizens
of Strasburg contend with their Bishop. They of Wittemberg are by some accused
as Adiaph^ists or Neuters, who, by their indifference and double dealing, made
way for the Popish Impiety. Melanchton answers these. Disputation in England
about the Lords Supper. The King of France is received at Paris. Vervinus is
beheaded. The Emperor pursues the Magdenburgers with Edicts. Pope Paul the
Third dies, and horrid things are reported of him. The Conclave of Rome is
described, and the manner of Creating the Pope. Mass is begun again at
Strasburg. An Edict published by the French King against the Lutherans. Julius
is elected Pope, and makes Innocent, a Youth, who was exceedingly dear unto
him, a Cardinal.

ON the last of June the Diet was dissolved. We told you in the Nineteenth
Book, that the Emperor had persuaded all to submit to the Council, upon the
assurance given them, that he would take care, it should be free and lawful: A
Decree of the Diet of Ausburg concerning a free Council.
Now therefore, a Decree is made, for the continuation of the Council at Trent,
the Emperor promising to use his endeavors, that it meet there again, as soon
as conveniently can be. Which being effected, he requires all, especially
Churchmen, and those of the Augustane Confession, that they repair thither upon
the safe Conduct that he should give them; for, that there all matters should
be Piously and Christianly debated and determined according to the holy
Scriptures, and Doctrine of the Fathers, without prejudice or affection, and
that they themselves should be heard to the full. Then other Decrees are read
over, as it is customary, especially that concerning Religion, and all are
strictly charged to obey it, as was before declared May the Fifteenth. We named
before the three Authors of the Book called the Interim. The Composers of the
Interim are bountifully rewarded.
One of them, John Islebius, had liberal Rewards both from the Emperor and
King Ferdinand, for his pains; but Michael Sidonius got afterward the
Bishopric of Mensburg in Saxony, this gave occasion to some to joke upon them,
and say, that they only maintained, amongst other things, the Popish Chrisme
and Oil, to be used as sacred and necessary to Salvation, that they themselves
might come off the better greased. Not long after, the Emperor sent his
Letters to the Princes that were absent, especially to those who seemed most to
stand in need of it, The Emperors Letters to the Princes about the receiving
of the Interim.
commanding them forthwith to obey that Decree: And, July the Tenth, he wrote
to Erasmus Bishop of Strasburg, to use endeavors, that that which, with so
much labor and pains, he had brought about, should be put into execution; and
that, if he wanted fit Men, he should provide himself somewhere else.

The Report of this Decree was soon spread abroad far and near. And the
Venetians, The Veneratians Proclamation.
July the Nineteenth, publish a Proclamation, charging all who had Books
containing any thing contrary to the Catholic Faith, to bring them in within
eight days to some certain Men appointed, for that afterward inquisition would
be made, and such as deserved be punished; promising Reward and Secrecy to
Informers: The Popes Legates in the Courts of Princes.
The Pope has a Legate or Nuncio always there, as in the Courts of Princes
also; these see and hear with the Eyes and Ears of many, and are often the
Causes, why Decrees of that nature are made: But the Senate of Venice uses
this Circumspection, The prudence of the Venetians in the business of Religion.
that they suffer not the Romish Bishops and Inquisitors to be sole Judges, but
always join with them the Governors of Places, and Lawyers, to Examine the
Evidences, and take care, that no Sentence pass against any Man within their
Jurisdiction, out of malice, or for love of gain. They made this Law in the
year 1521. The Venetian Inquisition against Sorcerers, and those that have
commerce with the Devil.
when, in the Country of Brescia, the Inquisitors tyrannised cruelly over poor
Wretches, as if they had been Sorcerers, and in Compact with the Devil: And
now, when the Doctrine of Luther had taken deep rooting, and was spread far and
near, that Law was in force still, whatever the Papist muttered, who would have
it abrogated.

Much about this time, the King of France sent Auxiliary Forces into Scotland,
against the English, French Auxiliaries sent to the Scots.
and amongst these some Germans, under the Conduct of the Rhinegrave. But the
Emperor Proscribes Hubert Count Bichling, and Sebastian Scherteline, in one
and the same Proclamation; and not long after, the Rhinegrave, Count Heideck,
They who served in the Protestant Arms, Proscribed by the Emperor.
Pecrod and Pifeberg, beseeching all Foreign Princes not to entertain nor
protect them, but to gratify him in that particular, and assuring them, that
they might expect the like from him, when occasion offered. The Duke of
Vendosme, a Prince of the Royal Blood of France, Married the Lady Jane,
Daughter to the King of Navarre, The Duke of Vend^sm^s Marriage.
who, seven years before, had been betrothed and given to the Duke of Cleve, as
has been said. Eleanor, the Emperors Sister, Queen Dowager of France, leaves
France, and goes to live in the Netherlands. The Duke of Aumale, The Duke of
Aumales Marraige.
Son to the Duke of Guise, after he had long courted the Duchess of Lorrain,
the Emperors Sisters Daughter, Married the Daughter of Hercules Duke of
Ferrara. Louis d' Avila^ History of the German War.
About that time, Louis d' Avila, a Spaniard, wrote the History of the
Emperors Wars in Germany in the vulgar Language, which was afterward
Translated into Italian, Latin, and French; where he speaks of the taking of
Marquess Albert, he says, That he minded his pleasures so much with Women,
that he neglected his Duty, and misbehaved himself at Nochlitz. Though the
Emperor had given most strict charge, that no Man should in any manner impugn
the Book that was published about Religion; nevertheless, several Pieces came
abroad, that confuted all the Doctrine contained in it, and admonished Man to
beware of it, as a most dangerous Plague. Amongst these was Caspar Eagle,
Minister of the Church of Salfield in Thuringe. The occasion of Writing was
given by Islebius, Islebius brags of the Interim.
who was upon his way home from Ausburg, and bragged mightily of that Book,
saying, That a Golden Age was now at hand, and that Eagle had also assented to
it. When this came to his Ears, he wrote a most bitter Answer, giving him the
Lie; and affirming, the Book to be stuffed with false Doctrines. In France
also, The Bishop of Auranches writes against the Interim.
Robert Bishop of Auranches wrote against it, but upon a different account, and
rejected the same, chiefly, because it allowed Marriage to Priests, and the
Sacrament in both Kinds to the Laity; where, taking occasion by the way, he
bitterly inveighs against Bucer for Marrying a second Wife. So does Romey the
Dominican.
Romey also, General of the Order of St. Dominick, wrote against it, for the
same Reasons, at Rome. So that the little Book was found fault with by both
sides.

The Emperor had sent an Ambassador to the City and State of Norimberg, to
persuade them to submit to the Decree that was made. On his way thither, he
solicited the Sons of the Duke of Saxony to the same purpose, but they all
resolutely refused. The constancy of the Sons of the Duke of Saxony.
Upon his return, he gave the Emperor a full account of his Negotiation:
Wherefore the Emperor makes his application again to the Captive Prince,
complaining of his Sons, that not only they rejected the Decree lately made,
but also suffered the Ministers to rail against it in their Pulpits and
Writings; wherefore, he desires him to use his Authority with them, that they
would give him satisfaction, The Duke of Saxony avows to the Emperor, his
rejecting of the Interim.
as to both these Points. To this he makes Answer, That he had lately satisfied
Granvell and the Bishop of Arras, why he himself did not approve the Doctrine
of the published Book; which being so, he would not persuade his Sons to do
that, which he could not with a good Conscience do himself; that he earnestly
besought him to take it in good part, and to favor both him and his Sons with
his protection. This constancy of his, and singular fortitude of Mind, in
bearing Adverse Fortune, purchased him the Love and Esteem of all Men.

As the States of Bremen and Magdenberg were the only People in Saxony, The
Deputies of Constance with the Emperor.
who were not reconciled to the Emperor, so were also those of Constance, that
border upon the Switzers, the only, in Upper Germany; but at length, having
obtained a safe Conduct, they send Deputies to Ausburg to Negotiate a Peace.
The Emperor proposed very hard Conditions to them, and amongst these, that
they should receive the Public Book, and conform their Religion unto it. The
Deputies desire some mitigation of the Conditions; but that was in vain, and
they are commanded to bring their Answer by a day prefixed. Their humble Letters
to him.
The Senate being made acquainted with this, on the Thirteenth of July, writ a
humble and submissive Letter to the Emperor, beseeching him, that he would not
force them to do any thing against their Consciences and the Salvation of their
Souls; that they saw their own danger, and were in great streights; for, that
if they obeyed not, their Lives and Fortunes lay at stake; but, that withal, if
they complied, they must abide the Vengeance and Judgment of God: That he would
therefore spare them, and not reduce to extremity poor unfortunate Wretches,
especially since they were no more in fault than the rest, and had formerly
suffered the greatest of Calamities for the Empire and House of Austria, as
they were still ready to undergo any burden, that they were able and ought to
bear; and, that though their Exchequer was low, and their Fortunes mean, yet
they were willing to give for a Fine eight thousand Florins, and four great
Guns; but, that they prayed him, that he would let them enjoy the Religion
which for twenty years they had professed, The Bishop of Constance dies of an
Apoplexy, which he had imprecated unto his People.
until the Decree of a lawful Council should pass, and not impose a heavier
burden upon their City, than it was able to bear. Their Bishop, John Vesalius,
who was also called Archbishop of Lunden, as has been said in the Twelfth
Book, threatened them severaly at Ausburg, after the Emperor had published the
Book; but within a few days after he died of an Apoplexy, the Disease which he
prayed might fall upon them. The Reason why they alleged, that they had
suffered great damage for the sake of the House of Austria, was this:
Maximilian's War against the Switzers.
The Emperor Maximilian, by the help of the Suabian League, we mentioned in
the Fourth Book, made War against the Switzers; wherefore, the People of
Constance, their next Neighbors, who were of the same League, suffered great
losses from them. The Grisons and other Neighboring People, nay, and Louis
XII. King of France also, aided the Switzers at that time, but at the
intercession of Ludowick Sforza Duke of Milan, the matter was made up, in the
year 1500. Maximilian was then Married to Mary Blanch, Sforza's Sister.

On the Third day of August the Emperor called before him the Burgomasters,
all the Council, The Emperor changes the Senate of Ausburg.
and some of the chief Citizens of Ausburg, and having, by the mouth of Seldom
the Lawyer, spoken much of the good will and favor, that he and his
Predecessors had showed them; he told them, that for many years past, the
Government of their Republic had been turbulent and factious, and that the
reason of it was, that inferior People, ignorant Handy-crafts-men, fitter for
any thing than Government, had been chosen into the Council; but, that he, who
wished the City well, to remedy that evil, did now dissolve the Council, and
turn them all out of place, not for any disgrace to them, but for the public
good and profit. Then he commands the names of those whom he had chosen for
Common Council-men to be read over; amongst these were the Welsers, Helingers,
Buntgartners, Fuggers, and Peutingers, that being done, he gave them their
Oaths, and assigned to every one their several Functions and Charges; giving
them serious Advice to love the Commonwealth, submit to the Decree of Religion,
and be obedient to him. At the same time he abolishes all the Companies and
Fraternities, The Companies are abolished.
making it death for the future, to have any Conventicles or Brotherhoods, and
commanding all Public Charters and Grants, which contained the Privileges and
Liberties of the Companies, to be delivered up to the new Common Council. This
new form of Government, he ordered to be proclaimed by an Herald, and that it
should be death for any to oppose or censure it. The Council thanked his
Majesty, and promised all duty and obedience. In the mean time, whilst these
things were a doing, all the Gates were shut, and Soldiers posted in several
places of the City.

There had been a Suit depending for many years betwixt the Landgrave and
William Count of Nassaw, The Emperor gives sentence in favor of Nassaw
against the Landgrave.
concerning the Dominion of Catzenelbogen, which at that time the Emperor
decided, and gave sentence against the Landgrave. The Fifth day of this Month,
the Emperor, by the mouth of the Bishop of Arras, answered the Deputies of
Constance, dismissing them without any success, and because he perceived them
not to be much concerned for Peace, he told them, he would take some course.
The Spaniards march privately to Constance.
The same day, the Spaniards, who, as we told you, were removed into those
parts to the number of three thousand Foot, march toward Constance, and
drawing out of Uberlinghen in the night time, part of them take the Woods,
that, by break of day, when they knew the People were to be at Sermon in the
Churches, they might invade the Town, and part stayed behind in the Woods
waiting for the occasion. Now it happened, that three of the City Watchmen,
hearing a noise in the Wood, ventured farther out to see what the matter was,
and so fell into their hands. These they took, and threatening them with death,
if they gave the least sign, carry them along with them; then they plant
themselves in a low ground, near the Lake, with great silence; but that was not
so private, but that some of the Watch, who then were in the Suburbs on the
other side of the Rhine, went and told their Captain, that there was some
Ambush laid, wherewith he immediately acquainted the Burgomaster; and this was
about two of the Clock in the morning. The Burgomaster presently calls a
Council, and orders all to Arm, though no body could tell, what the matter was.
About break of day the Spaniards began by little and little to appear, but in
small numbers, that they might discover the number of the Watch. Then again the
Captain of the Watch sends word to the Burgomaster, to put himself in a
readiness, for that there was danger at hand. Having therefore consulted what
was to be done, about four of the Clock they send out about two hundred
Citizens into the Suburbs. These, perceiving nothing after they were gone out,
began to be a little negligent, but, so soon as it was day, the Spaniards with
their great Guns let fly against the Pales which divided the Ditch into two,
and beat them down; and so in great numbers breaking in through the Ditch, that
was then almost dry, upon the Town Watch: Whereupon, they also, who, as we
said, remained in the Wood, came presently on, and with great force break open
one of the Gates, but the Citizens defended themselves valiantly, and made use
of their Ordnance, having, Alfonsus Vives was killed, and the Spaniards draw
off without success.
however, lost their Captain Alfonsus Vives in the first Charge. But when they
could hardly withstand the force of so great a multitude, by little and little
they retreat to the Bridge over the Rhine, where they maintained a hot and
tedious Conflict, and with much ado getting into the Town again, from the Walls
and Gates they briskly play their great Guns upon the Enemy, who with all their
might were attempting to force the Gate, and kill many of them. Those they
presently threw from the Bridge into the Rhine, and then perceiving that their
labor was in vain, fly into the Suburbs, setting fire to the further end of
the Bridge, lest the Townsmen might sally out upon them. Having afterward
satiated their filthy lusts, they gather into a heap all the Bodies of their
dead Men, and burn them, with the Suburbs, that the number of the slain might
not be known; but the Towns people lost an hundred Men. When the Alarm was
given at Constance, the Neighboring Switzers, as the custom was, presently
Armed, and were coming to their assistance; but the Governor of the Country,
who, at that time was a Citizen of Lucerne, A Custom of the Switzets.
recalled them under severe penalties, for the hatred he bore to the Religion.

We told you before, what past betwixt the Deputies of Strasburg and Granvell;
all which, upon their return home, after the dissolution of the Diet, they
report to the Senate; who, after some Consultation, wrote to the Emperor in
French, because he delighted most in that Language, to this effect: Our
Deputies, say they, The Letter of the Strasburgers to the Emperor.
being lately returned from the Diet, have told us what has been done, and
long before that sent us the Book, composed about Religion. They were desirous,
indeed, most mighty Emperor, to have petitioned your Majesty by Letter, before
they left Ausburg; but Grawvel would not receive it; and that is the reason,
Sir, we now write to your Majesty. Believe it, Sir, there is nothing in the
World we more desire, Their Judgment of the Interim.
than to gratify your Majesty; But as to the Decree about Religion, the Case
stands thus: Having convened the Divines of our City, we diligently examined
the whole Book: And though there be some things in it, which do not altogether
disagree with the holy Scriptures, yet since they are so penned, that for the
most part they stand in need of a fuller explication, it would be a very hard
and uneasy thing for us so to receive them. For we are most fully persuaded,
that our Doctrine and Ceremonies are consonant to the Word of God, and that,
without offending God, and wounding our own Consciences, we can neither forsake
nor change them, before they be fairly tried and examined, and our Divines
heard. For it has been the Custom, from the very first Age of the Church, that
all doubtful and controverted Points would be determined in lawful Assemblies,
and this also was always looked upon to be the best way in the Dyets of the
Empire, that the whole Matter should be referred to an holy Council. Wherefore,
we beseech your Majesty, by all that is Sacred, and for the sake of the Blood
of Christ that was shed for us, that the Decrees of the Empire may stand in
force, as to that Matter, and that we may be allowed the free exercise of our
Religion, until the Authority of a lawful Council intervene. For no better way
than that can be devised, for settling a firm and lasting Peace. But if your
Majesty do reject this our humble demand, and require from us a compliance, we
most earnestly beg that our Divines may first be heard, to show wherein it is,
we think, that Decree to be repugnant to holy Scripture. And if this be
granted, our hopes are, that your Majesty will both understand the equity of
our Plea, and also mitigate that Decree. We do nothing certainly out of malice
or obstinacy, but it is the consideration of our own Salvation, and the fear of
Divine Majesty, that moves us to deprecate in this manner. For in all things
else, we shall so demean our selves, that you may perceive how highly we value
your Majesty's Glory and Reputation.

With this Letter, and some other Instructions, Lowis Grempen, a Lawyer, was
sent to the Emperor. The Emperors answer to those of Strasburg.
But the Emperor answered them in the same manner, as he did the rest, telling
them, That nothing could be now determined more; that it was not now time to
stand upon debates, and that they might have a sufficient hearing in the
Council. And therefore he commands them to give him their positive answer
within a Month. When the way, we have been speaking of, would not do with the
Men of Constance, The people of Constance proscribed.
the Emperor by Proclamation puts them to the Ban of the Empire. Then began
Matters to be carried more tumultuously in the City: For both the remembrance
of their late danger, and the expectation of future misery extremely perplexed
them: Especially, seeing they saw not the least appearance of any human help or
relief. Some of the Citizens also did, with other expressions, exaggerate all
these things; so that the Council forced by their importunity, wrote to some
Princes, and the Suitzers also, praying them to intercede in their behalf with
the Emperor: The Suitzers immediately called an Assembly of their States, and
assented: But the Catholics amongst them, promised to do so, upon this
Condition; if they would receive the Decree of the Empire lately made
concerning Religon, and receive the Clergy into the City again: They pray some
Princes, and the Suitzers, to intercede with the Emperor for them.
The Common Council being pressed then by the Citizens, publish that Decree;
and then put the Matter to a Vote, where by the major part, it was carried in
the Affirmative, that it should be received. For they all cried, they should be
utterly undone, if they continued longer in the condition they were in; since
the Emperor had a vast and almost inexhaustible power not to be resisted. When
they had past this into a public Act, the Council acquaint the Suitzers with
what they had done: These sent Ambassadors to try, if the Emperor would admit
of an Intercession; and withal, to entreat him to deal graciously with them.
The Emperous answer to the intercessors.
But the Emperor made them such an answer, that they might easily perceive it
would not be acceptable unto him. For he told them, That he much wondered they
would do any thing in favor of Outlawed People. Wherefore, many who
disapproved the change of Religion, removed to other places, and amongst these
was Ambrose Blaurer, the chief Minister they had. The Lindavians, who are
opposite to Constance, on the other side of the Lake, had before answered the
Emperor manfully enough indeed; Those of Lindaw receive the Interim.
but being now terrified by a neighboring Example, they also receive the
Decree.

When the Deputy of Strasburg was returned with the Emperor's Answer and
Commands; The Strasburgers consult about the Interim.
the great Council of the Commonwealth was called, which was never wont to be
done, but about Matters of the greatest difficulty and moment. It consists of
three hundred Persons, that are chosen fifteen out of every Company, which are
twenty in number. The Matter being put to the Vote, it was carried by the
plurality, not to receive the Decree, but to stand it out stoutly: But when the
business was again stated some days after, they began to cool a little in their
heat, and a Committee was chosen of the Senate, to whom it was referred to
consult, what was most expedient for the Public. Some Neapolitan Horse, as we
told you, were quartered not far from the Town; and since the Emperor, at the
very same time, left Ausburg, it was verily believed, that he intended to come
to Strasburg, and many were terrified at what had lately happened to Constance.
Wherefore, several of the Nobility, Merchants, and some others, Many of them
renounce their freedoms in the City and depart.
fearing to lose their Estates, and being loath to offend the Emperor, having
in the Senate renounced their freedom in the City, removed to other places, not
without the murmuring and censure of many. The Emperor having removed from
Ausburg, where he left a Garrison to secure the change he had made, both in the
Religion and Government, marched with the rest of the Forces to Ulm. When he
came there, he dissolved the Town-Council, and appointed a new one, The Senate
of Vlm changed.
ordering the Ministers, amongst whom was Martin Frecht, to be clapped up in
Prison, because they rejected the Decree about Religion. Thus the new Council
being wholly at the Emperors devotion, received the Decre. During the sitting
of the Diet, at the request of Granvel, they had desired Frecht to go to
Ausburg, and assist in the settling the Affair of Religion, and that he might
lodge either with Pflug, Sidonius or Islebius, which he pleased: But he refused
it, as a suspicious thing, and the rather, that none of his Profession were
there from the other Cities. Being afterward enjoined to give his Opinion of
this Decree that was made, and how far he approved it, he drew up his Mind
concerning that in Writing. Now when the Emperor came to Ulm, the Council sent
for him, and the rest of the Ministers, and asked them their Judgment. They
answer as before, showing what they approved, and what they condemned in the
Decree. Being asked, Why, since those of Ausburg had sworn to submit to it, and
yet preached the Gospel, they did not do the same? It was unknown to them, said
they, what these men had done, nor was it their parts to be accountable for the
actions of others: The constancy of four Divines of Vlm.
That when at first, they were called to the Ministry, they had promised, upon
Oath, to preach to them the pure and sincere Doctrine of the Gospel, without
the mixture of human Traditions, that if the Council did now dislike that way,
they should release them from their Oath. At that time they were sent home, but
sent for again in the afternoon, and then some commissionated by the Council
told them, The Emperor, say they, has arrested you Prisoners to day, and now
ye shall be sent to his Palace: God guide you by his holy Spirit. They make
answer, That since it was God's good Will and Pleasure, they refused no danger,
and prayed in like manner for them. So soon as they were come out of the
Council, some Sergeants led them to Court, thinking that they would be brought
before the Emperor. But when they had waited a long while, and a great crowd
of People was gathered together, they were carried to the House of one George
Bessever, a Common Council man, they were Granvel, and the Bishop of Arras
lodged. Being at length called in, when, after a long debate, Granvel urged
them to submit to the Emperors Decree, and they again gave their Reasons, why
they could not: They were severely rebuked. But the rest being ordered to
withdraw a little, they take a milder course with Frecht, and speak him very
fair: However, he persisting in his Opinion, they try the rest also severally,
and of them, four continued constant, but two fell off. Hasen and Seldom were
all this while present with Granvel, and the Bishop of Arras. Presently after
they were put into Fetters, and sent to the Common Gaol, under a guard of
Spaniards and Germans, commanded by John, Count of Nassaw. And as they passed
by Frecht's House, he espied his Brother George looking out at the Window, whom
he called to, to have a care of his Wife and Family; but George, praying for
him, and his Companions, and bidding them to be of good courage, was for that
word carried to Prison himself; and this happened on the sixteenth of August.
After they had been kept four days Prisoners in the Town, The Ministers of Vlm
put into Chains.
on the fifth day, when the Emperor went away, they were, i^ their Chains, put
into a Cart, and carried to Kirchin, under a guard of about two hundred
Spaniards. Having continued there eight days in the custody of Captain
Altesteye's Germans, they were delivered over to the keeping of Madronio, a
Spanish Captain. The Emperor comes to Spire.
The Emperor went from Ulm to Spire, about the later end of August. Whilst he
was there, one came from him to Strasburg, to carry away the 12 great Guns,
which they promised to give the year before, on the last of August. The Pope,
The Popes Legates sent to Germany.
at the desire of the Emperor, dispatched three Bishops into Germany, to wit,
of Favo, Verona, and Ferentino, but what their Instructions were, it shall be
related in its proper place. The Emperor making but a short stay at Spire,
came to Mentz, and from thence went down the Rhine into the Netherlands, taking
with him in several Boats his Prisoners, The Duke of Saxony and Landgrave
carried Prisoners into the Low Countries.
the Duke of Saxony, and Landgrave, who had been lately brought from Hall in
Swabia, after that his Wife had again made intercession for him. The Landgrave
had a Town called Sanguer, and a Castle upon a steep Hill, lying upon the
Rhine: And when the Emperor came hither in the night time, he lay at Anchor,
and having only put a Shore a Guard, commanded all to stay on board in their
Vessels. The Senate of Strasburg, as we said a little before, was ordered to
give their answer within a Month: Wherefore, upon the Emperors coming to
Spire, The Deputies of Strasburg with the Emperor.
on the second of September, Deputies came thither unto him, to wit, James
Sturmey, Matthew Giger, and Lnvis Grempen; Not finding him at Spire, they
follow after to Mentz, and when they had given the Emperor notice of their
arrival, because the German Counselors, whom he commonly made use of, were
absent, they are commanded to follow him to Cologne. In the mean while, The
Bishops of Strasburg's Letter to the Clergy, about the observation of the
Decree.
the Bishop of Strasburg, writing to the Clergy, that lived in the City,
required them by his Letter, dated the fourth of September, to obey the Decree
of the Empire, and conform to the Rule prescribed: At that time, he sent also
the Emperors Letters to the same purpose, which, as we said, were written the
tenth day of July: And wrote also to the Senate, that they would not hinder or
molest them.

When the Deputies of Strasburg were come to Cologne, Their Letter to the
Emperor.
on the eighth of September they deliver the Emperor another French Letter
from the Senate, to this purpose. Although when we made our Peace with Your
Majesty, most victorious Emperor, we did not promise to obey what should be
decreed: And though we never did give our consent, that matters of Religion
should be handled after that manner; yet we are ready, as far as may be, to
comply with Your Majesty in all things, not only Civil, but Ecclesiastical: We
are very sensible, that Your Majesty, and the rest of the Princes, will have no
regard to our Remonstrances, and that it is but reasonable that we should
follow your footsteps. Nevertheless we beseech Your Majesty, on the other hand,
to consider, that, since every one must render an account of his Actions to
God, we have just cause to be concerned for our Salvation, and to take care,
that we do nothing contrary to our Conscience. Which was the reason also, we
were in good hopes, that having given Audience to our Divines, Your Majesty
would have moderated the Decree. But since now you refer us to the Council,
where, you say, matters shall be handled according to the holy Scriptures, we
admit of the condition; and that we may not seem to be contentious or
obstinate, we are not against it, but that the Bishop may, by men of his own
Order, officiate in some of our Churches, according to the formulary you have
prescribed: We shall transact with him about the Churches, and shall neither
offer any disturbance, nor hinder the Citizens from repairing to them; but it
shall be free to every one to follow what Religion they please, and that
seems rightest to them: Yet still on this condition, that we, on the other
hand, may be allowed some Churches, wherein the Word of God may be purely
taught, and the Sacraments administered as is fitting, and in the vulgar Tongue.
We shall also take care, that the People live orderly, and that nothing be done
undecently. Besides, we shall command Holy days and Fast days to be observed,
and that no Flesh be eaten on days prohibited; nor shall we suffer, that in
Sermons, or any other way, the least cause of Offense be given. And because
this Doctrine has now, for many years, taken such deep rooting in men's Minds,
that, without wounding their Consciences, it cannot be so suddenly taken away:
And then, Sir, since, in the manner we have declared, Your Majesty's Decree
will be received amongst us; we beseech Your Majesty, from the very bottom of
our Hearts, that you would be pleased to condescend to our humble
Supplications, and suffer us to enjoy our Religion, until the sitting of the
Council: This will be an Office most acceptable to God, and most conducible to
the Peace of our City and whole Province. When the Emperor had heard this
Letter, and also what James Sturmey, after his eloquent way, The Deputies of
Strasburg are dismissed, and ordered to agree with their Bishop.
had more largely said to the same purpose; and by the mouth of Seldom. made
ample protestations of his affection and good intentions toward Germany, at
length, after a long Parley, he thus dismisses them, that they should accord
with their Bishop, but on this condition, That if they did not agree, they
should stand to his Arbitration.

When the Emperor was come into the Low Countries, The Emperor keeps the Duke
of Saxony with him.
he kept the Duke of Saxony with him; but the Landgrave he sent to Oudenard, a
Town of Flanders: And upon the borders of Brabant, he dismissed all the Forces
that he had brought thither from Ausburg. The Landgrave he sends to Oudenard.
We mentioned before, that the States of the Empire had referred it to the
Emperor to constitute the Judicature of the Imperial Chamber. The first day of
October then, The Reformation of the Chamber.
according as it had been enacted, it began, and three Advocates were turned
out upon suspicion of Lutheranism, and all the rest are cautioned, amongst
other things, that they continue in the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, The
Duke of Brunswick brings an Action against the Protestants, and so do some
others.
or be turned out of place. There Henry Duke of Brunswick commenced a suit
against the confederate Protestants, for the past War wherein he was
overthrown. He had conditioned, nay, and sworn too, when he was let go out of
Prison, that he would not attempt any such thing; but he fell off from that
Agreement, and not only he, but also the Elector of Mentz, the Master of
Prussia, the Counts of Nassaw and Solmes, brought their Actions against the
Landgrave.

The Men of Constance, The people of Constance give themselves up to the house
of Austria.
lately outlawed, being reduced to great streights, and seeing no way how to
save themselves, fly to the last refuge, and surrender themselves for ever to
the House of Austria. King Ferdinand then takes them into his Protection, and
presently sent a Noble Man to be their Governor; who on the fifteenth of
October proposed these Conditions unto them. That from henceforth, King
Ferdinand, upon Conditions, takes them into his protection: And, then lays his
Commands upon them.
they acknowledge King Ferdinand and his Heirs for their lawful Lords, that
they perform all Fealty and Obedience unto them, at no time fall-off from their
Allegiance, and not enter into any League with others: That they absolutely
obey all Decrees to be made by King Ferdinand and his Governors, concerning
Religion and all things else. That they faithfully and truly serve King
Ferdinand and his Heirs, and obey his Commands as the rest of his Subjects do,
and then they swear to these Conditions. Two days after, the Governor calls a
Council, and demands of them what Money they had in their Treasury, and that an
Inventory be made of all their Artillery and Ammunition: He also commands, that
no Towns-man wear a long Sword; that none presume to come near the Works of the
Town, nor the Guard-house, that the Names of those who, during the War, gave
the City intelligence of their danger be given in; that the Goods of those who
are absent, and of those who have removed to other places, be inventoried and
detained: That all public Writings be produced, and some, who are skilful in
the Affair, give an account what every one of them concerns. Afterward, all
the Ministers of the Churches are commanded to leave the Town within eight days.

In this Month, The Marriage of Duke Augustus of Saxony.
Augustus, Brother to Maurice Duke of Saxony, Brother to Maurice Duke of
Saxony, married the Lady Ann, Daughter to Christian King of Denmark. It was
agreed upon in the Contract of Marriage, that Duke Maurice should settle no
Estate of Inheritance upon him out of the Lands of Duke Frederick, but out of
his own Paternal Inheritance.

At that time, A Sedition at Bourdeaux.
there was a great Insurrection through Guienne, about the gabel of Salt, and
the Customs. The chief City of the Country is Bourdeaux, a large and populous
Seaport Town, which sometimes belonged to the English. They were the very
chief in the Rebellion, and killed the King's Governor. This being then a
thing of most dangerous consequence, the French King sent thither, under the
Command of the Constable and Duke of Aumale, one and thirty Companies of Foot,
of which, one and twenty were Germans, and a small Body of Horse. The
Bourdeaux-men hearing of this, make their Application to the Constable,
offering him free entry into their Town with his Soldiers; but pray him not to
suffer the Germans to enter. His answer was, That they were not to give Rules
to him; that the Germans were in the King's Service, as well as the rest; that
he would do, what he thought fit; The Bourdeaux-men receive the Constable and
his Soldiers.
and if they did not open the Gates, he had Keys to unlock them. So then, he
entered the Town October the nineteenth, and having drawn up his Men in several
Posts, he first commands the Citizens to bring out all their Arms, and carry
them to the Castle, which took up two days time. The third day they began to
enquire from house to house, and many of the Seditious were taken, who were in
several manners put to death. The Punishments inflicted by the Constable at
Bourdeaux.
Fourteen Gentlemen were also brought forth with Halters about their Necks; of
whom, one or two being beheaded, the German Officers interceded for the rest,
and begged their Lives of the Constable. Twelve days were spent in this sad and
bloody spectacle, and yet that was not all; for, besides those that suffered
death, a great many were sent to the Galleys. All their Bells also were taken
from them, The Bells are taken from them, and their Charters burnt.
not only in the Town, but likewise in the Country about, that they might not
ring any Alarm, as they had done before. Then all their Charters and public
Writings, containing their Liberties and Freedoms, were burnt, they themselves
making the Fire. And because they had killed the King's Lieutenant, The dead
Body of the King's Lieutenant, being by the Citizens scraped out of the ground
with their Nails, is splendidly buried.
the Constable made them scrape up the Earth, where he was buried, with their
Nails and Fingers, allowing them no Tool or Instrument to do it with; so that
the dead Body being found, it was solemnly buried with a great Procession of
Monks and Priests, who went before the Corpse: After came all the Citizens,
about five thousand in number, each with a Wax Taper in his hand, and when they
past before the Constable's Lodgings, the Corpse was set down at some paces
distance; then the Towns-people falling upon their Knees, with a lamentable cry
beg pardon, bewail and curse their fact, and thank the King for not punishing
them more rigorously. Having so ordered all Matters, he left a Garrison in the
Town, and marched away on the ninth of November.

There happened a very strange thing at that time in Italy. The horrible
History of Francis Spira.
In Citadella, a Town not far from Padoua, belonging to the State of Venice,
lived one Franccis Spira, a Lawyer of great Practice at the Bar. This Man began
with incredible Zeal to embrace the Reformed Religion, and making daily more
and more proficiency in it, he told his Thoughts of the several Points of
Doctrine, not only to his Friends at home, but abroad every where to all. This
thing could not be long concealed, but was at length carried to John Caso, John
Caso, Archbishop of Benevento, the Pope's Legate at Venice.
Archbishop of Benevento, who was then the Pope's Legate at Venice. When Spira
came to know this, he very well saw, what danger he was in; and therefore,
having long cast about, and considered with himself, what was best to be done,
he resolved, at length, to go to the Legate, who had sent for him. Wherefore
going to Venice, and having confessed his Error, as he thought, or, as fear
made him call it, he begged Absolution, and promised Obedience for the future.
Though the Legate was glad of his voluntary Confession, yet, for Example-sake,
he enjoins him to go home, and make a public Recantation of what he had said
before. He promised to do so; and although he then began to repent of what he
had done, yet at the solicitation of his Friends, who told him, Spira falls
sick, and also into despair, admitting of no comfort.
that the welfare, not only of himself, but of his Wife, Children, Estate and
all, depended on it, he obeyed. But not long after, he fell sick, both in Body
and Mind, and began to despair of God's Mercy. By the advice thereof of his
friends, he is removed from Citadella to Padoua, that he might both have the
assistance of Physicians, and the ghostly comfort of learned and pious Men.
When he had been visited by the Physicians, John Paul Crasso, Bellacata and
Frisimelega, they presently gave their opinion, that the Distemper was
contracted by pensiveness, and over-eager thinking, and that the best Remedy
for him, was, good Discourse, and ghostly Consolation. Many learned Men
therefore come daily to him, and labored to cure his Mind by such Texts of
Scripture, as declare the manifold Mercies of God toward us: He again told
them, that he denied not, but that all they said was true; but that these Texts
did not belong to him, for that he was damned to everlasting Pains, because,
for fear of danger, he had abjured the known Truth; that these Pains he felt
already in his Mind, and that he could not love God, but horribly hated him. In
this condition he persisted, He dies, despairing of Salvation.
refusing all Sustenance, and when they forced Food into his mouth, ever
spitting it out again. It would be tedious to relate all that past, either what
he said, or what others alleged from holy Scripture to cure his despair.
Since, then, all Advice and Counsel were but cast away upon him, and that both
his bodily infirmity, and the anguish of his Mind, increased more and more
daily, he was carried home again, and there miserably died, in that sad state
of Despair. Vergerio.
Whilst he lay at Padoua, amongst others, Petro Paulo Vergerio Bishop of
Justinopolis, a Town in Istria, under the Dominion of the Venetians, came often
to visit and comfort him.

Mention is made, in the foregoing Books, of Vergerio's being employed by the
Popes, Clement and Paul, as their Nuncio in Germany. He was also in very great
favor with King Ferdinand, whilst he was in Hungary. Who having there a
Daughter baptized by the name of Catharine, Vergerio, with George Marquess of
Brandenburg, and the Archbishop of Lundon, who were the Godfathers. But
afterward he revolted from the Papacy, and that upon a very strange occasion.
Upon his return to Rome, whither he had been recalled after the Conference of
Worms, The strange Conversion of Vergerio to the reformed Religion.
which was in the beginning of the year 1541. The Pope designed to have made
him a Cardinal, amongst other new ones, whom then he was about to promote: But
it was whispered about by some, that, through long conversation with the
Germans, he was become a Lutheran. When Vergerio heard this from Cardinal
Ginucio, whom the Pope had told it to, he was strangely surprised, Vergerio
writes a Book against the Apostates of Germany.
and to purge himself, retired into his own Country, and there began a Book, to
which he gave this Title, Against the Apostates of Germany. Now whilst for
confuting the Opinions, he carefully perusued the Books of his Adversaries, and
attentively considered their Arguments, he perceived himself worsted and
overcome; and laying aside all hopes of a Cardinals Hat, he went to ask advice
of his own Brother, John Baptista Vergerio, Bishop of Pola.
John Baptista, Bishop of the City of Pola. His Brother terrified at first,
bewailed the poor man's condition: But having, at his earnest prayer and
entreaty, applied himself to the search of the holy Scriptures, and diligently
weighed that Point of Doctrine concerning Justification, and having compared
things together, he yielded, and concluded the Popish Doctrine to be false.
Whereupon, rejoicing in one another, they began to teach the people of Istria,
which is the proper Office of a Bishop, and to preach up the benefit of Christ
to mankind, and to tell the people, what works God requires of us, that so they
might bring over Men to the true Worship of their Maker. But many Adversaries
arose against them, The Inquisitors against Vergerio.
especially the Monks called the Observantines, who informed the Inquisitors,
of whom the chief was Hannibal Grisonio, who had for Colleague Jerome Mutio,
the same that afterward wrote an Invective against Vergerio: An Invective
against Vergerio.
And not content with that neither, he published also a Libel, wherein, through
hatred to the reformed Religion, he most slanderously traduces Germany: When
Grisonio came to Pola, and Justinopolis, he rushed into the Citizens Houses,
The Inquisition of Pola and Justinopolis.
and searched for prohibited Books: Next he went to the Pulpit, and amongst
many other Terrors denounced, he excommunicated all, who did not inform,
against those, that were suspected of Lutheranism: Promising, however, easier
Penance to those that did repent, and of their own accord asked Pardon from
him: But threatening such as did not openly confess their Crime, and were
afterward accused by others, that they should be burnt for the same; and thus,
he went, from house to house, scaring the people out of their wits. So that
some came in and acused themselves, and for fear did, as they were bid. The
richer sort were forced to acknowledge their Error privately, but the poor
publicly: Such as confessed, that they had read the New Testament, in the
Vulgar Tongue, were strictly charged to do so no more for the future: This
wrought so upon the common People, who were struck with a panick fear, that
they strove, who should inform most, without any regard to Relation,
Friendship, or Obligation; the Son not sparing the Father, the Wife the
Husband, nor the Tenant his Lord and Master. Now the Informations were, most
commonly, about frivolous Matters, such as superstition made them take for
scandalous sins. Besides, they had frequent Sermons against the Doctrine of
Vergerio: And on a certain day, when there was a great confluence of People, in
the Cathedral Church of Justinopolis, Grisonio, who then publicly said Mass,
in very rich Vestments, steps up into the Pulpit, and amonst other things, that
he might drive the Nail to the Head, Now, said he, and for some years past, you
have been visited by many Judgments and Calamities, that fell sometimes upon
your Olives, and sometimes on your Corn, Grisonio's exhortation against the
Lutherans.
sometimes upon your Vines, and sometimes again on your Cattle, or other Goods:
And the cause of all these evils, has been your Bishop, and the rest of that
heretical Rout; nor are ye to expect any relief, before they be restrained; and
the best way to do that, is to fall upon them, and stone them. Vergerio, being
thus baited by their violents courses, was forced to step aside to Mantua, to
Cardinal Hercules Gonzaga, Vergerio goes to Trent to justify himself in
Council.
who his familiar acquaintance, But, since some at Rome, and John Caso, the
Popes Legate at Venice, urged Gonzaga, by Letters and Messengers, that he should
no longer harbor such a man: He went to Trent, where the Council then sat,
that he might purge himself. When this came to the Popes Ears, though he could
rather have wished, to have had him Prisoner, yet to avoid all suspicion,
especially in Germany, as if it had not been a free Council, he wrote to his
Legates, that they should not allow him any place amongst the Fathers, but
command him to be gone some where else. Being in this manner turned out, But is
denied a place in it.
he went to Venice: There Caso, the Legate, persuaded him, by all means, to go
to Rome; But he knowing his own danger, refused it. Then some days after,
another charges him in the Popes Name not to return again to Justinopolis; and
therefore he went to Padua, during his abode there, he was a Spectator of the
sad Example, we mentioned, and being moved thereat, and an eyewitness of Gods
heavy wrath, which persued that poor wretch for denying of the Truth, he began
to be confirmed more and more, and then fully resolved to leave his Native
Country, and all that ever he had, and take upon himself a voluntary
Banishment, that he might go live in some place, where he might freely profess
the Doctrine of Christ. Vergerio preached the Gospel against the Grisons, and
from thence was called to Tubingen.
This he did some Months after, for leaving the Country of Bergamo, he went and
settled amongst the Grisons, who were the next Neighbors: And having, for some
years, preached the Gospel there, and in the Valteline, he was by Christopher,
Duke of Wittemburg, invited to Tubingen. His Brother, the Bishop of Pola, died
before he left Italy, and was suspected to have been poisoned. Many other Great
Men, besides Vergerio, had seen Spira in that State, Vergerio's Brother dies,
not without suspicion of Poison.
and amongst these, Matthew Gribaldo, a Lawyer of Padua, who published a
relation of all that he himself had seen and heard; as also did Vergerio
himself, Sigismund Gelou, Polonus, and Henry Scot. The Archbishop of Benevento,
The Book of an Archbishop on the praise of Sodomy.
whom we mentioned, wrote a Book of Sodomy, than which nothing can be imagined
more filthy and obscene. Nor was he ashamed to extol and praise the foulest of
Crimes, which, nevertheless, is too well known over Italy and Greece.

In the mean time, the Archbishops of Germany, especially those of Mentz,
Cologne, and Treves, call Synods in their several Provinces, to reform the
Church, according to the formulary prescribed by the Emperor. Bucer, as we
told you before, had preached in the Province of Cologne, and there were some
Ministers in it, that had married Wives. Now, though it was by the Emperors
Decree allowed, that married Priests might retain their Wives, until the
Council determined the Matter, yet the Archbishop of Cologne pretended, that
that was only indulged to the Lutherans, Marriages contracted by the Ministers
of the Church of Cologne, are annulled and declared to be incestuous.
but not to Roman Catholics; wherefore, he made a Decree, annulling Marriages
contracted, pronouncing them to be incestuous, and declaring the Children begot
in them, to be illegitimate. The Archbishop of Treves has but a small
Province, and only three Suffragan Bishops, Metz, Toul, and Verdun. There was
no need of such a Law amongst them: For the Churchmen, in those places, liked
Concubines better than Wives: But in this Archbishopric, where he perceived
the danger to be greater, he made the same Decree, as his Colleagues did. The
Custom of the Province of Treves.
The Jurisdiction of Mentz is of a vast extent; for he has twelve Suffragan
Bishops, and all Hesse in a manner is subject to him in Spirituals. He
therefore began to urge, and press, the Observation of the Emperors Decree,
The Interim is in vain pressed upon the Landgrave's subjects.
and of the Doctrine contained in the Interim. The same did the Archbishop of
Treves, who also had some Jurisdiction there: But the Landgrave's Sons, and the
rest of the Governors, and Counselors, were deaf to these things. The
Archbishop sent also Michael Sidonius, his Vicar General to Franckfurt, where,
having first consecrated the Churches, he preached and taught, after his own
manner. And the Bishop of Ausburg made some inconstant Priests, that wavered in
their Opinions, Si^onius consecrates a new the Churches of Franckfurt.
abjure their Doctrine.

We spoke before of the French, who in the Summer time went to the assistance
of the Scots: Now these, at length, carry over into France, Mary the Kings only
Daughter and Heir, a young Lady of six years of age, that so they might put the
English out of all hopes of obtaining her. The Queen of Scots carried over into
France.
This year the Pope made Charles of Vendosme, a French man, Cardinal.

After that Maximilian of Austria arrived in Spain, and had married the Lady
Mary, the Emperor's Daughter, Philip the Emperor's Son, a Prince of one and
twenty years of Age, Philip the Emperor's Son passes through Italy to the Low
Countries.
being sent for by his Father, prepares to be gone, and leaving behind him his
Cousin German, and Brother in-Law, to govern the Kingdom in his absence, he set
sail with a Fleet of fifty Galleys, and almost as many Merchants Ships, under
the command of Andrea Doria, who had brought over Maximilian, and on the twenty
fifth day of November arrived at Genoua, accompanied with a great train of
Nobility, amongst whom was the Duke of Alva, and the Cardinal of Trent. Philip
is magnificently received at Genova.
For some fews days, after his arrival, he lodged without the Walls in the
Palace of Andrea Doria, the Admiral, till the Ships should be unloaded, and the
preparations within the City finished. But on the second of December, 1549.
he made his entry, and was magnificently received. Being there furnished, not
only with Money, but also other necessaries for a journey by Land, eight days
after he departed, and passing by Alessandria and Pavia went to Milan. At Pavia
were the great Guns, that the Emperor took from the Duke of Saxony, As also at
Milan.
John Frederick, as we said; and these also he viewed. At Milan, where he
arrived, the nineteenth of December, triumphal Arches and Statues, with
honorable Inscriptions were erected for him in many places, at his entry, he
was received by the Duke of Savoy, and the Ambassadors of Venice, Florence,
Ferrara and Siena. About that time Maximilian, Count of Buren, died of a
Quinsie at Brussels, where the Emperor then was, his Physician Andrew
Vesalius, The Count of Buren dies.
having at first sight foretold him, as they say, the very hour of his death.

Duke Maurice, as we told you, after the Decree about Religion was read, left
Ausburg: A Convention of States in Saxony.
So soon as he came home, he called a Convention of the Nobility, and other
States at Meissen, where he propounds the whole Matter, and declares to them,
what the Emperors will and pleasure was. They urge him with his own, and the
Emperors promises, and insist upon having the Religion of the Augustan
Confession allowed them. Afterward it was thought fit, that the Divines of
Wittemburg and Leipsick should be consulted: Who, accordingly, met first at
Begy, then at Zell, and afterward at Juterbock. Whither also came John
Islebius, sent from the Elector of Brandenburg. Here was a Decree made
concerning things indifferent, and what are called Adiaphorous. The last
Convention was at Leipsick, and there a form of Religion was drawn up, A Form
of Religion is drawn up for Saxony.
which all Men, within the Territories of Duke Maurice, were to observe; but
this Book gave afterward great offense, as shall he declared in its proper
place. In the mean time, the Emperors Son proceeded in his journey, and passing
by Mantua and Trent, he came first to Ausburg, The Emperous Son comes to
Germany.
then to Spire, and so continuing forward, through the Country of Luxemburg, he
came to his Father; the Cardinal of Trent, amongst others, waiting upon him.
The Emperor, upon his approaching, sent a party of goodly Horse, under the
command of the Duke of Arescot, to meet him. Duke Maurice also, having gone to
meet him, The Duke of Arescot is sent to meet him.
as far as Trent, took a short progress, with a small number of Attendants, to
go see Mantua and Venice, and was most honorably entertained by the Senate. He
earnestly begged of Prince Philip, that he would intercede with the Emperor,
Duke Maurice's intercession for the Landgrave his Father-in-Law.
for the Landgrave, his Father-in-Law, which he did, and sent him word of it,
bidding him be in good hopes, for that he had received a fair answer, but that,
withal, he should dissemble, and seem not to know of any such thing.

About this time there happened troubles in Africa; for one Zeriff, rising from
a very small beginning, Troubles in Africa.
was at last advanced to a Kingdom, and drove his next Neighbor, the King of
Fez, out of his Country, who, afterward, came to the Emperor at Ausburg, to
bewail his own misfortune; and implore his aid. Nicholas, Upon what occasion
the Cardinal of Lorrain was made Bishop of Metz.
Bishop of Metz, Son to Anthony Duke of Lorrian, and Guardian to his Brothers
Son, as we mentioned in the sixteenth Book, renouncing his Ecclesiastical
Orders, married a Lady, of the House of Egmont, which has large Possessions in
Brabant; so that the Bishopric fell to the Cardinal of Lorrain.

We told you before, what past betwixt the Emperor, and the Deputies of
Strasburg at Cologne: A little while after they returned home, they began to
treat with the Bishop, who, having assembled the Nobility, declares to them,
what the Emperors pleasure was, and charges all to obey, laying the same
commands also upon the Clergy of Strasburg: But seeing he propounded harder
conditions than were expected, The City of Strasburg's Letter to the Emperor.
on the twelfth of February, the Senate sent Henry Cope, as their Deputy, with
Letters to the Emperor, wherein they acquaint him, that they had taken great
care to treat with their Bishop, but that he propounded such Conditions to
them, that if they accepted them, they could not enjoy those things which were
allowed them, by the Decree lately made at Ausburg: For, after a long debate,
they say, we told him, that we would enjoin our Citizens to keep Holy Days, and
on certain days, abstain from eating of Flesh: Besides, we have dealt with the
Ministers of our Church, and we believe some of them will, of their own accord,
lay down their Office of Preaching: We are willing and free, then, that he
settle Religion, according to the Platform prescribed at Ausburg: For no
hinderance shall be made on our parts, nor by the Citizens neither, whom we
shall strictly charge, not to offer the least opposition: Now this being our
Case, most victorious Emperor, we pray your Majesty, that you would be pleased
to suffer us to keep our own Ministers, even such of them as are married, and
not reduce us to extremity, especially, since we are ready to behave our
selves, with all moderation, and shall not give the least cause of offense.

Mention has been made before of the Emperors proscribing the Republic of
Magdenburg: The People of Magdenburg exposed as a prey, because of Religion.
But their rejecting of the Decree, lately made about Religion, did much
inflame their former offense: So that now the Emperor proceeded against them,
with new Edicts and Proclamations, exposing them, as a prey, to all, inviting
the neighboring Princes, and States, to make War against them, and to do them
all the hurt and damage, that by any means whatsoever, they could. It has been
said before, The Preachers of Vlm freed out of Prison.
that the Ministers of Ulm, were, by the Emperors Orders, made Prisoners; but
at length, after seven Months confinement, they are now, in the third day of
March, set at liberty, having first paid their charges.

About this time began the State of England to be troublesome. Edward, Duke of
Somerset, Tumults in Eng^and.
the King Uncle, and Protector of the Kingdom, as we said before, had a
Brother, who was Lord High Admiral: Of him the Protector conceived some
suspicion, or suffered himself to be persuaded, that he aspired to the Crown,
and intended to get the King into his power; whereupon he ordered him to be
apprehended, The Admiral of England beheaded.
and brought to his Trial; where, being condemned to die, he was beheaded on
the twentieth of March. He had married Catharine Parr, the Queen Dowager of
King Henry the Eight, and that also, somewhat increased the suspicion. But the
envy, and emulation of another great Lady, was thought to have contributed much
to this disaster.

The Bishop of Strasburg, The Bishop of Strasburg enjoins the Clergy to obey
the Emperors Edict.
again, enjoins the Clergy to obey the Emperors Edict. Now there is in that
City, a Church dedicated to St. Thomas, the yearly Revenues whereof were by the
Senate allotted for stipends to the Ministers of the Gospel, and the other
learned Men, who had the Education and Instruction of the Youth. Those chiefly
he urged to tell him, within what time they would satisfy the Emperors
Decree, and Expectation; then, what fit Men they had for that purpose, and what
Ornaments of the Church were yet in being: But they took time to advise with
Thomas Cranmer, The diligence of Archbishop Cranmer in Promoting Piety.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of England, a Man of excellent Learning,
who made it his whole business, to revive, and promote Piety and Learning:
Wherefore, when he saw in what state Germany was, and the danger learned Men
there were in; by frequent Letters he solicited Bucer chiefly, Bucer and Fagius
go over Sea to England.
and Paulus Fagius, one most expert in the Hebrew Language, to come over into
England, assuring them of all love and friendship; wherefore, by permission
from the Senate, on the first of April, they set out upon their Journey, that
they might go thither, and sow the Seed of pure Doctrine. Their coming was very
acceptable, not only to the King, but to most of the Nobility also, and the
People: And after they had been for some time with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, they were both sent to teach in Cambridge.

On the first of April, The Emperors Son makes his entry into Brussels.
Prince Philip of Austria, with a most splendid Pomp, made his entrance into
Brussels, where his Father was. The Ambassadors of Duke Maurice, and the
Elector of Brandenburg were there, being sent to solicit the intercession of
Prince Philip, and the Cardinal of Trent, who was a great Friend to Duke
Maurice. Intercession made for the Landgrave, but in vain.
But though they put the Landgrave, who then was at Oudenard, in good hopes,
yet nothing could be effected, and not long after, when the Landgrave, for his
healths sake, would have eaten Flesh, the Captain of the Guard coming in, threw
down the Dish, Meat and all, that was brought him, upon the Ground. At the same
time, the Bishop of Strasburg, after eight years, takes, at length, Orders, and
says Mass, and holding a Convocation of his Clergy at Saverne, made such
Decrees, as suited their purpose. Then he requires of the Senate of Strasburg,
The Bishop of Strasburg says Mass.
by Messengers, that they rebuild the Altars, restore to him the liberty of
appointing the Ministers of the Church; absolve the Clergy from their Oath,
restore their Privileges, and produce all the Ornaments of the Churches. But
the Professors, he strictly charges, to give him a positive answer, whether
they would obey the Emperors Edict, or not? They having spoken, at large, of
their submission and deference to the Emperor, and then, of their several
Charges and Employments, openly declare what it is they teach and do, that
being Divines, Philosophers, Logicians. and Rhetoricians, and Men of the like
Profession, they were not only useful, but also necessary in the Church and
Schools, then they show, by whom, they were admitted into the College, The Plea
of the Professors of Strasburg to the Bishop.
with the Approbation of the Senate, and after a long Declaration of their
Case, they humbly, and lovingly, pray, that he would not disturb an Order so
well established, nor put them upon minding of other Affairs, that were not
near so necessary. The Agents, on the other hand, make answer, that that
College was not Instituted for such kind of Scholastic Employments, and that
the Ancient Order ought not to be changed: That if there were any among them,
The Answer of the Bishops Agents to the Professors of Strasburg.
that thought themselves grieved, and could not, with a good Conscience,
comply, the Bishop was not the Man, that would persuade them to any thing
against their wills: But that they were free to give place, and as the common
Proverb is, Either to drink, or be gone: For that if the Senate had a mind to
have Professors of Arts and Sciences in the Town, it was but reasonable, that
they should be maintained out of the Public Treasury, and not by the Rents and
Profits of the College, which was appointed for other uses. That the Bishop,
and the Predecessors, had for many years past been hindered in the Exercise, and
execution, of their Right, but that he would not suffer it any longer. After a
long debate about the Matter, they depart without coming to any conclusion; and
when the Senate came to know of it, they interceded with the Bishop, The
intercession of the Senate of Strasburg for their Professors.
by most kind and friendly Letters, praying and beseeching him, that he would
have some regard, at least, to the Youth, who were much improved in Parts and
Learning, by the Endeavors, and Education of that School. In this manner, was
the Matter long tossed to and again, by Messengers and Letters, till, at
length, by the interposition of Mediators, it was taken up and compounded, as
shall be mentioned hereafter.

It was thought, that the Bishop, who had been always looked upon, as a Man of
a mild and peaceable Nature, that loved his ease, did not act thus, so much,
out of his own inclination, as at the instigation of his Friends, who
represented to him, that this occasion of recovering his Jurisdiction, was not
to be slighted, and that unless he prosecuted it, he might also incur the
Emperor's displeasure. In all these Transactions, Christopher Welsinger, a
Civilian.
he made use of one Christopher Welsinger, a Civilian, who had sometimes
studied at Wittemberg: But the Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Strasburg
employed, as their Advocate, one John Tischell, a Doctor of the Laws.

The last Book mentioned, how that after the promulgation of the Decree about
Religion, The Duke of Deux-ponts is again urged to approve the Decree.
Wolfgang Duke of Deux-ponts was sent for to come to Ausburg. The Emperor had
pressed him by several Letters, to obey the Decree; and because he had referred
the matter to the Bishops, the Emperor put the Question to him, whether or not
he himself approved the Decree? And if he would turn out the Ministers of the
Church, who did not conform thereunto? He therefore wrote to the Emperor in
French, resuming in a few words what had been done the Summer before at
Ausburg; His Letter to the Emperor.
and telling His Majesty, That upon his return home, he had intimated to his
people, and commanded them to observe that part of the Decree, which related to
the keeping of Holy days, and the eating of Flesh, that he had also several
times carefully read over the whole Decree about Religion, wherein he
confessed, there were many things that agreed with that Faith, whereby he
expected Salvation; and many also that were inconsistent with it: But that
nevertheless he had charged the Ministers of the Church to weigh seriously all
the Points of it, and afterward make their Report to him, how they thought the
matter might be ordered; that since all of them with one voice affirmed, that
they could not with a safe Conscience approve it in all points, he thought it
not his part to compel them to do otherwise. That he had therefore desired the
Bishops, that they themselves would take some course about it; and that he had
already acquainted His Majesty with their Answer, being in good hopes, that no
more would have been required of him: But now that you would have a plain and
positive Answer, Most mighty Emperor, said he, I Will freely tell Your Majesty,
what my Judgment is. And first, as to the Religion, Rites, and Ceremonies,
which now, for some Years past, have been observed within my Dominion, I have
been born and bred up in them, The Ingenuous Confession of the Duke of
Deux-ponts.
Sir, as I told Your Majesty before, to this very time, and never heard of any
other kind of Doctrine; besides, Sir, I have been at some pains to study and
examine it, and, as far as I can conceive, it has seemed to me in all things
consonant to the Word of God. For so much I must confess, now the Question is
put to me, lest I should wound my own Conscience, and endanger my Salvation.
This is also the reason, why I cannot approve the Decree, though in every thing
else I be most ready, in imitation of my Ancestors, to render you most humble
obedience: Your Majesty, Sir, as chief Magistrate, has power to Enact and
Enjoin what you think fit to be done; for I am no such man, as can, will, or
ought to, be against that; it wholly depends on your own will and pleasure:
This only I humbly beseech, that neither I, nor the people of my Dominion, be
constrained to do any thing contrary to our Judgment and Conscience: As for the
Ministers of the Church, in my last Letter I begged of Your Majesty, that you
would be pleased to suffer them to stay, chiefly to baptize Children, and visit
the Sick, till others should be put into their places: Nevertheless, if Your
Majesty command them instantly to be gone, and not stay the coming of others,
you shall be obeyed, Sir, though it will be a great grief and detriment to the
People; for many of them are already gone, and in all things that can be
performed, I know that Obedience is due to Your Majesty.

When in the Territories of Duke Maurice, The refutation of the Interim by
those of Lower Saxony.
things seemed to tend to a change in Religion, the Ministers of Lubeck,
Lunenburg, and Hamburg, published a Writing, wherein they fully confuted the
Book and Decree of Ausburg; and the chief Author of that Writing, was one John
Epine. Moreover, the Doctors of Magdenburg, Nicholas Armstorff, and especially
Matthias Flacius, a Sclavonian, born in the Town of Albona, The beginning of
the divisions in the Churches of Saxony.
and Nicholas Gallus, take up sharply the Divines of Wittemberg and Leipsick,
in many public Papers, accusing them, that they acted disingenuously, and by
their adiaphorous and indifferent things opened a Door to Popery. This at
length they lay down for a Rule, that all Rites and Ceremonies, though never so
indifferent in their own Nature, yet are no longer indifferent, if force, an
opinion of holiness, and necessity intervene, and, if occasion be thereby given
to impiety. The Sclavonian had for some years been an Hearet and Disciple of
Melanchton; but when this Debate arose, he went to Magdeburg, and, in a little
Book which he afterward published, The Hamburghers Letter to Mela^chton, about
indifferent matters.
gave his Reasons why he did do so. Furthermore, the Divines of Hamburg wrote
to those of Wittemberg, and particularly to Melanchton, telling them, what they
called Adiaphorous or indifferent things, and how far they might be admitted;
and desiring of them, on the other hand, that they would write back, and
plainly show them, what it was they comprehended under that Name, to the end,
Men might be sure, what they were to follow, without wavering in their minds,
and that that name, Adiaphorous, might not give occasion to many other Errors,
which might insensibly insinuate themselves into the Church again. Melanchton
answered that Letter, Melanchton's Answer.
wherein, amongst other things, he said, that some little Bondage was to be
endured, provided it were not joined with impiety.

The Archbishop of Mentz having called a Provincial Synod in the beginning of
May, The Electoral Archbishops held Provincial Synods.
afterward published a Book of the Decrees thereof. The same did also Treves
and Cologne, which last has a very large Province too. That Book, amongst other
things, The Heads of their Decrees.
determines about Confession, that no man be admitted to the Lord's Supper,
unless he have confessed his Sins; about the hallowing of Salt Water, and other
things, which, by Exorcisms and Prayers, are prepared for the use of believers,
as they say; about Relicts, the Invocation and Adoration of Saints; about
Pilgrimages, Prayers for the Dead, Purgatory, Fasting, and the choice of Meats;
about Canonical Hours, as they call them, and the tremendous Ceremonies of the
Mass. Maurice, Bishop of Aichstadt, came in person to the Synod, but the rest
sent their Vicars. Now the constitution of the Synod, touching Consecrations
and Exorcisms, is of a very large extent. Of Consecrations and Exorcisms.
Every Lord's day, when there is a great Congregation of People in the Church,
the Priest, with many Prayers, exorcises, as they term it, first Water, and
then Salt; then putting the Salt into the Water, he therewith sprinkleth the
People; The manifold use of Holy Water.
and this Sprinkling is thought to give Health, both to Body and Mind, to
defeat the Snares of the Devil, and to cleanse, not only Men, but inanimate
things also; for it is sprinkled upon the Ground, Stones, and the Graves of
dead Men, the Priests praying God, that he would endow it with that Virtue and
efficacy. Salt in Baptism.
After the same manner also is Salt used in Baptism, for the Priest puts
Consecrated Salt into the Child's Mouth, commanding the Devil to come out of
it; then he dips the Insant three times into Water, and wetting his Thumb in
Oil, The Churching of Women.
anoints its Breast and Shoulders. Women also, when after their Childbed they
go to be Churched, at their entering the Church door, are sprinkled with this
Holy Water: In short, it serves for many uses, especially when there is
occasion to engage Spirits that walk in the Night time, or are to be exorcised.
1589.
Whatever also belongs to the Accoutrement and Dress of the Priests, is
consecrated by certain Prayers: Besides in hallowing the Baptismal Water of the
Font, Tapers, Palms, the Pascal Lamb, or Agnus Dei, as they call it, which is
made of Wax, Eggs, Flesh, Cheese, Bacon, Flowers, Herbs, the Fruit of Trees; in
all these, the Holy Water, we have been speaking of, is employed* When a Church
is to be built, The Ceremony of the Dedication of a Church.
the Bishop or his Vicar lays the first Foundation Stone, and sprinkleth it
with Holy Water; and when it is finished, he goes thrice round it, and first,
sprinkles the upper Walls, then the middle, and the last, the lowermost of all;
with his Crozier making the sign of the Cross upon the leaves of the uppermost
Door, to keep the Devil off, that he do not approach it: Entering afterward
into the Church, and some Prayers being sung, an Officer makes the sign of the
Cross with the sprinkling of some Ashes; that being done, the Bishop with his
Crozier draws some Greek Characters upon the Ashes at the left side of the
Cross, and Latin Characters at the right; using afterward another sort of Holy
Water, made of Water, Salt, Wine and Ashes, wherewith he again sprinkles the
Church, and exhorts the People to bountifulness and liberality. The
Consecration of Bells.
The like is done with Bells, and in the first place, they must hang so, as the
Bishop may go round them, who having muttered over some Psalms, blesses Water
and Salt, which he mingles together, and therewith carefully washes the Bell
inside and outside; then he wipes it dry, making the sign of the Cross upon it
with Holy Oil; and prays to God, that when they ring or toll that Bell, Faith
and Charity may be increased in the Minds of Men, all the Snares of the Devil
driven away; Hail, Thunder, Lightening, Winds, Storms, and all bad and
unseasonable Weather may be assuaged. When with a Linen Cloth he has wiped off
that Oily Cross, he makes seven other Crosses upon it, and but one only in the
inside; and having afterward said over some Psalms, he puts a Censer under the
Bell, and so censes and blesses it. In most places, after this Ceremony is
over, they feast and make merry, as if it were at a Wedding. The way of
Consecrating Altars.
Now Altars are Consecrated in this manner: They take Oil, Chrisme, a Pound of
Frankincense, a Pan of Coals, Salt, Water, Wine, Ashes, Hyssop, one course
Linen Cloth to wipe with, and another finer and softer to cover, five Crosses
made of Wax, a Chalice, Cement, a couple of Torches; and lastly, all that
belongs to the Ornament of the Altar. In the mean time, the Bishop, with some
Priests, say over some Psalms and Prayers, and sprinkles the Altar in five
different places, making in every place the sign of the Cross with the Water:
Then he goes round the Altar seven times, and throws upon it Water mingled with
Wine, Hyssop, and Ashes; after that, he mixeth Cement with the Water, and
pours out what remains about the Altar; This being done, presently the
Relics of Saints are brought in great pomp, and, being censed, are put in
their proper place. Next to that, he censes the Altar three times all round,
and then gives the Censer to a Priest, who continually keeps censing, during
the remaining time of the Consecration. Having afterward made the sign of the
Cross with Oil on several parts of the Altar, he pours the Oil upon it, and
rubs it in: Then he places here and there five pieces of Frankincense, and as
many Crosses made of Wax, and kindles them; so letting them burn there, that
the Ashes, being afterward gathered up, may be kept as holy Relics. Lastly,
he anointeth the four corners and fore front of the Altar, The making of Oil,
and the Chrism.
and then says Mass. Now the Oil and Chrism, as they call it, is made every
where on Thursday before Easter Day. These things heretofore were mightily
reverenced and esteemed by all people; but after that Luther and others taught,
that all Creatures were consecrated by the mouth of God himself, when he
created the World. This whole show and mummery became contemptible and
ridiculous, as looking like Jugglery and Legerdemain. But now the German
Bishops, The Popish Ceremonies brought into contempt, through the preaching of
Luther.
finding a fair opportunity, restore and bring them into play again. And for
the use of Holy Water as they call it, there is a Decree extant in the Canon
Law, which they attribute to Pope Alexander, the fifth after S. Peter, that the
opinion of Antiquity may give it more credit and authority.

It has been said before, that the Pope sent three Bishops into Germany: These
came to the Emperor in the Low Countries, A Papal Decree, concerning the use
of Holy Water.
and on the five and twentieth day of May first show their Instructions. In the
beginning, the Pope represents the great Care and Anxiety he was in, because of
those who rent the seamless Coat of our Lord; but that two things chiefly eased
and comforted his Mind: First, because Christ himself foretold, The Pope's
Legates to the Emperor.
that the Devil would assault the Church, but in vain: And then, because, that
by a General Council, all those bad Innovations that had crept in, The Pope's
Indulgence.
might be easily cast out again: And that seeing other Nations had already
reapt the benefit of the Council, but no fruit as yet appeared in Germany, by
reason of the many Sects and Differences in Religion there; therefore he had,
partly of his own free motion, and in discharge of his Pastoral Office, and
partly also at the desire of the Emperor, with the Consent of the College of
Cardinals, sent out and impoured some Bishops to receive those into the bosom
of the Church; who were willing to enter into it again, and to assure them of
all the kindness and favor, that they might hope for from his Clemency and
Goodness, provided they would be content to receive Laws, and not prescribe to
others: That he granted so great a benefit to all men in general, The Power of
the Bishops delegated.
not excepting any order or degree, nor any Crime of that nature, though
continued in for never so many years, yet so, that such Offenders confess their
Errors and Sins to some Orthodox Priest, and perform the Penance that he shall
therefore enjoy them; but that he did freely remit and pardon them all open
Confession, Abjuration, and Satisfaction, prescribed by the Canons: That he had
also empowered the Bishops Delegate, to absolve those who had bound themselves
to the Lutherans, by compact, Promise or Oath; as also all Monks who were
fallen into Heresy, Of Monks fallen into Heresy.
and had forsaken their Monasteries; and to permit them to change their Habits,
and serve in any other Function of the Church: To allow the eating of Milk,
Cheese, Butter, Flesh, and Eggs, with respect to the place and person: To
permit those to receive the Sacrament in both kinds, who, renouncing all their
other Errors, did approve the Decree of the Council of Constance, Of the
Communion in both kinds.
and openly confess, that there was as much received under one kind, as under
both, and that the Church did not err in making a Decree for Receiving under
one kind alone: That that might be indulged to them for a certain time, as
should be thought fit, yet so still, as that they received a part at another
time and place, and not at that time, when others did receive the Sacrament
under one kind only. Of the Profits of Church Lands.
That they were also empowered to compound with the possessors of Church Lands,
for the Fruits and Profits which they had received and spent, provided they
left the posession for the future: In like manner, to inflict Ecclesiastical
Censures upon the Obstinate, and crave the assistance of the Civil Magistrates:
And lastly, The Subdelegation of the Bishops Delegate.
to delegate and substitute Bishops in Germany, to see the Premises put into
execution. In persuance of this Commission, these Roman Delegates substitute
Bishops in those places, where they understood there was most need; amongst
those, was the Bishop of Strasburg also, whom they enjoined to put the Points
abovementioned in execution, and not to reconcile Churchmen, unless they would
put away their Wives. Now it was said, that they went to the Emperor, to
advise and consult with him, in what manner they might put in execution their
Commission; and that afterward, when they understood, that it was not possible
for them themselves, to have access into all places that stood in need of their
help, they had been necessitated to employ others. The Emperor sends the
Pope's Indult to the Bishops of Germany.
This Indulgence or Indult of the Popes, as they call it, the Emperor
presently sent to all the German Bishops, admonishing them severally, to use
gentle and mild ways, and to try all Courses by fair Language, Exhortation, and
Entreaty, before they should come to Threats and Excommunication. The
Archbishop of Mentz sends the Pope's Indult to the Landgravians.
Wherefore the Archbishop of Mentz writing, amongst others, to the Landgraves
Governors and Counselors, and having said much of his own Pastoral Care, and
of the Emperor's earnest Concern for the Public, requires them to show the
Pope's Indulgence to the Ministers of the Church, and command them to obey it.
The thing being proposed to the Preachers, their answer was, A godly Answer of
the Preachers.
That their Doctrine agreed with the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and
that though their Lives and Conversation did not suit with their Profession,
yet they acknowledged no Error in their Doctrine; and that therefore they stood
not in need of an Indulgence from the Pope; that they had preferred Marriage
before an unchaste single Life, according to the Word of God; and that they
would not forsake their Wives and Children, whom Christ himself commanded us to
love, cherish, and provide for: That in administering the Sacrament under both
kinds in their Churches, they therein followed the command of Christ, and the
custom of the Primitive Church, and that there was no reason to admit of any
Alteration therein.

In the Month of May, A Dispute at Oxford in England, about the Lord's Supper.
Peter Martyr and the Divines of Oxford disputed publicly concerning the Lords
Supper, and the Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament. Martyr proposed
these Points to be defended; That the substance of the Bread and Wine was not
changed; and, That the Body and Blood of Christ was not Carnally or Corporally
in the Bread and Wine, but sacramentally united to them. Afterward there was a
Book of this published, wherein the presidents of the Dispute, who were
appointed by the King, give no obscure intimation, that Martyr had the better
on it in that Debate.

On the Tenth day of June, The Coronation of the Queen of France.
the Queen of France was crowned at St. Denis, as the custom is, the Ceremony
being performed by the Cardinals of Bulloigne, Guise, Chastillion, Vendosme and
Bourbon; for all the rest were at Rome. Six days after, the King made a most
splendid and magnificent Entry into Paris, The King and Queen of France make
their entry into Paris.
the chief Town of the Kingdom, where he had not been seen publicly since the
death of his Father, and two days after, the Queen. During his abode there,
some were put to death for Lutheranisme, and, as it is said, he himself was a
Spectator of the Execution. Afterward, July the Fourth, he made a solemn
Procession and Prayers in the Churches, A Persecution in France.
and next day after published a Printed Proclamation, declaring the causes of
it to have been; Solemn Processions and Prayers at Paris.
That he might give God thanks for the many Blessings he had bestowed upon him,
that he might pray to God for the safety and preservation of himself, his Wife,
and Children, and of the whole Kingdom and Commonwealth; as also for the Souls
of good Men departed, especially for the Kings of France his Progenitors, and
the late King his Father, after whose Example he was resolved to take upon
himself the protection and defense of the Catholic Religion, the Authority and
Liberty of the Apostolic See, and of the Ministers of the Church; that amongst
others, this was also a chief cause, that it might publicly appear, how much
he detested those, who, contrary to the command of Christ, contrary to the
Traditions of the Apostles, and the consent of all Antiquity, deny the presence
of the Body and Blood of Christ, who take away all force and efficacy from
Baptism, Penance, good Works, and the Sacraments; who professedly despise the
Authority and Hierarchial Order of the Church; who reject the Worship and
Adoration of Saints and Relics; Moreover, that, by that solemn Procession and
Supplication, he might make known, what his Judgment and Inclinations were,
Luther and other Heretics to be rooted out of France.
to wit, that according to the Example of his Forefathers, and in a certain
Hereditary Imitation, he so thought and believed, as the Catholic Church, the
Apostles Creed, the first Council of Nice, and many other Councils of the
Fathers enjoined; as also, that he was fully resolved to root out of all his
Territories, those Heresies which were long ago condemned, but now again partly
revived, and partly contrived by Luther, Carolostadius, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Melanchton, Bucer, Calvin, and such other monstrous and
pestilent Arch-Hereticks, and severely to punish, such as deserved it. This
Writing set forth in the Vulgar Tongue, he sent all over France, commanding it
to be published to the People, and accordingly public Processions and Prayers
to be made in all places. Monsieur Vervine beheaded.
A little while after he caused Monsieur de Vervius to be beheaded, for
surrendering the Castle and Town of Bulloigne, as was mentioned in the Fifteenth
Book, and confined to perpetual Prison his Father in Law d' Abigny, a very
ancient Man, who had been Governor of all the Bolonese, and one of the four
Mareschals of France. For many Months now, he had solicited the Switzers to
renew with him the League they had made with his Father; and though the
Emperor, by Messengers and Letters, A League betwixt the Switzers and French.
did what they could to dissuade them from it; yet they, judging it more for
their Interest, consented; and first the Catholic Cantons, with the
Rhinwalders and Wallisserlanders, and afterward also those of Basil and
Schafhawsen; to the great astonishment of many, because of those Edicts and
Punishments we spoke of. For it was the general opinion, that no League nor
Society ought to be made with him, who so cruelly persecuted the Reformed
Religion, and by name condemned their Churches and Doctors. But the Cantons of
Bern and Zurick, following the counsel of Zuinglius, as may be seen in the
third and sixth Book, refused to enter into that League.

We took notice before of the Convocation at Leipsick: Duke Maurice's Letters
to his Subjects.
But now that some talked and complained, that Popery was again stealing in
upon them: Duke Maurice in his Letters addressed to his Governors, July the
Fourth, tells them, that he was informed, many, partly out of a too solicitous
jealousy, and partly through the suggestions of others, were apprehensive,
that the old Errors might be by degrees introduced again; that some of the
Ministers of the Church, and other busy, and restless, spirits, that delighted
in changed, were not altogether free from fomenting of that Calumny; that, by
several Declarations, he had formerly made public, what his Purpose and
Resolution was; which now, because of the Slanderous Reports raised, he again
repeated, thereby to convince all, that his Religion was dear unto him; that
therefore he required those, who, either out of a fond credulity, or through
the suggestions of others, were apprehensive of a change, to lay aside all
their fear, and give credit to his Letters and Testimony; And, that as for such
who went about to spread such Reports, they were not to expect to go
unpunished, if they persisted to do so; Moreover, that by his Order, some Heads
were abstracted out of the Decree lately made at Leipsick, which he would have
to be taught; that therefore, they should enquire and learn, whether the
Ministers did follow that form in the Churches, or openly condemned it in their
Sermons; However it were, that they should give him notice of it; that if any
doubts were started, The Landgraves Wife dies.
the Divines of Wittemberg and Leipsick were to be consulted; and that he
commanded these things to be declared unto the People. At this time died the
Landgraves Wife, and Duke Maurice's Mother in Law, being heart-broken with
sorrow and care for her Husbands Imprisonment, and many other Calamities she
had suffered.

There happened now a Popular Insurrection in England upon a double account; An
Insurrection in England.
the one was for enclosing of Lands; for it was a Vulgar Grievance, that the
Nobility and Gentry had taken in and Emparked a great deal of Land, which had
formerly been Common, and made Parks thereof for Deer; the other Pretext was
Religion; for though the Devonshire-men were also against new Enclosures, yet
their chief Quarrel was for the alteration made in Religion, and therefore they
demanded, that the six Articles made by King Henry the Eight, which we
mentioned in the Twelfth Book, might be restored. Since then they were up in
Arms, a thing of no small danger, The French King recovers some Places from
England.
and would not listen to any Admonition or Advice, the King and Council, much
against their Wills, were obliged to send Forces against them, that routed and
killed some thousands of them. The French King, who exceedingly longed to
recover Boloigne again, laid hold on this occasion, and partly by Storm, and
partly by Surrender, took some Castles and Forts along the Sea shore betwixt
Boloigne and Calais, whereby he reduced the Garrison of Boloigne to great
difficulties and streights. The Nobility of England highly resented this
Accident; The Duke of Somerset committed to Prison.
and because the whole Government was in the hands of the Protector, the Kings
Uncle, all the blame was laid upon him, that he had not in time provided the
Places with Necessaries. This Accusation and Envy increasing daily more and
more, the Protector, by the joint consent of the Peers, was in the beginning of
October apprehended at Windsor, where the King then was, and sent to the Tower
of London. The Nobles afterward, by a public Printed Proclamation, signed with
all their Hands, declare to the People the causes of it, and charge him with
bad Administration of the Government; And the Ringleader of them in this
attempt was John Earl of Warwick.

Whilst the French King is thus employed against the English, The Emperor
makes the Low Countries do Homage to his Son Prince Philip.
the Emperor goes with his Son through Flanders, Haynault and Artois, making
the People of those Provinces swear Allegiance to him; and then both return to
Antwerp, about the Thirteenth of September. There the Emperors Son was
received in a most magnificent manner, not only by the Towns people, but also
by the Foreign Merchants, Spanish, Italian, German and English; and being
afterward accompanied by his Aunt the Regent, he visited the other Provinces
also, and received Homage from them.

We mentioned before, how the Senate of Strasburg had sent a Deputy to the
Emperor, for adjusting the Controversy, that they had with their Bishop;
wherefore, The Senate of Strasburg agree with their Bishop.
with the Emperors leave, Arbitrators were chosen on both sides to take up the
matter. These met in the Month of October, and after a long debate, the Senate
allowed the Bishop three Churches, that, according to the Decree lately made,
he might therein have the Exercise of his Religion; and took all the Clergy
into their Care and Protection. The Bishop, on the other hand, grants the
Senate the College of St. Thomas for a public School, and all the rest of the
Churches. The Clergy also was to pay a yearly Tribute and some Money to the
Senate, and were exempted from all other Charged and Duties. The Emperor, as
we said before, prosecuted those of Magdeburg with Edicts and Proclamations,
and solicited the States of Saxony for Aid. The danger of the Republic of
Magdeburg, by reason of the Emperors Proscription.
Most part did not refuse, provided, all the other States, not only of Saxony,
but of the Empire also, did the same. But the Lubeckers and Luneburghers at
that time, having obtained leave from the Emperors Deputies, went to
Magdeburg, with a design to make their peace, but it was in vain; No Man,
indeed, attempted any open Hostility against them; but, being outlawed, they
were in continual dangers, and durst not stir abroad out of the City, without
risking their Lives and Fortunes; for it was lawful for all Men to fall foul on
them. The Senate therefore, having in a public Declaration complained before
only of the Injury and Violence received from their Neighbors, do now emit a
Manifesto, directed to all in general, but chiefly to those that lived next to
them, complaining, that Calumnies and false Reports went abroad of them, as if
they behaved themselves stubbornly and arrogantly toward the Emperor and
Empire, Their Apologetick Declaration.
slighting Peace, and publishing reproachful Papers; but that therein they were
wronged: That they owned Charles the Emperor for their chief Magistrate, and
had, by public Proclamation, charged all their People, not to presume to utter
any the least undutiful Expression of his Majesty, or of any of the States;
that they had given no other cause of offense, but that they professed the
Gospel of Christ; and, that all the rest were but Calumnies forged by their
Enemies: That it was not unknown to them, who had been present but in some few
Assemblies, how desirous they had been of peace; for, that they not only
understood, but had tasted the sweetness and comfort of it, and on the
contrary, the miseries and calamities that attended War; that it would be also
a great grief and trouble to them, if for their sake their Neighbors should be
exposed to danger, or receive any prejudice; that, moreover, they confessed,
that it was neither lawful for them, nor in their power, obstinately to stand
it out against the Emperor and Empire; but, that being necessitated to defend
themselves from injury, they had demolished some Houses, and seized some
Castles, small Towns and Villages, in time of War, not indeed, with a design to
appropriate them to themselves, but that they might not fall into the hands of
Strangers, nor would they refuse to deliver them up, provided their Neighbors
would live quietly: That there were two main Reasons, Two Reasons why they
cannot obtain Peace.
why they could not obtain a Peace; first, because they retained the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel, and rejected the Idol of Popery; and then, because the
other Conditions proposed were not only heavy, but intolerable to them, and
altogether such, as could not be performed; for, that to betray their Liberty,
which had been granted them by the Emperor Otho the Great, the first of that
Name, and had been handed down to them from their Ancestors, and successively,
even to the present time, was a thing that could noways be defended nor
justified to Posterity: That now it manifestly appeared, what end the Authors
of the Book made at Ausburg, had proposed to themselves, and what they drove
at; for that, they had endeavored to deprive Mankind of the chief head of the
Doctrine of Justification, the very groundwork of our Salvation; as also, to
question the use of the Lords Supper, and the Marriage of Priests; to teach,
besides, the Invocation of Dead Men, and all that depends thereon; in short, to
restore Popery again in its full extent, as many Men of Excellent Learning had
made it appear; that, certainly, so great Impiety was not to be winked at, nor
past in silence, but earnest and fervent Prayers made to God, that he would not
suffer the glory of his own Name to be thus polluted: That it was, indeed, a
sad and lamentable spectacle, to see men violently driven to a false Religion
and Idolatry, the Ministers of the Church cast into Gaols, or, with their Wives
and Children, forced into Exile, and some also butchered and killed; but it was
extremely grievous, that though these things were openly seen, especially in
Upper Germany, yet there were some, who had the boldness to say, that Religion
was not struck at; that, nevertheless, it was no new thing, since, from the
very Creation of the World, it had been the condition of Pious and Innocent
Men, to suffer affliction; and, that there were many Examples both in the Old
and New Testament, which declared the constancy of holy Men, when Kings and
Princes set forth Edicts contrary to the Word of God; for that Rule of
Scripture always prevailed with them, That it is better to obey God than Men:
That this was not only the Doctrine of St. Chrysostom, St. Austin, St. Ambrose
and others, but their Practice also, when the Emperors commanded any thing
repugnant to the Law of God; that their case was now the same; that they saw
the danger they were in, and yet could do not otherwise than they did; for that
they would suffer any thing, rather than applaud to, and embrace, manifest
Errors: That it was reported of Gordius the Martyr, Gordius the Martyr.
how, that being desired by his Friends, as he was going to the place of
Execution, that, to save his Life, he would forsake his Opinion; he made
answer, That the Tongue ought not to speak any thing in reproach of him who
created it. A saying that concerned all Men in general; for, that it was the
Opinion of the Ancient Church, and of some of the first Bishops of Rome also,
that they do not only betray the Truth, who teach false Doctrine, but those
also that dare not openly confess and defend the known Truth: That therefore
the event of all was to be committed to God, and that Men ought not for love or
favor, or the fear of any danger, to turn aside from the profession of the
Truth, but to have the Example of Daniel always before their Eyes, who,
contrary to the Decree of King Darius, prayed to God with his Windows open:
That he might, indeed, have done the same privately and closely, without any
danger, but because, the open confession of his Faith, and the glory of the
Divine Majesty, required it should be otherwise, he had, with a great and
undaunted mind, openly called upon God, without any regard to that danger,
which being laid for him by his Enemies, fell afterward upon their own heads:
That, therefore, they begged, they would not raise Arms, nor attempt any
Hostility against them who were Members of the true Church, but therein follow
the Example of the Christian Soldiers of former Ages, who would not obey, when
the Emperors would have employed their Arms against those who professed the
Christian Religion, as might be made out by the instance of St. Mauritius the
Martyr: That it was to be found in the Book of Judges, how highly God was
offended with the Israelites, because, being terrified by the multitude of the
Enemies, they assisted not their weaker Brethren; which might be a lesson to
all, that not only Brethren and Associates were not to be deserted, but ought
also to be relieved and succored: That they made no doubt, but that good Men
were moved at these things; that God lived and was immortal, who had often
showed strength with his Arm in old time, and was still able to do it: That
after all, they most earnestly besought them, that they would carry these their
Complaints, to the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and the other Princes and States,
and at the same time intercede for them, that they might not be reduced to
extremity; for that they refused nothing, that could be lawfully and honestly
performed; that it was their hearty Request also, that they would commend them
in their Prayers to God, that, in imitation of the Ninivites, they might from
the bottom of their hearts repent of their Sins, and send up their sighs unto
God; that they might undauntedly persevere in the profession of the Doctrine of
the Gospel, which had now for these thirty years been preached amongst them;
and set it forth with Pious Lives and Conversations; that they might do the
Works of Charity to all Men, but especially to the Ministers of Gods Church,
who were now turned out, and in exile, to their Wives and Children, and such
other poor People in distress; and that they might retain this pure and
wholesome Doctrine in spite of the tricks and artifices of those, who, under
the Pretext of restoring of Ceremonies, would again let in upon us the sink of
Popish Pollutions.

In the Month of October, The Marriage of Francis of Mantua.
Francis Duke of Mantua, the Son of Frederick, took to Marriage the Lady
Catharine, Daughter of Ferdinand King of the Romans; and the Tenth day of
November after, Pope Paul III. departed this Life, in the Fourscore and second
year of his Age. The death of Paul III.
The day before he died, he discharged the Imposts which he had laid upon Salt,
and most part of other Commodities, to the grievance of the People. Some Months
before, he had solicited the Emperor about the restitution of Piacenza, but it
was in vain; and it was generally thought, that if he had lived longer, he
would have espoused the Interests of the French King; for, it was believe, that
he had been hatching Revenge in his mind, ever since the Murder of his Son
Petro Aloisio. His Body lay for three days in State in the Chapel of Pope
Sixtus; whither the People flocked in great numbers, to kiss his Feet, which
were put out at an Iron Gate, as the custom is. Before he died, a bitter and
Satirical Book came out against him, under the Name, indeed, of one Bernardino
Ochino, A Book against Paul III.
but, as it was thought, written by other hands, with a Prefatory Dedication to
Ascanio Colonna, whom he had banished. This little Book, amongst a great many
other things, which would be too long to relate, addressing to him, calls him
Antichrist; In the time of Pope Innocent, says it, most wicked Prelate, The
Murders of Paul III.
thou wast cast into Prison for two Murders and one Parricide, thou
committedst, in poisoning thy own Mother, and a Nephew, that all the
Inheritance might fall to thee. Being afterward set at liberty, thou did not
scruple, to put in for the Purple Hat; Paul's Sister being a Whore makes him a
Cardinal.
but thou wast thrice rejected by the College, and it was thy Sister Julia
Farnese, that at length prevailed for thee; for she threatening that his
Holiness should have no more to do with her, Pope Alexander VI. fearing her
anger and displeasure, thrust thee into the Congregation of the Cardinals. You
also poisoned another Sister for her Incontinence, the common fault of your
Family. When you were Legate of Ancona, He murders another Sister.
in the time of Julius II. you basely overreached a Maid of that City; His
Lusts.
for dissembling what you were, and making her believe, you were one of the
Legates Gentlemen, you prevailed with her and defloured her; which Villainy, the
Cardinal of Ancona, the Maids Uncle, after the City was taken, charged you home
with, in most severe manner, before Pope Clement, who then was Prisoner.
Nicholas Quercy surprised you lying with his Wife Laura Farnese, your own
Niece, and gave you a wound with a Stiletto, of which you still bear the Scar.
What need I speak of your Daughter Constantia, with whom you have lain so
often? For, that you might the more freely enjoy her, you poisoned her Husband
Besio Sfortia; who, having perceived your naughtiness with her, conceived such
inward grief at it, that he was never seen to look merry afterward. You
certainly exceed Commodus and Heliogabalus in filthy Lust; and that plainly
appears by the many Bastards, you have. Lot lay with his Daughters indeed, but
then he was drunk, and knew not what he did; but you, being sober, have lain
not only with your Niece, but with your own Sister and Daughter also. How foul
and horrid a Crime was it, that your ungracious Son, Petro Aloisio, committed
upon the Bishop of Fano? When Pope Clement was detained Prisoner in the Castle
of St. Angelo, and sent you Legate to the Emperor, for obtaining his Liberty,
you would not set out on your Journey, till first he had bestowed the Bishopric
of Parma upon your Nephew Farnese, a Boy of Ten years of Age. When that was
done, you nevertheless deceived him, and pretended to have been taken sick at
Genoua. How did you Traffic in Church Livings, when you were Cardinal? And
since you become Pope, good God! how have you squandered away the Revenues of
the Apostolic See? Are not you ashamed, to have put your accursed Son in the
highest place of Government, with a Pension of Forty thousand Crowns a year,
and have given almost as much to your Nephew Ascanio? Not to mention the vast
profusion of Wealth you have made, upon all the Women of your Family and your
Nieces, the Santa Floria's. After all this, you dare to mention the Turks, who
now are ready to invade poor Italy; and with the intent too, that you may have
some plausible occasion and pretext to pillage the People, who groan under most
heavy and intolerable Burdens through your Tyranny. You sold Modena and Rhegio
to the Duke of Ferrara; You have alienated Parma and Piacenza, which you never
acquired to the Church of Rome, a thing Pope Clement was ashamed to do. To
enrich your own House and Family, you have unjustly opressed others, and made
War against those, who either would not or could not submit to that Slavery.
Those of Perugia and Ascanio Colonna, amongst others, are instances of this. He
that raises an extraordinary Subsidy of his People, of Three hundred thousand
Crowns a year; that often imposes new Customs, now on Salt, and by and by again
upon other Commodities; that exacteth, now the Tenths, and now the moiety of
the Fruits and Increase of the Ground, that Man, I say, ought justly to be
reckoned the Enemy of Christendom. Since you were Pope, the Turkish Fleet
securely sailed along the Coasts of the Territories of the Church, when
Barbarossa cruised on our Seas. Wherefore that secret Correspondence you
entertain with the Infidels, stops your Mouth, from hereafter making a Pretext
of the Turkish War. And in the mean time, you have had the boldness to tax the
King of France, for entertaining Friendship with the Protestants; and the
Emperor, for joining with the King of England. Is it not a most shameful
thing, that you should wholly depend on Astrologers and Necromancers? It Is
matter of fact, and cannot be denied; for you have raised to Honor and Riches
many of them, as Cecio, Marcello, Gaurico the Portuguese, and others; a Crime,
that manifestly stains you with Impiety, and heinous enough, to make you be
degraded from the Papacy.

Many other things of that nature are contained in that Printed Book, we
mentioned; Let us now return to the dead Body. On the ninth day after his
Death, the Funeral Rites began to be celebrated, and lasted nine whole days. In
the mean time all the absent Cardinals hasten to Town, Trent, Salviato, Mantua,
Cibo, de Monte, Ausburg, d'Oria, Urbin, and these were present at the
Obsequies. But he that came first was the Cardinal of Trent, for he was at
Mantua at the Wedding we spoke of, The Funeral Charges of Paul III.
when the news was brought of the Popes death. The Funeral Charges was reckoned
to amount to Fifty thousand Crowns. November the Eight and twentieth, after
Mass, they went into the Conclave, as they call it, for the Election of a new
Pope. On the Fourth of December, Cardinal Pacieco, a Spaniard, came from Trent.
On the Twelfth, came the Cardinals du Bellaye, Vendosme, Chastillon, Guise and
Tournon, and about the end of the Month, Boloigne, Ambois, Lorrain, as
afterward the aged Bourbon, all Frenchmen; besides, there were some others of
that Nation there already, whom the King sent thither two years before, as we
said in the Nineteenth Book. And now we are gone so far, it will not be amiss
to describe some things in this place. There is a Palace in Rome called the
Vatican, adjoining to St. Peter's Church, where the Popes keep Court, and where,
upon occasion, A description of the Conclave of Rome.
the College of Cardinals meet. In this Palace, among other Apartments, there
are five Halls, a Gallery seventy paces long, and two Chapels, all which
together make that Apartment, which is called the Conclave. One of the Chapels
is designed for saying of Mass, and taking the Votes in, and the other, which
is called Sixtus his Chapel, and those Halls we mentioned, are for the
Cardinals Lodgings. 54 Cardinals in the time of Paul III.
At this time, after the death of Paul III. the Cardinals being fifty four in
number, there were as many Chambers made for them. In former times the Conclave
had several Gates, but now they are all shut up, save one. Besides, there are
no Glass Windows, except in the Chapels, and these too so high, that they
cannot be reached. So that neither Air nor Light can get in to it, and Day and
Night they are forced to burn Wax Lights. Now the Chambers, we mentioned, are
fourteen foot wide, sixteen foot long, and twelve foot high, not of Brick,
Stone or Timber, but of Green or Purple Cloth. And because some of them are
more commodious than others, they cast Lots for them, to avoid Competition and
Envy: In each Hall there are two rows of Chambers; and within that space and
bounds, the Cardinals must confine themselves, with their Families and
Furniture. Every Cardinal has four Servants allowed him, that lie within, and
always wait on him, whilst the rest make the Beds, and do the other necessary
Duties. There are, besides, twelve Men appointed for the whole, commonly called
the Sweepers, who make clean the Conclave, and carry out all the filth and
ordure, to a place appointed for it. They who are within, must continue there,
unless they be sick, and if once they go out, they are not admitted again,
except they be Cardinals. When they enter the Conclave in order to an Election,
they presently choose three or four Cardinals, to provide all things necessary,
and to give Answer to the Ambassadors of Kings and Princes. These have one Key
of that Gate we spoke of, the Roman Nobility have a second, the Bishops a
third, and the Masters of the Ceremonies a fourth. This Gate is never unlocked,
after once the Conclave is shut up, but when new Cardinals come. In it there is
a little Wicket, whereof the Masters of the Ceremonies keep the Key, and it is
never opened but at Dinner and Supper time. For then the Victuals, which are
dressed in Kitchins abroad, are let in by that Wicket, and there are some
Bishops there, chosen for that purpose, to view the Dishes carefully, and see
that no Letters be hid in them. The Masters of the Ceremonies, receiving the
Dishes from them, deliver them to the Cardinal's Servants through that Wicket,
for no body else is suffered to approach it. The Meat is served in Earthen
Dishes, and the Wine in Glass Bottles, and daily they have new ones: For it is
an ancient Custom, That the Vessels which are once brought in, are the Fees of
the Masters of the Ceremonies, who are very careful in gathering them together;
they being exquisitely fine, both for Matter and Workmanship, and to sell them
at dear Rates. At that time five hundred Italian Foot, under the Command of the
Count of Petugliano, lay without, and kept guard near the Palace Gate, next to
them the Suisse Guards of Paul III. and the Horse Guards, then the Roman
Nobility, after them the Ambassadors of Kings and Princes, and last and next
the Gate, the Bishops, who, as we said, were Supervisors of the Victuals. Four
thousand Foot were posted for the Guard of the City, under the Command of
Horatio Farnese, there being Armed Men likewise in the Private Houses and
Palaces of the Cardinals and Nobles. Let us now speak of the Election. Though
it was the custom of old, to go into the Conclave the tenth day after the death
of the Pope, yet now, after the decease of Paul III. it was the nineteenth,
which happened to be the Nine and twentieth day of November, as was showed you
before. The Cardinals, going into the Conclave that day toward the evening,
took an Oath of the Roman Nobility, and of the Officers and Captains that were
appointed to guard the Town, to be true to them; and afterward they went with
their Families to their several Lodging Rooms, all others being commanded out
of the Conclave. Some Cardinals are Bishops, some Priests, and some Deacons.
Before they came to Voting, some Rules are read over, which they make to
themselves for the time. These concern the Privileges and Immunities of the
Cardinals. The first thing then they do, is, severally to take an Oath, That if
it be their turn to be chosen Pope, they shall observe all things exactly; and
then, that they will choose him, whom they shall think most useful both for
Church and State. After this they fall to Business; it was the second day of
December. Then the Master of the Ceremonies, about Nine of the Clock in
Morning, rings a Bell throughout the Conclave, to call them to Mass, that being
over, there is a Desk brought to every Cardinal, The way of choosing the Pope.
and in it, a Paper containing a List of all the Cardinals Names; after that,
there is a Table with a Scarlet Carpet, placed before the Altar of the Chapel,
upon which stands a Chalice and Silver Bell, and about the Table six
Foot-Stools. Now every Cardinal writes down his Voice in a Billet or bit of
Paper, and so folds and makes it up, that nothing is to be seen but the Name of
him that is chosen. Then they rise severally in their Order, and having upon
their Knees prayed at the Altar, drop the Billet into the Chalice, and so
return to their place again. That being done, two Bishops, as many Priests, and
as many Deacons, take their places upon these six Stools. The first Bishop
takes all the Billets in order out of the Chalice, and delivers them to the
first Deacon, he unfolds them, and with an Audible Voice reads the Name of the
Elected, but not of the Elector. With that, the Cardinals, who, as we told you,
have every one Papers containing all their Names, note down the number of
Voices, under every ones Names, as they are drawn out and read. The Votes being
thus collected; the first Priest, who has also a Paper with the Names of the
Cardinals, tells how many Voices every one has. If the number be not
competent, the Billets are cast into the Chalice again; then one of the Deacons
rings a little Bell, and presently enters the Masters of the Ceremonies, who
waits without, and in a Pan of Coals that he brings in with him, How many
Voices every Cardinal may give.
burns all these Billets. Every Cardinal may at the same time give his Voice
for four different Persons, but that seldom happens. And this is the manner of
Election; now let us return to our purpose. The Cardinals being thus shut up,
set to work, as we told you, on the second of December; but they made but slow
progress, because the French Cardinals were said to be coming. Most People
thought they should see a new Pope in Rome before Christmass-day; Three
Factions of Cardinals. The Conclave full of chinks.
but their expectation was frustrated. The College of Cardinals was divided
into three Factions, the Imperial, the French, and the Faction of the Farneses.
The French were for Trani, Salviato, Rudolpho, Lorrain, or Theatine; but the
Imperialists for Pool, Bourghese, Carpo, Sancta* Croce, Morono, or Sfondrato.
There was a great talk about Town of Pool and Salviato; for though they
labored to keep all things very secret, as I said, yet because now and then
several came out of the Conclave, for sickness real or counterfit, it could not
be concealed; and, as it was said, the Emperor and French King had an account
of all they did. That Pool was not chosen, it is said, was through the means of
Cardinal Theatine, Pool upon suspicion of Lutheranism, disappointed of the
Popedom.
who had said, that he smelt of Lutheranism; for many, both in Italy, and
others also, affirmed, that his Judgment was right as to the true Religion, as
was said in the Tenth Book. There were at that time many Pilgrims in Rome, who
were come thither from several Places and Countries, that in the beginning of
the new year, The year of Jubily.
which was then the year of Jubily, as they call it, they might obtain the
Pardon and Remission of their Sins. A great number of People were got together
on Christmass-Eve in the Porch of St. Peter's, hoping that the Gate, The
Golden-Gate.
which is called the Golden-Gate, would be opened by the new Pope. And though
it troubled them much to wait longer, yet they did not think fit to depart,
before the Election was past. The matter is thus. Pope Boniface VIII. was the
first that instituted a Year of Jubily, The institution of the Jubily by
Boniface VIII.
in the year 1295. and commanded it to be kept once every hundred years,
promising to those who then came to Rome, and performed their Devotions at the
Shrines of St. Peter and St. Paul, full Pardon and Remission of all their Sins.
After his death, when the term of an hundred years seemed to be too long,
Reduced to 50 years.
Clement VI. reduced them to fifty. There is also a Bull of his extant, wherein
he commands the Angels, to convey the Souls of those that died in this
Pilgrimage, And then to 25.
into the Kingdom of Heaven. But Sixtus IV. decreed, That every Twenty five
years Mankind should participate of this Benefit. When therefore the year 1550
approached, Paul III. soem months before had published a Bull, The Jubily in
the year 1550, earnestly desired by Paul III. But he was disappointed.
earnestly exhorting Men, that they would not let slip so fair an occasion of
disburdening them of their Sins, and of Meriting the Kingdom of Heaven. He was
also mightily overjoyed, that he had lived to that time, saying, That it would
be a most delightful day to him, wherein he should deserve so well of Mankind:
But it was but a false Joy to him, for, as we have said, he died some weeks
before that day came, which he so earnestly desired to see. Paulus Fagius, The
Death of Paulus Fagius.
who went with Bucer into England about the end of November, died of a Quartan
Ague at Cambridge.

We told you before, how the Controversy betwixt the Bishop and Senate of
Strasburg was taken up by Arbitrators: Now the Bishop had resolved to begin the
Office in his Churches, on Christmas day, and had prescribed a Method, to be
followed, by the Clergy: But, because they were not then in a sufficient
readiness, Mass again said at Strasburg.
he put it off till the first of February. And then the Priests said Vespers in
those three Churches, that the Senate had granted the Bishop by composition,
and next, day Mass, which had not been seen there for twenty years before.

Great was the concourse of People, 1550
that flocked thither, especially; of the Youth: For to them it was a strange
kind of sight, to see a great many Men with shaven Crowns, in a new sort of
Habit, singing all together, what no body understood; Tapers and Lights burning
at Noonday, Incense streaming up, and smoking out of Censers, the Priest,
with his subservient Ministers, standing before the Altar, speaking all in a
strange Language; using various kneeling and gestures, bowing down with Hands
joined; one while stretching forth his Arms, and by and by, again, contracting
them: Now and then turning about to the People; raising his voice high at some
times, and at other times, again, muttering to himself very softly; The sight
of Mass strange at first.
now casting up his Eyes, and by and by looking down on the ground; shuffling
from place to place: Now on the right, and now on the left, side of the Altar,
playing tricks with his Fingers, breathing into a Chalice, then lifting it up
on high, and afterward setting it down again; naming in certain places, now
the Dead, now the Living; breaking the Wafer, and, putting it into the Chalice;
knocking his Breast with his First, sighing, shutting his Eyes, as if he were
asleep, and then awaking again; eating one part of the Wafer, and swallowing
down the other whole with the Wine, washing his Hands, that the least drop may
not remain; turning his back to the People, and with an outstretched Arm,
showing them a gilt Patten, clapping it to his Forehead and Breast; and kissing
sometimes the Altar, and sometimes a little Image, enclosed in Wood or Metal.
These, I say, and the like, the young People could not behold, without wonder
and amazement, nor, indeed, without laughter. And could hardly be restrained.
After noon, a Priest, who came thither from another place, preached in the
Cathedral Church, where he had no great Auditory, though some out of curiosity
went to hear him. In time of Sermon, a Youth making I know not what noise, an
Officer chid him, and made, as if he would lay hold on him, A tumult in the
Cathedral of Strasburg.
at that, all the young People came running about, and, as it is usual, on the
like occasions, there arose a bustling noise, and din, in the Church, whilst
every one moved to and again, enquiring what the matter was. But the Preacher,
The Preacher leaves the Pulpit, and shifts for himself.
in the mean time, who thought all was in an uproar, being apprehensive of
danger, and in a panick fear, made all the haste he could down out of the
Pulpit, and fled to the Chancel, where, by his Companions, he was received
within Iron Grates: For most of all the Priests, belonging to that Church, were
there, and some dignitaries also of Noble Families, who being in a higher place
to hear, withdrew with all speed, not knowing what might come on it. This was
presently carried to the Counsul, and Mayor, who, with the rest of the Senate,
were at Sermon in other Churches. They presently hasten thither, to keep all
things quiet; but the Hubbub was already over; for besides, some young Lads, no
body had stirred. Wherefore, the Senate sent James Sturmey, and others, to
those of the dignified Clergy we mentioned, to acquaint them, that the Senate
was heartily sorry for the Tumult, and to tell them the occasion of it; That no
Citizen was concerned therein, and that since it had fallen out contrary to
their knowledge, to pray them not to take it ill, promising to make it their
business, that no such thing should happen for the future. However, this did
not satisfy them, nor would they, as they said, expose their lives any more to
so great danger. Wherefore, they departed, next day, in anger, leaving their
Work unfinished, and repairing to their Bishop at Saverne, they made a heavy
complaint of their sad Fortune; Saying of Mass interrupted.
so that for some Months after, they officiated no more. In the mean time, a
complaint of this was made to the Emperor, as will appear hereafter. Many were
of opinion, that inwardly they rejoiced, that so good a pretext of
discontinuing had been offered them. For all the while that Mass had been
abolished, by Decree of the Senate, they lived with all freedom, and received
their full Rents yearly without any trouble: But that, now they were again
astricted to Duty, The Priests glad of it.
though the labor, indeed, was not great, it was thought, that an occasion of
shaking off that Yoke was not unwelcome to them; especially, since they saw,
that their actions were commonly contemned, and derided, and themselves pointed
at, as being extremely hateful to the people. The Senate having made strict
inquiry, could not find, that any Citizen was in the fault.

About the beginning of February, A treaty of Peace between the English and
French.
the English and French Ambassadors meet to treat of a Peace: For the English
having lost some Forts, as we said, were reduced to some streights. At the same
time, the Kings Uncle, the Protector, was set at liberty, out of the Tower, the
Counselors perceiving, that it would be very acceptable to the King: And
because he had been committed at the instigation, The Protector of England
delivered out of Prison.
chiefly, of the Earl of Warwick, an expedient was hit upon, to renew their
friendship by affinity. The Protectors Daughter was therefore married to the
Earl of Warwick's Son: And afterward the King made Warwick, Duke of
Northumberland: But this proved no lasting friendship, as shall be showed
hereafter.

In the mean time, Factions at Rome about choosing a Pope.
all things were carried on, at Rome, by intrigue and faction, as we hinted
before: The Farnese's were wholly bent to have one of their Faction chosen, and
at first, as it is said, Alexander, Pope Paul's Nephew, and some other
Cardinals, who had been promoted and favored by him, joined with the
Imperialists: But when the French Faction gave their voices for Salviato, a
Florentine, Alexander fearing, lest at the next Session, he might be declared
Pope, fell over to their party, having first contracted with them, as it was
reported for a certain truth, that they should not give their voices for
Salviato. By this manner, at length, John Maria de Monte is made Pope.
John Maria de Monte, who, as we told you, had been President of the Council at
Trent, and Bolonia, was on the seventh of February chose Pope; and was always
accounted a great Friend to the Interest of France, and the House of Farnese.
The cause why Farnese bore no good will to Salviato, is reported to be, that he
feared, lest, if he should be promoted to the Papacy, he would clip the Wings
of himself, his Brother, and Relations, who, by hook and by crok, had heaped up
vast Riches, and revenge the Injuries, done to his Family, by the Farnese's, De
Monte changing his name, is called Julius III.
and Paul III. Nay, it is said, that Cardinal Farnese did not promise de Monte,
whom Paul III. made Cardinal, that he and his Faction would stand for him, till
first he gave his assurance, that he would leave Parma to his Brother Octavio.
This Pope, according to Ancient Custom, changed his Name, and took to himself
that of Julius III.

At the same time, The French Kings Edict.
the French King set forth an Edict against the Lutherans: Appointing a
Penalty, also, for the Judges, who were slack and negligent in prosecuting
them. Before the Pope was Elected, the Cardinals Verulo and Rudulpho departed
this Life: The number of Cardinals.
So that there remained two and fifty in the Conclave, and of these fourteen
were French, two Germans, four Spaniards, two Portuguese, and one English; the
rest were all Italians, and of them, eleven Romans, on the twenty third day of
February, Julius inaugurated.
Julius was inaugurated by Cardinal Cibo, and two days after, he opened the
golden Gate, at which, there was an infinite number of people, The opening of
the golden gate.
waiting for the remission of their Sins, as we said before. The Pope strikes
the Gate with a little golden Hammer; for that is the Ceremony, which
afterward he uses to bestow on some person, as a mark of Honor and Esteem,
and there are some that think themselves very happy, if they can get it; as at
this time it cost the Cardinal of Ausburg much entreaty, who carried it with
him into Germany. Whilst the Pope is striking the Gate with the little Hammer,
there are Workmen busy in breaking it down with Iron Crows: And then the
People, who crowd and press to get in, carefully pick up bits of the Lime and
Rubbish, that are beat down, and keep them as precious Jewels. Some joked upon
the Cardinal of Ausburg, when they heard of what he had done, saying, That he
intended to knock the Lutherans in the head with that Hammer. A Joke upon the
Cardinal of Ausburg.
Some time after came to Rome, to complement, and make their submission to the
Pope, the Duke of Urbino, and the Duke of Ferrara, the Ambassadors of Venice,
Savoy, Florence, Genoua, Ambassadors sent to complement the Pope.
Siena, Scotland, France; and afterward the Emperor's also. The Pope not only
restored Parma to Octavio Farnese, but made him also chief Governor, which
they call Gonfaloniero: He also restored Ascon^o Colonna, who had been benished
by Paul III. Parma restored to Octavio.
It is an Ancient Custom, for the new-made Pope to give his Cardinals Hat to
whom he pleased: Now whilst Julius was Legate at Bolonia, he was extremely
enamoured of a Youth, named Innocent: And him, in spite of all the rest, who
disliked and spoke against it, he brought into the College of Cardinals, and
into his familiar and domestic conversation also, giving him his own Name, and
Coat of Arms, to bear. It was the talk of Rome, and Pasquil said, that Jupiter
hugged Ganimede, though he was deformed: Nor could the Pope himself dissemble
it, for it is reported of him, that in a merry humor, he would tell some of
the Cardinals, how wanton and lascivious a Lad he was. Whilst the grand Matter
was in agitation in the Conclave, there was a Letter intercepted, which one
Camillo Oliva, servant to the Cardinal of Mantua, had written to a certain
Darling of his, The most obscene Letter of Camillo Oliva out of the Conclave.
Hannibal Contino, dated the twenty sixth of January, and with it also, a Copy
of Italian Verses, wherein, speaking of his Love, and the longing desire he had
to see him, he uses such filthy and shameful words, that it would be no less
than a crime almost to repeat them. Hence some gave way to their wit, and
drollingly said, That he must needs be an obscene Pope, that was to come out of
a Conclave, where such Letters were written.

March the thirteenth, The Emperors Letter to the States of the Empire wherein
he appoints a Diet.
the Emperor writes to the States of the Empire, to this effect: That after
the Diet at Ausburg, he had gone into the Low Countries, to make the people, of
those Provinces, do homage to his Son, whom therefore he had sent for out of
Spain: That his intent was to have returned into Germany, so soon as that
business was over; but because all seasons were not alike fit for failing, and
that the distance of place was great, it was somewhat longer than he expected
before his Son arrived from Spain: That after he was come, all the Summer, and
a good part of Autumn had been spent, in ordering of necessary Affairs; and
that though Winter was at hand, yet he had still resolved to make a Journey into
Germany: But that at the same time, he had been taken ill of the Gout; and not
long after, had had the news of the death of Pope Paul: That he had therefore
changed his design, and waited for the Election of a new Pope. That since
Julius III. had acquainted him with his promotion, and made very large and fair
promises of his Zeal, and good inclinations toward Religion, and the welfare
of the Public: That so soon as this came to his knowledge, he had thought,
that so fair an occasion of acting ought not to be slighted, especially since
the safety, and preservation of Germany, depended on it: That therefore a
course was to be taken, that those things, which had been decreed in the last
Diet, and begun, should be perfected and accomplished: And then, that care
should be taken, both that the causes of Division be removed, and some
obstinate and rebellious persons quelled: That for these causes he purposed to
hold a Diet of the Empire; and therefore charged and commanded all, whom it
concerned, not to fail to meet at Ausburg, the twenty fifth day of June; and
that nothing should hinder them from coming, but sickness, and of that, also,
they should make Faith upon Oath: And that they send their Deputies, and
Representatives, with full Power and Instructions, to treat of all things
relating to the Public, that no delay, nor hinderance, may obstruct the
Deliberations.

THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH.
BOOK XXII.
The CONTENTS.
A Peace is concluded between England and France. The Magdeburgers refute the
Crimes objected to them, and prove them to be the Calumnies of their
Adversaries. The Emperors Edict against the Lutherans is published, which
astonished many. Whilst the Diet is held at Ausburg, for continuing the
Council of Trent, Granvell dies. The Emperor takes Tripoly, a Town in Africa.
George Duke of Meckleburg puts all to Fire and Sword in the Country of
Magdeburg. Duke Maurice, and some others also, takes up Arms against the
Magdeburgers. Pope Julius Emits a Bull for calling of the Council. Duke Maurice
commanding in chief against the Magdeburgers, offers them Conditions of Peace.
The Clergy also publish an odious Paper against them, to which they make a
large Answer, and refute the Crimes objected. Osiander broacheth a new Doctrine
concerning Man's Justification. The Emperor makes a Decree at Ausburg, for safe
Conduct to be given to those that would repair to the Council. Bucer dies.
Three Suns, and as many Moons are seen in Saxony. The Pope, by a Bull, heavily
accuses Octavio Farnese, and the Emperor publishes also an Edict against him.
In the mean time the King of France justifies him to the Pope. The captive Duke
of Saxony helps and comforts the Ministers proscribed by the Emperor. The
Council of Trent revived; and an account given of the form and order of the
public Sessions. The manner of framing Articles of Faith is set down. The King
of France publishes an Edict against the Pope. A Relation of the beginning of
the War of Parma.

ABOUT this time, Peace betwixt the English and French.
the Ambassadors of England and France, after long and tedious Debating,
concluded a Peace; and they were the more inclinable to it, because both of
them perceived the Advantages that some were like, in time, to make of their
Enmity and Dissension. Therefore the English restore to the French, Boloigne
restored to the French.
Boloigne, that had been now whole six years almost in their possession; at
which many wondered, though the French paid Money for it; and the Scots were
also comprehended in this Peace. The two Kings, having afterward sent
Ambassadors mutually to one another, confirmed this Peace by new marks of
Friendship; for the French King was made Knight of the Garter, and the King of
England, one of the Order of France; which, amongst great Princes, is, as it
were, a Badge and Cognizance of Amity.

The Magdenburghers, being severely lashed by the Emperors many Edicts,
publish again, March the Twenty fourth, another Manifesto, addressed chiefly to
their Neighbors. Another Manifesto of the Magdeburgers.
First, they allege, that neither by the Law of God nor Man, could they be
convicted of Rebellion; then they declare, that they, who take up Arms against
them, make War against Christ himself. In the third place, they refute the
Crimes objected to them, and affirm them to be Calumnies of their Adversaries.
And though, say they, the Emperor, at their instigation, has Outlawed us, yet
we may truly affirm, that we never, as yet, refuted any Reasonable Conditions,
provided the Doctrine of the Augustane Confession, and the Liberty left us by
our Ancestors, were allowed us; we are still of the same mind, nor do we
decline the performance of any kind of Duty, that either the Emperor or Empire
can justly challenge of us; and we call God to witness, that we have not given
any cause of War or Commotions, but are, above all things, desirous to
entertain peace with all Men, and, by the help of the true Religion and
Worship, to attain Life Everlasting; which is, indeed, the cause of all this
hatred that is raised against us. Now it is established by Law, that as the
Inferior Magistrate is not to impeach the right of the Superior; so also, that
if the Magistrate transgress the bounds of Authority, and command any thing
that is wicked, he is not only not to be obeyed, but, if he use force, to be
resisted also. For that all Power is of God, we think no Man will deny; and if
any Edict or Decree be made against him, it is not to be doubted, but that they
may be rejected and disobeyed: Now the Decree made at Ausburg concerning
Religion, is of that nature; and therefore we cannot obey those, who forcing it
upon us, depriveus of the Light of the Gospel, and offer us the Idol of Popery,
that they may draw us into Eternal Damnation: Which being so, we cannot justly
be accused of any Rebellion. Besides, it is obvious to any Man, how unlawful it
is, to use violence against us, since it is not we that are only struck at, but
that the great design is, utterly to destroy the Professors of the true
Doctrine, and, through our side, to wound Christ himself and all the Godly; for
we are all the Members of Christ, and therefore what else can they expect, who
defile themselves by so impious a Crime, but the Vengeance of God Almighty? In
a former Declaration, we took notice of some Castles and Villages sezed by us,
and it is needless here to repeat, what was there said; for so soon as we have
assurance of peace, we shall restore them to the Right Owners. It is also
reported by our Adversaries, that unlawful and Promiscuous Lust is tolerated
amongst us, but it is a most Impudent Lie. We therefore beg of you, by all that
is sacred, that you would not pollute your selves with Innocent Blood; but pray
to God, with us, that he would confound the Bloody Counsels of the Wicked, and
if any War happen to break forth, that you will not deny your assistance.
Afterward, in the Month of April, the Ministers of the Church publish a Paper,
wherein they exhibit a Confession of their Faith, and prove, that it is lawful
for an Inferior Magistrate to resist a Superior, that would constrain their
Subjects to forsake the Truth: And here they address themselves to the
Emperor, The confession o^ Faith of the Ministers of Magdeburg.
beseeching him, that he would not give credit to those, who inflame him to the
commission of wicked and unjust Cruelties; but, that he would first truly and
duly examine the whole Matter. Lastly, They humbly deprecate all War, but, at
the same time, if occasion so require, they crave the assistance of their
Neighbors.

Of the Tumult, which, we told you, happened in the Cathedral of Strasburg, the
Bishop made a complaint to the Emperor; The Bishop of Strasburg complains to
the Emperor of the City.
but the Senate, by a Deputy whom they sent, purged themselves of having any
hand in it. Wherefore the Emperor wrote to the Bishop, enjoining him to
continue the Service that had been intermitted, and proceed. However the Bishop
took an Engagement first from the Senate, that there should be no violence
offered, nor any obstruction made to their Actings. So, at length, on
Whitsunday, which fell on the Four and twentieth day of May, Mass again begun
there.
the Clergy began again to officiate. For a few days, at first, the Consuls and
some Senators were present, in a different place of the Church, to prevent any
disturbance; and the Clergy of the Church had enclosed, with Iron ^rates, that
part of the Quire, by which they went into the Vestry, that no body might
approach too near.

About the end of May, The Emperor and his Son come to Ausburg.
the Emperor, with his Son, departed from Brussels, and went to Ausburg, to
the Diet there, taking with him his Prisoner, the Duke of Saxony, but leaving
the Landgrave at Mechline. Not long after his departure, a Proclamation, dated
the Twenty ninth day of April, was published against the Lutherans, both in
Flemish and French, of which this was the purport. Although, says the
Emperor, The Emperors Edict against the Lutherans in the Netherlands.
it has been always our endeavor, that the true and ancient Religion should
be observed within our Dominions; though it has been always our chief study,
that the Errors, Heresies, and Sects, which for many years now have spread
over Christendom, should be utterly abolished; and though we have for that end
emitted many Proclamations, enjoining most severe Penalties; Nevertheless, to
our great grief, we have learned, that not only many of our Subjects, but
Strangers also, who live and Trade in our Provinces, spread the contagion of
this Evil far and near amongst the People; so that it is absolutely necessary,
that some sharp Medicine be applied to the Disease, and the Guilty strictly
enquired after, that this Plague may be totally rooted out, as, in the late
Assemblies of the Provinces, we gave it in charge to the Governors and States,
that they should, in their several stations, diligently apply themselves
thereunto, and persevere in the true and Catholic Religion. Especially, since
it plainly appeared to all Men, what Troubles and Commotions this Infection had
raised amongst the Neighboring People, not to mention the danger of Souls, and
loss of Salvation thereby occasioned. Therefore, with the Advice and Consent of
our dearest Sister, and of the rest of our Nobles, we make this new Law, and
strictly charge and command, in the first place, that no Man, of what Rank or
Quality he be, presume to keep, buy, or distribute, any of the Books of Luther,
Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Bucer, Calvin, or generally, any Books that have been
published within these Thirty years, without the Authors Names, as in the
Catalogue of the Divines of Louvain, is more at large contained: Moreover, That
no Person or Persons have a Picture or Image, made in contempt and derision of
the Blessed Virgin and Saints, neither throw down or break any Image or Picture
made to the honor of any Saint: That no Man receive secret Conventicles into
his House, wherein Errors are commonly preached up, Children rebaptized, and
Conspiracies framed against Church and State: That no Man privately or
publicly dispute about holy Scripture, especially about difficult and obscure
passages, nor take upon him to interpret the same, unless he be a Divine
authorized by some approved University; that such as do otherwise, be punished
as seditious persons, and Disturbers of the public peace; the Men by the
Sword, and the Women by being buried alive in the Earth, if they forsake their
Error; but if they continue stubborn, that they be burnt, and what punishment
soever they undergo, that all their Goods be confiscated: Moreover, that they
have no power to make a Will: And, if, after they have violated this our Edict,
they offer to do any such thing, by these Presents we declare it to be void and
null. Furthermore, We charge and command, that no Man receive into his House,
or any ways help and relieve those whom he knows to be suspected of Heresy,
but presently inform the Inquisitor or Governor of the place of them, at his
utmost peril. That such, as, not out of malice and obstinacy, but through
infirmity, have fallen into Heresy and Error, and have not transgresled this
our Edict, nor been guilty of any Seditious Practices, but of their own accord,
have returned, and, upon abjuration of their Error, been reconciled to the
Church; presume not for the time to come, to entertain any Talk or Discourse
about Matters concerning Faith and Religion; otherwise, that they be punished
as Apostates. That if any Man not convicted, but vehemently suspected of
Heresy, be sentenced to abjure it, or to do public Penance for the same, and
shall afterward be accused of Heresy, he shall be punished, as if he were
relapsed into the Crime: That they who have been stained with Heresy, and such
like Crimes, even after Reconciliation, shall not be admitted to any Honor,
public Place, or Dignity in the State. That he, who has not a Certificate from
the Curate of the Parish where he last lived, be not allowed any House or
Habitation; for such are to be reckoned suspected Persons. That the Governors
of Places, and all in Authority under us, do in their several Provinces and
Jurisdictions, make diligent inquiry after those, who shall transgress this
Law, as also, that they aid and assist the Inquisitors and Ecclesiastical
Judges, in bringing the guilty to condign punishment, according to the form
prescribed by us to the Inquisitors; or otherwise, they shall suffer for it at
our pleasure. That the Attorney General also inquire into the Administration of
their Offices, and, if he find them negligent, bring them to a trial for it,
wherein, if they be cast, that they be turned out of place, or otherwise
punished, according as shall be thought convenient* That Bishops, Archdeacons,
Abbats, and other Rulers of the Church, diligently examine, if any Churchmen be
infected with this plague, and severely punish them. That they, who know of any
that is infected with Heresy, or of the places where Heretics lurk and hide
themselves, do instantly present them, upon pain of incurring the punishment
due to Heretics. The Reward of Informers.
That the Informer, if the Information prove true, have the one half of the
Goods of the Party convicted; provided, they exceed not the value of six
hundred Ducats; but if they be worth more than that sum, that he have then only
a tenth part. He that discovers private meetings to the Inquisitor, though he
has been of their counsel, shall not be punished, provided he be right in his
Religion, and abstain for the future; but he, who, not being of their Society,
does inform against them, shall have the Reward abovementioned. That Penalties
be inflicted in the same manner as we have commanded, and that no Man take to
himself any power to alter or mitigate the same, which, we understand, is often
done; for the Judges that herein offend, shall not go unpunished. And forasmuch
as many, who have been accused of Hersie, and cited to appear, have fled, and
been outlawed for it, but afterward, upon the death of their Accomplices, have
used to come in, and prayed, that they might be admitted to justify
themselves, as thinking that the Crime could not be made out against them, and
by that means being returned, have again spread their false Doctrine and
Errors, to the great prejudice of the public: It is therefore our will and
pleasure, that no regard be had to their demands, but that all who have not
appeared upon Citation, but saved themselves by flight, be held as Persons
convicted and condemned. That they, who intercede for suspected Persons,
Fugitives, Outlaws and Anabaptists, be reputed savourers and supporters of
Heretics; and that Judges and Governors receive none such into favor,
without leave from us or our dearest Sister, first had and obtained, upon pain
of losing their Places and Commands. That Printers and Booksellers do not
print, publish, sell, or disperse any Religious Book or Pamphlet, without a
License from those who shall be empowered to grant it; and who shall answer for
their own works also, if therein they offend. And because there is extant a
Catalogue of the Books which the University of Louvain have rejected, that all
Booksellers have it hanging up in their Shops, so that neither they nor the
Buyers who have it before their Eyes, may pretend ignorance; and again, that
they have another Catalogue of all their own Books, wherein he that sails shall
be fined in an hundred Ducats. That no Man either keep School or teach
Children, without a License from the Magistrate, and especially the Curates of
Parishes, and that he teach nothing to Youth, but according to the form
prescribed by the Divines of the University of Louvain.

When the Edict was proclaimed, Many astonished at the Emperors Edict,
especially those of Antwerp.
all Men generally were extremely startled at it, especially the German and
English Merchants, who in great numbers traded in the Emperors Towns and
Provinces, but chiefly at Antwerp. So that they were of the opinion, that
either the Edict must be moderated, or, that they must remove to some other
place; nay, many shut up their Shops, and thought of nothing but flying from
the danger. The Common Counsel and private Citizens also of Antwerp, who saw
what an incredible loss that would prove to them, were in great streights, so
that when the Inquisitors came thither, they vigorously oppose them, and making
their application to Queen Mary, their Governess, represented to her, how much
it concerned not only them, but the whole Country also, that the Edict should
not be put in execution. Wherefore, by reason of the many people of various
Nations that then resided in Antwerp, the execution of the Proclamation was for
that time superseded in the very same City, for which it was chiefly made. The
(...) against the (...)
The Slavonian, we mentioned before, published afterward, this Edict,
Translated into High Dutch, and severely taxed Islebius and the Adiaphorists,
as he calls them, who labored to persuade the People, that Religion was not
the thing aimed at. As for the commission of Inquisition, which they called,
Instructions, The power of the Inquisitors.
it contained a most ample power; for they had authority to call before them
not only ordinary People, but also the Magistrates themselves, and make them
swear to answer what Interrogatories were put to them, and to discover all they
knew. Now the Questions concerning Religion, that were put to those who were
accused or suspected, were thirty eight in number, of which these were some;
The Questions in the Emperors Edict against the Lutherans.
Whether or no they believed the Sacrifice of the Mass to be Propitiatory for
the Dead, so as to deliver them out of the pains of Purgatory; If they believed
Peter to have been the Prince of the Apostles, the Vicar of Christ, and Pope of
the Church of Rome, and those who lawfully succeed him in his Chair, to be so
esteemed also; Whether they believe it lawful, to withdraw from under the
obedience of the Pope, provided, he be not a Heretic or Schismatic; If they
believe Private Marriage to be lawful; and if they believe the Lutherans,
Bucerans, and the like, to be the Church.

The French Cardinals, The Cardinal of Lorrain, the Companion of King Francis,
dies.
who had stayed at Rome some time after the Election of the Pope, now returned
home; but John Cardinal of Lorrain, who had been the darling Companion of King
Francis all his life time, died upon the Road, after he came back into France,
but before he had seen the King. Upon that occasion Robert Cardinal de
Lenoncour, By whom Metz betrayed.
obtained the Bishopric of Metz, who afterward was thought to have much
contributed in bringing the City of Metz, which belonged to the Empire, under
the Dominion of France, as shall be said hereafter. There was a Decree made in
the last Session of the Council of Trent, That they who had a plurality of
Bishoprics, might reserve to themselves which of them they pleased, and resign
the rest, as has been said in the Nineteenth Book; Nevertheless, so long as
Paul III. lived, it was never put in execution; but in the Pontificate of this
Pope, in France the Cardinals made a show of obeying it, but not at all to
their prejudice: For, since most of them had two or three Bishoprics, and many
others aspired to that Dignity, they made exchanges, and for one Bishopric
they parted from, got from him they surrendered it to, many Abbeys, or other
Ecclesiastical Promotions in lieu of it.

In the Month of July, Adolph Archbishop of Cologne, makes his entry into that
City.
Adolph Archbishop of Cologne, having struck up an Accommodation with the
Senate, made his entry into that City with extraordinary pomp and splendor,
all his Vassals, Tenants, Kindred and Relations being from all places summoned
in to give him an honorable Attendance that day; And, as it is said, The Duke
of Cleve has a Daughter born.
he had above two thousand Horse in his Retinue, the Duke of Cleve having
brought in a great many. This Duke had a little before a Daughter by his
Duchess Mary, Daughter to King Ferdinand. The Godmothers were the Emperors two
Sisters, Queen Eleanor and Queen Mary, and the Elector of Cologne Godfather;
but not long after, the Duke and Archbishop had a grievous falling out, about
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

On the Six and twentieth of July, the Emperor opened the Diet at Ausburg;
wherein he propounded the prosecution of the Council; the observation of the
Decree about Religion lately made at Ausburg; the punishment of the Rebels, and
the restitution of Church Lands and Jurisdiction, as the matters to be treated
of. This also was an Armed Diet, though the State of Affairs was somewhat more
peaceable now. The Princes there present were the Electors of Mentz and Treves,
for the other Electors had sent their Ambassadors: Wolfgang Master of Prussia,
the Bishop of Wirtzburg, Aichstadt, Constance, Trent, Cambray, and Mersburgh;
Duke Maurice his Protestation against the Council.
None of the rest of the Princes appeared, except the Duke of Bavaria, and at
length Henry Duke of Brunswick. Upon debating of the matter, the greater part
were for continuing the Council. But Duke Maurice's Representatives declare in
their Masters Name, that he no otherwise approved it, than, that all Matters
should be reviewed, and handled again of new from the very beginning; That the
Divines of the Augustane Confession should not only be heard, but also have
Deliberative and Decisive Voices; That the Pope should submit to the Council,
and not preside therein, and release the Bishops from their Oaths, that they
might speak with greater freedom. When this Protestation was publicly read,
the Ambassador desired it might be entered upon Record, as the custom was, The
Elector of Mentz Chancellor of the Empire.
but it was denied, by the Archbishop of Mentz, who, as Chancellor of the
Empire, had the sole power of doing it; and so the Emperor afterward moved the
Pope for a Council. On the Seventh of August the Cardinal of Ausburg made an
invective and bitter Sermon against the Lutherans; The Cardinal of Ausburgs
Sermon against the Lutherans.
and a few days after, some Spaniards, in contempt and derision of the
Citizens, who were then at a Protestant Sermon, played some tricks in the
Church, so that it was like to have occasioned some great disturbance, had not
the Burgmaster or chief Magistrate of the City come in in time, Some Spaniards
interrupt Divine Service.
and with much dexterity appeased and quieted the Tumult. About the later end
of August, Granvell, who came lately from Besanson in the French Conte to
Ausburg, died, to the Emperors great grief, as it was reported. The death of
Granvell.
He had succeeded to Cardinal Mercurino Catinario, as we mentioned in the
Seventh Book, and now, for the space of twenty years, had been chief Minister
of State, and the only Person, in a manner, whom the Emperor trusted with his
secret Counsels and Designs. The Bishop of Arras in great power with the
Emperor.
His Son, Anthony Bishop of Arras, succeeded to his Place and Office; a Man of
great Learning, who had been already accustomed, in his Fathers absence, to
manage Affairs of State, and was very familiar with the Emperor. In the mean
time, Henry, Duke of Brunswick, besieged the Town of Brunswick, a place that,
upon account of Religion, and some other Reasons, Brunswick besieged.
for many Years he had born a grudge to: But after he had harassed and spoiled
their Lands by burning and plundering, and yet was not able to take the Town,
at the mediation of some persons, the Emperor commanded both to lay down their
Arms, and plead their Cause before him. This happened in the Month of September.

The Emperor's Army at that time besieged Tripoly in Barbary: It was then in
the possession of Dragut, Dragut, a notable Pirate.
a famous Pirate, who had lately joined with the Turk, and the Emperor's Army
was commanded by the Viceroy of Sicily; who, after he had for some time
battered the Town with great Guns, being informed, that Dragut was coming with
fresh Forces to the Relief of the place, perceived, that there was need of
Expedition: Tripoly taken by the Imperialists.
Therefore, September the tenth, he made a general Assault, both by Sea and
Land, and so took it by Storm. The Knights of Rhodes, who fought by Sea, did
the Emperor good Service that day; but the Spaniards, who were more numerous,
and made the Assault by Land, got most of the Booty and Plunder. Many Prisoners
were taken, to the number of about eight Thousand; who, being put on board of
Ships, were carried to Sicily, Sardinia, and other places. The Situation of the
Town is said to be very pleasant, because of the neighboring Fields and Hills
covered with Olive and Palm Trees, and the fair Springs of Water that are about
it. They talk of a Country not far from thence, that is exceeding fruitful in
Corn, and yields the Husbandman a plentiful increase for his labor. In this
War, Cosmo, Duke of Florence, assisted the Emperor with Forces, commanded by
Jordano Ursini, and Astori Balio. But seeing Winter was now approaching, and
Provisions could not be had, the Viceroy, leaving there a Garrison of Spaniards,
brings the Army back to Sicily: After this, Dragut sled to the Turk to
Constantinople, The occasion of a Turkish War.
and there fomented a new War, which the Turk undertook, not only against the
Emperor, but King Ferdinand also.

Upon the Emperor's Command to the Duke and Senate of Brunswick, At the
Emperor's Command, Duke Henry, and the Senate of Brunswick, lay down their
Arms.
to lay down their Arms, both Parties disbanded their Forces: But afterward,
George, Duke of Meckleburg, the Son of Albert, a Youth, who had served under
Duke Henry, wheadled them all into his Service. The Report was, that the Clergy
of Magdeburg, and Dignitaries of the Cathedral Church, most of them of Noble
Extraction, who were enraged against the City, had, by great Promises and
Rewards, engaged him to take upon him the conduct of them and their Forces, and
assist them in taking their Revenge: Their Forces were, by the Duke of
Meckleburg, turned against the Magdeburgers.
But that they denied, as shall be said hereafter. Their Archbishop, John
Albert, died lately before, wherefore they were said to have made over the
Dominion and Property of the whole Province, if he did subdue it, and to have
morgaged to him three Castles for his Security. So that he began his march
through the Country of Halberstadt, and came afterward into the Province of
Magdeburg, The death of John Albert, Archbishop of Magdeburg.
plundering, burning, and spoiling, wherever he past; there he surprised the
Town of Wansleben, which he burnt and razed; and having attacked the Castle
that stood hard by, but in vain, and lost some of his men, he marched forward,
doing a great deal of mischief in all places. Wherefore, G^^^ge, Duke of
Meckleburg, wastes the Country of Magdeburg.
when the Country people perceived, that their Goods, Cattle, and all they had,
were taken from them, they beg help from the Senate of Magdeburg, offering to
expose themselves to any Danger or Cost in their own just Defense. The Senate
therefore ordered them to Muster, and be in Town by a certain day, which was
the one and twentieth of September; at which time, a mixed Body of Garrison
Soldiers, Citizens, and Boors, marched out of Magdeburg, with three Troops of
Horse, Fieldpieces, and Ammunition, and rested that night two miles from the
City. The Magdeburgers engage the Duke of Meckleburg.
Next morning, before break of day, they decamped, and marching straight
toward the Enemy, so soon as they came in view, drew up their Men, and offered
him battle. In the Front were the Citizens and Soldiers, where the danger was
thought to be greatest; and after them, the rest of the Country rout were
posted. But the Duke of Meckleburg observing their order, suddenly faced about,
and besetting the Boors in the Rear, who were a sort of ill-armed and
unexperienced Soldiers, And are overthrown.
he charged them, before the rest could face about and come in to their
assistance. So that they immediately threw down their Arms, and ran for it as
fast as they could, disordering their Companions Ranks, and so making way for
the Enemy's Victory. Most of them were killed at the first Charge, and in the
flight; not many of the Citizens and Soldiers were slain, but many taken, who,
with their Artillery, Wagons, Ammunition, and Baggage, fell into the Enemy's
Hands. The Emperor, in the mean time, presses home the observation of both the
Decrees of Ausburg, and makes an heavy complaint of the Magdeburgers and
Bremers; The Emperor complains of the Magdeburgers and Bremers.
for they only, of all the Cities, stood it out, although the Bremers were not
outlawed. But the Princes intercede, and desire leave to interpose for an
accommodation; to which the Emperor condescending, they write to both Cities
on the two and twentieth of September, and cite them to appear by the second of
November at Ausburg, The Princes write to the Magdeburgers and Breme^s.
giving them safe Conduct to come and answer for themselves, and enjoining them
to send their Deputies with full power to treat and conclude the matter: A
certain Woman of Ausburg seeing a Priest accidentally pass along the Streets,
carrying the Sacrament to a sick Man with lighted Tapers, as the custom is, A
Woman of Ausburg in great danger for a rash word.
out of curiosity asked the Question, What he meant by carrying Lights at Noon
day? For this Saying, she was apprehended, and in great danger of her Life; but
many Women begging, and the Emperor's Sister at length interceding for her,
she had her Life, but was banished. Now Queen Mary, with others, were come
thither, that, amongst other things, she might procure a moderation of the
Edict lately published in the Low Countries; The Edict about Religion in the
Netherlands* moderated at the intercession of the Emperor's Sister.
for unless that were done, she represented the great danger that Antwerp, the
most flourishing Mart in the World, was in, of losing all its Traffic and
Splendor: And that, besides, there was great cause to fear an Insurrection all
over the Country, if the Proclamation should be executed to the Rigor. With
much ado, the Emperor, at length, condescended, and having made some
Alterations in those Heads that concerned Foreign Merchants, he struck out the
name of Inquisition, which was generally hated by all, and commanded the other
Clauses to remain in force, and be observed. Whilst the Letters are carrying to
Magdeburg and Bremen, the Princes and States desire to know of the Emperor,
upon what Conditions he was willing to treat with them: The Conditions proposed
to the Bremers.
He therefore proposes to the Bremers, that they wholly submit themselves to
him, humbly beg Pardon for their Offense, renounce all Leagues and
Associations, and make no League for the future, wherein he and all his Family
should not be comprehended; that they obey the Imperial Chamber, and contribute
their Quota to the charges of it; that they agree with their Archbishop, and if
they cannot, that they stand the Verdict of the Arbitrator, that he shall
appoint; that they compound also with all the Clergy, restore the great Guns
they took from Duke Erick, and satisfy him for the wrong they had done him;
that none within their Jurisdiction serve against him in the Wars; that they
pay an hundred and fifty Thousand Florins, deliver up twenty four Pieces of
Ordnance, with their Carriages and Appurtenances; and obey the Decree of the
former Diet, and Those which now should be decreed. The same Conditions, in a
manner, And to the Magdeburg^rs.
were proposed to the Magdeburgers; to which, it was added over and above, that
they should answer to all Suits of Law, and obey the Sentences pronounced
against them; that from the time of their first Rebellion, they have no action
against any Man; that their Fortifications and Strengths be demolished; that
they receive him, and those who have his Commission, into their City, at any
time, and with what number of Forces they please, without any previous
capitulation; that they pay two hundred Thousand Florins, and that they ratify
all confiscations, and not disturb those, who are in possession of consiscated
Goods.

The news of the Battle of Magdeburg presently flew about far and near, The
third Declaration and undaunted Courage of the Magdeburgers.
for within six days it was brought to the Emperor; and when all Men were of
opinion, that now they were almost quite ruined, out comes another Declaration
of theirs, dated the first of October. Therein they give a relation of the
whole matter, saying, That of Citizens and Soldiers they had not lost above two
hundred, and comforting others, when they themselves were thought to stand in
need of Consolation. For by this means, say they, God thought sit to try our
constancy; and of his infinite Goodness and Mercy toward us, we make not the
least doubt; for though it were his good will and pleasure that we should be
undone, and utterly perish, yet could there be no harm in that: For how much
better is it to run the utmost danger, than to swerve, from the profession of
the Truth, to the Antichrist of Rome? For such, as through Fear, Covetousness,
Ambition, or other by-ends, relent, submit to the Council of Trent, and receive
and allow of that wicked Decree of Ausburg, shall, without all doubt, unless
they repent, suffer most heavy Torments, both in this Life, and the everlasting
Life to come: And we know also, that God has set Limits and Bounds to our
Adversaries, which they cannot pass: Wherefore we beseech all Men, that they
would join their Prayers with ours, and not take up Arms against us; for if we
be once crushed, all Germany, without distinction, must expect the same
Calamity. Which being so, the very natural inclination, that all Men have to
the safety and welfare of their Country, craves at your hands, that you would
lend your assistance to us, who suffer for the Doctrine of the Gospel. This
prosperous success against the Magdeburgers, encouraged many others immediately
to take up Arms; Forces against the Magdeburgers.
amongst these, were Duke Maurice, the Elector of Brandeburgh, his Cousin
Marquess Albert, and Duke Henry of Brunswick; the Nobility and Gentry also
being invited to bring into the Field what Horse they could. Most people were
of opinion, that these Forces were raised, to beat George, Duke of Meckleburg,
out of the Country, and many thought, at first, that it was to put a stop to
his Excursions: But being all mustered together, on the fourth of October they
march, and encamp not far from the Town. The sixth Night after, A fight at
Magdeburg.
they came running on with great shouting, as far as the Gates and
Town-ditches, to try what the Towns-people could, or durst, do; but the great
Guns firing upon them from the Walls, The besieged make a sally out.
they lost many Men, and retreated in great anger to the Camp, setting on fire
the Leper's house on the way, contrary to all Military Discipline, and the Law
of Arms. Next day, the besieged made a ^ally out, and came to a slight
Skirmish; for they were brisk, and, amongst others, many Persons of Quality,
that were good and experienced Soldiers, flocked thither, out of the hatred
they bore to Henry, Duke of Brunswick. October the twelfth, A Cessation of Arms.
a Cessation of Arms was made, and some Commissioners came into the City to
treat of a Peace; but that proved in vain. In the mean time, the States of the
Archbishopric of Magdeburg, A Deputation sent to the Emperor against
Magdeburg.
amongst whom, the Clergy was the Chief, met at Hall, and, October the
fifteenth, sent Deputies to the Emperor and Princes of the Empire: So soon as
these came to Ausburg, which was ten days after, they bring a heavy accusation
against the Senate and People of Magdeburg, and in consideration that Duke
Maurice had taken into his Service the Forces of the Duke of Meckleburg, that
they had also sent him Supplies, and that they were not able long to support
such Charges; they desire the Princes to take some speedy course to quench the
common Flame, that both the Soldiers may be paid, and these outlawed Criminals
brought to condign Punishment, before they recovered Strength and Courage after
their late overthrow, for that otherwise the Soldiers would run away to the
Enemy; which would put, not only them who were the next Neighbors into present
danger, but also all the States of the Empire: That it was their whole design
to overturn the Government, and to raise a popular Insurrection all over the
Empire; and therefore they proposed a Supply of eight thousand Foot, and twelve
hundred Horse. The same day, the Answers of the Bremers and Magdeburgers to the
Princes Letters, The Bremers Letter to the Princes at Ausburg.
we mentioned before, were publicly read; and the Bremers, in the first place,
plead the earnest desire they have always had of Peace, and the Emperor's
Friendship, that for obtaining it, they had not only employed Deputies of their
own, but used the mediation also of the King of Denmark, and the Maritime
Cities, and that the Conditions proposed were very hard: But however, that it
might appear how great the Emperor's Authority was with them, they would not
refuse to send Deputies, and promised to do any thing, provided they might be
allowed their Religion and Liberty.

The Magdeburgers again allege, The Answer of the Magdeburgers.
that, in the former Diet, they had made most humble and earnest suit to the
Emperor for a Peace; but that the Conditions were intolerable, and the Wrongs,
since that time they sustained, so grievous, that finding no end nor measure of
suffering Injuries, they had been necessitated to resist force by force, but
still moderately: That the cause why they were so much hated, was only, that
they desired to retain the true Doctrine, and eschew Idolatry: That, as affairs
stood, they could find none that would undertake to go in their Name with full
power to the Diet against the Day appointed, as they were commanded: That
besides, George, Duke of Meckleburg, had unexpectedly made War upon them, and
declared openly, that he did it by command from the Emperor and Empire: That
now also the City was blockt up by the Enemy; but that if these did withdraw,
and safe Conduct were given to their Deputies, with liberty to return and make
a report of their Demands, they would not refuse to send some. The death of
Vlrick, Duke of Wirtemberg.
About the beginning of November, Ulrick, Duke of Wirtemberg, died, whilst the
suit which he had with King Ferdinand, as we said before, was still depending,
and his Son Christopher succeeded him. When the Emperor had received the
Answers of the two Cities, he said, the Bremers were to be expected, because
they had promised to come; but as to the Magdeburgers, since the matter was
quite otherwise than what they said, and because they answered with a kind of
contempt, he bids them proceed, in consulting what was to be done with them,
and chiefly, that they should take the Demands of the States of the Bishopric
into their serious consideration, and do therein what they should think fit,
both for the welfare and dignity of the Empire. The Princes and States easily
perceived, that no Peace could ever be made upon these Conditions, and
therefore they desired easier Terms might be proposed; but the Emperor
persisted in his purpose. So they, at last, A cruel Decree against the
M^gdeburgers.
though much against the minds of many, especially of the free Towns, assent
and promise Assistance, but, on the other hand, they pray the Emperor, that he
would also contribute: And then, that if he could not command in person, he
would appoint a General to carry on this War; and for that end, propose to him
Duke Maurice, if he thought fit; but as for the Charges of it, it was their
judgment, that they should be paid out of the Money already raised for the
future occasions of the Public. The Emperor, on his part, made answer, That
he had been at vast Charges in the former War, to restore Peace to Germany, and
therefore desires them to take it into their Consideration: Duke Mauric General
of the War against Magdeb^rg:
That as to Duke Maurice, he was very well pleased, nor did he know any man, at
that time, more fit for the Charge than he was, and that for several Reasons:
But that Money should be taken out of the public Treasury, he so far approved
and allowed it, as, that what was taken out, Which the Emperor is earnest
should be prosecuted.
should within a certain time be refunded again, for that that Money was not
raised for this use; and he exhorted them to prosecute the matter with all
their Force, that they might be punished according to their Deservings; which
was easy enough to be done, he told them, if Castles and Redoubts were raised
about the Town, and the Siege vigorously carried on without intermission, till
they were forced to yield; but that there was need of expedition, because of
the season of the Year, and the opportunity of Action: For that if that
headstrong and obstinate Rebellion were not suppressed, it was obvious to them,
how much it would redound to the prejudice and disgrace of the Empire. So then,
Duke Maurice, who, as we said, had already thrust himself into Action, having
mustered the Forces under him, is now publicly entrusted with the management
of the War: For defraying the Charges whereof, a Subsidy is granted of
threescore Thousand Florin's a Month, and an hundred Thousand allotted for the
Charges already made. The Emperor, in the next place, assured the Princes,
That the Council should be again continued at Trent before Easter, for that he
had the Pope's Promise for it. The Emperor desires to know the Reasons why the
Interim was not observed.
In the mean time, he urges the Decree of Ausburg, and bids them tell him the
Reasons, why the Regulations that were made two Years before, for the
Reformation of Religion, and the Clergy, were not observed? The Electoral
Archbishops answer, That they had not omitted any thing, and were at present
wholly taken up about it; but that the cause why it did not take effect, was
the Exemptions and Privileges that some pretended to. The Causes why the Decree
was not observed.
The Representatives of the absent Electors, said, That all Endeavors had been
used, but that an inveterate continuance had withstood the effect; for that
this Religion was not so soon to be plucked out of Men's minds, The Answer of
the Deputies and Catholic Princes to these things.
but that there was need of Instruction, and bringing them over by degrees, who
were fully persuaded, that that Decree was, in many things, repugnant to the
Holy Scriptures; that no violent Change could be made, without Troubles and
Stirs; and that, if any Man should constrain the Preachers to it, there would
be no Service in the Churches; for that hardly any one could be sound that
would stoop to it, because of that Article of Celibacy, and of the Lord's
Supper. The other Princes and States of the Catholic Religion, give for
Reasons, the Schools and Colleges, wherein the Youth is not rightly Educated;
the Protestant Ministers, who srighten the People from that Decree; the Poverty
of Priests, and the Negligence of the Magistrates; that the dissolute and
impure Lives of some Churchmen also, was a great hinderance; and lastly, that
many, in scandalous Books and Pamphlets, did scurrilously rail and inveigh
against the Decree, without any Punishment. Pope Julius his Bull for calling
the Council.
Pope Julius having been often importuned by the Emperor, about the thirteenth
of November issued forth his Bull of Indiction for calling of the Council,
affirming it to be in his power to call and direct Councils: That he was
desirous also to procure the Peace of Germany, which had been always most
dutiful to the Catholic Church, and Popes of Rome, who are Christ's Vicars
upon Earth: That therefore all should come by the first of May to Trent, who by
any right, custom, or privilege, ought to have place there, and whom Paul the
Third formerly called, when he summoned the Council to meet at the same place;
for that from that day forward the Council should be continued: And that if by
reason of Age, Sickness, or public Affairs, he could not come and preside
therein in person, yet he would do so by his Legates. This Bull he afterward
sent to the Emperor.

Duke Maurice, Duke Maurice attacks the Magdeburgers.
being now Generalissimo of the Imperial Forces against Magdeburg, vigorously
persued the Enterprise, and having built some Castles and Redoubts, for lodging
the Soldiers in the Winter time, about the end of November he attacked the
Town. The City is divided into three parts; one of which, that is called the
New Town, he surprised, by scaling the Walls and Gates, with great silence, in
the Night time, and gave no Alarm before he had brought in his Soldiers. The
Towns-people rouzed by the Noise, were, such of them as were in Arms, put to
the Sword, and the rest being taken and plundered, were turned out. But the
Magdeburgers, that they might force the Enemy from that advantageous Post, sent
Soldiers to set fire to it, on that side which belonged to them; and afterward
burnt the other part of the Town also which is called Sudeburg, and received
the Inhabitants into the City. Much about this time, Lazarus Schuendi came to
the Camp, that, in the Emperor's Name, he might assist Duke Maurice with his
Counsel. At that time, Count Heideck, whom, as has been said, the Emperor
proscribed two Years before, was in Saxony; where he, and Albert Count
Mansfield, were raising Forces in the Neighboring Cities, which are called the
Maritime Towns for the Relief of the Magdeburgers. Mansfield and Heideck
defeated by Duke Maurice.
Duke Maurice therefore, in the Month of December, marches against them with
part of the Army, and disperses them, taking four Companies of their Men into
his Service; the same he did afterward to Count Heideck, as shall be related
hereafter. On the fourteenth of December, the Emperor published a very long
and severe Edict against the Magdeburgers, The Emperor's Edict against the
Magdeburgers.
charging all Men not to aid nor assist them, and commanding the Officers and
Soldiers that were in the Town, within fourteen days after sight of his
Proclamation to depart out of the City, and to certify the same to Duke
Maurice, or, in his absence, to Lazarus Schuendi; upon promise of Pardon, if
they obeyed; but if otherwise, upon pain of his heaviest displeasure. Albert
Count Mansfield was in the Town, who had not, indeed, been Outlawed by the
Emperor, but was turned out of all, for his having continued, to the last,
true and faithful to John Frederick Duke of Saxony.

We told you, that the Emperor, upon his going to Ausburg from the
Netherlands, had left the Landgrave Prisoner at Mechline. The Elector of
Brandenburg, and Duke Maurice, had indeed earnestly solicited his Enlargement;
but they were told, that both he himself, and his Sons and Counselors, did so
behave themselves, that he could not as yet be set at liberty; nay, his Keepers
also told him, that he was to be carried to Spain. He therefore craved the
assistance of his Sons, whom he minded of the Duty they owed to him, and
charged them to enter their Action against the Elector of Brandeburg, The
Landgrave's Sons sue in behalf of their Father.
and Duke Maurice, and force them to make their appearance, according to the
tenor of their Obligation, and to fulfill their promise. His Sons obey, and, by
frequent Messages, admonish and cite them. They again, sometime jointly, and
sometimes severally, now by Messengers, and then in Person, excuse themselves,
showing them, that it was neither for their own, nor Father's, Interest, to do
so, and after allege new Reasons, which gave them confidence, that he might be
set at liberty without any danger: They therefore begged Pardon, and that they
would have a little longer patience. But the Emperor, who, as has been said,
had by De Lire solicited the Landgrave before to deliver up the Letters
Obligatory, Lazarus Schuendi sent by the Emperor to the Landgrave's Sons, etc.
being again put to it, sent Lazarus Schuendi to his Sons and Counselors,
commanding them, not only to desist for the future from suing Duke Maurice, and
the Elector of Brandeburg, but also to send him all Papers and Obligation of
that nature, and to let fall their Action, under the severest Penalties; but
this was all in vain. By public Letters also he discharges the Princes
engaged, and declares them free from all obligation. When therefore the
Landgrave saw no hopes remaining, The Landgrave thinks of making his escape.
he resolved at all ventures to make his escape if he could, and cast about,
and devised how he might effect it with his Servants, whom he had sent for out
of Hess, and were some of them Gentlemen of good Families; but they, fearing
the danger, went but slackly about the business. At length, he prevails with
two of them, Conrad Bredenstein, and John Rommelun, these laid fresh Horses all
the way from Hess to Mechline, for him to fly upon, But the design is
discovered.
and make his escape: But the design took vent through the fault of a Servant
of his own, who in familiarity blabb'd it out to a friend of his at Mechline,
that within a few hours his Master would be at liberty. This being carried from
hand to hand, came at length to the Captain of the Guard's ears, and so the
design was baulked, in the very nick when it was to have been put in execution.
Two of his Servants were therefore run through upon the spot, some others taken
and beheaded, and he himself made a close Prisoner. The Emperor was highly
displeased at this attempt, The Emperors Letters to Duke Maurice and
Brandeburg, concerning the Landgrave's flight.
and wrote to Duke Maurice, and the Elector of Brandeburg, telling them, That
so bold an enterprise was injurious, both to him and his Government, and that
he would, severely, revenge himself upon those that therein had assisted him,
either with aid or counsel. They sent Copies of these Letters, to Prince
William, the Landgrave's Son, and, amongst other things, acquaint him, that if
any such thing were attempted for the future, they would be absolved from all
obligation unto them. Nevertheless, Duke Maurice comforting them under hand,
Duke Maurice comforts the Landgrave's Sons, promising his utmost endeavors.
told them, That he would venture, not only all his Fortunes, but Life and
Blood also, for their Fathers freedom, and that then it would be a fit time to
surrender body for body, when the state of Affairs should be such, that the
displeasure of some men needed not so much to be feared. December the
nineteenth, all the Horse and Foot within Magdeburg, but what were upon the
Guard, The Magdeb^rgers sally out, and get the Victory.
sally out of the Town, after midnight, that they might fall upon a party of
the Enemies Horse, that lay in a Village not far off. It was, indeed, a
dangerous attempt, because they were to march betwixt the Enemies Camps;
however, it succeeded: For before the Enemy could Arm, they possessed
themselves of the Village, and set Fire to it in several places, all of them
having white Shirts over their Armor. Of the Enemy, who ever made any
resistance were killed, most of them being Persons of Quality: Many fought from
the Houses, but these being set on fire, were burnt: Many Gentlemen, of
Quality, were taken, and presently carried to the Town, with about two hundred
and sixty Horses. Next Morning, when by break of Day, they were upon their
rereat homewards, they met a party of Horse, commanded by George Duke of
Mekleburg, The Duke of Meckleburg taken.
who presently charged them, but being beset, by the Horse, on the Front, and
the Foot on the Rear, he himself, who first began the War, was made Prisoner,
and carried into the Town.

Now about this time, Maximilian, Archduke of Austria, the Emperors
Son-in-Law, created King of Bohemia in his absence, returned from Spain, and
came to Ausburg, Maximilian's return into Germany.
being recalled by King Ferdinand his Father, who then began to have some
clashing with the Emperor, about the Succession to the Empire, for which cause
also, it is said, that the Emperor had sent for his Sister, Mary Queen of
Hungary, who returned thither in January, having parted from thence the
September before, The Emperor and King Ferdinand's emulation for the Empire.
that she might interpose her Interest. For the Emperor, who knew of what
moment it would be, to unite Germany to the other vast Territories and
Dominions, which his Son was to Inherit, had a design to lay the Foundation of
a spreading Monarchy, and entail it upon his Heir, by the accession of the
Empire. But King Ferdinand, who aimed at the same thing, thought it no ways
reasonable to suffer his own and Childrens expectation and advantage,
Maximilian beloved of all.
to be frustrated or empaired. Besides, Maximilian, who was a Prince of
excellent temper, and every way accomplished, spoke many Languages well, but
especially, High Dutch, was very much favored and beloved of the People.

The Bull of Indiction of the Council, Pope Julius his Bull offended many.
we mentioned before, was, by the Popes command, published at Rome, about the
end of December. There were many things in it, that might give offense, as,
that it belonged to him to rule Councils, that he called himself the Vicar of
Christ, that he would have the proceedings continued, and not to be begun again
of new: That he took to himself the Place and Authority of President; and that
he seemed only to invite Men of his own Profession. The Emperor, as it was
said, observed these things, when the Bull was brought unto him, and desired
him to mollify some things in it, that were too rough: For, it was thought, he
was afraid, lest the Germans, splitting upon that Rock, would either reject the
Indiction, or start delays and impediments to the Work, which he had brought
about, with so much labor and pains. I will not affirm this to be true, and
such counsels are commonly concealed: But if it be true, it is certain, he
obtained nothing: For the Pope published it in the same Form I mentioned,
without changing a word: And there were not wanting some, who thought that he
did it purposely, that he might terrify the Germans from coming to the
Council, or, if they came, hold them entangled and foreclosed. This was the
Artifice, as it is said, of Paul III. as we mentioned in the ninth Book, that
when he had learned from his Emissaries, what the Protestants would admit of,
and what refuse, upon his calling of the Council afterward, he clapped into his
Bull of Indiction, what he knew would chiefly irritate, and offend them, as may
be seen also in this Bull of Julius, which is exactly framed according to that
of Paul.

At that time Duke Maurice, The Magdeb^rgers are solicited to surrender.
and the Elecor of Brandeburg, propose Conditions of Peace to the Magdeburgers,
requiring them to surrender, and submit themselves to them, and their
Archbishop: That if they would do so, they should still retain their Religion,
and the Doctrine heretofore professed at Ausburg, that they should lose nothing
of their Privileges, Rights nor Liberties, that the Fortifications of the Town,
and every Man's private Estate should be safe, and that no force should be used
against any Man: Moreover, they promise to intercede with the Emperor, that he
would recall the Out-lawry, but upon these Conditions; that as other Princes,
and free Towns had done, so they also should humbly beg pardon of his Imperial
Majesty, that they should deliver him up sixteen pieces of Ordnance, and pay an
hundred thousand Florins, to redeem their confiscated Goods; which sum of Money
they also promised to advance for them: That they should restore to the
Churchmen their Possessions; that they themselves would judge of the hurt done
on either side, of the Habitations of the Clergy, and Ceremonies of the
Cathedral Church. That to incline the Emperor to condescension, they must
receive a Garrison into the Town; until he ratified the Treaty, and the other
Conditions should be performed: That it should be their care, that the Garrison
Soldiers did not commit abuses: But that if the Emperor rejected these
Conditions, they would presently draw out the Garrison, and leave them the Town,
in as safe and good a condition, as they had received it. However, the Senate
refused to surrender, and would not admit of a Garrison. In the Month of
December, the States of the Archbishopric of Magdeburg, The Declaration of the
Clergy of Magdeb^^g against the Senate.
but chiefly the Clergy, published a Declaration in the Vulgar Tongue, against
the Senate, and People of Magdeburg; alleging, that anciently, and by right,
they belonged to the Jurisdiction of them, and the Archbishop, which might be
made out by the Letters and Charters of the Emperor, Otho the First: That the
truth was, they had done many things sawcily and insolently, especially against
the Archbishops, Burcart and Gunther; but that they had been reduced to their
Duty, and made to suffer for it, as was evident from History. When, say they,
Ernest of Saxony, first, and then Albert, of Brandeburg, were Archbishops, all
Controversies were made up and ended, but they kept not Covenants: And as
often, as the Bishops, with common consent of the rest of the States, enacted
any thing for the Public good, they always shifted it off, and drove at this,
that they might skrew themselves into Authority, and give Law to the rest. And
when Cardinal Albert had his Cousin John Albert give him for a Co-adjutor, they
not only not-approved it, but also refused to give him his Name and Title,
though they had been often called upon to do so. And when after the death of
Albert he succeeded, they would neither acknowledge him for their Bishop, nor
do homage to him, persisting in that obstinacy, so long as he lived, though
many, Great Men, often interceded. Now their design in so doing, was, that they
themselves might invade the chief Government; as may easily appear to any, that
will consider their actions. And though, in the Declaration, they published,
with a design to raise Commotions, they endeavor to persuade the People, that
they are faultless, and innocent, and that they suffer only for Truth's sake,
and Religion; yet it is quite otherwise. For neither have they been any ways
let in their Religion, though they seized our Churches: Who bore with them
patiently, because they promised to answer for what they had done, in a lawful
Council: But they, not satisfied therewith, combined into a Confederation and
League, which was not lawful for them to do, without the consent of us, and the
Archbishop, acording to Compacts made; and would force us to be of their
Religion. From whence it is apparent enough, that it was not Religion, but
Church Lands they wanted, and that they acted so, that they might cloak their
Rebellion and Perfidie with some honest pretext. Many things have they
seditiously done against the Emperor, and States of the Empire, nor can all be
reckoned up; only we'll touch at those things which properly concern us. And in
the first place, about four years since, in prejudice of their Faith, and
Engagements, The actions of the Inhabitants of Magdeburg against the Clergy.
whereby they stood bound to us, they gave us open defiance, and, having
invaded our Houses and Possessions, banished us, and committed some of our
number to prison, where some are still detained, and others died: More than
that, they razed our Houses to the very ground, reduced, under their own Power,
Towns, Lands, and Governments, which belonged to our Jurisdiction, and having
fortified their Town, that they might the more safely rebel, they imposed a
Monthly Assessment and other burdens upon the People; Churches and Religious
Houses, they partly demolished, and partly defaced, converted the Bells, taken
out of the Steeples, into great Guns, dug up the dead Bodies, not only of
Priests and Monks, but also of the Nobility and Gentry, and with them filled up
their Works and Ramparts: Statues, Altars, and the Monuments of the Dead, they
took and built into their Walls: Out of the Churches that remained entire, they
drove all Religious Worship: They plundered the Churches of all their Ornaments
and Jewels, and of all the Writings, and Records, they found therein, driving
the Priests, and other Officers of the Church, with Fists and Clubs out of
God's house, and from his very Altars. In several places they have imposed new
Customs and Duties, quite contrary to the usage of the Country: Nay more, in a
tumultuary manner, they broke down the Monument and Sepulcher of our Founder,
the Emperor Otho the Great. And these are all Domestic Villainies: But not
herewith contented, they broke into the Bishopric of Halberstadt, and there
ransacking the Monastery of Hamersleber, drove the Priests from the Altars,
where they were officiating, of whom they wounded some, and killed others, and
profaning all things Sacred, they trampled under foot the Consecrated Host:
Afterward having put themselves into the Habit of Monks, and so acted many
scornful and outrageous parts, they returned home loaded with spoils and booty:
But without any cause they broke down a Bank, or Dike, which cost a vast charge
in making, and was very useful in those places, burning and breaking down the
Bridges, that no body might pass that way: They lay in wait, also, for our
lives, and do so still, so that, without danger, we can neither live at home,
nor be abroad with our Friends: And if they suspected any to have entertained
us in their Houses, they set upon them in the night time, robbed them of their
Goods, and carried away many Gentlemen Prisoners, some of whom they rackt and
tortured: Many Ladies, also, and young Virgins, they stripped of all their
Apparel and Ornaments, and put them in fear of their Lives, nor did they
refrain their hands from young Children neither: In short, hardly do we think,
that any such Example of cruelty can be shown amongst the Turks; The value of
the damage received.
and if an estimate were taken of what they have made of our Goods, and of the
damage they have done, it would be found to amount to the value of, at least,
eight hundred thousand Florins: Not to mention, in the mean time, the
reproachful railings they have used, and the scandalous, and defamatory Libels
and Pictures, they have set forth, in contempt and scorn of the Emperor, and
States of the Empire; nor the injuries, that for almost twenty seven whole
years past, we have suffered from them. For they have thrown Stones and
kennel-Dirt at us, set upon us in the Streets with horrid clamor and noise,
chased and hunted us from place to place, many times set fire to our Houses,
and Doors, in the night time, with Stones broke our Glass Windows; and in
short, used all the insolences against us, that they could devise. It is but
four years since, that we having met in our College, at the desire of the
Consuls, they required of us first, that we would profess the same Religion
that they did: And then that for the preparations of War, we should, in a Weeks
time, pay them down twenty thousand Florins: Afterward they entered the Church,
whither the Citizens came flocking in great numbers, and there in a tumultuary
manner cast out the Priests, shut the Church Doors, and demanded of the
inferior sort of Priests, a great sum of Money, which they not being able to
pay, they chased them out of the Town, and banished them. After the self-same
manner also, they treated the other Churchmen, seizing into their hands all
their Lands, Goods and Possessions: Wherein they have transgressed, not only
the Laws of God and Man, but also their own Promises and Compacts. For we are
their Magistrates, and it is to us chiefly, they owe their Wealth and Fortunes.
But when George Duke of Meckleburg took lately into his service the Forces,
that had served, both in the besieging, and defending of Brunswick, to the
number of above three thousand Men, and without our knowledge made an inrode
into the Country, about Magdeburg and Halberstadt: They, truly, with a great
deal of arrogance, came out of the Town, with intent, first, to drive out the
Enemy, and then to turn all the force of their Arms against us, that they might
utterly destroy us. For they had two Tuns full of Halters, and had hired
Executioners, with their Swords, that they might hang up some, and behead all
the rest. But through God's Blessing, it fell out quite otherwise. For though
they were about eight thousand strong, yet they were overthrown, and above two
thousand killed, and amongst those, many innocent Men, whom they had partly
feared, and partly wheadled, into their service, eight Colors, with all their
Artillery, Ammunition and Baggage taken. Now they endeavor to make us the
cause of this War, and say, That at our instigation, the Duke of Meckleburg
took up Arms: But it is false, for many times before, and since the Battle, we
sent Deputies to treat of Peace, and desire nothing else at present, than that
they might make their Peace with the Emperor, and suffer us to live peaceably
and quietly at home, as in former times we did. But seeing they reject all
offers of Peace, and by unjust violence detain from us our Castles, Towns and
Villages, we are constrained to take some course, to recover them again. Now
all that they allege, and publish, in their own justification, is utterly
false, as is commonly known. For we did not disturb, nor molest them, in the
Exercise of their Religion, and when lately, the most Illustrious Princes, Duke
Maurice, and Joachim, Elector of Brandeburg, proposed reasonable Conditions of
Peace unto them, they proudly rejected them, and sallying out, in the night
time, fell upon an Aged Gentleman a Bed, in his own House, without any offense
given, and when, with very much ado, he had escaped half naked, they plundered
his House, robbed his Wife and Children of all their Clothes, and having
threatened many times to kill them, left them naked, so that a Gentleman
happening at that time to come, was fain to cover the Lady with his own
Garment. The truth is, it cannot be expressed in few words, what outrages they
committed that night. They have made their brags also, and that not obscurely
too, that it is in vain for us to expect restitution, for having raised their
Fortunes with our Lands and Goods, they are accustomed now to an higher rate of
living, and cannot be easily brought to restore the Possessions of other Men.
Which being so, and seeing, to past injuries they add present contempt, and are
wholly bent upon our destruction, we could not but give this short account of
their noble Actions. Wherefore, it ought not to seem strange to any man, if
courses now be taken to reduce them to their Duty. For, whoever love the Civil
State, and common Society of Manking, cannot but have an aversion to them, and
so be far from succouring or assisting them. In the same manner, they had, a
little before, accused them by their Deputies at Torgaw, where Duke Maurice
held then a Convention of States, upon account of this War.

But not many days after, The Magdeburg^s answer to the Accusations of the
Clergy.
the same Month, the Senate made answer by a public Declaration; that they did
not suppose all the States, of the Archbishopric, made this complaint of them,
but that it proceeded wholly from the Clergy. For it is a great grief to them,
say they, that the Purity of the Gospel is preached up amongst us, that their
our naughtiness is detected, and dignity abased: And this is the source of all
their hatred. This has egged them on to accuse us falsely to the Emperor,
that, being outlawed by him, we might lie the more exposen to injuries. We have
not, truly, offended the Emperor in any thing, and, saving our Religion and
Liberty, there is nothing, but what he might expect from us. We are, indeed,
bound to the Archbishops of this City, but upon certain Conditions, to wit,
that they impeach not our Rights and Liberties; and these Conditions we have
not violated: But our Adversaries advised John Albert, the Archbishop, to
demand some things that were new and unsual: Wherefore, we refused to do homage
unto him: However, they have no great cause to instance him; for neither were
they themselves faithful unto him, and it much grieved them, when in former
years they saw a way made for him, to enter into the Archbishopric; for they
would rather have had him excluded: Now we are not subject, nor any ways bound
to them: And so long as the Compacts of the last Age were observed, we refused
no kind of Duty; but after that, these began to be laid aside, we withstood it,
and many Quarrels have arisen from thence. When of late years also, new ways
were now and then found out, to raise Money in this Province, we openly opposed
it in the public Conventions, showing, that it was a thing never attempted by
former Archbishops, though all we could do was in vain. For a great part of
that, went, as a prey, amongst some of the States, but especially the Clergy.
This is that refractariness, which they object to us. They went out of the
City, but of their own accord, and prompted to it by a certain kind of pride,
when they saw that the Duke of Saxony, and Landgrave were overcome: For then
they thought, the time was come, when they should have their hearts desire,
invade the Government, and live, again, at their wonted rate of impurity. We
did not, indeed, drive them out, and though some of our Ministers, would now
and then inveigh against the filthy, and dissolute, couse of life they led,
yet, for many years, they lived with all safety amongst us, and now, but very
lately, some of them dwelt in the City. Now, if we had had a mind to have used
any force upon them, it had been no hard matter to have been done: But we
attempted no such thing, and when the state of our Affairs was such, that we
had reason, and were constrained to fear hostilities, we called a Convocation
of the Chapter of the Cathedral Church, and that since the Light of the Gospel
was made manifest, and that God also requires the Profession of it; we
earnestly entreated them, as we had done many time before, that they themselves
would choose some learned Divine, to preach the Word of God in the Cathedral
Church: That that, in it self, was a very pious Work, and would much conduce to
the settling of mutual good will, and friendship, betwixt them and the Towns
people: But upon their refusal to do it, we procured it to be done. And because
the Enemy was at hand, and had already entered our Frontiers, we desired of
them, that they would advance a certain sum of Money, send no Letters out of
the Town, remain with us, and use and enjoy their own Possessions: But not long
after, they removed, and being afterward importuned, by us, to send Deputies
at a day prefixed to Salfield, with whom we might treat, they scornfully
rejected the Conference. Wherefore, since they thus expressed their hatred and
enmity to us, we were forced to requite them in the same manner: Though, if
they had tarried with us, all this trouble might have been avoided: But they
were inflamed with malice against us, and were still hatching ways to ruin and
destroy us: So that we were necessitated to take up Arms for our own defense.
For if we had not seized their Villages and Towns, there had been a place of
refuge left for the Enemy. And seeing these Lands belong to the Church of
Magdeburg, not to those who persecute the Church, they may very well be
employed, in the defense of Religion, against false Doctrine and Idolatry: Nor
is that a thing without Precedents in former Ages. We are, indeed, outlawed by
the Emperor, but for no fault of ours, as we have, many times, heretofore
declared: But this Fortune and Case is common to us, with the Prophets, with
the Apostles, and with Christ himself, who were persecuted and afflicted for
Truths sake, as Seditious, Rebels, and the worst of Men. We have supplicated
the Emperor, that he would spare us our Religion and Liberty, but all has been
in vain hitherto; and what all their Counsels and Intrigues drive at, we have
susficiently made appear in our former Declarations: And, indeed, the thing
speaks it self, that the grand and sole design on foot, is, to estabish wicked
Popery again. The Controversy has, oftener than once, been brought to a
Conference, and some meetings there have been for that end, but we had no
satisfaction given us, as to the very chief Points, the Deputies telling us,
That they had no power to act in that Affair. We are really grieved, and that
heartily too, that any Man should, for our sake, sustain prejudice, but we make
no doubt, but that such as are good and godly Men, will think the same as we
do, and that all things are to be suffered, rather than to forsake the Truth.
For since Christ, so long ago, foretold the Crosses and Inconveniences that
attend this Profession, and at the same time promised eternal Rewards to those
who forsake Wives, Children and Possessions for his sake, why do we not trust
to those sure and ample promises? The truth is, they who slacken, and give
back, and avoid displeasures, for fear of their own danger, draw upon
themselves eternal damnation, unless they do repent. What our Adversaries
object to us, may be very well, and truly, retorted upon themselves. For they
lead a filthy, scandalous, and beastly Life, and in those places, where they
bear rule, hardly can the Men defend the Chastity of their Wives and Daughters.
We imposed a little Money, indeed, upon the People, but not with that severity
they pretend. As to what they say of Customs, they might have had a clearer
Answer, if they had spoken more clearly; we cut through the Dyke, they mention,
though it belongs not to them, for a public convenience: For it was a kind of
a short cut, to come and do mischief within our Territories, and it was an
usual thing for Robbers to retreat with their booty that way, and so get out of
danger. They cry out, that we have treated the Neighboring Gentry in an
hostile manner: But what ever we have done that way, has been forced from us,
after that, for a year and more, we had born with injuries from many. What they
say of Women, and young Maids, we utterly deny: And such of the Gentry, as were
made Prisoners by us, we dismissed, with their Servants, without any Ransom,
and the Matter has been agreed and compounded betwixt us. They swell the value
of Losses received to a very high pitch, and set down the sum of eight hundred
thousand Florins: What if we, on the other hand, should show them to what
misery they have reduced us? Pictures, and the like, came out privately, and by
stealth, not all from one place, and yet all the blame is laid upon us: But it
is certainly true, that we gave strict charge, by Orders and Proclamations,
affixed on public places, that no man should offer to do any thing saucily
against the Emperor, or any other Prince: And some were also punished for so
doing. We do not deny, but that other Books have been printed and published
amongst us, whereby Idolatry has been battered, and the Consciences of many
comforted and diverted. That we have received an overthrow, we acknowledge, it
being the good Will and Pleasure of God, not to destroy us, but to bring us to
an amendment of Life. Those, who were killed, died in a good cause, fighting
for the Glory of God, and the safety of their Country: Nor do we question, but
that God, in his own due time, will look mercifully upon us, and punish also
our Adversaries. But neither was this a chance of Fortune, as they pretend. For
by presents and promises, they allured in George Duke of Meckleburg; and, in
the mean time, by a singular fetch of cunning, called a Convention of the other
States of the Archbishopric to meet at Stasfurt, to consult, what course was
to be taken for driving out of the Country those Robbers, as then they called
them. For it can be made out by their own Letters, that they raised Soldiers,
nay, they have been heard to glory and boast, that they were not much concerned
at public Calamities: For grant, say they, some hurt and damage may be done,
yet the Ground and Land remains still our own. When news was therefore brought
us, that they had unexpectedly surprised, plundered and burnt Mansleben,
besides a great many Villages, that they had laid waste, and that at the same
time, crowds of Country Men, Women, and young Maids came all in tears, begging
help of us; we could not, indeed, deny them. And though we had no good success,
yet we make no doubt, but what we did was acceptable to God. Now, what they say
to curry favor, that it was our design to oppress the Nobility and Gentry, and
other States of this Bishopric; it is a most idle Fiction, and can never be
made out. For we have always honored the Nobility: But if we have done any
hurt to those, who fell upon our People, as they passed to and fro, what man is
so unjust as to blame us for it? What they say of Executioners Swords, found
after the Battle, is all Fiction: We deny not, but that they might find Ropes
and Halters; for it is plain enough, that they were necessary for the Wagons,
and other Carriages. For very weighty Reasons, we did not embrace the
Conditions of Peace, proposed by Duke Maurice, and the Elector of Brandeburg;
for had we but yielded, and received a Garrison, it is easy to understand, what
would have been the condition of our Religion and Commonwealth. God, in his
infinite Mercy, has discovered to us the knowledge of his Gospel; and we pray
him, that we may never be without this so great a blessing. But how it is
credible, that they, who promise to protect us in it, either can or will
perform that, since their minds do waver, as to their Religion, and that they
study to please Men? We are willing, that our Adversaries should recover their
own, and that the damages done on both sides should be equally born: But that
they should return into the City, and there set up their Idolatry again, is a
thing we can by no means endure. They say, that they did not at all molest us
in our Religion; no thanks to them for that: But we ought to render our hearty
thanks to the immortal God, that they were not able to do, what they were very
willing to have done. The Bodies of the Dead were not so used, as they affirm:
But when, for our defense, we demolished some Churches near the Town, what
Bodies were found, not as yet consumed, were removed to another place, and
buried deeper in the ground: Again, all had leave to carry the dead Bodies, of
their Relations, that were found there, whithersoever they pleased. What they
say of the Emperor Otho, is a most false and impudent lie, of their own
devising: For we are not ignorant, what Honor is due to the chief Magistrate
of all, but especially to him, of whom they speak, the Emperor Otho, who did
many great Actions, and was a most valiant Asserter, and Defender of the
Liberty of Germany. That Worship, which they call Holy and Divine Service,
which, they complain, we disturbed in their Churches, is nothing less than
Holy, but rather a reproach to God in the highest degree. The Vestments,
Chalices, and other Ornaments were long before carried out of the Town by them:
1551*
But the Writings, and public Records, are in our keeping, and are not
cancelled, as they falsely accuse us. Nor were the Priests beaten, but they
themselves robbed the Churches, and carried the prey elsewhere. We assaulted
the Monastery of Hamerslebe, which, nevertheless, belongs not to them, because
it was a refuge to our Enemies, where they divided the spoil, that they took
from us, and our Associates. What they add of the many insolences, and saucy
tricks, that our Men did there, it is a mere Fiction of the Monks, as to the
injuries, which they say, were done them in the City, the story is this: About
five and twenty years since, when on Palm Sunday they were performing their
apish and ridiculous Ceremonies, the Rabble ftocking thither laughed at them
for it: But they, whose rashness, and boldness, proceeded so far, as to break
the Windows, were by us severely punished and banished: For other injuries, we
know none, nor did they themselves ever complain to us of any. Wherefore, we
have done nothing against our Engagements or Transactions, and so have given
our Adversaries no cause of War. These things then considered, we beseech all
men, not to give credit to their Calumnies, but that they would pity our case,
who are constrained to a defensive War, that we may be permitted to preserve
the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Liberty, which we received from our
Forefathers, for which the godly Kings and Magistrates, of former times, and
those Valiant Macchabees, thought no danger too great to be undergone. Peace is
the thing we most wish for: But it is denied us: So that being long, and much
infested by the Incursions of our Neighbors, we cannot but resist unjust
violence: And this makes us the more confident, that such as have never been
provoked by any injury from us, will not concern themselves in this War, but
stand in awe of the great God, the Avenger of all unrighteousness. For the same
cause, that has raised this trouble against us, will, within a short time,
involve themselves also in streights and difficulties, if they are desirous to
preserve and maintain the true Religion.

January the fifth, the Emperor commanded the Popes Bull of Indiction of the
Council, King Ferdinand complains of the Turks breach of Truce.
to be read in the Diet of the Princes and States, and warned them to prepare
against its sitting. The same day King Ferdinand informed the States, that, in
time of Truce, the Turks began to stir in Hungary, and to build a Castle within
his Dominions, as they had endeavored to surprise his Castle of Zolnock, and
put a Garrison into it. That they had also made an inrode into Transylvania:
That for his part, he had given no cause of any Quarrel, and was wholly
inclined to observe the Truce: But that, if the Turk refused to do so, he
moved, that supplies might be given him. We told you in the twentieth Book, The
Bishop of Winchester turned out of his Bishopric, and committed to prison
again.
that Stephen, Bishop of Winchester, was made Prisoner in England: Now seeing
he persisted in his opinion, and would not allow the Laws made, or to be made,
concerning Religion, during the Kings minority, he was this year, in the Month
of January, turned out of his Bishopric, and sent again to Prison. Andrew
Osiander, who went, as we said, into Prussia, broached, at this time, a new
Opinion, affirming, That man is not justified by Faith, but by the
righteousness of Christ dwelling in us, Osiander's new Opinion about
Justification,
and he maintained, that Luther was of his Judgment also. But the rest of the
Divines, his Colleagues vigorously opposed him, declaring what he said of Luther
to be false, who, not many Months before his death, had given an ample and fair
testimony of Philip Melanchtons Book, concerning common places of Scripture,
Condemned by the other Divines.
in the Preface to the first Tome of it: That in falling foul then upon
Melanchton, he made Luther also his Enemy, because both were of one mind. Then
having compared places, they plainly demonstrated* that Luther taught quite
contrary to him in this Matter, and affirmed his Doctrine to be pestiferous,
since he asserted, that the Righteousness of Faith did not consist in the Blood
and Death of Christ: And this Matter was declared to and fro, with great heat.
He pretended, as I said, that Luther, and he, were of the same Judgment: But,
in the mean time, he boasted amongst his Friends, as it is written, that
Luther, and Melanchton, had framed a certain Aristotelian Divinity, Albert,
Duke of Prussia, sides with Osiander.
that savoured more of the Flesh than Spirit. At first, Duke Albert desired
that the Matter might have been taken up by Mediators: But after much
tampering, being persuaded by Osiander, he came over to his Opinion, and
commanded the Adversaries of it to depart his Country. Joachim Merlin, and some
others, are banished for Osiander's Doctrine.
Amongst these was Joachim Merlin, and he must pack off too, though not only
the Citizens, but Women and Children also, petitioned the Prince, that he would
not deprive them of such a Pastor. Now, Osiander had taught many years at
Norimberg, and with applause too, started no Innovations then, and seemed in
all things to follow the Doctrine of Luther, so long as he lived; but when,
after the Emperors Edict about Religion came out, he left Norimberg, and went
into Prussia, he broached this Opinion, which, as most think, he would hardly
have done had Luther been still alive. He challenged chiefly the Divines of
Wittemberg, to refute these things, if they could, and he declared, he would
defend them, whoever should offer to impugn the same, Osiander falls foul upon
the Divines of Wittemberg and Melanchton.
not sparing Melanchton, whom he sharply pinched. All Learned Men generally,
especially in Saxony, condemned his Opinion in Books they published for that
effect, and censured him for disturbing the Church, at a most unseasonable
time; but every body grumbled, that he should so unworthily treat Melanchton, a
Man of so much Mildness and Learning. In another Book he maintained, that
though Mankind had not been lost by the Sin of Adam, Another of his Opinions.
yet Christ was to have been born in the World.

February the Thirteenth, The Decree of the Diet of Ausburg.
the Diet of the Empire was dissolved. Therein the Emperor made a Decree; And
because, says he, this sad difference about Religion can no way better be
remedied, than by a free and holy General Council. Again, because in the former
Diet the States submitted to the Council, and still persist in the same
purpose, that shall be firm and stable. What I also then promised, shall be
performed, and I Will make it my chief care, that all things be rightly done and
in order. Now seeing this Bull of his Holiness extends to all the Provinces of
Christendom, I do suppose, that all Kings and Higher Powers, being mindful of
their Duty, will obey it, and promote so Pious a Work to the utmost of their
power. Whatsoever is proper for me also to do, as Protector of the Church and
Defender of Councils, I shall be ready to perform; and will give safe Conduct
to all that shall repair to the Council, and to their Representatives, whether
they have changed their Religion or not, that they may safely be there,
propound whatsoever they may think expedient for the quiet of their
Consciences, and return home again, when they please: Moreover, I will
endeavor, that all matters be debated and determined in a holy and Christian
manner, without passion or interest, according to the holy Scriptures and the
Doctrine of the Fathers, that, all Errors and false Doctrines being removed,
both Church and State may be reformed. It is my design also to remain within,
or, at least, near the confines of the Empire, and to protect the Council, that
it may have the wished for issue, that the fruit of it may extend to all
People, and that it may chiefly be an healing Council to Germany. Wherefore, I
require and exhort all the Princes and States, but especially the Churchmen,
and those who have changed their Religion, and have embraced the Augustane
Confession, that, according to the Popes Bull, they come thither ready
prepared, that they may have no pretext afterward to complain, that they have
been supplanted by too much haste, or not admitted fully to plead their own
Cause: For, as I said, they shall have safe Conduct, and I will procure, that
they have a competent hearing. Furthermore, because the States have given
several Reasons, why the Decrees about Religion, made in the former Diet of
Ausburg, are not observed, I take to my self the care of that, and will know of
them severally, what the Impediment is. Let every one then make it their
business, A meeting of the Princes at Norimberg.
to have their Case fairly stated. It was also Decreed, that Commissioners from
the Electors and the six other Princes should meet at Norimberg, by the first
of April, to consult how the Money, that was taken out of the public Treasury
for the Magdeburg-War, should be refunded; that what they determined, as to
that particular, should be as valid, as if it were Enacted in a full Diet: And
since that War concerned the common Welfare of all Germany, power was granted
to the several Magistrates, to impose Taxes upon their People for that end;
Again, if any Subject of the Empire or Foreigner should assist the
Magdeburgers, the Emperor, in that case, promised also to be at the Charges.
As to Jurisdiction and Ecclesiastical Possessions, the Emperor said, he would
take care, that they, Supplies decreed to King Ferdinand against the Turk.
who applied themselves to him, should have right done them, so that every one
might recover their own. The supplies against the Turk, which had been promised
King Ferdinand in the former Diet, were now decreed to him, though somewhat
unwillingly. Lastly, because the Winter before, Mansfield and Heideck had
levied Soldiers for the assistance of the Magdeburgers, The Emperors Edict
against those that should assist the Magdeburgers.
as has been said, it was enacted by the Emperor, That if for the future
Soldiers did muster together in any part of Germany, the next adjoining Princes
and States should forthwith unite their Forces and quell them, and so quench
the flame before it should grow to an head.

About the same time, Henry King of France received into his protection Octavio
Farnese, Octavio Farnese in protection of the King of France, puts a French
Garrison into Parma.
who being both privately a mortal Enemy to Ferrante Gonzaga, Governor of
Milan for the Emperor, because of his Fathers Murder, and doubting also,
because of the Neighborhood of Piacenza, which was in the Emperors hands,
that he was not able with his own Forces to secure Parma, sought for Aid
elsewhere, and put a French Garrison into the Town. This exceedingly vexed the
Emperor, and much more Pope Julius, as will appear hereafter.

The Emperor pronounced Sentence now against the Landgrave, for the County or
Lordship of Dietz; Sentence pronounced against the Landgrave.
and he was condemned for Contumacy, that he did not Answer: But he again
alleged, that it was not in his power to Answer, since he had not the liberty
to Discourse with his Counselors, being observed and overheard by his Keepers;
for since the discovery of his late design to make his escape, no Man was
permitted to go to him, nor talk with him, but in presence of a Witness.

On the penult of February, Bucer dies.
Bucer died at Cambridge, and was honorably buried, being celebrated by the
Epitaphs of the Learned, among whom were two Brothers, Young Noblemen of the
House of Suffolk, whose Mother had all along before, and in time of his
Sickness, been extremely kind to Bucer, a Lady very zealous for the Reformed
Religion.

About this time, The complaint of the Bishop of Strasburg against the
Preachers.
the Bishop of Strasburg wrote to the Senate, complaining heavily of their
Preachers, that they did inflame the People, and expose the Clergy to great
dangers; and therefore, he desires, that these things may be reformed, or, that
otherwise he would consider what was to be done. March the Tenth, King
Ferdinand and his Son Maximilian parted from Ausburg; for, till then they had
been Treating with the Emperor and his Sister Queen Mary. The Deputies of
Bremen also depart at length, without any success in their Negotiation. There
were no great matters acted at this time at Magdeburg, only frequent sallyings
out and light Skirmishes. And when the Elbe was out, the Besieged made Boats,
and up and down the River brought in Provisions to the Town. Many Prodigies
were at that time seen in Saxony, Prodigies in Saxony.
and amongst the rest three Suns, and as many Moons, sometimes of a pale, and
sometimes of a bloody, color. The Magdeburgers sent Volrate and John of
Mansfield, the Sons of Count Albert, to solicit Aid from the Maritime Cities,
but all in vain. The Enemy then built Castles upon the Elbe, above and below
the Town, and, having posted Vessels on both sides well manned, hindered the
Towns Men from venturing out by Water. There happened many Conflicts also, when
the Besiegers attempted to carry off the Cattle, which the Besieged turned out
daily to graze about the Town.

On the Eighth of April, The Popes Brief against Octavio Farnese.
the Pope published a Bull, wherein he grievously accuses Octavio Farnese, and
when, said he, I conferred upon him Parma, and the chief Ministry, he promised
faithfully, neither to espouse the party of any Prince, nor, without my
consent, to put a Foreign Garrison into Parma: And when he seemed to be
inclining to new courses, I many times admonished him friendly of his Duty,
both by Messengers, and by the intervention of his Brother the Cardinal
Alexander; and because he answered somewhat suspiciously then, I directed a
Brief to him with severe Threatenings, if he offered to do otherwise: Being
afterward fully assured, that he kept not his Promises, I was, indeed, as I
ought to be, extremely troubled, to receive such an injury from him, on whom I
had heaped so many Honors and Favors: Wherefore now, though in a thing so
manifest and notorious, I might presently proceed to sentence, yet to make him
sensible of our goodness; Octavio cited to Rome.
I charge and command him, that within thirty days he make his Personal
Appearance at Rome, to answer to the Accusations that are brought against him,
and give sufficient security for his good behavior in time to come; wherein,
if he fail, I declare him now as then, and then as now, guilty of High Treason,
Perjury, and other most heinous Crimes and Offenses; and all his Lands, Goods
and Chattels to be confiscated to the Public, and in punishing him, I crave
the Emperors Assistance; as I strictly command and charge, that no Man do aid
or help him. The Council meets again at Trent.
When May* Day was come, the Council commenced again; but, because there were
but very few as yet present, and that the War of Parma had intervened, the
Session was put off to the first of September. The Deputies of the Princes, who
Assembled at Norimberg in the Month of April, resolved, that more Money should
be contributed for carrying on the Siege of Magdeburg. And though, by a
Posterior Edict, the Emperor commanded the same thing, yet there was much
difficulty in the accomplishment of it, and all were unwilling to pay their
Money, for that the Siege was long, and not like to be brought soon to an end.
Wherefore also, Duke Maurice Treated often with the Towns People about a Peace,
and when, on the Fifth of May, they came out to the Camp, upon a safe Conduct
given, Heideck a Friend to the Magdeburgers.
the Matter was long and much debated in his presence. Some Months before, Duke
Maurice had taken into his Service Count Heideck, who was Outlawed by the
Emperor, and made him Governor of Leipsick. He, for the love he had to the
Reformed Religion, and the hatred he bore the Emperor, wished well to the
Magdeburgers, and was a Counselor to Peace, that, when that War was over, Duke
Maurice might attempt greater matters. For even then the War was projected,
which Duke Maurice had afterward with the Emperor, as shall be said in its
proper place: Nevertheless, they could not then agree upon a Peace, because too
hard Conditions were proposed, and that purposely too, as many thought, that
Duke Maurice might protract the time, and wait an opportunity of acting; which
offered not, till the French King made War against the Emperor, as shall be
said hereafter. But in the mean time, there happened a great Mutiny in the Camp
before Magdeburg, for the want of some Months pay.

Farnese, Farnese, being con^umacious, undertakes the defense of Parma.
though cited, did not appear at Rome; but, being strengthened by French
Supplies, undertook the defense of Parma. Wherefore, May the Thirteenth, the
Emperor emitted a Proclamation, to this effect. For as much, says he, as in
compliance with the Duty and good will we bear to the Pope and Church of Rome,
The Emperors Declaration against Octavio.
we are desirous to perform those things we ought, and to take care, lest upon
this occasion greater stirs arise in Italy, and afterward in other places
also: Again, when we consider, upon how just grounds the Pope is offended, and
how he has omitted nothing, that was fit to keep Octavio in his Duty. We have
commissioned and appointed Ferrande Gonzaga in our Name, to aid and assist his
Holiness, because we cannot do it in Person. Wherefore we command all our
Subjects within the Duchy of Milan, that, during this War, they pay him the
same obedience, as they would our self in Person, and endeavor to do the Enemy
all the hurt and damage that possibly they can. The War of Parma betwixt the
Emperor and French.
So then Gonzaga began the War, and having wasted the Country, laid Siege to
Parma, as the Pope did to Mirandula. For the Prince of Mirandula was on the
French side, and, unless he had been diverted, might have been very useful to
Octavio and those of Parma.

May the Two and twentieth, the Pope wrote a very kind Letter to the Switzers,
The Popes Brief to the Switzers, wherein he desires them to send their Bishops
to the Council.
telling them, that, as he had taken the Name of Julius the Second, who
entertained great kindness for them, so also had he proposed to follow his
Example and footsteps in loving of them: That hitherto, indeed, he had been so
taken up about various and weighty Affairs relating to the Public, that he had
no time to give them a Declaration of his good Intentions toward them, but
that yet he had had them constantly in his thoughts; as might be seen by two
Instances chiefly: First, in that for the security of his Person, he had chosen
in the City a Guard of their Countrymen, and then, that he had done the same
at Bolonia, as trusting to their fidelity and diligence: That now an occasion
of Writing to them offered, by the calling of the Council, which on the First
of May was begun at Trent: That therefore, since their conjunction with the
rest would be of great moment for carrying on so pious and necessary a Work, he
earnestly entreated them, that the Prelates within their Territories would not
fail to be present at the next Session to be held the First of September: That,
what else he had to say to them, they might know from Sir Jerome Franco, his
Nuncio, of whose integrity and diligence they themselves had now many years
experience; and, that, besides, since he concerned himself much in that Affair,
he would within a short time send one of his Confidents, a Bishop, to treat
with them more at large concerning the Council.

About the end of May, Prince Philip returns to Spain.
Prince Philip, the Emperors Son, leaving Ausburg, took his Journey through
Italy into Spain. With him went Maximilian his Cousin and Brother in Law, that
he might bring home his Wife, now the Mother of two Children. The French Kings
Apology to the Pope.
In the mean time, the French King, to appease the Pope and College of
Cardinals, by his Ambassador Monsieur de Terms, makes his Apology at Rome,
for taking Octavio into his protection, alleging, that he ought not to be
blamed for that, since it belonged properly to Kings, to succor the afflicted:
Again, that he proposed to himself no private advantage by the matter, but,
that what he had done, was for the sake of the Church of Rome, in imitation of
his Ancestors, who had more than any others enriched her with Lands, and many
times protected her by their Arms: For, since that Parma belonged to the
Patrimony of the Church, it was his chief care that it should not fall into the
hands of Strangers, and that it was for that end only, Parma of the Patrimony
of the Church.
that he was at such vast charges daily. That, therefore, he earnestly desired,
that he would so interpret what he did, and put away the opinion he conceived
of him; for that, that would much redound to the benefit of the Public. But,
that if he was not satisfied with this Excuse, and would prefer War before
Peace, he himself must see, how prejudicial and dangerous that would prove to
all Italy and Europe also, and be the cause, in like manner, that no firm nor
lasting Treaty could be set on foot about matters of Religion. That therefore,
if sad Commotions should thereupon ensue, if the Council now called could not
meet, or, if it did assemble, should be dispersed, if in that state of affairs
he could not send any of his Bishops to Trent; the fault was not to be imputed
to him, who was willing not only to offer, but to receive, Conditions of Peace,
as he did publicly protest. But the Pope, relying upon the Aid and Promises of
the Emperor, was nothing softened by that Embassy.

On the Seventeenth of June, Conditions of Peace proposed to the Magdeburgers.
Duke Maurice again granted a safe Conduct to the Magdeburgers, for Deputies to
be sent to Treat with him about a Peace; who, being dispatched and conducted by
Marquess Albert of Brandeburg, found Duke Maurice at Pirn, a Town of Misnia,
for he was gone home, and seemed to act remisly. So soon as they came, he
propounded these Conditions to them in the Emperors Name: That they shall make
no League against the Emperor, King Ferdinand, Austria, nor the Netherlands;
That they shall observe all the Decrees of the Empire: That they shall stand
Trials at Law, and satisfy the Clergy for the damage they have received of
them; That they shall demolish their Works and Fortifications; That they shall
admit of a Garrison of Twelve hundred Soldiers; That they shall receive the
Emperor, King Ferdinand, and their Generals, at all times, and with as many
Men as they please; That they deliver up twelve great Guns, pay down an hundred
thousand Florins; and ratify and confirm all these Conditions upon Oath.
Though they were not in a condition to perform these Articles, yet did they not
wholly reject them, and, at Count Heidecks intercession, The Empe^our calls the
States to Trent.
they were by little and little qualified. The Emperor had before sent Letters
of safe Conduct to Germany, especially to the States of the Augustane
Confession, requiring them to repair to Trent by the First of May. But, because
by reason of the War of Parma, the Council was put off till the beginning of
December, as has been said before, he again warns them by any means to come,
and promises them all imaginable Justice and fair dealing. Though there were a
great many of that persuasion, nevertheless, (what ought chiefly to have been
done) they did not confer Counsels together, either, that they despaired of any
success in the matter, or, that they were afraid to offend the Emperor; or,
again, that they grew faint-hearted when they saw the danger at hand. Of all
the Free Towns, none but Strasburg sent Messengers to enquire both what their
Neighbors, and those, Duke Maurice his Confession drawn up by Melanchton.
more remote, were resolved to do. And Duke Maurice had ordered Philip
Melanchton, to draw up the heads of their Doctrine, which might afterward be
publicly produced. That being finished, and perused by all the Divines and
Ministers, who, by the Princes command, met at Leipsick on the Eighth of July,
The Confession of Wirtemberg.
it was by them all unanimously approved. Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg took
the like course also, and caused Brentius to compose a Book of the same nature.
And though both Writings agreed in the very same points, yet Duke Maurice would
exhibit his own apart, lest, if many together should propound the same thing
in common, the Emperor might take Umbrage at it, and suspect some Association.
However, having mutually communicated the Books to one another, the Divines of
Wirtemberg approved the Saxons Book, and the Saxons that of Wirtemberg, as the
Divines of Strasburg did both. And so it was agreed upon, that, when time
served, some should be sent to the Council to propose and defend that Doctrine.
The Duke of Wirtemberg, after his Fathers example, made much of John Brentzen,
Brentius is by the Duke of Wirtemberg restored to the Ministry in the Church.
for his Excellent Learning, using his assistance in the restoration of the
Reformed Religion; he also restored him again to the Ministry, and gave him
the Living of Sutgart. July the Five and twentieth, Marquess Albert of
Brandeburg, in the absence of Duke Maurice, by a Trumpeter, rejects the answer
that the Magdeburgers made to the Conditions of Peace proposed by Duke Maurice
at Pirn. He had got a small Ruffle the day before; for they had engaged with
greater Forces, A M^tiny in Magdeburg.
than ever they had done hitherto. On the Thirteenth of August, there had like
to have been a great Mutiny within the Town: For a Letter was brought to the
Soldiers, which mentioned, that there were some of the Senate who would betray
the Town, and named Henry Alman for one. Whereupon the Soldiers flocking
together, demand him. He appeared and protested, that it was an injury done
unto him, that it was a trick of the Enemy, that, by cunning and treachery,
they might bring about, what they could not accomplish by force and fair
^ighting; and, that if the thing could be proved against him, he did not refuse
to submit to any punishment; so that the whole Senate having engaged for his
fidelity, the matter was quieted, and some Citizens and Soldiers were chosen,
to view the Letters that should be sent to and again for the future. Fight days
after, Duke Maurice his Letter to the Emperor.
Duke Maurice wrote to the Emperor, acquainting him, that, for his own part,
he was satisfied with the safe Conduct he gave, and could not find any great
fault in it; but, that he was informed, there was a Decree made in the Council
of Constance, that Heretics, or such as were suspected of Heresy, should be
brought into Inquisition if they came to the Council, and sentence pronounced
against them for their Crime, although the Emperor had given them safe
Conduct: The Decree of the Council of Constance.
That that Decree was extant amongst the Acts of the Council, and actually put
in execution upon John Huss, who had been put to death, notwithstanding the
safe Conduct of the Emperor Sigismund, upon the security whereof he came: That
since it was so, he could not send any of his Divines to Trent, unless the
Prelates assembled there, should, in the Name of the whole Council, grant also
their safe Conduct, as it had been done in the Council of Basil, which
immediately succeeded that of Constance: That the Bohemians, being moved by the
forementioned instance, would not then go thither, till first they had a safe
Conduct from the whole Council; that therefore he entreated his Majesty, that
either by his Authority or Interest, he would obtain that from them; for, that
unless a safe Conduct were granted in the same form, as heretofore at Basil, it
ought not to be prejudicial to him, or any else of the same profession, if they
suffered none of theirs to repair to the Council. Now, of the Bohemians, and
John Huss who was burnt at Constance, and of the War that followed thereupon,
mention has been made in the third Book. And because a Decree past at
Constance, that the next subsequent Council should be held five years after;
another, seven years after that, and so for the future, one every tenth year,
the Fathers met again at Basil. The safe Conduct that the Bohemians had when
they came to the Council of Basil.
But, because the Bohemians were not as yet reconciled, the Affair was managed
betwixt them by Letters and Messengers, and at the Town of Egra a Draught of a
safe Conduct was made, which, if the Fathers did admit of, the Bohemians did
not refuse, said they, to come. And so soon as the Deputies, whom they had
sent, had declared their Commission, the Fathers did approve, and set their
Seals to that form of safe Conduct, which they sent to them with a most
friendly Letter, exhorting them to prepare themselves, that when the safe
Conduct also of the Emperor Sigismund should be brought to them, they might be
in readiness to undertake the Journey. This was done in the fourth Session, in
the year 1432. Now what kind of safe Conduct that of the Fathers, was, it shall
be at length delcared in the following Book. Duke Maurice then, being, by his
Divines informed of this, makes application to the Emperor, and urges the
precedent of Basil, as the latest, and most suitable to the Age. For the
Protestants were much in the same case, as the Bohemians had been in formerly,
and for the same causes, in a manner, was the Council of Trent called, that
that of Basil had heretofore been, to wit, that Heresies might be rooted out;
that peace and tranquillity might be restored to the State, and, that the
Church might be purged from Vices, and reformed. On the Twenty sixth day of
August, in the Morning after Sermon, the Doctors and Preachers of the Church of
Ausburg, ten in number, with the Schoolmasters, were sent for to the Lodgings
of the Bishop of Arras, The Ministers of Ausburg questioned about their
Doctrine.
every one by himself. When they were come thither, some sooner, some later,
not knowing what the matter was, they were commanded to keep a part, and not to
talk to one another; afterward, they were called in order one after another
into a Hall, where the Bishop of Arras sat with Hasen, Seldom, Malvenda and
some others. Seldom was Spokesman, and, as he was bid, proposed the Questions.
Whether or not in the Lords Supper, there was as much contained under one Kind,
as under both? Next, How many Sacraments they believed there were? The Answer
and Constancy of the Ministers.
And, lastly, Why they did not teach according to the form prescribed by the
Emperor three years ago, whereas they had promised to do so; no less than the
Senate it self, and all the States had done? They answered every one for
himself severally, That Christ instituted the whole Supper, and that his
Institution ought to be followed; That there is mention made but of two
Sacraments in the holy Scriptures, Baptism and the Lords Supper; That they
received not that Form of Doctrine, because it disagreed with the holy
Scripture. Here the Bishop of Arras took them up in a great heat, Do ye think
then, said he, that the Emperor cannot make Laws and prescribe Rules in
Spiritual Affairs, as well as in Temporal? What the Emperor may do, we do not
now dispute, said they; but, as we said, we neither received that Form, nor can
we, indeed, approve it. With that he fell into a greater passion, and in a rage
bestowed some bitter and reproachful words upon them. When also they spoke as
they did of the Sacraments, Seldom the Lawyer, as being Interpreter, rebuked
them sharply. So they were ordered to withdraw, and stay without, being
attended by a Guard, who placed them severally, that they might not come
together. Presently some of the chief Senators were called, and when these
came, the Ministers were all brought in together, The Ministers of Ausburg
banished.
and strict charge given them, That within three days they should depart out of
the City, before Sun setting the third day; That they should never preach any
more within the Empire, nor as far as the Emperors Jurisdiction extended; That
they should not speak with any of their Friends or Relations, nor tell any Man
the cause of their departure; That they should not write back to any in the
City, nor give an account of what course had been taken with them; and all
these things, with hands lifted up, as the custom was, they were made to Swear
against their wills. Preaching prohibited.
Then the Town Council was enjoined to put a stop to all preaching in the
Lutheran Churches, until the Emperors farther pleasure should be known in the
matter. The same course was afterward also taken with the Schoolmasters, and
with those of Memmingen, and others in Schwabia, who had been also sent for,
and came thither; for the one was prohibited to teach, and the other to return
home, any more. And when one of them urged, that his Wife was near her time;
and therefore earnestly begged, that he might be suffered only to go and see
her: The Bishop of Arras turning to his Company, He calls her a Wife, said he,
who is a Harlot. Thus then, were they forced to be gone, which occasioned much
sorrow in the City; but the Citizens showed them all the kindness they could in
Presents and other Instances of Liberality. The liberality of the Captive Duke
of Saxony toward banished Ministers.
When it came to the Ears also of the captive Duke of Saxony, he sent
Messengers to comfort them, and to help them with Money at their departure. The
reason, why the Emperor did do so, was thought to be, first, because he was
egged on to it by some; then, that upon enquiry he had found, the Ministers to
have obstructed the execution of his Decree about Religion: The Reasons why
they were served so.
And, lastly, that he had been informed of the consent and agreement of the
Divines of Saxony, Schwabia, and Strasburg. And, it is believed, they looked
upon this as the best course that could be taken, to banish them, that so the
Fathers at Trent might have the less work to do, and an easy victory, their
Adversaries having none hardly left, whom they might send to oppose them. Being
thus banished, then, and forced to fly, they went, some into Switzerland, and
some to other places. Many were terrified at the report of this. For no Man
doubted, but what had been done there, would also be practiced in other places:
But at the same time that all Men lay under this consternation, Henry King of
France makes War against the Emperor.
the French King made War against the Emperor, seized some Dutch Ships, and
made prize of them, and took several Towns in Piedmont and Turin; and amongst
the rest Cherie and St. Damian, by the Conduct and Command of the Duke of
Brisack. Cherie and St. Damian taken.
As to the Ships that were taken, the Imperialists published a Declaration,
importing; That, in time of Peace, when the Emperor expected nothing less than
a War, and had commanded his Subjects to be quiet, a French Captain come up
with them, and sent them word, that, in honor to the Queen of Scots whom he
had on board, they should, after the old and ancient custom, Strike Sail, and
give him so many Guns; and, that having done so, when their Guns were
discharged, they were treacherously boarded and carried away. It was wondered
at by most Men, that the French King durst break with the Emperor, at a time
when he flourished with so much success and prosperity; and, as it is said, the
Emperor himself expected no such thing. For though he had a quarrel with
Farnese Duke of Parma, he would not therefore seem to be at enmity with the
French, The Reasons why the French King made War against the Emperor.
with whom he had made a Peace seven years before. But the French King, who
thought himself wounded through Octavio's Side, had certain intelligence, that
the Turks were at Sea with a Fleet, was informed by Agents of the intentions of
Duke Maurice, and believed, that the Emperor, now crazy and valetudinary,
could not live long, bravely attempted the matter.

Near to the same time, the Turkish Fleet, having in vain attempted Malta, took
Tripoly in Barbary. The blame of this the Emperor laid upon the French King,
The Turk takes Tripoly.
and, by his Envoys, told the Princes and Free Towns, that it was occasioned by
French Treachery. So soon as the King came to know this, he justified himself,
affirming the cause of the Turkish War to be, that the Emperor did not,
according to his promise, restore a Town of theirs that he kept in Barbary,
that King Ferdinand had seized and fortified the Castle of Zolnock, Contrary
Narratives from the Emperor and King of France.
seated on the frontiers of Hungary within the Dominion of the Turks, that he
paid not his yearly Tribute, and attempted Innovations in Transylvania.
Afterward he published a Narrative in confutation of the Emperors Relation,
(wherein it was given out Tripoly, was lost by the Treachery of d'Aremont the
French Ambassador) and confirmed it by the Grand Signiors Letters.

During these Transactions, The Restoration of the Council of Trent.
the First of September, the day of the Sessions of the Council came; and then
were present, besides the Italian and Spanish Bishops, the Archbishops of Mentz
and Treves, in appearance, mightily congratulated and welcomed by all, who were
followed not long after by the Archbishop of Cologne. For the Emperor had,
both personally at Ausburg, and by Messengers and Letters, dealt earnestly with
them, that they should be there; and, indeed, they far exceed the rest in
Dignity and Splendor, and have most of the Bishops of Germany under their
Jurisdiction. Now, seeing they thought, that they were like to make a long stay
there, they kept but a few Horses, and sold all the rest, laying in Household
Provisions also, for a considerable time. There came also the Bishops of
Strasburg, Vienne, Constance, Off, and Naumburg; the rest, being detained by
Business, Wherein Cardinal Crescentio presides.
Sickness, or Age, begged leave, and sent their Vicars and Proxies Cardinal
Crescentio was Legate, and President for the Pope; to whom were joined the
Archbishop of Siponto, and Bishop of Verona, as his Nuncio's. The Emperor sent
thither Don Francis of Toledo, Hugh Count of Montfort, and William of
Poictieres, and some were there also to represent Ferdinand King of Hungary.
When all were assembled in Session, then on the First of September, in the
Cathedral Church, and that Mass and the rest of the Ceremonies which are
commonly performed in the beginning were over, unexpectedly came in the Abbat
of Bellosane, The French King, Letter to the Council.
Ambassador from the French King, with a Letter directed to the Assembly of
Trent. Having delivered it to the Legate, who read the Superscription, a Debate
arose, Why he called them an Assembly rather than Council; That the Letter was
not to be received nor read, cried they, unless he did show that he had a
Commission; And a Debate amongst the Fathers about the Superscription of it.
And when, in the heat of the contest, a heavy noise and clamor was made,
especially by the Spanish Bishops, and that he told them, that his Commission
was contained in the Letter; the Popes Legate arose, and called the Fathers
into the Vestry. The matter being canvassed, they concluded, that he was to
have Audience, because the Inscription could admit of a good sense. The Letter
being then read privately, wherein the King briefly expressed his grief, and
complained that he had wrong done him, they all took their places again, and
then the Letter being read publicly, they made Answer. That whereas the King
called the Council an Assembly, they took it in good part, and would not
harbor any sinistrous suspicion of him, who bore the Name of Most Christian;
but, if he meant otherwise, that they looked upon the Letter as not addressed
unto them; and then he was bid to speak, The Speech of the French Ambassador.
what he had to say. He therefore read a long Speech in Writing. And first, the
King tells them, what de Term, his Ambassador at Rome, had done with the Pope
and College of Cardinals; that none of these ways could prevail, though he had
made all Overtures of Peace: And, that Pope Julius, The French Kings
Protestation against the Council of Trent.
who, in imitation of his Predecessors, ought to compose the Controversies of
Princes, had raised an extraordinary Combustion, in a time that he ought least
of all to have done so, considering the sad and distressed state of
Christendom; that since it was so, and because he dealt so roughly and
implacably with him, who was the Eldest Son of the Church, he protested, as it
had been also done at Rome; first, that, by reason of the Troubles and Wars, he
could not send the Bishops of his Dominions to Trent: Again, that he owned not
that Council for Public and General, but looked upon it rather as some private
Assembly, gathered together not or public good, but for the profit and
advantage of some few: And, lastly, that neither he nor any of his Subjects
could be obliged to submit to the Decrees thereof; but, on the contrary, that,
if occasion required, he would apply those Remedies, which, in the like case,
his Ancestors were accustomed to make use of; that his Intentions, indeed,
toward Religion and the Church of Rome, should always be right and sincere,
nor would he do any thing that might deserve a Censure; but, that since he was
undeservedly loaded with the injuries and hatred of some Men, he could not do
otherwise at this time. That therefore they should take his protestation in
good part, and give him an Instrument thereof, that he might acquaint the rest
of the Princes and People of Christendom with the whole affair. Now, as to what
he said of using Remedies according to the custom of his Ancestors, the meaning
of it is this. As in all other Provinces, so also in France, if any Bishopric
or Abbey fell to be vacant, the free Election belonged to the Canons and Monks;
but for smaller Benefices, which are not Elective, as they term it, the
Bishops and Patrons bestowed them; and then all Suits about Benefices or Church
Matters, were decided in the several Provinces. Now the Popes of Rome, as they
grew more covetous, began to overthrow these Elections, Expectative Graces.
and by Reservations and Expectative Graces, as they call them, drew all the
Profit to Rome and to themselves, and removed all Suits, even those which they
call of the first instance, primae instantiae, to Rome. The beginning of this
alteration in France happened in the time of Lowis IX. but he vigorously
opposed it, and in the year 1267, made a Law, that the ancient custom should be
observed, and no Tribute upon that account, paid to the Pope of Rome. That Law
was, indeed, in force for many years, but at length the power of the Popes
prevailed, and all over Christendom they published those Graces and
Reservations that I mentioned, which were a great grievance to many, until the
Council of Basil abrogated this way of pillage, reviving the ancient Canons
about Collations and Elections, The payment of Annats discharged.
and discharging the payment of Annats. Charles VII. of France having consulted
the matter, approved and ratified this Decree of the Council, by an Edict in
the year 1438, which is commonly called the Pragmatick Sanction. Pragmatick
Sanction.
But Eugenius the Fourth declared this Council to be null, as we said in the
first-Book, and the Popes who came after him, rejected that Decree, and called
it Schismatical; so that Pius II. by his Legate, earnestly solicited Louis XI.
the Son of Charles VII. to abolish that Sanction; but the King asked the
Opinion of the Parliament of Paris, The Advice of the Parliament of Paris, not
to abrogate the Pragmatical Sanction.
the most famous Judicature in France, consisting all of Lawyers, about the
matter. They quoting the practices of ancient times, made their Report, and
told him, What had been done in the matter, by the Popes and Councils
heretofore, nay, what his own Ancestors had done, Clovis, Charles Ma^gne,
Philip Deodat, Lowis IX. Philip the Fair, Louis the Hutin^, John the First, and
his own Grandfather and Father, that France was then in a very flourishing
condition, and that it was now low and distressed; and unless the ancient Laws
be observed, said they, the Ecclesiastical Order will run into confusion,
France become thinner of People, the most part running away to Rome, and be
exhausted of its Wealth; the Churches, and other stately Religious Houses in
France, will be slighted and fall into decay. And as to the Money Business,
unless your Fathers Sanction continue in force, ten hundred thousand Crowns
will be carried yearly out of France to Rome. For, not to mention other things,
in the time of Pius II. there were at least twenty Bishoprics vacant, which,
for Annats, and other charges, paid Six thousand Crowns a-piece yearly: There
were about threescore Abbeys vacant, and every one of these paid two thousand
a year: Of other Benefices there were above two hundred vacant, every one of
which paid five hundred Crowns: Besides, there are above eleven hundred
Parishes in France, out of which a vast deal of Money was raised through that
Popish Invention. Follow then the footsteps of your Father, and depart not from
the Decree of Basil. This was the Parliaments Advice; but the King, being
either overreached or over awed by the Pope, would needs abolish the Sanction;
and a chief Agent in that business was the Cardinal de Babvo, The Pragmatical
Sanction in danger.
in great favor with the King, and much obliged by the Pope: But both the
Kings Advocate, and the University of Paris, who were much concerned in it,
manfully withstood the same, and appealed from the Pope to a Council. Louis
XII. had afterward great clashings with Julius II. about the same matter, and
it was brought before the Council of Lateran; A Transaction about it.
but at length Francis the First, who succeeded Lowis, transacted with Leo the
Tenth, upon certain Conditions at Bolonia, after the taking of Milan; to wit,
That when a Bishopric or Abbey fell to be vacant, the Chapter or Monks should
not have the Election, but that it should be in the Kings power, to name,
within six Months, one to the Pope, whom he should think worthy of the
Benefice. And this, amongst other things, is what King Henry meant, when he
spoke of a Remedy by his Ambassador in Council. For the French Kings keep that
as a Bit to curb the Popes with, when they fall out with them, and they urge
the pragmatick Sanction, especially at this time, when the thunder of Rome is
no longer so terrible, as formerly it has been, and because France is a vast
and wealthy Country, The pragmatick Sanction a curb to the Popes.
and, without great loss, Rome, cannot be without some of its Riches. Now what
he talked of doing at this time, he actually did not long after, as you shall
hear. Philip the Fair made use of some Remedy heretofore against Boniface VIII.
For when this Pope had enjoined him to make War beyond Sea against the
Sarazens, and would not hear of any Excuse, but discharged him from raising any
Money from the Clergy of his Kingdom, which he was necessitated to do, because
of his Wars, and unless he did obey, put him under Interdict: He assembled all
the States at Paris, and there having complained of the Injuries of Boniface,
and put the Question to all the Bishops and Princes, who made him answer, That
they held all their Estates and Fortunes of his Bounty and Liberality; he
commanded, That no more Money should be carried to Rome for the future, and
ordered all the ways and passages to be carefully watched. Moreover, when the
Parliament of Paris reckoned up, how much the Money, paid by vacant Bishoprics
and Abbys, amounted to yearly, that, they said, was to be understood of former
times; that now the Charge was double, and exceeded the Yearly Revenues: So
that some beneficed persons, by reason of the extreme exaction, were forced to
pawn their Bulls, and leave them in the Bankers hands. Twelve Archbishopricks
in France: And ninety six Bishoprics.
Now, in France, there are twelve Archbishopricks, Aix, Vienne, Lions, N^rbon,
Toulouse, Bourdeaux, Aux, Bourges, Tours, Rowen, Rheims, and Sens; and about
ninety six Bishoprics, out of the Vacancies whereof, there goes a vast deal of
Money to Rome; and out of the Archbishopricks, about threescore Thousand three
Hundred Crowns, as it was calculated in the time of Louis XII.

When the Letter was read, the Fathers promised to give an answer to it in the
next Session; but said, That they admitted not what was then done, but so far
as it consisted with Law; and that therefore they could give him no Instrument
of that Protestation. Having afterward appointed the eleventh day of October
for the next Session, they broke up, and departed severally home, about two of
the Clock in the Afternoon. And here it seems proper, to give some Description
of the form and order of a Public Session. The order of Sessions in a Council.
When that day came, the Fathers, as they love to speak, meet in the Legate's
Lodgings; and from thence, to the Cathedral Church, there is a Lane of Soldiers
made, consisting of about four hundred foot, besides a Troop of fifty or more
Horse. At Nine of the Clock, the Legate comes out with his Cross-bearer before
him, and the Cardinal of Trent on his left hand; after him, come his Colleagues,
and the Electoral Archbishops; then the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and King
Ferdinand, by themselves; and at last, all the other Bishops, every one
according to his Rank and Quality. So soon as they are all come to the Church,
the Soldiers discharge their Pieces, and give them a Vo^ley; then they draw up
in the Marketplace, and there, and about the Church, keep Guard 'till the
Council break up. These are, for the most part, sent for out of the Country, to
be ready against the day of the Session, though the Town also supply a good
many. When they are come into the Church, Mass is said; that being over, the
Decrees of the Council are read, and then a day appointed for the next Session.
Then also, if any Ambassador have ought to say, he is heard: But, by reason of
the many various and most cumbersom Ceremonies that are used in every thing,
the day is far spent before their Business is over, and then the Legate returns
home in the same Pomp as he came. The Pope's Legate takes the first place in
the Council, next to him the Cardinal of Trent, then the Legates Colleagues, and
after them the Electoral Archbishops. On the left hand, sit the Ambassadors of
the Emperor and other Princes. And the middle Benches are filled by the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates, taking place according to the
Seniority of their Consecration. September the second, Subjects were given to
the Divines to be discussed, and that they might give their Opinions of them,
that so they might be decided in the next Session. Subjects allotted to the
Divines.
Now in giving their Opinions, this method was prescribed, That they should
insist upon the Holy Scriptures, Apostolical Traditions, received and approved
Councils, and the Authorities of the Fathers; that they should use Brevity,
abstain from unnecessary and superfluous Questions, and avoid all Jangling and
Contention. As to the Order, it was thought fit, that the Pope's Divines should
speak first, and then the Emperors, and so of the rest. The Pope's Legate
also, for the finding out of the Truth, and the confuting of false Opinions, as
they said, gave them leave to read all sorts of Books. There were a great many
Divines present, Spanish, Italians, and Germans, whom the Pope, Emperor, and
his Sister, Queen Mary, the Governess of the Low Countries, had sent; besides
those, whom the Electors of Cologne and Treves, and some Spanish and Italian
Bishops also, Who chiefly examined all Points.
brought with them. All things were to be examined by them, and no Man, who had
not the Title of Doctor, as they call it, was permitted to speak. But in favor
to the Bishops of Cologne and Treves, John Gropper, a Civilian, and John Delph,
a Divine, but under Doctors Degree, were admitted. And because in some former
Sessions, in Anno 1546, and the year following, new Canons were made concerning
Original Sin, Justification, Free Will, and the Seven Sacraments in general,
and particular Decrees made concerning Baptism and Confirmation, it was
resolved, That all these standing in force, they should proceed to other
things, and, in the first place, to the Sacrament of the Eucharist. Then,
Points were assigned to the Divines, with these Instructions, that they should
search and try, if they were Heretical, and to be condemned by the holy
Council: And these Points were gathered out of the Books of Luther, Zuinglius,
Bucer, and other Protestant Writers.

Now in this manner do the Divines handle the matter: The way of making
Articles of Faith.
They all meet daily in the Legate's Lodgings; and there, for several hours,
and in the order we mentioned, every one discourses of a Point without any
interruption; yet so, that they still submit all they say to the Judgment of
the Church of Rome, for none of the Protestants were present. This place is
open indifferently to all Men. The Pope's Legate, and, generally, all the
Fathers are there; but none speak, except the Divines, and their several
Sayings and Opinions are marked down by Clerks. When they have all discoursed,
which then was done commonly in a Months time, the Bishops meet at the Legate's
Lodgings, and examine the Opinions of the Divines, registered by the Clerks: The
way of making Canons.
Then some of every Nation are chosen out of the whole number, that then are
present, who having weighed all the Opinions, out of them frame that which they
call a Doctrine, what ought to be determined and believed in every point:
Afterward, they Condemn in few words, but with a severe Censure, the contrary
Doctrine and Errors, as they call them: And, at length, all these things are
reported to the whole Assembly. When they are fully agreed, a public Session
is held, as we said before, where the Decrees are read aloud, and then the
Bishops are asked, if they approve them: To which, they severally answer with a
Placet. And so then, some Divines tell their Opinions of the several Points;
but the Bishops only, and with them a few Mitred Prelates, have the power of
Determining. What is so decreed, they command to be reverenced as Sacred and
Holy, and call them Canons. These things, indeed, are acted publicly; but
they, who are more intimately acquainted with the Affairs of Rome, say, That
all the Decrees are already framed at Rome by the Pope's order, and sent in due
time to the Legate, that the Divines in their Reasonings may follow that Form
and Prescript; for the Pope maintains several of them, and many Bishops also
there. And it is a jocose Proverb used by some, The Holy Ghost in the Pope's
hands.
That the Holy Ghost comes ever now and then from Rome to Trent in a Cloak-bag;
because, the Pope sent Letters, with his Orders and Instructions, by Post from
Rome.

September the fourth, Count Heideck came to Magd^burg; and Duke Maurice sent
by him the Conditions of Peace formerly proposed, so moderated, that they
resolved to proceed in the Treaty. In the mean time, there was a Cessation of
Arms, which was afterward also prolonged for many days, as shall be said
hereafter.

The French King, The French King's Edict against the Pope.
now at variance with the Pope, published an Edict, wherein having enlarged
much upon the injury done him by the Pope, upon the cause of the War of Parma,
and why he had taken Octavio into his protection, he commands under a most
severe penalty, That no more Money be for the future carried to Rome; for since
Money was the Sinews of War, what madness would it be, with his and his
Subjects Treasure, to maintain and strengthen the power of his Enemy? That it
was the proper Office of the Popes, to take up the differences of Princes; and
that did Paul III. who, being almost worn out by Age, made a long progress to
Nizza, to make the Emperor and his Father friends; but that Julius took a
quite different course, who, having lately called a Council, which was, indeed,
very necessary to the public, had stirred up a War against him, on purpose,
that he might exclude all the Church of France, which was one of the chief, and
that so no lawful Council might be had, wherein the Errors and Faults, both of
the Head and Members, A most severe Edict of the French King's, against the
Lutherans.
might be reformed. This Edict of the King's was published at Paris the seventh
of September, when, a few days before, another Edict of his, and a most severe
one too, was published against the Lutherans, which partly confirmed the former
Decrees of that nature, and partly, where they seemed not smartly enough
penned, sharpened them, and skrewed them up to the highest pitch of Rigor,
inviting and encouraging Informers, by ample promises of Rewards. Which the
King, as it was thought, did with this design, that he might curb those, who
were desirous of a change of Religion in France, that they should not take to
themselves the greater liberty, because of his clasing with the Pope at this
time: Again, that they, who honored the Church of Rome, might entertain no
suspicion of him, as if his mind hankered after a new Religion. And lastly,
that both the Pope, and College of Cardinals, might perceive, that they might
have access still to his Friendship, when they pleased. Afterward, a
Declaration came forth out of the Emperor's Court, The Emperor's Declaration
against the King of France.
wherein the original of the War of Parma is related, and how just a cause of
Offense the Pope had against Octavio, and the Prince of Mirandula; of how
restless a mind the French King was, who laid hold on all occasions, and made
it his whole study and endeavor, to hinder and disappoint the Emperor's most
honest and lawful Designs. But that the Emperor was so little moved at all
these things, that he would proceed with greater Courage and Resolution.
Octavio had given it out, that he was necessitated to put himself under the
protection of the French King, because of the Injuries and Treacheries of
Ferdinando Gonzaga; but in this Declaration, that is refuted: For, that if
there were any cause of fear, he himself gave the occasion, who had oftener
than once laid wait for the life of Gonzaga. Then, there is an account given,
how Piacenza fell into the Emperor's hands; for that Petro Aloisio, the Pope's
Bastard Son, being invested into Parma and Piacenza, governed the Poeple
tyrannically, and, like another Nero, practiced his detestable Lust, not only
upon Women, but Men also, as his custom was, that therefore he was slain and
murdered in his own House by the Citizens, who could no longer suffer so great
Cruelties: That the Towns-people, then, perceiving the present danger they were
in, if they should fall again under the Jurisdiction of the Pope and Church of
Rome, had no other way of security left, than to resign themselves over to the
Emperor, especially since, of old, they had been free Denizons of the Empire.
That therefore they had applied themselves to Gonzaga, praying him, to receive
them into the Emperor's protection, for that otherwise they must look for help
and patronage somewhere else. That it was an idle thing in him, then, to
pretend fear, seeing the Emperor had bestowed many favors upon the Family of
Farnese; that he had chosen Octavio to be his Son-in-law, given his Father
Peter Aloisio the City of Novara in Fee and Inheritance, and honored him with
the Title of Marquess: But that they had been very ungrateful at all times, but
particularly, when, under a counterfeit mask of Friendship, they assisted him,
in subduing some Rebels of Germany, their whole design was, at the same time,
to have taken from him Milan and Genoua; for that Joannin D'Oria, a brave and
valiant Man, was basely killed in that Scuffle and Tumult, whilst he discharged
his duty to the Emperor, and stood up for the safety of his Country.

There came out an answer to this, The French King's Justification.
afterward, in name of the French King, wherein a relation is given, how that
the Emperor, to endear Paul III. to himself, had given to his Son Petro
Aloisio the Title and Quality of Marquess, how that he had taken his Son
Octavio to be his own Son-in-law; how that he had gratifyed and obliged his
other Son Alexander with many Ecclesiastical Preferments; and, in short, how
that he had made a League with the Pope, wherein it was provided, as it is
said, that the Emperor should confirm the Decree of the College of Cardinals,
concerning the Principality of Parma and Piacenza, to the Family of the
Farneses: But that when the Emperor was at War in Germany, and pretended, it
was not for Religion, The cause of the difference betwixt the Emperor and the
Pope.
but to punish the Rebellion of some, that he had taken up Arms, it was a very
unacceptable Contrivance to the Pope, as well perceiving, that, by so doing, he
minded only his own private Concerns, and aimed at Dominion: And that he had
not been out in his Judgment neither; for that, when the War being over, the
Emperor stood not much in need of the assistance of the Farneses, he had given
no dark intimations of his ill will to the Pope; for that then, his Governors
in Italy had had an eye and mind to Piacenza, and that not long after, Ruffians
being subborned to murder Petro Aloisio in his Chamber, before that the
Citizens heard of the Murder, Soldiers had been brought into the Town, who
seized the Castle in the Emperor's Name: That, if the Emperor had not been
privy to the Fact, it had been but reasonable, that, after the death of Paul
the Third, he should have restored it to the Church; but that he not only
restored it not, but had also endeavored to take Parma from his Son-in-law,
and had, even in the lifetime of Paul, laid his measures for effecting it,
insomuch, that the Trouble and Vexation, which the Pope thereupon conceived,
shortened his days. That afterward Assassines had been apprehended at Parma,
who voluntarily confessed, That they had been employed by Ferdinando Gonzaga to
kill Octavio; that being reduced then into such streights, that they, from whom
he expected help, and his own Father-in-law too, had designs upon him, to rob
him both of Life and Fortune; he had implored help and protection from him,
which, upon his humble Supplication, he could not refuse.

THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH.
BOOK XXIII.
The CONTENTS.
The Fathers of Trent meet in Session, and draw up the form of a safe Conduct,
for coming to the Council: The French King consents not; nay, he persuades the
Switzers to send none to it. Peace is fully concluded with the Magdeburgers:
The Conditions of the Peace are set down. Some Cities of Germany send Deputies
to the Council. The Ambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberg are deluded. Duke
Maurice having sent Ambassadors to the Emperor about the Landgrave, and
obtaining nothing but shifts and delays, he presently resolves upon a War. The
Bishop of Waradine, lately made Cardinal, by whose help King Ferdinand had made
himself Master of all Transylvania almost, is slain in his own House. The
Emperor, in his Letters which he sends to appease the Electoral Archbishops,
tells them, That he expects nothing but what is fair and honest from Duke
Maurice; who, the better to cloak and conceal his designs, sends his Deputies
also to the Council, with whom others join, and demands a safe Conduct for his
Divines to come; but especially, that they, who are of a contrary persuasion,
should not sit as Judges in the Council. They depart without success, when it
began to be spread abroad, that their Master, Duke Maurice, was a preparing for
War. The Tridentine Fathers disagree among themselves. Shortly after, news
being brought of the taking of Ausburg by surrender, they fly for it.
Crescentio, the Legate, being frightened by an Apparition, fell sick, and
despaired of Life, what ever his Servants and Physicians could do, or say, to
comfort him.

IN order to a pacification, For making Peace with Magdeburg, Duke Maurice
holds a Convention of States.
Duke Maurice held a Convention of his own States, about the end of September,
at Wittemberg; whither, as it had been agreed upon, the City of Magdeburg sent
their Deputies, who, ten days after, returned home, under the safe Conduct of
Marquess Albert, of Brandeburg. We told you before, how Duke Maurice had, by
Letters, interceded with the Emperor, He also desires a safe Conduct from the
Council for his Divines.
that his Divines might have a safe Conduct from the Council; the Emperor
therefore sent Orders to his Ambassadors, to prefer the Matter to the Fathers,
and bring it to pass. A Session was then held on the eleventh of October;
wherein was read, first, a Decree, explaining the Doctrine of the Corporal
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; The Decree of the Council
concerning the Lord's Supper.
of the manner of its Institution; of Transubstantiation, as they call it; of
the Worship and Adoration of this Sacrament; of keeping of the Host, and of
carrying it about to the Sick; and of the Preparation that is required for the
worthy Receiving thereof. And then all Christians are forbidden to believe or
teach otherwise, than according to the Doctrine of that Decree: Then were the
Canons read over; and, in them, were all the Points condemned, which, as we
said before, had been drawn out of the Books of Luther, and others;
nevertheless, to comply with the Emperor, they left four of them undecided,
Four Heads left undecided to be disputed about.
^o wit, Whether or not it be necessary to Salvation, and commanded by the Law
of God, that all receive the Sacrament in both kinds; whether he who receives
it only in one kind, receives less than he who takes it in both; whether the
Church erred, when she appointed, that the Priests only should receive in both
kinds, and the rest under one; whether the Sacrament be to be given also to
young Children. The Protestants, they said, desired to be heard, as to these
Points, before the Council determined any thing in them, and to have a safe
Conduct to come: Since, therefore, they had hitherto earnestly looked for their
coming, and were in good hopes, that they might return to the ancient Unity and
Concord of the Church, they granted them a safe conduct to come and return
home, and did defer the decision of these Points 'till the twenty fifth day of
January, that, by that day, they might be present, and allege what they had to
say: That then also, because of the Affinity that was betwixt the two, the
Sacrifice of the Mass should be handled. These things then were publicly read
by them, as if their Adversaries had desired only to be heard concerning those
matters, whereas no such thing had ever entered into their Thoughts. Besides
Duke Maurice, no body had made address to the Emperor, and he also did it in
the manner we mentioned before, there being far greater matters to be
propounded, than those were. But what the design was, in giving out that Sham,
one may guess it, though nothing can be positively affirmed, though one of two
it must needs be; for, either they had had a lame and sinistrous account of
Duke Maurice's demand, or they themselves cunningly misunderstood it, which is
the more likely of the two, because of the safe Conduct which they gave; for
when Duke Maurice desired a safe Conduct for his People, in the same form and
manner, as the Bohemians of old obtained one: The form of the safe conduct from
the Council.
They, in a few words, and very superficially, drew up a draught, without the
usual formalities; to wit, that all Germans, indifferently, might come to the
Council, and freely debate, confer, and treat, about the Matters there to be
handled, either in full Council, or with some Commissioners appointed, and that
either by Word or Writing, as they pleased, without contumelious and
reproachful Language or Reflections, and, when they should think fit, to depart
and return home; that the Council, as to that, granted them safe Conduct, so
far as was in their power: And, that they might also, for the Crimes committed,
or to be committed, though they were most grievous, and savoured of Heresy,
choose to themselves Judges at their own discretion. The same day, the eleventh
of October, they made some Canons touching Reformation, which related to their
own Jurisdiction. And then the twenty fifth of November was appointed to be the
day of the next Session, when Penance and Extreme Unction should be handled.
Brandeburg's Ambassador claws the Fathers of the Council.
Joachim, Elector of Brandeburg, sent also his Ambassador, Christopher
Strassen, a Lawyer, to offer his Duty and Obeisance, and the Ambassador made a
long Harangue, indeed, concerning the good Intentions of his Master: They make
answer, That with great pleasure they had heard all his Speech, especially that
part of it, wherein the Prince submits himself wholly to the Council, and
promises to observe the Decrees thereof; that they were in hopes, that what had
been now said by him, would be effectually performed by the Prince, his Master.
Upon the death of John Albert, Frederick of Brandeburg, elected Archbishop of
M^gd^burg.
who had enjoyed the spacious and rich Archbishopric of Magdeburg, as we said,
Frederick, the Elector of Brandeburg's Son, was, by the Chapter, chosen
Archbishop: But the Matter stuck at Rome, and could not be dispatched, it being
a great Obstacle in the way, that, as it was publicly known, the Elector
Joachim had before been of the Protestant Religion. To remove that suspicion,
therefore, was the Ambassador, whom I named, sent, who used his utmost
diligence, by sawning and cajoling, to work upon the Prelates.

Peace was concluded at Wittemberg, The end of the War of Magdeburg.
and though the Siege was not presently raised, yet, October the twelfth, they
began to have friendly Meetings together. At the same time, Duke Maurice made
those of Catzenelbogen a People of the Dominion of Hess, Duke Maurice makes the
Hessians swear A^legiance to him.
who, three years before, had, by the Emperor's Sentence, been taken from the
Landgrave, then Prisoner, as we said before, to swear Allegiance to him, with
the consent of the Landgrave's Sons, and that because of an Hereditary League,
as he said, betwixt the Houses of Hess and Saxony, whereby, for want of Heirs
Male, the one is to succeed to the other. No Man doubted, but that this was an
injury done to the Emperor, who had pronounced the Sentence, and that it
tended to some new commotion, and all wondered what would come on it; yet hardly
any notice was taken of it in the Emperor's Court, but all was seemingly
connived at.

About this time, The Protector of England again made Prisoner.
the Duke of Somerset, Uncle to the King of England, was a second time
apprehended, and, with him, the Lord Paget, the Lord Gray, and some others.
John, Duke of Northumberland, had then the chief Government; and the reason of
his apprehension was said to be, That he had conspired the death of
Northumberland, as he himself alleged; for that, by a late Law, was made
Felony amongst them.

About the fifteenth of October, Martinhausen made Cardinal.
the Pope made George Martinhausen, a Dalmatian, Bishop of Waradin, Cardinal.
He was a Man of great Authority in Hungary, and commonly called Monk, because
he was of the Order of Paul, the first Hermit.

It has been declared before, The Council's Letter to the French King.
that the French Ambassador was ordered to attend on the eleventh of October,
to receive his answer, provided, the King owned the Council; but he came not,
and nevertheless, in name of the Council, a Letter to the King was published.
And first, they tell him, that for many Reasons they had expected every thing
that was good and great at his hands; but that upon the coming of his
Ambassdor, and reading of his Letter, it was a great Grief to them, to find
themselves frustrated of their hopes; and that, nevertheless, since they were
not conscious to themselves of any wrong they had done, nor of any cause of
offense that they had given, they had not as yet wholly laid aside the hopes
they formerly conceived of him; that the Opinion he entertained then, as if the
Council had been called for the particular interest and advantage of some few
ought least of all to take place in that so great an Assembly. That the Causes
of calling the Council, were published, not only by the present Pope, but also
by his Predecessor Paul III. to wit, that Heresies might be rooted out, that
Discipline might be reformed, and that the Peace of the Church might be
restored: Was not that manifest enough? Could there any thing be done more
Piously, or Christianly? That Heresies did now spread, not only over Germany,
but, in some manner, over all Provinces; that the Council would apply a Remedy
to this great evil; that this was the ground, and this also the end, of all
their Deliberations, and that all they did, aimed only at that; that therefore
he would suffer the Bishops within his Dominions, to come and assist in
carrying on so holy a Work; that he had no cause to fear, but that they should
have liberty to speak freely what they thought; that, with much patience and
attention, his Ambassador had been lately heard, though his Message had not
been so very pleasant; and, that since a private person had been heard with so
much mildness and favor, why should any Man believe, that that would be denied
to public persons, and Men of such Dignity, too? That notwithstanding, though
he should not send one single person, yet both the Authority and Dignity of the
Council would subsist, as being both lawfully called at first, and for just
Causes now again restored; but that as to what he intimated, of using Remedies,
such as his Ancestors had made use of, they did not think, that he would ever
proceed so far, as to revive those things, which have heretofore been
abolished, to the great advantage of the Kings of France: And that seeing God
had blessed him with so many benefits and favors, they could not but hope,
that he would not do any thing, whereby he might seem unthankful to God, or to
holy Mother Church: That he should only look back upon his Progenitors, upon
his own Title of Most Christian King, and, in a word, upon his Father King
Francis, who honored the former Council by the Ambassadors and most learned
Bishops, whom he sent to it; that he should imitate that late and domestic
Example, and sacrifice private Offenses to the public Good.

The Emperor and Pope had exhorted the Switzers to come to the Council, The
French King frightens the Switzers from the Council.
but it was in vain. And the Pope, as we said before, made use of the Ministry
of Jerome France* his Nuncio there, to bring that about: But the French King
sent Instructions to the Ambassador, La Morliere, who resided in those places,
that he should endeavor to persuade them all, not to send any person to it. La
Morliere, finding that to be a difficult task* sent for Vergerio, an expert Man
in those Affairs, Vergerio's Book about avoiding the Council.
to come to him from amongst the Grisons, who supplied him with Arguments, and,
a little after, published a Book against repairing to the Council. La Moliere
thus provided, came to the Convention at Baden, and there alleging his
Reasons, he persuaded, not only those, who long before had shaken off Popery,
but also all the other Cantons, to what he desired of them; so that none came
from them to Trent. The Bishop of Coyre recalled from the Council.
From the Grisons came, by Orders from the Pope, Thomas Plant, Bishop of Coyre;
but when the Grisons understood, from Vergerio, what the Pope was driving at,
that is, by his means, to recover his Authority over them, he was recalled.

The Spaniards, The Duchy of Wirtemberg rid of the Spaniards.
who Quartered here and there in the Country of Wirtemburg, were, about this
time, called out by the Emperor, and sent into Italy, because of the War of
Parma. By their departure, the whole Province was relieved from a very heavy
Bondage, under which it had groaned for almost five whole years; only the
Castle of Achsperg the Emperor still retained, with a Garrison of Germans in
it. Hasen's Exploits in Schwabia.
About the same time also, Henry Hasen, at the Emperor's Command, went over
Schwabia, and in all places changed the State of the Government, putting in new
Senators, as had been done three years before at Ausburg: He turned out also
all Preachers and Schoolmasters, as had been done lately at Ausburg, unless
they would obey the Decree about Religion.

That Duke Maurice, The Duke of Wirtemberg's Ambassadors at the Council.
and the Duke of Wirtemberg, had ordered the Heads of Doctrine to be drawn up,
which should afterward be exhibited; and that the Senate of Strasburg joined
with them also in that design, it has been said before. The Duke of Wirtemburg
therefore sent two Ambassadors, John Theodorick Plenninger, and John Heclin,
with Instructions, publicly to produce that written Confession of Doctrine,
and to acquaint the Council, That Divines would come to treat of it more at
large, and to defend the same, provided, they might have a safe Conduct granted
them, according to the form of that of Basil. So soon as they arrived at Trent,
which was about the later end of October, they waited upon Count* Montfort,
show him their Commission and Credential Letters, and acquainted him, that they
had some things to p^opose in Council, in their Princes Name. His Discourse
seemed to insinuate, that it behoved them to apply themselves to the Pope's
Legate: But they perceiving, that if they should have any Communication with
him, it would be construed, as if they owned him to have the chief Right and
Authority in judging, which would be a prejudice and great disadvantage to
their Cause, did not go to him, but gave their Prince an account of what they
had done, and expected new Orders from him how to behave themselves. In the
mean time, the Divines were employed, after their usual manner, in examining
and discussing the Points, we mentioned, of Penance, and Extreme Unction.
November the third, Count Heideck came from Duke Maurice to Magdeburg, and
having called out the Officers of the Garrison to a Castle hard by the City, he
fully concluded a Peace, and thereupon drew up and signed Articles; The
Pacification of Magdeburg.
wherein it was provided, that the Soldiers should have a safe Conduct to
depart whither they pleased with security; and this was done the eighth day of
the same Month: But so soon as they were disbanded, they were secretly listed
again under the Command of the Duke of Meckleburg, now by the pacification set
at liberty; for Duke Maurice would not be seen in it himself. The Conditions of
Peace.
Now these were said to be the Conditions of Peace: That they should humbly beg
the Emperor's Pardon; that they should not attempt any thing against the House
of Austria and Burgundy; that they should submit to the Imperial Chamber; that
they should obey the last Decree of Ausburg; that they should answer to all
Lawsuits; that they should dismantle the Town, at the Emperor's discretion;
that they should at all times receive Garrisons from the Emperor, and open to
him the Gates of the City; that they should pay fifty Thousand Florins into the
public Exchequer, for the Charges of the War; that they should deliver up
twelve Pieces of Ordnance to the Emperor; and, that they should set at liberty
the Duke of Meckleburg, and the rest of the Prisoners. The same day the
Soldiers of the Garrison marched out, to the number of two Thousand Foot, and
about an Hundred and thirty Horse; The Magdeburgers having received Duke
Maurice, swear to be true to the Emperor.
and Duke Maurice commanded five Companies of Foot to march in. Next day, he
made his entry with the whole Army, having been met by the Senate, and made
them all swear to be true to the Emperor, and to himself, who had been
Commander in chief in the War, and then leaving a Garrison in the Town, he drew
out all the rest. Afterward, he ordered the Preachers to be called together,
and by the mouths of his Counselors, Fuchsen, Carlebitz, and Mordeyson, Duke
Maurice's Complaint to the Preachers of Magdeburg.
he complained of the Injuries that he had been done unto him by Libels and
Pictures, which they had dispersed abroad in his Infamy, as if he had fallen
away from the Reformed Religion, and, as if he had made War against the City,
for their constant Profession of the Gospel: That therefore he had just cause
to be offended with them, if he would give way to his Passions, but that he
pardoned all for the sake of the Public, and desired of them, that, for the
future, they would exhort the People to amendment of Life, and obedience to the
Magistrates: Commanding public Prayers also to be made for the Emperor, for
himself, and for the rest of the Magistrates: Moreover, he tells them, That
there was a Council now at Trent, wherein he was to exhibit a Confession of
their holy Doctrine, as well in his own, as in the name of the other Princes
and States: That therefore they would pray to God, to direct and order all the
actions of the Council for the best, The Preacher^ Answer.
and that they would not rail at it, as they usually did. They, having
deliberated upon the Matter, made answer; That, indeed, they had not dispersed
those Pictures; nor did they judge them worthy of censure, neither: That it was
not to be denied, but that some, within his Territories, had within these three
years fallen off from the pure Doctrine of the Gospel; for that there were
Books and Records to prove it: That the City had been besieged for the cause of
Religion, might be easily demonstrated, if one did but consider, who were the
first Authors of the War: That they had never foreborn to admonish the people,
nor would they forbear to do so for the future: That for the Council, which was
met to stifle and abolish the Truth, and wherein the Roman Antichrist possessed
the chief place, they could no otherwise pray, than, that it would please God
to confound, disappoint, and break all their Counsels and Enterprises; for that
there was nothing but mischief to be expected from them: These were the
Conditions of Peace, that were made public: But it is certain also, that they
had good security given them for their Liberty and Religion: And Duke Maurice
was more willing that the Town should be open to him, than to the Emperor, as
the event proved it afterward. The Magdeburgers, The constancy and renown of
the Magdeburgers.
contrary to the expectation of many, being in this manner delivered, purchased
to themselves great Reputation and Praise amongst Foreign Nations; that they
alone, in a manner, of all Germany, had by their Example made it appear, what
constancy could do. Now, the end of their Miseries was the beginning of a War
against those very persons, by whose Aid and Counsels they had been distressed,
Duke Maurice hatches a War against the Emperor.
as will be seen hereafter. During these days that Duke Maurice was in Town, he
gave some intimations plain enough of what he hatched in his thoughts, and that
was, that he would hazard his Life, but that he would deliver his
Father-in-Law; nor did he dissemble it the day after, when he was put to it by
a certain person. He had already sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, to solicit
the Landgrave's Liberty: He had, in that, joined with him the King of Denmark,
An Ambassador from the French King Duke Maurice.
and many Princes of Germany, as we shall relate hereafter; and if he could not
prevail, he was fully resolved, to try what he could do by force, and had
therefore already entered into a League with the King of France, who had
privately sent to him John de Fresne, Bishop of Bayonne, a man well acquainted
in Germany, and not unskilful of the Language. However, the Emperor seemed not
at all to be startled at these things, but was wholly intent upon the War of
Parma, and the proceedings of the Council of Trent.

Much about this time, Maximilian comes from Spain.
the Emperors Son-in-Law, arrived at Genotta from Spain with his Wife and
Children. The French, setting out from Marseilles, boarded some of his Ships,
and made booty of them. The Reason of this was said to have been, His Ships
plundered by the French.
that the Horse, which King Ferdinand had sent into Italy, to receive his Son
upon his arrival from Spain, and to guard him home, had served in some Military
Action under Ferrante Gonzaga. But the French, before that also, had, under a
pretense of Friendship, put into the very Port of Barcelona, and carried off a
Gally, and six Merchant Ships, loaded with Provisions, and all things necessary
for Maximilian's Voyage, as the Imperialists upbraided them, in a certain
Invective, wherein they complained of the injuries done by the French, and of
their breach of the Peace.

In the Diet of Ausburg, the Princes had begged of the Emperor, that if he
could not be present in Person, he would not be far from the place of the
Council, for which he had given them his Promise, saying, That he would tarry
upon the Consines of the Empire, as has been said before, wherefore the
beginning of November he left Ausburg, and came to Inspruck, three days Journey
from Trent. S^eidan sent Deputy from Strasburg to the Council.
This, it was thought, he did, both because of the Council, and of the War of
Parma, that being so near, all things might be dispatched with greater
diligence. Shortly after, November the twenty first, John Sleidan, the Deputy
of Strasburg came to Trent, that he might join with the Ambassadors of Duke
Maurice, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, in negotiating the common concern. To this
City were associated Esling, Ravensburg, Ruteling, Bibrach and Lindaw, who gave
him full Commission to act jointly also in their name. But why those of
Frankfurt, and especially Norimberg, did not send; it may be doubted. They of
Ulm had already changed their Religion, according to the Emperors Prescript.
From Ausburg, and other places, all the Doctors had been lately taken, as was
said before, so that it was not in their power to send; though, if no such
thing had been done, the Senate would have acted nothing in that Affair,
without the Emperors leave. Thirteen Cardinals created.
In the Month of November, the Pope in one day created thirteen Cardinals, all
Italians, for these are as the Guards, which they usually provide for their own
defense and security. On the five and twentieth of November, the Session was
held in the accustomed manner: Where the Degrees were read: First, The Decree
of the Council concerning Penance.
concerning Penance; that it is a Sacrament instituted by Christ, and necessary
to those, who after Baptism fall into sin: That it is also a distinct Sacrament
from Baptism, and, as it were, a Planck for Salvation after Shipwreck: That
Christ's words, whereby he gives the Holy Ghost to his Apostles, ought to be
understood of the Power of remitting Sins by this Sacrament: That for the
Remission of Sins, three things are required; to wit, Contrition, Confession
and Satisfaction: And that Contrition is a true and profitable sorrow, which
prepares Man for Grace: That Confession, or the secret way of revealing Sins to
a Priests, is of Divine Institution, and necessary to Salvation: That all the
Sins, which one remembers, and their circumstances, are to be confessed: That
once a year, at least, one ought to confess, and that chiefly in time of Lent:
That Absolution is not a bare Declaration that Sins are forgiven, but a
Judicial Act: That Priests only, though they be never so sinful, have Power of
Absolving: That Bishops reserve to themselves some Cases and Offenses, from
which other Priests cannot Absolve, is rightly done: That although the guilt be
remitted, yet the punishment is not, and that Satisfaction consists in Works,
not in Faith: That by the Penance, which God either inflicts, the Priest
enjoins, or we choose of our own accord, Sins are expiated, in as far as
concerns the temporal Punishment: That satisfactions, whereby Sins are
atoned, are part of Gods Worship: That the Priest has the Power of binding and
loosing, and therefore may impose Penance upon him, that confesses his Sins.
And so much of Penance.

Extreme Unction, The Decree concerning Extreme Unction.
they decreed to be a Sacrament instituted by Christ, that it both confers
Grace, remitteth Sins, and comfort the Sick: That the use of this Sacrament,
is the same, that the Apostle St* James spoke of; that the Elders also, whom he
mentions, are not the Elders in years, but Priests, who are the only true
Ministers of this Sacrament. This Doctrine they commanded to be taught and
observed, and those that taught, or believed otherwise, they cursed and
anathematized, as wicked and pestiferous wretches. Next day after the Session,
Letters came from the Duke of Wirtemberg, to his Ambassadors; wherein he
ordered them to proceed, and produce the written draught of the Confession of
their Doctrine, in the Session of the twenty fifth of November. Since,
therefore they came a little too late, Wirtemburgs Ambassadors apply
themselves to the Cardinal of Trent.
that it was a long while to the next Session, and that Count Monfort also was
absent, they applied themselves to the Cardinal of Trent, acquainting him, that
they had some things to propose in Council, in name of their Prince: That it
ought to have been done in the last Session, but that the Letters came too
late, when the occasion was over: That therefore they entreated him, who was a
German born, that, for the love of his Country, and the sake of the Prince,
whom he knew, he would assist them in the Matter, and so far prevail with the
Fathers, that they would all meet, and give them an Audience. He made them
ample promises of his Favor, and good Will, and told them, that he would
acquaint the Popes Legate with their desire; but that it had been agreed upon
amongst the Fathers, that no man should be admitted to propound any thing
publicly, unless it were first known what the matter were: That the French
Ambassador had given occasion to that resolution, when not long since, an
undecent kind of Hubbub and scurvy noise was, by his means, raised in the
public Session: Wherefore, he desired to know, what it was, in short, they
were about to demand: They being very hot upon the Matter, showed him their
Letter of Instructions: But, when by that Letter, he found, that they had some
Writing of Doctrine to present, he dismissed them, with hopes, that within a
few days the Matter might be brought about. Next day he sent for them, and told
them, That he had acquainted the Legate with their business, and to confirm
what he said, had shown him the Letter of Instructions: But that he took it in
great indignation, that they should think of presenting a Writing, and that it
was his Opinion, that it was very absurd and misbecoming, that they, who ought
reverently to receive and obey the Rule of Doctrine set before them, should
offer to prescribe to their Superiors: That at that time, indeed, he could
obtain no more of him; but that he would urge him once more about the Matter;
bidding them withal not to despair. Some days after, when upon the approach of
Maximilian of Austria, the Cardinal was to go as far as Mantua to meet him, he
advised the Ambassadors of Wirtemburg, since he was necessitated for some time
to be absent, to make their application to Don Francisco de Toledo, the
Emperors Ambassador: That, by Virtue of his Character and Authority, he could
do them great kindnesses, and that he would willingly do it, were it no more
but for his sake, who had recommended the Affair unto him. In compliance with
this Counsel, And are gulled.
they address themselves to the Ambassador: Who, having promised them great
Matters, dismissed them: But next time they came again, he began to excuse
himself, upon pretext of the ensuing Disputations of the Divines, at which the
Fathers were to be present; but that when these were over, he would not neglect
the occasion of doing them service. It is probable, that he had received just
such another answer from the Legate, as the Cardinal had before: But that he
might not put them out of all hopes, he had pretended this Reason especially,
since he knew that the Emperor both urged the Council, and that it was
stipulated, by a public Decree of the Empire, that all should have liberty to
propose what Matters they pleased. The Deputy of Strasburg applies himself to
the Emperors Ambassador.
In the mean time, the Deputy of Strasburg, waited upon the Emperors
Ambassador, William of Poictieres, in the absence of Montfort. And seeing the
Case of all was alike; and their Power the same, he showed him his Commission,
as it was usual, telling him, That he was sent to joint with the rest of the
Augustane Confession, in the prosecution of such means and counsels, as might
tend to the composing of the difference about Religion and Doctrine, and the
settling of public Peace and Tranquillity. He, having taken a Copy of his
Commission, which he promised to send to the Emperor, and spoken much of the
Doctrine, and of the dignity of the Council, as he was, indeed, a Learned Man,
and accustomed to the Bar, offered his pains and service. This was the last of
November: And the same day, the Divines had the Sacrifice of the Mass assigned
them, as the subject of their Disputations, of which they were to give their
Opinions, in the manner before mentioned.

We told you a little before, The Ambassadors of Duke Maurice, and the Elector
of Brandeburg, solicited the Emperor about the Landgrave.
that Duke Maurice had sent Ambassadors to the Emperor in behalf of the
Landgrave; and with them were joined the Ambassadors with the Elector of
Brandeburg. Being admitted, the, to Audience, about the beginning of December,
and having made their Complements in the names of their Princes: You know, say
they, most gracious Emperor, the streights and difficulties, that the most
Illustrious Princes Electors, Duke Maurice, and the Marquess of Brandeburg lie
under, upon the account of the Landgrave's confinement, which, contrary to all
expectation, they have run themselves into, whilst they made it their chief
study to procure to your Majesty an easy and honorably Victory, lessen the
charges of War, and recover peace and quietness to their common Country. And
this also has been the cause, why they have solicited your Majesty, sometimes
by their Ambassadors, and sometimes in person, that you would have some
consideration of them, and set him at liberty; offering your Majesty, at the
same time, more ample security, if that which they, Welsfgang, Prince Palatine,
and all the people of Hesse had granted, were not thought sufficient. To these
their demands, Sir, you made answer, telling Christopher Carlebitz, and James
Schilling, whom they sent last to you, that you could not conveniently set him
at liberty, before it appeared, what the issue of the Imperial Diet, then at
hand, would prove: And again, that you promised no more, but that, if he
performed his Articles, he should not be detained perpetual Prisoner. But, when
their other urgent Affairs would not suffer them to come to the Diet, they made
fresh Addresses to your Majesty, by Letters, and their Agents at Ausburg: To
these you were pleased to write an Answer, wherein having told them, why you
had more reason to be offended with him than before, and that you could not
discharge him, you absolved them from the Obligation, wherein they stood bound
to the Sons of the Prisoner. Wherefore, they were resolved to renew their suit
to your Majesty, and would have come themselves, but you know, Sir, how they
were both hindered by the War of Magdeburg, and Brandeburg also by Sickness;
they therefore have employed us to do it, in their name. And first, then, when
it was your pleasure that the Landgrave should submit to your Majesty without
any Conditions, they understood from the Bishop of Arras, that your intention
was, that he should accept, and observe, the Conditions you thought fit to
communicate to them. Now, if he was to be persuaded, to render himself up in
this manner, it was absolutely necessary to make known to him, that he should
neither be kept Prisoner, nor be liable to more than what was contained in the
Articles proposed. And so the Princes gave him assurance, as was well enough
known to your Majesty's Counselors. Besides, when he desired an Explanation of
some of the Articles of the Pacification, and that he might be dispatched
within six days, this was granted him by the Bishop of Arras, as in most other
particulars, the Princes obtained what they would. And though in this Treaty,
things were not understood by both parties in the same sense, so that, upon his
coming in, contrary to the assurance given by them, he was put into custody;
yet they never accused you, Sir, upon that account, nor debated the Matter with
your Majesty, seeing they had treated only with your Counselors, and not with
you, save only then, when the Landgrave was upon his Journey, and sent them word
to come to him to Norimburg. For then they came and waited upon your Majesty,
to acquaint you, that they had persuaded him to embrace the Conditions
proposed, and that they were going a little way to meet him, if you pleased to
give them leave: Beseeching your Majesty, that since, relying upon their
assurances, he was now coming, no more should be imposed upon him, than what
was contained in the Articles of Pacification; and your Majesty having
graciously promised this, they then went to Hall, and brought him. Now in the
last Treaty, no mention at all was made of Detention and Custody, which, they
think, those you employed, can honestly testify, that is, the Bishop of Arras,
with whom alone they treated, and Seldom, whom sometimes he brought with him.
And, indeed, the Princes thought, that so soon, as he had signed the Articles,
and made his humble submission, he should have been dismissed; and many Reasons
too they had, to make them believe so. First, because your Counselors made no
mention of detention, which is the chief clause in that Instrument, and,
doubtless, most of all weighed and considered by the Landgrave. Again, because
in the Articles of Peace, there are many things which cannot be performed by a
Prisoner, but only by a free Prince: Besides, because when he humbly begged
pardon, you forgave him his fault, promising, to recall the proscription, and to
give him a public Remission, under the Great Seal: Moreover, because you
ratified and approved the security by them given, whereby it is provided, that,
if he perform not his Articles, the People should deliver him up Prisoner, and
his Sureties compel him to Duty, by force of Arms. Since all this was to no
purpose, and superfluous, if they had thought, that he was to have suffered in
his own person. Now when no such thing ever entered their thoughts, nor was
mentioned by your Majesty's Counselors, they confidently sent for him,
obliging themselves to his Son, that if any thing else happened to him, they
would answer body for body for him, and undergo the same Fortune, as he did.
This was their mind and thoughts of the whole Matrer, which was also confirmed,
when, after the submission, the Duke of Alva, invited the Landgrave, and them
to Supper. Since, indeed, they could not so interpret that Invitation, and
Hospitable Entertainment, according to the manner of Princes, and the Custom of
Germany, that he should go to Alva's Lodgings, as to a Prison, and that they
should wait and attend upon him to his Gaol: For if they had had but the least
suspicion of it, who can believe that ever they would have done so? For as they
are Princes of the Empire, and Electors too, descended of most Illustrious
Families, they would never have had an hand, sure, in enticing a Noble Prince,
their Kinsman, and near Relation, into such streights, and in being the
Instruments of his Imprisonment. Nor, indeed, had they any knowledge thereof,
till after Supper; that the Duke of Alva told them, That he must remain in the
Castle, as in Custody. But however it be, they acted generously and fairly, as
we said in the beginning: And since they also engaged their Faith and Promise,
your Majesty may easily perceive, how heavy it must needs lie upon them, their
Children and Relations, if after so many and frequent intercessions, and all
security given, he be longer detained Prisoner. You see, in like manner, most
mighty Sir, since you have German-blood in your Veins, what they ought to do
for their Honor and Reputations sake, according to the ancient and received
Custom of the German Nobility, when the Sons of the Captive Prince, claim their
Right, and put them to it, to answer according to the Form of their Obligation;
and that they could not excuse themselves to other Princes, though either the
Power of suing, or the Bond and Obligation which they have, were taken from
them. Now, if the Landgrave, who is, neither by Compact nor Promise given, but
upon the occasion we mentioned, kept Prisoner, did through impatience, and the
irksomness of so long a custody, essay some means of procuring his own Liberty,
and if, perhaps, his Servants did attempt somewhat against his Guards; the
Princes earnestly desire, that that may not be prejudicial to them: But seeing,
that by reason of their Obligation, they lie under great streights, out of
which, none but your Majesty, under God, can relieve them, since you know, how
they came to strike upon that Rock, and since your Majesty has good experience
of their Loyalty, Affection and Duty, when in the worst of times, according to
the Example of their Ancestors, they ventured their Fortunes, Lives and Blood
in your Service, it is their most hearty and earnest suit to your Majesty, that
you would relieve them by releasing your Prisoner, and therein have regard to
them, who honor and love you, and not to what the Landgrave has done:
Especially, since not a few of their Families have spared neither cost nor
danger, in serving you Ancestors, and the House of Austria and Burgundy. And if
it be feared, that if he were at liberty, he would flinch from his Articles,
you are not ignorant, Sir, granting it should be so, of what the Nobility and
People of Hesse are bound to by Oath, and what the Princes have given your
Majesty security for. But if you demand more ample security, they have not only
offered that already, but now again do it, and have empowered us to treat about
the same. They are of opinion also, that all the Conditions, which could
presently be performed, are already fulfilled: But if you would know the
reason, why the Castles have not been so soon demolished, they make no doubt,
but that the Prisoners Sons can satisfy your Majesty; and then, if any more be
wanting to be done, they will use their utmost endeavors, that you have all
just content given you. Wherefore, if ever they themselves, their Fathers or
Grandfathers, have done any thing, that has been acceptable to your Majesty,
to the Emperor Maximilian, or to any of your Progenitors, or if you think that
they can be able to do any thing for the future, that may be pleasant and
agreeable to you: They beg of you again and again, that you would now suffer
them to reap some fruit of it, and that you would give Life to that Hope and
Promise, which you made to them, First, at Hall, then at Naumburg, and lastly,
at Ausburg, that so they may serve and honor you, from henceforth with greater
promptitude and ala^rity, and have cause to glory, that the Fidelity and
Service, which they have formerly performed to your Majesty, has been well
bestowed, and amply rewarded. For if otherwise they can obtain nothing at
present, you may conjecture, Dread Sovereign, what inconvenience will ensue
upon it, when they are forced to appear publicly, and justify their own
innocence. But it is still their Hope, Sir, that you will listen to their
Prayers. They Will take that, indeed, as the greatest favor you can oblige them
by, and not only they, but the Landgrave himself, his Sons, and all their
Relations, will ever make it their earnest endeavors, to express their
gratitude for the same. And because their Reputation is so deeply engaged in
the thing, they have solicited other Princes to intercede with them also, whose
Ambassadors stand now before your Majesty: And for this end have they done it,
that what they themselves by Prayers, Agents and Letters could not hitherto
obtain from you, by their Recommendation and Favor they might effect; and they
pray your Majesty to take it so. When thus they had spoken, they presented to
him the Letters of Ferdinand, King of the Romans, Albert, Duke of Bavaria, and
the Brothers of Lunenburg, in favor of the Landgrave. Now the Princes, who
interceded by Ambassadors, were, Frederick, The names of the Princes that
interceded for the Landgrave.
the Elector Palatine, Wolffgang, Duke of Deuxponts, John Marquess of
Brandeburg, Henry and John Albert Dukes of Meckleburg, Ernest Marquess of
Baden, and Christopher Duke of Wirtemburg. Their Ambassadors, presently after
the foregoing Speech had been spoken, showed their Commissions, and then told
their Errand. The Speech of their Ambassadou^.
The Electoral Princes, Duke Maurice, and the Marquess of Brandeburg, say they,
being in great perplexities upon occasion of the Landgrave's detention, as they
said, and intending to supplicate your Majesty in his behalf, most gracious
Emperor, have entreated our Princes to intercede jointly with them, that,
through their Recommendation, the suit might have greater weight with your
Majesty: Which Office, in so reasonable a thing, they could not deny them,
considering the intimate Friendship, and Relation, they have to one another.
Since the Case is so then, as the Ambassadors, of both the Princes, have now
made it sufficiently appear: And seeing if he should be longer detained, it
must needs redound to the disadvantage and opprobry of those, who have pawned
their Faith and Honor to him; the Princes, who have sent ^s, pray and beseech
your Majesty, to take these things into serious consideration, for they think
themselves very much concerned also, that the Dignity, Honor and Reputation of
the other Princes, do not suffer; nor can any thing afflict them more, than
that their Fame should be ^ullied with any stain, which cannot be avoided,
unless the Captive Prince be set at liberty. They therefore earnestly beg, that
these Prayers and Intercessions, may prevail with your Majesty, and that he may
be speedily released, especially, since he has acknowledged his fault, humbly
begged pardon for the same, and has been now a long while in custody; but
above all, because the necessary Obligation of two Electors does require it;
who, in acting a fair and generous part, and endeavoring to gratify your
Majesty, have run themselves into these streights. Now, though there may have
been some mistake committed in the Treaty, and some things not rightly
understood; yet it suits well with your Imperial Clemency, to prefer Equity
before strict Justice, and to have regard not so much to the Prisoner, as to
the inevitable necessity of the Electors: And to treat them graciously, after
the manner of your Predecessors, who have been always exceedingly tender of the
Dignity of the Princes of the Empire. And this, Sir, will render your Majesty's
Name glorious amongst all Men, and engage them more and more, in Love and
Loyalty, to your Person and Interests, so that they will be ready to do any thing
for you. The Danish Ambassador intercedes for the Landgrave.
The Ambassadors also of the King of Denmark, interceded in the same behalf.
But some days after, the Emperor made answer; That seeing it was a difficult
business, that required deliberation, and that he had notice, that, Duke
Maurice would be with him shortly, about other weighty Affairs, The Emperors
Answer to the Mediators.
in so much, that having written to him, he expected him daily, therefore he
put off the Matter till then, as thinking it most convenient to treat about it,
when he should be present: That as for them, they might return home to their
own Princes, and tell them in his Name, That he would be mindful of their
Intercession, and so order Affairs, that they should understand, that their
Mediation had been of no small weight with him. Not long after, Prince William,
the Landgrave's Eldest Son came to Duke Maurice; to enquire of him, what was
done in the mediation he had put him in hopes of, now, that it was so many
Months since the Ambassadors were gone on their Journey. He told him, That
because the Danish Ambassadors came a little too late, and not before the
Emperor was gone from Ausburg to Inspruck, it was some time delayed: And then
he showed him what Answer the Emperor had given; telling him, That since he
was desirous to speak with him, and had put off the business till then, though
he was loath to leave his Country, at that time, yet, because it was the Affair
in the World, that most affected him, he was resolved to go, so soon as he had
received his Letters. Then, replied Prince William, that that was a doubtful
and uncertain Answer: The Conference of Duke Maurice, and Prince William, the
Landgrave's Son.
Nor did he see, what it was, they could expect, that, in the mean time, his
Father was in a sad Condition, pining away for grief, in a nasty and loathsome
Prison: That he could not but concern himself for him, both in Duty, and upon
the account of Promise; that he should therefore endeavor, to get him a plain
and definite Answer, and that within a time, too; or else that he, and the
Elector of Brandeburg, must not take it ill, if they were cited, and made to
fulfill their Obligation: As to what he said of his Journey, he would have him to
think better on it: Nor did he know, whether it might be safe for him, or not.
Now these things were done only for a show, in presence of some Counselors,
whom Duke Maurice would, by no means, have privy to his Counsels and Design:
For ever since he had begun to project the Matter with Count Heideck, which
was, when he drew over some of his Forces into his Party, as we told you in the
foregoing Book, he scarcely acquainted any about him with what he did intend,
so that what the French Ambassador came thither for, or what he did at Court,
none of them could tell. Having therefore received this Answer from the
Emperor, he presently bent his thoughts upon War, and only waited for a fit
season.

The Disputes began December the Seventh, 1552.
concerning the Heads we mentioned before; and on the shortest day of the year,
Maximilian made his entry into Trent with his Wife and Children, Maximilian
honorably received at Trent.
and was received by the Popes Legate, by the Spanish, Italian, and some German
Bishops also, but not by the Electors. He brought with him from Spain an Indian
Elephant, a Beast not often seen in Germany. The day after he came, it came to
the turn of John Gropper, whom I named before, to Dispute, Groppers immodesty
in the Council.
and, in the heat of Discourse, he bitterly enveighed against Melanchton and
Bucer who was then dead, and, being himself a German, railed reproachfully at
both, whereas both the Spaniards and Italians had been more moderate, and this
was both contrary to the Decree of the Empire, and the Law they themselves had
made, which was, That matters should be debated without passion or reproachful
language; wherefore, some days after, the Deputy of Strasburg took notice of it
to the Ambassador Poictieres, and complained of the liberty they were suffered
to take to themselves. He made answer, That it was much against the Fathers
Will that they did do so, and that they had been severely admonished to
refrain; and, that though, perhaps, being provoked by the Example of their
Adversaries, who for many years had domineered in that manner, they did do so,
yet they would take care, that it should be so no more for the future; that it
was not the Emperors Will neither, that any Man should have cause of offense
given him; and, that the Fathers were of the same mind.

On the Eighteenth of December, The Bishop of Waradin murdered in Hungary.
the Bishop of Waradine, lately made Cardinal, was, upon suspicion of
confederacy with the Turks, murdered in his own House. The Author of this
Assassination was, John Baptista Castaldo, an Italian, whom the Emperor had
formerly sent into Hungary, to aid and assist King Ferdinand, with his counsel.
Sforza Palavicini had also an hand in it. When this Murder came to the Popes
Ears, he appointed Judges to enquire into the Fact, and, at the same time,
Excommunicated those we named. The Widow of John, Vayvode of Transylvania,
finding that it would be hard for her to preserve the Country, treated with
King Ferdinand, and having resigned over the Government to him, and delivered
up the Insignia and Ornaments of the Kingdom, she returned to Poland. By this
means then, King Ferdinand gets Transylvania.
and the assistance of the Bishop of Waradin, Ferdinand got possession of all
Transylvania almost, but because this Bishop seemed afterward to plot new
designs, and to aspire to the Government, he lost his life.

We spoke in the former Book of the Ministers of the Church, that were banished
Ausburg; most of the Churches therefore were destitute, to the great offense of
the People, who thought, that the Senate had put the Emperor upon it. And,
seeing it was to be feared, that this grudge might some time or other break out
into disorder, Huberine an Interimist.
after much and long inquiry, one Caspar Huberine was at length found out, who
would conform to the Regulation of Doctrine, prescribed by the Emperor. He had
published some little Pieces about Religion, which were always very much
approved, and commended also by Luther; but how he came to change his Opinion,
I cannot affirm. He did not begin to preach so soon as he came to Ausburg, for
fear the People might mutiny, but on Christmuss-day he fell to work, to the
amazement of many, who had read his Books before.

The Soldiers, The Soldiers of Magdeburg create trouble to the Elector of Mentz.
as well they who besieged Magdeburg, as the Garrison that held it out, had
their Winter Quarters in Thuringe, and the adjoining Places, and did much
damage, especially to the Churchmen, and among those also, to the Archbishop of
Mentz, whose frontiers reached so far. The Electors of Mentz, Treves, and
Cologne, The Letters of the Spiritual Electors to the Emperor.
being moved thereat, the first because of the damage he received, and the
other two, for that they feared it might be their own case next, resolved to
return home, and accordingly made the Emperor acquainted with it by Messengers
and Letters.

But the Emperor, The Emperors Answer.
who earnestly desired that the Council might be continued, thus answered them,
on the Third of January. I received, says he, your Letters of the One and
twentieth of December; and because I sent Orders to Don Francisco de Toledo, to
discourse you concerning the Affairs you wrote to me about; and then, because
the Bishop of Arras, had, in my Name, imparted several things of that nature to
your Agent here, I thought you had been satisfied. But since I hear, that,
because of an unwelcome report now spread abroad, you are resolving to return
home, I thought fit to advise you in Writing, that you would not lightly give
credit to every thing that is told you. For though there has been a rumor now
for some time, of some hidden designs in Hesse, as if it were to be feared
there might be an Insurrection there; yet, I am informed, that if there be any
such thing, it is but the attempt of a few, which the greater part dislike; so
that it is more credible, that they themselves will reflect not only upon the
Oath and Promises, whereby they have bound themselves to me, but also upon the
Duty they owe both to me and the Public, and not run themselves into so great
danger, upon any uncertain hopes. Besides, having, by Messengers, diligently
enquired of the Neighboring Princes, States, and Cities, how things went, and
if any new attempts were on foot, I have found, that all were dutiful and
obedient; for, indeed, I have given no Man any cause of offense. There has been
a great talk for sometime past, of Duke Maurice also, arising perhaps from
hence, that he formerly commanded the Forces, which getting together into a
Body after the surrender of Magdeburg, had done hurt in some places; but he
has lately, both by Letters and Ambassadors, assured me of his fidelity; nay,
he has at this present two Ambassadors here, who will set out to morrow for
Trent to come to the Council. He has signified to me, besides, that for some
weighty and important Affairs he is preparing to come unto me, and, I have
certain intelligence, that to day or to morrow at farthest, he will set out
from Magdeburg upon his Journey hither. In short, he makes me such fair and
ample promises of his Duty and Allegiance, that I ought not to look for any
thing from him, but what is just and honorable, if there be any faith amongst
Men. And seeing he is a true German by Birth and Extraction, I cannot be
induced to think, that he can hatch such sinistrous Designs and Counsels. As to
the Forces, complaints have, indeed, been brought me from many hands, and some
States are apprehensive, that they may remove their Camp, and do more mischief;
but after that I came to understand, that they kept together in Bodies and used
violence, for want of their pay, I sent Messengers and Officers with a strict
charge, to use all their endeavors, and by any means raise Money to pay them
off; nor is that all, for I have written also to Duke Maurice, and past my word
and promise for what Money might be owing, provided the Soldiers were
disbanded; and this I did, not that I was obliged to it, but because I wish the
quiet of Germany above all things. I now therefore expect hourly that it should
be done, and make no doubt, but that they being fairly dismissed, all this stir
and busle will be over. But if the Soldiers, having received their pay, be not
disbanded, then will it easily appear, that some underhand designs are on
foot, and then also will it be fit to take other measures, such as I have
already in my hea^. Now, as to the other frequent, but uncertain, and almost
contradictory Reports that are brought unto me, it is my opinion, that they are
in a great part devised by our Enemies, and, according to their wonted levity,
dispersed among the People, with design to disturb the Council and Peace of
Germany. But I trust, that by Gods Blessing, these Clandestine Counsels and
Contrivances will at length be brought to light, and meet with the success they
deserve. For now, that Magdeburg is surrendered, all are still and quiet
Germany, and all the Princes and States behave themselves so lovingly and
obediently toward me; that I cannot, indeed, devise, what excuse or pretext
can possibly be invented to color any new s^irs. I am not, however, ignorant,
but that circumspection is to be used; and, that at this time, when there are
such Commotions in Foreign Nations, the least suspicion of danger is not to be
neglected; Again, I am neither so unadvised nor negligent, as to be deaf to the
Reports that are brought unto me; for I have Spies in all places, that enquire
into every thing, and in that I spare neither cost nor labor: Nevertheless,
that upon every light report, the whole State should straight be alarmed, you
in your wisdom know, how silly and unadvised a thing it would be. Now, that you
should leave the Council, unless in case of extreme necessity, I can in no ways
approve; for since very much depends on your presence, it is to be ^eared,
lest, by your departure, not only the Council may be dispersed, but also a
fatal blow given to Religion, wherein both the salvation of Mankind in general,
and your own private Fortuens, consist. Which being so, I earnestly desire you,
my Lords of Mentz and Treves, that you would alter your resolution, and not
think of going as yet; and you, my Lord of Cologne, who seem not to be in so
great haste, continue in the same mind, I pray you. In general I exhort you
all, that, since you hold the chief place among the States of the Empire, you
would help one another with Aid and Counsel, and entertain Brotherly Love and
Kindness amongst your selves. In the mean time, it shall be my care to watch
for the Public, and, as far as I am able, either by parts or power, to
endeavor timely to quench any fire that may break out; that, Civil Broils
being over, and strength increasing at home, we may be in a better condition to
resist a Foreign War, and that you may have leisure, all things being quiet and
peaceable within your Jurisdictions, to mind the affairs of Religion and
Christianity. After all, though, I would advise you, to give Orders to the
Counselors and Officers that you left at home, that they look carefully about
them, that no sudden surprise happen, and that they consult with their
Neighbors, whom they think they can safely trust. And, if I can do you any
kindness that way, I Will willingly assist you, that if any Commotion happen,
which, I think, will not, you may be in the greater readiness, whatever fall
out. And seeing we are not far distant one from another, I Will take it kindly,
if you will hereafter write to me of what you hear, I shall do the same, and not
fail to acquaint you, with what I think concerns the Public, nor be wanting in
giving that necessary protection and defense to all that expect and deserve it.
The Wirtemberg Ambassadors desires to Count Montfort.
Some days before, Montfort was come back to Trent; and therefore the
Ambassadors of Wirtemberg went to wait upon him, and tell him, That hitherto
they had obtained nothing by the help of the Cardinal, nor of Don Francisco de
Toledo; and, that since he and his Colleagues represented the Emperor there,
they desired, that their Princes demands might be heard. But receiving no
satisfactory answer then neither, they began to despair of success, and to
think of returning home, as the Prince had lately enjoined them, if they found
they were put off with longer delays. The Deputy of Strasburg gave Count
Montfort also an account of the business he came about, as he had done before
to Poictieres, and he likewise took a Copy of his Commission. Now were the
Disputations of the Divines over, and the Fathers met daily, that, having
examined all their Opinions, they might frame the Decrees, as we told you
before. Three of the German Nation were chosen for that purpose, the Bishops of
Cologne, Vienna, and Julius Pflug Bishop of Naumburg. Whilst these were taken
up about that affair, and prepared all things for the future Session, at
length, January the Seventh, came the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice, of whom the
Emperor had written a little before, and these were Wolf Coler, The
Ambassadors of Duke Maurice come to the Council.
and Leonard Badehorn a Lawyer. Their coming cheared up the Bishops whom I
named before, and chiefly the Emperors Ambassadors, who thought, that Duke
Maurice, being peaceably inclined, was now no more to be suspected. The third
day after they came, they acquainted the Emperors Ambassadors with their
Instructions, And declare their Instructions.
and at first alleged, that the safe Conduct granted by the Council was not
sufficient security for the Divines to come, and, that it was the cause, why
the Princes had sent none; that he himself was very well affected toward the
Public, and earnestly desired, that some way of Concord might be found; that
therefore he was fully resolved to send some good and peceable Men, and doubted
not but most of the rest would do the same; but, that it might be so, his
demands were first, That those who were to come might have a safe Conduct in
the form of that of the Council of Basil, which was heretofore given to the
Bohemians; That when they should come, all that had been done before might be
reviewed and debated again of new, and the day of the ensuing Session
prorogued; That there should be a Council, wherein all Nations and People might
meet; That the Pope should not take to himself the Authority of President, but
submit to the Council, and absolve all the Bishops from their Oaths of
Canonical Obedience, that so all the Votes in Council might be free, and no
constraint laid upon Men's Judgments; That they would propose these things more
at large in the Congregation of the Fathers, when it should be thought fit, and
move, that something might be done therein with all expedition; That now the
Divines were about forty Miles forward on their Journey, and waited only till
they should be sent for. That was done on the Tenth day of January. They made
answer, That they were very glad of their coming, and that they would make a
Report of all they had said to the Council. They informed the Emperor also of
the whole matter, who, to soften Duke Maurice, advised and counseled the
Fathers, to return a mild and friendly answer to his Demands. The Duke of
Wirtemberg also, hearing that Duke Maurice had sent thither, ordered his
Ambassadors to stay till the next Session, and there exhibit their Writing. At
the same time the sent another short Paper, much to the same purpose that the
Demands of Duke Maurice were, as will appear hereafter; and, that he would have
also produced with the confession of Faith and Doctrine. The Deputy of
Strasburg had orders to stay, either till the Mauritians came, or that it were
certainly know, they would not come. When they were come therefore, he
communicated to them the cause of his Deputation, told them, how Affairs stood,
and learned of them what Instructions they had. Those of Wirtemberg did the
same, and so all joined in the common cause; which they, as coming latest, did
chiefly prosecute, and therefore made earnest suit to the three Electoral
Archbishops, the Cardinal of Trent, who was Duke Maurice's familiar Friend, The
diligence of the Protestant Ambassadors in the Council.
and the Emperor's Ambassadors, that, for the sake of the Public, they would
both be favorable to them, themselves, and persuade the rest of the Fathers
also, to be so. For none of the Ambassadors went to the Legate Crescentio, or
his Colleagues, lest they should seem to own their Authority; but, because in
obedience to the Emperor, and to comply with the Imperial Decree, they had
been sent to the Council, therefore they applied themselves in all Matters to
his Ambassadors, who was the chief and supreme Magistrate. And, at the same
time, News was also brought, that Duke Maurice would, in a few days, be with
the Emperor, which raised the hopes and expectations of all Men.

The King of England's Uncle, The Protector of England beheaded.
whom we named before, was, in this Month, beheaded at London, and some of his
familiar Friends suffered with him. No Man doubted, but that this was done by
the influence of the Duke of Northumberland; and wiser Men began now to be
concerned for the good King, whom they saw more exposed to Danger and Treasons,
now his nearest Relations were taken out of the way; for, after the death of
the Duke of Somerset, Northumberland brought in new Bedchamber-men about the
King, and amongst these his own Sons and Relations.

The day of the next Session of the Council now approaching, the Emperor's
Ambassadors sent for those of Duke Maurice, The Discourse of the Emperor's
Ambassadors, with those of Duke Maurice.
and told them, what they had done with the Fathers in their Affair; that they
had obtained a safe Conduct, such as they desired; that all farther Action also
should rest, and be put off until they came, and might be present; that it was
not in the power of the Fathers, that all Nations and People should meet there;
that the Council was lawfully called, and, though all did not come, it
nevertheless retained its Authority and Dignity; that they themselves might
consider, how undecent a thing it would be, to handle the Decrees, already
made, over again, for that it would redound to the Infamy and Disgrace of so
great an Assembly; that the Divines, come when they would, should have a full
hearing about all things, and be most courteously used; that if any thing
should offend them, or seem to be partially carried, they should have liberty
to depart, when ever they pleased; that they earnestly desired, they would have
respect to the Times, and not to expect, that all things should be granted them
at once; that when Matters came into agitation, most part of what they demanded
might be occasionally obtained, which now seemed somewhat too hard; that the
Fathers were very desirous of Reformation, and would not be wanting in their
Duty; that they much longed for the coming of the Divines, whom they would
treat with all Civility and Kindness; and that they themselves had Matters of
great importance to propound, but were desirous, that the Protestant Divines
would break the Ice, that so they also might appear in due time; that what they
demanded likewise, as to the Pope's submission, they begged, they would be a
little more reserved, as to that point; that the Fathers were very sensible,
that, in so high a Pinnacle of Dignity, several thing were to be found fault
with, and ought to be reformed, but that, nevertheless, such a thing was to be
managed by fine and quaint measures; that it was the will and desire of the
Emperor, that all things should be carried on duly and lawfully, but that they
had daily experience, how tenderly and slily the Pope's Legates were to be
handled, for that it required singular Art and Dexterity to manage them, that
they should therefore acquiesce in what was now obtained for them, not without
great trouble and pains, and hasten, as much as they could, the coming of the
Divines; that, both in their public and private Capacity, they would be ready
to do them all kindness; and having proceeded so far, they gave them a draught
of the safe Conduct, which they desired them to read over, and then send it
back to them again. This past Januuary the Twenty second, in the morning. After
they had so dismissed them, they presently sent for the Ambassadors of
Wirtemberg, A draught of the safe Conduct given to the Ambassadors of Duke
Maurice.
and, in the first place, made an excuse for what was past, because of the
extraordinary business the Fathers had been engaged in, but that now, if they
had any thing to be done, they were ready to serve them. They made answer, That
a good while since they had had Matters to propose, and that they desire
Admittance, as soon as possible. These being also dismissed, they sent for the
Deputy of Strasburg, and discoursed him much after the same manner. He gave
them a short account of the business he was sent about, by reason Don Francisco
de Toledo was there, to whom he had not spoken before, that he had no more to
say at present, but expected Letters from his Principals; for he had Orders,
upon the arrival of the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice, to write immediately to
the Senate, to acquaint them with their Instructions, and then to expect
farther Orders from home; but, in the mean time, he entreated, that what was
communicated to them by the Mauritian Ambassadors, they would presently bring
under public debate. They replied, That some things they had to treat of, with
the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice and Wirtemberg, and that, when any thing was
done therein, they would impart it to him, that he might acquaint his
Principals therewith; that they heartily wished for Agreement, and that the
Emperor bent all his Thoughts and Care that way; that they were very desirous,
Matters might once be brought upon the Debate; and that they made no doubt, but
God would Bless all honest Endeavors. When these things were over, the
Ambassadors of Saxony, Wirtemberg, and Strasburg, consulting together, examined
and weighed the draught of the safe Conduct, which they had received. And
because they had before drawn out the Heads of the Decree of Basil, The safe
Conduct of Basil perverted and altered.
those especially wherein the stress of the business lay, that they might have
them before their Eyes, it was no difficult matter, by comparing them together,
immediately to observe, wherein this differed from that. Having run them over,
they presently found, that the chief places were partly altered, and partly
omitted; for in the safe Conduct, that was heretofore given to the Bohemians,
there are these things, The form of the safe Conduct of Basil.
amongst others, That also they should have the power of deciding; that in
every Controversy, the Holy Scripture, the practice of the Primitive Church;
Councils and Expositors, agreeing with the Scriptures, should stand in place of
a Judge; that they should have the free exercise of their Religion at home, in
their own Houses; and that nothing should be done in contempt and disparagement
of their Religion. The first, third and last of these, were omitted; the
second, and that which is indeed the principal, was plainly altered. Having
observed these things, they themselves drew up a form, consonant to the Decree
of Basil; but, in the mean time, Upon examination of the Council's safe
Conduct, a new form of one is drawn up, according to the Decree of Basil.
whilst they were busied in drawing up that from, Don Francisco de Toledo sent
a Servant once or twice for the Paper, fearing, as it should seem, too strict
an Examination. However, they went on, and having finished it at length, the
Ambassadors of Duke Maurice return to Don Francisco de Toledo, and comparing
the one with the other, show him, what they found wanting in his. Then began he
to storm and huff; and why were not they content with that, which had cost them
a great deal of Labor and Pains in the obtaining; that there was security
enough, in conscience, provided, for those that were to come; that safe coming
and going was the chief point to be mineded; and that the rest signified
nothing, but only in relation to the way of proceeding; which might be far
better adjusted when the Divines were present, than then. They made answer,
That they durst not transgress the limits of their Commission, which was, that
they should not accept of a safe Conduct, different from that of Basil. Two
days after, all the Fathers met in the Legate's House in the morning, and, with
them, the Emperor's Ambassadors; who sent for the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg
thither, as they had told them they would, The Speech of the Wirtemberg
Ambassadors to the Fathers at Trent, and the Exhibition of the Confession of
Doctrine.
two days before. Being introduced, they were bid speak what they had to say;
so, having produced their Commission, and made some little Preamble, they
presented their written Confession of Doctrine, and gave it in to the Clerk of
the Council, according to Custom; and then told the Fathers, That there were
Divines coming from the Prince, who would handle all the Points more at large,
but upon these Conditions: First, That fit Judges should be chosen by consent
of both Parties, who might hear the Plea of the Divines, and judge uprightly of
the Matters in Controversy; for since the Prince understood, that the Doctrine
of his Divines, in most things, was repugnant to that of the Pope, and Bishops,
who were all many ways bound and engaged to his Holiness, it seemed very
unreasonable and unjust to him, that they, who were Parties, whether Plaintiff,
or Defendant, should take to themselves the power of Judging: Again, That it
was a Decree of the Diet at Ausburg, that the Council should be continued, and
all things carried on in a right and pious manner; that their Prince had always
understood it so, that what had been done in the Council in former years, ought
not to have the force of Laws, but that all things should be reviewed again
from the beginning; for what Law or Justice would it be, when two are at Law,
that one of the Parties absent upon a lawful ground, should be obliged to
ratify and approve the Sentence pronounced in his absence? Besides, since not
only in the former Council, but in this also, there had been many Decrees made,
contrary to holy Scripture, and many ancient Errors also confirmed, as might be
demonstrated; the Prince demanded, that they should be of no authority, but all
submitted again to a fair and lawful Trial. And all these Heads he gave in in
Writing with the confession of Doctrine. Having done so, their Answer was, That
the Fathers would in due time tell them their thoughts as to the matter, The
Confession of Wirtemberg, given in to the Fathers.
and so they were dismissed. The same day toward the Evening, the Ambassadors
of Duke Maurice were sent for to have Audience in the same place. When they
were come, they delivered their Masters Demands in the long Speech, The
Ambassadors of Saxony sent for by the Fathers.
to the same purpose, as they had lately done to the Emperors Ambassadors;
but that it was more pithy in the close; where they boggled not to say, That
the Worship and Service commonly performed in Papist-Churches, was not the true
Religion, but a painted shadow of Devotion. Having done speaking, they
delivered in the same Speech in Writing to the Clerk I mentioned; and they had
an Answer in the same terms, as those of Wirtemberg had before. Amongst other
things it vexed them exceedingly, as was known afterward, that their Religion
had been called by so base and contemptible a name. The Ambassadors purposed
to have delivered their Commission in a public Session; but to avoid that,
which they knew would have been done, The Confession of Faith written by
Melanchton, is not produced.
the Fathers gave them a private Audience, for, either they must have done so,
or have left all to a public Debate. They had brought with them, indeed, the
Confession of Faith, that was drawn up, as I said, by Melanchton; but, for what
cause I cannot tell, they produced it not.

The day following, Another Session of the Council.
which was the Twenty fifth of January, the public Session was held, and the
Legate went to Church in the pomp we mentioned before. There was a greater
number of Soldiers then, and a greater confluence of People from several
places, expecting great matters should be done that day. After Mass and all the
Ceremonies were over, it was publicly read from the Pulpit, That for the sake
of the Protestants, all matters were put off to the Nineteenth day of March; by
which day they were to be present, to propound what they had to say; that the
Council did condescend to that out of kindness to them, hopeing that they came
not obstinately to oppugn the Catholic Faith, but with a desire to learn the
Truth, and at length to submit and obey the Decrees and Discipline of the
Church; that a safe Conduct had also been granted them, in a more ample manner,
that nothing at all might be wanting; and, then, that the Sacrament of
Matrimony was to be handled in the next Session. Three days after, when nothing
appeared, the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice dineing with Don Francisco de
Toledo, desired a sight of the safe Conduct that had been promised: He gave
them a civil answer; but when three days more were past, the Deputy of
Strasburg, at the desire of the rest, went to Poictieres, and complained, that
now in six days time they had received nothing; that there had been delay long
enough before, because the safe Conduct was not full enough; and, that now
again, time was protracted; but that the Divines would not come, before their
Masters were satisfied with the safe Conduct. He made answer, That it was not
any fault of his, and that he wondered why Don Francisco de Toledo, who was
chief of the Embassy, deferred so much; that he would presently go to him, and
made no doubt, but that the matter would be dispatched the same day; that he
would send him word of what he learnt from him, and so going out together, he
went to his Lodgings. This was on the Thirtieth of January. Some hours after,
all the Ambassadors are sent for to the Lodgings of Don Francisco de Toledo,
where Montfort also was present, but Poictieres spoke; and first makes an
Apology for the delay that had been made, enlarging much upon their own
sincerity in the affair, and the honorable Intentions of the Emperor their
Master; and then he urges them to hasten the coming of the Divines with all
speed; which they thought they must needs do, having once received their safe
Conduct. The safe Conduct is delivered without any alteration.
At these words Don Francisco de Toledo arose, and gave every one of them a
Copy of the safe Conduct, signed by the Clerks of the Council. They withdrew to
peruse it, and found that the places which they had corrected before the
Session were not altered; wherefore they came back to them again, and complain
of that, showing them what it was they desired to have done in every Article of
the same. The Ambassadors of Duke Maurice also were willing to know of them,
what answer the Fathers made to their demands; which those of Wirtemberg
likewise desired. Poictiere's Discourse as to the Ambassadors Demands.
Poictieres spoke again, and as to the safe Conduct, made answer: That to
demand liberty to be granted to their Divines to sit in Council, and decide,
was done a little too early by them; that if they were once present, and
engaged in business, many things, perhaps, might be occasionally allowed them,
which now were refused; that no Man was, indeed, against it, but that the holy
Scripture should be the Judge in all Controversies, but that when any debate
arose, about the interpretation of Scripture, who was more to be believed, than
a Council? That Scripture was an inanimate and dumb thing, as all other
Political Laws also were; but that the Judges Mouth must go along with it, to
make it to be understood; and, that that had been the custom ever since the
Apostles days, when any doubts arose: That it was not, indeed, expressly granted
to them, that they should have the exercise of their Religion, in their Houses,
but likewise, that it was not forbidden; that they had no reason to fear, that
any thing would be done in contempt or reproach of their Religion and Doctrine,
because severe Orders would be made to the contrary; for, that it was the
Emperors will it should be so, as the Fathers hated all saucy and intemperate
Language; and that seeing they met for the sake of peace, scurrilous and
opprobrious Expressions would not be allowed in any manner. They answer their
demands much in the way as they had been lately answered before the Session, as
we said before, to wit, That all Public Action was at a stand upon their
account, and put off till another time; The Answer made to the Demands of the
Ambassadors.
but to have the Decrees debated again of new, they prayed them not to cast
such an aspers^on upon so many Excellent Men; that they would engage their
Faith and Word, that when the Divines came, they should be heard concerning all
things; that as to the bringing the Pope to submit to the Council, and to
absolve the Bishops from their Canonical Oath, was a thing that properly
belonged to his Holiness himself, and that therefore the Fathers would do
nothing therein, till first they had acquainted him with it; that as to the
demands of Wirtemberg, since they were almost of the same nature, the Opinion
of the Fathers was the same; that therefore they besought them, that for such
trifling matters they would not suffer the occasion, so long wished for, of
accomplishing a most holy design to be obstructed and disappointed, to the
prejudice of all the Provinces in Europe, which might otherwise reap the fruits
thereof; but, that they would use their endeavors, and persuade their Masters,
that the Divines might be sent with all speed; and, that they could not, at
that time, do the Public better Service. Many words having past betwixt them,
when the Ambassadors had insisted upon this chiefly, that it was very
unreasonable, that one of the Parties in a Suit should be both Judge and Party,
and pass sentence upon the thing controverted, at length they depart,
protesting, that they received the Copy of the safe Conduct upon no other
condition, but that they might send it to their several Masters, which they
would forthwith do with great expedition; that they would promote the matter as
much as possibly they could, and that they did not despair of their coming. The
Ambassadors of Duke Maurice presently sent the safe Conduct, both to their
Prince and Divines, who, they thought, were then at Ausburg; The Ambassadors
of Wirtemberg depart from the Council.
the like did the Deputy of Strasburg; but those of Wirtemberg carried their
Copy themselves, setting out on their Journey homewards on the first of
February, by permission from their Prince, who appointed others in their
places, as shall be said hereafter. A little before this, the Divines came from
Duke Maurice to Norimberg, and amongst these Melanchton, being ordered to stay
there, The Divines of Saxony come to Norimberg on their way to the Council.
till the Ambassadors sent the safe Conduct from Trent; but some days after
they arrived, they had other orders sent them, not to proceed any farther in
their Journey, but to expect the event of the Prince's Negotiation with the
Emperor, to whom, as it was said, he was going. After the Decrees are
published in the Session, it was usual to assign the Divines Subjects for their
future Disputations, as has been mentioned before; but all things were now at
a stand, since the last Session, whereof more causes than one were alleged.
However it was given out publicly, to have been done for the sake of the
Protestants; for in the beginning of February, when one of the Ambassadors of
Saxony and the Deputy of Strasburg went for their pleasure into the adjoining
part of Italy as far as Venice; the other, in the mean time, who had seen Italy
before, dealt with the Emperors Ambassadors, because he expected the Divines
in a very short time, they being then, as he thought, come as far as Ausburg,
that all Business might be deferred till they came, The bitter Reflection of
Ambrose Pelarg upon the Protestants.
and that the Fathers would patiently bea^ with so small a delay. The
Archbishop of Treves had with him one Ambrose Pelarg, a Dominican Friar, who on
a Festival day, which was the Seventh of February, preaching on that Text of
Scripture concerning the Tares mingled with the Wheat, said, amongst other
things, The Ambassador of Duke Maurice his Complaint of the sawciness of
Pelarg.
that the Tares must be in any manner rooted out, provided, it could be done
without endamaging the Wheat, applying all his Discourse to Heretics, who were
signified by the Tares. Now it was reported to the Ambassadors of Saxony, that
he had railed bitterly against Heretics, and had also said, that no says nor
promise, though made to them, was to be kept. Having therefore made diligent
enquiry into the thing, he went to the Cardinal of Trent, who had authority
there, and the Emperors Ambassadors, and complained of what he had heard. The
Friar being sent for, Pelarg Justifies himself before the Cardinal of Trent.
confessed that he had spoken of Heretics in general, and that they were to be
destroyed by Fire, Sword, the Halter, or any way whatsoever, provided that
could be done without a greater Inconvenience, or Tumult; but that he had not
said a word of not keeping Faith to them, and that if he had, he must have
endangered his own life, for having transgressed a Decree of the Empire.
Afterward they send for the Ambassadors, and having read over the Friars
Justification, bid him look for nothing from the Fathers but candor and fair
dealing; that if any thing should happen to be rashly blurted out, though that
was a thing severely prohibited, they ought not to be moved thereat. Whether
the Friar was wronged or not, I cannot certainly tell; for some of the Hearers,
being asked about it, varied in their Relation.

Much about this time came Letters from Duke Maurice to his Ambassadors, dated
the last day of January. Duke Maurice's Letters to his Ambassadors.
Therein he ordered them, that they should urge those things, which they had
not as yet obtained of the Fathers; that now he was wholly taken up in making
preparations to come to the Emperor; that then, amongst other matters, he
would treat of those things with him; that besides his Divines, the Deputies
and Divines of some other Princes and Cities would also come, amongst whom he
named the Cousins, Dukes of Pomerania. The one of the Ambassadors, because his
Colleague was not as yet returned from his Expedition, sent a Copy of this
Letter to the Cardinal of Trent, who lately before was gone to Brixen; for he
being much devoted to the Emperors service, as he had a great love for Duke
Maurice, with whom he had lived with great intimacy, and above all things
wished the progress of the Council, he was much troubled at this growing
dissension, that was in every bodies mouth, and, that was the reason why the
Ambassadors sent a Copy of the Letter, because he knew it would ease and
refresh his Mind. No sooner had he received that Letter, but he wrote the
Ambassador an Answer, That whereas he had had some doubts before, he now began
to take breath again, and to hope that all would be well; that so soon as Duke
Maurice arrived at Inspruck, he would immediately go thither, if it were a
great deal farther off to meet him; for he thought, that upon account of the
friendship and intimacy that had been betwixt them, he could prevail with him
to follow peaceable courses. Now the Letters were signed by Duke Maurice's own
Hand, and thereto was their Commission joined, which they might produce, if
there were occasion; for that had been omitted before. Not long after, February
the Sixteenth, The Elector of Treves returns home.
the Elector of Treves, to refresh himself, departed from Trent homewards;
which the Emperor, as it was said, allowed of only upon this condition, that
so soon as ever his health did permit, he should return thither again; but he
left Pelarg behind him, that he might be present at all the Actions. The
Electors of Mentz and Cologne brought him going a Mile or two on his Journey;
but he struck off to the left hand, and did not go by Inspruck, where the
Emperor then was. Not long after it began to be whispered by many, that the
Council would be Prorogued; A Rumor of a War with the Emperor.
and, that Duke Maurice having made a League with the French King, was
preparing to make War with the Emperor. This was, indeed, but a faint rumor
in the beginning; but growing stronger and stronger daily, there was one
privately sent from Trent to know the Emperors thoughts of the matter.
Afterward one came thither also from the Emperor; but all things were
industriously concealed. On the Second of March, which then was Ashwednesday,
the Popes Legate affixed public Indulgences upon the Church-doors, granting
Plenary Remission of Sins to all in general, but especially to the Bishops,
Ambassadors and Divines, who having either already, or would within a certain
time confess their Sins, should go to some Churches of Trent, on certain days,
and there by saying five Pater Nosters and as many Ave-Maria's, with the other
Prayers, should pray to God for the Concord of Princes, the Unity of the
Church, and the happy progress of the Council; That this so great a benefit was
granted by Pope Julius III. out of his great care for the salvation of Souls,
Indulgences published by the Popes Legate.
and that it might be obtained at Trent as well as at Rome. The Bishops and the
rest, therefore, thronged daily to the Churches, especially the Spaniards,
observing a distinction of days; for sometime they spent more time, and
sometimes less about their Devotion. In this so great silence, the Deputy of
Strasburg having, in a Conference with Poictieres, enquired of him concerning
the state of Affairs, was told by him, that it was an idle Report spread
abroad, of proroguing the Council, and that the Emperor would have them by all
means to proceed and continue their Actions; that it was for their sake also,
that for several days nothing had been done, since they had given hopes of the
coming of their Divines. This was about the beginning of March, when toward
the later end of February, Duke Maurice had recalled his Divines from
Norimberg, who after the Report was raised of his going to War upon the
Emperor, having made some progress in his Journey thitherwards, returned home,
and began to raise Soldiers, as you shall learn in the following Book. When
these things began to be publicly known, and that the many Messengers who came
upon one another heels, put the matter past all doubt, The Electors of Mentz
and Cologne return home.
the Electors of Mentz and Cologne, to whom plenty of Provisions had been
lately brought from the Lower Germany, having with great expedition provided
themselves Horses, on the Eleventh of March, departed from Trent about break of
day; the Legate with the Italian and Spanish Bishops having been to take leave
of them the Evening before. New Ambassadors from Wirtemberg to the Council.
The same day new Ambassadors came to Trent from the Duke of Wirtemberg, Wern,
Munching, and Jerome Gerard a Lawyer. Next day after they went to wait on the
Emperors Ambassadors, and having showed their Commission, desired to have an
answer to their Princes Demands, which were presented to the Fathers on the
Twenty fourth day of January; and acquainted them withal, that within a few
days the Divines would come and give a fuller account of their Doctrine and
Confession of Faith. That seemed very strange to them, but for what reason, I
know not, unless it were, that it was said, one of them had all things in
readiness for their Journey, and was thinking of returning home, who then must
needs tarry against his will. Their answer was, That they must communicate the
matter to the Fathers, and that when that was done, they would inform them of
what they had said. In the mean while the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice were in
great perplexity and anxiety; for they were thought to have acted craftily, and
being privy to their Masters Council, to have dissembled all along; when they,
in the mean time, affirmed, That they neither knew what was doing at home, had
received no Letters from thence, nor could tell how they could return home
without danger. And since they perceived that the longer delay they made, Duke
Maurice's Ambassadors depart secretly from Trent.
the greater their danger was like to be, March the Thirteenth as soon as it
was day, with great silence they slipped away, and posting to Brixen, consulted
the Cardinal of Trent what they had best do. At length one of the Ambassadors,
who had lived long at Inspruck before he came to Trent, and had in his Princes
name made intercession with the rest to the Emperor for the Landgrave; Having,
if I be not mistaken, obtained a safe Conduct, came to Inspruck, and purged
himself so well to the Emperors Counselors, of having any knowledge of
Warlike Preparations, that he gained credit from them. From thence he went
straight home; but the other took his Journey through Carniola, and so returned
safe into his own Country. When the Electors of Mentz and Cologne came to
Inspruck, they were honorably received by those whom the Emperor sent to meet
them, amongst whom was the Bishop of Arras. Having after had long and private
Conferences with the Emperor, they pursued their Journey; for the matter
required dispatch. Divines of Wirtemberg and Strasburg come to Trent.
Six days after the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice left Trent, four Divines of
Wirtemberg, and two of Strasburg came thither, of whom Brentius was one.
Wherefore the Ambassadors repair instantly to Count Montfort, and name the
Divines to him that were come, praying that he and his Colleagues would use
their endeavors, that the Fathers might give an answer to their demands, and
fall to business again. Next day, being the Nineteenth of March, appointed for
the Session, as was said before, the Fathers met in the House of the Legate.
The Ambassadors of Portugal, who arrived a little before, was present; who
having showed his Commission, was in solemn manner received by the Fathers, and
admitted to his place; After that, the public Session was put off till the
first of May, The Confession of the Duke of Wirtemberg.
and all this privately, nothing else being done. In the mean time the Duke of
Wirtemberg, caused the Confession of Faith which his Ambassadors presented in
Council, to be printed, of which those who came last, and afterward the
Divines, had brought some Copies with them, and those being communicated to
some, were sought after by many. For the Popes Legate kept the written Copy,
that, as I said, was presented on the Twenty fourth of January, and suffered
but very few to read it, which was not known till then; so that when it was now
published, some Italian and Spanish Bishops and Divines, made great enquiry
after it, though, perhaps, not all with the same design. But the Legate
Crescentio taking that ill, chid a certain Physician of Trent, a Learned Man,
for dispersing such kind of Books. Count Montfort also told them plainly little
less, than that they had trespassed against the Conditions of the safe Conduct;
and, that they who had public security given them to save them harmless, ought
also to avoid all occasions of giving offense. Two days after the private
Congregation that was held in the Legates House, Poictieres sent the Deputy of
Strasburg word in the Nightime, after they had had some hours before a long
Conference together about entering upon Business again, that if they would have
him or his Colleagues propound any thing to the Fathers, they would not sail to
do it, and at the same time appointed them an hour. Wherefore the day
following, which was the Two and twentieth of March, the Ambassadors of
Wirtemberg and Strasburg, came to the House of Don Francisco de Toledo, where
Poictieres having spoken first, The Protestation of the Ambassadors of
Wirtemberg.
the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg said, that they again demanded the same thing,
which they had moved at their first coming, to wit, that they might have an
Answer to the Demands presented long before; that, that being done, they might
the more conveniently proceed to the rest; and when after many words on both
sides, it might easily appear, that if they stuck to that, a stop would be put
to the whole Negotiation, the Ambassadors, according to their Instruction,
declare, That though they did not obtain what before they had demanded, yet
that it might be evidently known, how very desirous their Prince was of Peace
and Concord; again, that the handling of the cause might no longer be delayed,
as also, that in obedience to the Emperor, and in compliance with the Decree
of the Empire, they were willing in their Princes Name, to present their
Divines to a public Disputation; but upon this condition still, that thereby
they may not be thought to pass from any part of their own Right, but that they
may retain whole and entire to them and theirs, all that they can claim by Law
and Custom, and by the Decrees of the Diet of Ausburg. When they had made this
protestation, they gave it them in Writing, and then stepped aside. Being again
called, the Imperialists commended their Action, and acknowledged that they
aimed at Concord; that since it was so, the next thing, said they, that was to
be considered, was the manner of proceeding, and they entreated them to give
their opinion, as to that. The Ambassadors withdrew, and having consulted
together, declared, that they had thought on two ways; to wit, That either the
Divines might be heard touching all the Decrees of Doctrine that had been made
in the Council, or that the Confession of Doctrine given in to the Fathers, and
now published in Print, should be produced openly, and the several Heads
thereof handled in order; for that their Divines were come with that intent,
that they might more fully explain and demonstrate the Doctrine contained in
that little Book, and answer those that would oppugn the same; that this
seemed to them to be a very compendious way, and the most convenient that they
could think on. Then the Deputy of Strasburg said, that the Magistrates whom he
represented had read the Writing of the Wirtemberg-Doctrine, which they
approved and professed, and had sent Divines thither, to join in that
Confession, and, together with those of Wirtemberg, to defend the same; that he
was enjoined to make this profession to them in the name of the City of
Strasburg and their Associates.

To these things they made answer, That whereas they made so fair advances, and
acted so openly and sincerely, that the Commonwealth of Strasburg, and the
other associated Cities, joined also in the Profession of the same Doctrine,
they were exceedingly overjoyed, and thanked them for it, promising to make a
faithful report of the same to the Emperor, who they doubted not but would be
glad to hear of it: That as to the Theological Disceptation, and way of
proceeding prescribed by them, they would shortly acquaint them, what the
Fathers Opinion was concerning it. Some days after, when they heard no news
from them, when the Bishop of Naumburg was upon his departure, and the other
two German Bishops, who were all that remained, preparing also, as it was said,
to be gone, the Ambassadors went to Count Monfort, to know if the Fathers had,
as yet, given any answer. All that he had to say, was, that the Fathers had not
given any answer, as yet; and when mention was made of the departure of the
Bishops; he said, that Naumburg went no farther than to wait upon the Emperor;
for that there were some Commissioners coming out of Saxony, to treat a Peace
with Duke Maurice, and that he being of the same Country, and one of chief Note
too, he could not, but at their request, be there: That as for the others, he
knew nothing of their designs. For that since the Emperor was very desirous of
the Progress of the Council, they also directed all they did and said to that
end, that Men might not lose all hopes of the main concern. The next day, The
Deputy of Strasburg's Discourse with the Ambassador Poctieres.
which was the twenty seventh of March, the Deputy of Strasburg waited upon
Poictieres, and told him, that the state of his Affairs was such, that he must
needs return home: And that therefore he was desirous to know, what account he
could give, upon his return, of the Theological Disceptation. This gave
occasion to some farther discourse about the way, how the future Debates of the
Divines was to be managed, and it was the opinion of the Ambassador
Poictieres, that they could not conveniently proceed in the Method, which they
had lately proposed: That now it was the design of the Fathers to determine the
business of the Mass, in the next Session: That therefore he thought, that this
was first to be debated, and then to proceed to the rest in order: That,
nevertheless, what he had said, was his own private thought, not that his
Colleagues had enjoined him, to say any such thing. On the other hand, the
Deputy of Strasburg alleged: That in the same manner, as the Divines of the
Council had handled all things, in order, from the first Fundamentals of
Religion, as the Creation; the Fall of Man; Original Sin; Justification; Faith;
Good Works; and at length the Sacraments, so also ought their Divines to be
allowed to follow the same Method: That they had also promised, the very same
day, they delivered the safe conduct, about the later end of January, that they
should be heard about all Matters: That it was best to stick to that, and not
invert the Order and Nature of things: For that unless Superior and Antecedent
Points were rightly determined, all Disputes about inferior and subsequent
Matters, that depend on, and are deduced from the former, would be fruitless
and vain. But when they could not agree upon that Matter, he told him, That as
to his intended departure, it could not be granted him: That the Emperor had
commanded them to suffer no Man to depart. After a long Discourse, when he told
him, That he had no more to do, that what now remained would be managed by the
Divines, who had a Commission for that in Writing: He bid him go to Count
Monfort and show him the Commission, and then civilly dismissed him, wishing
him a good Journey home. When Count Monfort had seen the Commission, he could
have wished; he said, that his Affairs would have permitted him to stay longer,
but that since his, occasion so required, he could not be against his going,
and so very kindly dismissed him. Next day, when he was just ready to set out
upon his Journey, The Deputy of Strasburg, being upon his return home, is stopped.
the Ambassadors sending for him, Poictieres told him, That though they had
the day before condescended to his departure, yet having considered better
on it, and consulted together, they could not give him leave to depart: That
Matters were now brought to such a maturity, that the fruit of the time spent
was to be expected: And the Actions to be begun again: That if the Legate had
not been somewhat indisposed, something might have been determined that very
day: That therefore he must needs stay: For if he should depart at that
juncture of time, the Fathers would be offended, who knew, that he had been
there for some Months past: That it was the Emperors command also, that no Man
should withdraw: But that if he had Orders, from his Principals, to be gone, he
should show the Letters whereby he was recalled, that they might excuse
themselves to the Emperor. To which he made answer, That he did not go,
because he was recalled by the Senate, but because his own Affairs required it:
And then having told them some Reasons, he declared, That if it were not for
these, he would not have stirred one foot from thence: That not only the
Authority of the Senate, who wished that he might tarry longer, but the dignity
also of their Character, who desired it of him, and the cause it self, which he
was very fond of, might justly prevail with him to do so: That by the coming of
the Divines, he could be much better spared now; especially, since all that
remained, was only to admit them to a hearing: That the Ambassadors of
Wirtemburg, who lately arrived, were also present with the Divines, and that
the cause was common, as had been lately declared: That if the Matter should be
handled seriously, and without intermission, the Senate, perhaps, would
substitute another in his place, for that he had given them, by the last Post,
notice of his coming away. To this, replied Ambassador Poictieres, that he
would stay, at least, so long, till the Action were begun again, which would be
very speedily: And that if the Legate Crescentio recovered not, they would
endeavor, that his Colleagues should manage the Matter in his place. When he
perceived that excuses and entreaties would not prevail, he betook himself to
his last remedy, which he had purposely reserved till then; and told them, That
both he, and all the rest, of the Augustane Confession, had leave granted them,
by the safe Conduct, to depart, whenever they pleased. Then at length, said
Don Francisco de Toledo, they had so, indeed, and that they neither would, nor
could, hinder him from going: But that they could do no otherwise, than to
signify to him the Emperors Commands, and what it was they themselves
desired. So then having recommended the Public Cause, and the Divines to their
Cares, he took leave of their Excellencies, and departed. At that time, the
Fathers disagreed among themselves, Divisions amongst the Fathers of the
Council.
nor did they all look one way: For the Spaniards, Neapolitans, Sicilians, and
all that were on the Emperors side, but chiefly the Spaniards, and with them
the Ambassadors, urged hard, that the Actions of the Council might be
continued: But the Pope's Creatures, suspecting that the Spaniards had a design
to attempt the Reformation of the Court of Rome, desired to see some
impediments started, that might prevent it: And, because of the Civil Broils,
the Chief German Bishops were already gone, they looked for the same occasion,
and the rather, that they had intelligence daily by Letters, that Duke Maurice
and the Confederates were already in Arms. The King of France also had employed
the Cardinal of Tournon, The French King negotiates a Peace with the Pope.
who bestirred himself actively in negotiating a Peace with the Pope: And if
that took effect, since the French King was then in War with the Emperor, no
Man doubted, but for his sake also, the Council would be dissolved. The
Ambassadors of the Emperor, therefore, who saw and dreaded all these thing,
made it their whole business, to bring about what they most desired, by means
of the Protestant Ambassadors. About the later end of March, a certain
Franciscan Friar, preaching upon St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, before a
numerous Auditory, took occasion now and then to rail bitterly against Luther,
and his Followers, and went so far, as to say, That they, who had never had the
knowledge of Christ, and yet lived an honest Moral Life, might be saved: That
this was the true meaning of the Apostle, in the second Chapter of the Romans,
upon which he preached. Some of the Protestant Divines having been present, and
heard this, they all consulted together, and wrote a Letter to the Emperors
Ambassadors, The Demands of the Protestant Divines to the Council.
on the last day of March, declaring that the cause of their coming, was, that
they might illustrate, and defend the Confession of Doctrine exhibited: And
that it was a grievance to them, that nothing was done in Council, whose
Decrees already made contained hardly any thing else, but bitter Censures, and
Execrations of the Doctrines they professed: That a Franciscan Friar the other
day had not only said many absurd things openly, which were contrary to the
sense of the Church, and Ancient Doctors, but had also belched out many
reproaches against their Doctrine and Churches: And that although some said,
that he did these things against the will of the Fathers, yet they saw how well
his Sermon took with the Hearers. That if that were the only cause why they
were called to come thither, that they might be made a spectacle and
laughing stock to others, and be forced daily to hear their Doctrine reproached
and railed at, there was no necessity, that they should have made the Journey,
and that all these things might have been done in Writing: That therefore it
was their earnest suit to them, that by virtue of their Character and
Authority, they would procure, not only that they might, at length, know what
the Fathers found fault with, in the Confession exhibited, but that they also
might be publicly heard, as to all the Points of it. The Ambassadors
graciously received the Letter, professing that they were glad to find an
occasion offered of urging the Council to action, so that, if the Legate
Crescentio did refuse, they might put it home to his Colleagues, and the rest of
the Fathers. The Friar also preached no more after that, pretending Sickness.

April the first, Duke Maurice takes Ausburg upon surrender.
Duke Maurice and his Associates, besieged Ausburg, and three days after took
i^ by surrender, as shall be related in the following Book. April the fifth,
the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg being sent for came to the House of Don
Francisco de Toledo, taking with them, as they had been enjoined, two Divines,
The Ambassador Poictieres Conference with those of Wirtemberg and Strasburg.
Brentius, and John Marbach of Strasburg. The Ambassador Poictieres spoke, and
told them first, That the Ambassadors had been very zealous in pursuing the
common concern; but then, that because of the Sickness of the Legate
Crescentio, neither his Colleagues, nor the Fathers, would act any thing in his
absence: Lastly, that it was not their fault, if no progress were made, and
that they would not omit any thing for the future, that might contribute to the
furthering of business, and of this he made a protestation. The others having
consulted together, made answer, That they were very sensible of their Zeal,
and the diligence they had used, but that they had expected something else, and
a more certain Answer to their Demands, to have been communicated to those that
sent them: But that now, since the matter was so, they were to take the next
course. With that the Ambassadors, replied, That he did not intend, by what he
said, nor was he to be so understood, as if there remained no more hopes of
acting: That it was well done in them, and according to Duty, to acquaint their
Magistrates with the whole state of Affairs: Nor did he doubt, but that when
they should come to hear of all, they would both wonder at this delay and
cessation, and take it ill: But that, however, he prayed them, patiently to
bear the tediousness of a few days more: That in the mean time, they would
endeavor, that they should have a plain and positive answer: To which they
made answer, That, for their sakes, they were very willing to do so. Next day,
Messengers and Letters came post haste with the news of Ausburg's being taken,
and that the Princes were marching straight toward the Alps, to possess
themselves of the Passes, and stop all the ways. Whereupon the Militia was
raised all over the Country of Tirol, and Soldiers listed, with Orders to
Muster at Inspruck. All the German Bishops were now gone, The flight of the
Fathers at Trent.
none remained but the Proxies of the Bishops of Spire and Munster, when this
news was brought, the Italian Bishops presently fled for it, carrying their
Goods, by Water, down the River Adige. So that the Wirtemberg Ambassadors
started thereat, and seeing that the Council broke up of their own accord, they
went to the Emperors Ambassadors, and acquainted them, that they also, and
the Divines, were resolved to return home. They seemed much against it at
first, and told them, That until they knew the Emperors pleasure therein, they
could not consent to it: But when they could not prevail, they desired to have
the reasons, of their departure, given them in Writing, that they might excuse
themselves to the Emperor, and the Fathers. The Ambassador Poictieres put the
question also, that if, after they were gone, the Fathers did proceed to
action, what would the Divines say? To which the Ambassadors, having consulted
with the Divines, said, That they would answer it, and so, April the eighth,
The Writing of the Wirtemberg Ambassadors given to the Imperialists.
in the Morning, they delivered to them the Writing they required. Therein they
declared, when the Confession of Divines was exhibited; wherefore the Divines
came: How they had in vain solicited till then, to have had answer to their
demands: How to that very day, there had been no hopes of any future action:
That now also a War was broken out, so that not only the German Bishops, but
the Italians also went away, and that all the States were so involved in
troubles, that there was nothing to be expected at present: That they did not
think it prudent neither, to make any progress, in the absence of the Roman
Bishops: That if hereafter, that Affair happened to be duly and orderly
treated, they supposed their Prince would not be wanting: That it was the
Opinion of the Divines, that many Decrees had been made, both in this, and in
the former Council, which could not but be found fault with, if they were
brought under a lawful Examination: That if the Fathers should now proceed, it
was credible, that the same course would be taken: That, nevertheless, if
perhaps, either the Decrees already made should be corrected, or that such
things should afterward be decreed, as were agreeable to the holy Scriptures,
they made no doubt, but they would be embraced with most willing and obedient
Minds: That that would be most acceptable to them, as had been demonstrated in
some places of the Confession exhibited: Which Writing they both judged to be
pious, and would be ready to explain it more fully, when occasion called for
it: That therefore they prayed them, to take their departure in good part: That
they had liberty, indeed, granted them, by the safe conduct to depart thence,
whenever they pleased, and were not obliged to give any Man a reason for
their so doing, but that the many civilities, they had received from them,
obliged them not to baulk that small Duty, such as it was. So then they took
their leave, and departed in the Afternoon, and a few hours after, they met
upon the rode the Cardinal of Trent, coming post from Brixen to his own City,
who being informed, That they belonged to Wirtemberg, asked, who was Brentius,
and spoke to him most courteously. We said before, that the Fathers did nor all
look one way: The different Opinions and Intentions of the Fathers of the
Council.
The Spanish Bishops, indeed, seemed the most active and diligent of all: Some
of the Germans also pretended, that there was great need of Reformation: But
this was the mind of those, who all entertained the best thoughts, that
Ecclesiastical Discipline and Manners should be reformed, That Luxury,
Ambition, and Examples of impure and dishonest Lives, should be removed, that
every one should mind his own Cure, and that no single person should enjoy more
Livings than one. Besides, they had it in their thoughts, as it should seem, to
confine the Popes Power within certain bounds, and not allow his Court so much
Authority and Jurisdiction over all Provinces. These, and some other things,
they comprehended under the name of Reformation, and acknowledging, that they
belonged properly unto them, and required amendment: But as to Doctrine, they
neither owned themselves guilty of any Error, nor would they allow that a
Council could err, and believed, that their Adversaries would be at length
forced to come over, and obey the Council; as appeared plainly enough from the
French Kings Letter, and the form of the safe Conduct. It confirmed them in
this Hope and Opinion, that they thought there were not many Professors of that
Doctrine remaining, the most part being either dead, or banished, as it has
been said of Schwabia. It was the common talk there too, that, within a few
Months, all Matters relating to Doctrine would be determined. For of the chief
Points, two only remained, the Lords Supper and Marriage: All the other Heads
of Doctrine were already determined. The Fathers of Basil decided all things by
the holy Scriptures, and the Writings which agreed with them: But these would
have it to belong only to them to interpret the Scriptures, nor would they
admit of that place, of the Decree of Basil, by the Ambassadors restored, as
we said before, and changing the Words of the Decree, determined that the
Traditions also of the Apostles were to be followed in all doubtful and
controverted Points, and whenever they wanted a Testimony of Scripture, they
bragged of Traditions, handed down to them from the very Apostles, as was
oftener than once observed in the Disputations of the Divines. And this also was
the reason, that when on the thirtieth of January, the Protestant Deputies
received the safe Conduct from the Imperial Ambassadors, they declared, That
by Apostolical Traditions, they only understood written Traditions of the
Apostles, which were subjoyned to the Second Part of the Bible, the New
Testament, or the History of the four Evangelists. We told you before, that the
first of May had been appointed the day of the next Session: But Affairs being
now in a desperate Case, The last Session of the Council of Trent, at this time.
the Fathers that remained met, and, by reason of the Dissentions, and
Quarrels, of Kings and Princes, prorogued the Council for two years time, and
longer, if Peace were not made. This was done the twenty ninth day of April,
and by this time, the Pope had agreed with the French King. Peace betwixt
France and the Pope.
Within a few days after, the Emperors Ambassadors departed also. But the
Legate Crescentio was sick, and stayed behind: He being frightened by a Vision
in the Night, as it is said, began both to be ill, and to despair of Life;
notwithstanding, all his Friends and Physicians could do to comfort him. The
death of the Popes Legate.
Nor was he mistaken in his Judgment: For his Distemper increasing, he died at
Verona. And this now was the end of the Council, at this time, which being with
great hopes, renewed, thought of nothing less, than of retrieving Popery, The
number of Bishops and Divines in the Council of Trent.
and setting it shortly upon its Legs again. There were present at it, besides
the Popes Legates, and the Cardinal of Trent, threescore and two Bishops, and
of these, eight Germans, five and twenty Spaniards, two Sardinians, four
Sicilians, one Hungarian, the Bishop of Agria, all the rest were Italians: But
of Divines, there were forty two, and of them, nineteen Spaniards, twelve
Germans and Flemings. The cause of the Sickness of the Popes Legate.
I intended to have past in silence the occasion of the Legate Crescentio's
Sickness, because it was suspected to have been invented, by some, out of
malice: But seeing it has been so reported, by his Friends and Servants, who
waited upon him, and sometimes comforted him on his Sick bed, I thought sit to
subjoyn it. He had been very busy all day, March the twenty fifth, even till
night, in writing Letters to the Pope; but then, rising to refresh himself,
when his Work was over, it seemed to him, that a black Dog of extraordinary
bigness, with flaming Eyes, and Ears reaching almost to the ground, entered the
Room, and made straight toward him, but afterward slipped away under the Table.
When he came to himself again, after the great fear and amazement, that the
sight struck him into, he called in his Servants, who were in the
Outer-chamber, and bid them bring a Candle, and beat out the Dog: But when no
Dog could be found, neither there, nor in the next Chamber to it, he became
very pensive, and so fell into Sickness, as I said before. It is reported also,
that upon his Death bed, he many times cried out to those, that were about him,
to beat off the Dog that clambered up upon the Bed.

THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XXIV.
The CONTENTS.
Duke Maurice publishes a Declaration to all the States of the Empire,
entreating them not to hinder his Design, but that all assist and declare for
him. Much to the same purpose there was another Declaration published by
Albert, Marquess of Brandenburg. The King of France also declares himself the
Protector of the Liberty of Germany, and of the Captive Princes; and so
marching into Lorrain, seizes Metz. After that be marches as far as Strasburg,
and from thence went to Hagenaw, whither many Ambassadors and Deputies came to
him, to desire him that he would abstain from wasting the Country, and put a
stop to his Army. The King removes his Camp, and leaving Germany, retreats
again to Lorrain. Duke Maurice with his associates possesses the passes of the
Alps, and forces the Emperor to fly, who a little before had set the Duke of
Saxony his Prisoner at liberty. The Princes by Proclamation at Ausburg restore
all the outed and banished Ministers. Whilst Duke Maurice is at Passaw treating
a Peace, Albert of Brandenburg uses great Cruelty against those of Norimberg,
and forces them to accept of a Peace; many things both by Letters and Agents
represented to the Princes, who treat about entering into a League, and by
certain conditions things are softened. They of Siena revolt from the Emperor,
who comes to Strasburg on his march to besiege Metz.

WE told you before that in the last Diet of Germany, The care Duke Maurice
took for the Landgrave his Father-in-Law.
the conduct of the War with Magdeburg, was by the unanimous consent of the
Emperor and the other States, committed to Duke Maurice. This War lasted a
Year; in which time, the Duke who had the chief command of the Forces, began to
think of a way of setting at liberty the Landgrave his Father-in-Law; since all
the intercession he had hitherto made to the Emperor for that purpose had
proved ineffectual. Having therefore forced the People of Catzenelbogen to
swear Allegiance to him, made Peace with Magdeburg, and sent an Embassy to
Inspruck, as has been fully related in the foregoing Book, he entered into
League with the French King, His League with the French King.
which was confirmed by Hostages mutually given, and both thought fit to
publish a declaration of the causes of the War, that they might thereby win the
favor and good will of many. Albert, Marquess of Brandenburg had a great hand
in making this alliance, who for that end went privately into France to treat
with the King. In the mean time the Soldiers, as well those who had besieged
Magdeburg, as the Garrison that held out the City, had their Winter Quarters in
Mulhausen and the places thereabouts, and did much damage to those of
Northhausen and Erford. When the Emperor demanded the reason of this from Duke
Maurice, who had the chief Command in the War, he was answered, that the
outrages they committed was, for want of their Pay; for this was the pretext he
used, when, in reality, they were listed in his Service, and had been secretly
sworn to their Colors. And the better to persuade, at the same time he sent
his Ambassadors to Trent, who were to pass by Inspruck, to procure a safe
conduct for the Divines that were to come, and to propound some other things in
the Council: then he ordered the Divines to follow, who being advanced on their
way, as far as Norimberg, there stayed for Letters from the Ambassadors we
mentioned, as has been fully related in the preceding Book. He sent before
other Ambassadors also to the Emperor, Christopher Carlebitz, and Ulrick
Mordeysen, who were to stay for his coming upon the Frontiers of Bavaria, being
to use them in his Treaty and Negotiation: Besides, he ordered Lodgings to be
taken for him at Inspruck, and he himself set out and advanced, some days
Journey in the way, but then stopped sho^^ and making an excused by very kind
(...) which upon the roa^ he wrote to Insp^^^^, returned home. Thus from (...)
time, till in the very beginning of the Spring, having timely recalled his
Ministers, he began to muster the Soldiers, whom with great Secrecy he had
raised in the Winter time, Duke Maurice's Declaration to the States of the
Empire.
and published his Declaration to all the States of the Empire to this purpose:
That there was nothing in this World so dear unto him as Peace and Concord; but
that the chief thing he wished for, was agreement in Religion, according to the
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; that their Adversaries had indeed, put
them in hopes of that, both privately and by public decrees: that however
nothing had been performed, and that they did not only interpret these Promises
and Decrees in another sense now; but wholly rescinded and abrogated them: that
they had not spared neither to tell some, that unless they were obeyed, no Man
needed much to trust or rely upon former Promises; for that when they were
made, the state of the times and affairs was different; but that now all must
obey, or expect to suffer if they refuse. That not satisfied with these
Expressions, which yet showed a hostile Mind, they had stirred up also foreign
Kings against himself and other Princes of his Rank and Profession, and
invented many causes of hatred against them, sometimes their Religion, and
sometimes other Crimes: whereas the thing it self made it plain, that Religion
was least in their thoughts, but that it has been always their aim to make the
difference in Religion, a step to raise them to Dominion and Rule: for that it
was now obvious to all Men what arts and tricks they had used to overturn and
destroy the true Religion, which in former years was set forth and professed at
Ausburg, that in order thereunto, they had banished the Preachers of the Gospel
out of the Empire, and without staying for the decree, not to say of a lawful,
but even of a Popish Council, had begun, where they should have ended, with
Execution: that therefore he was not to be blamed, if by Wars he rescued
himself and People from that slavery of Mind and Conscience: But that seeing
the Glory of God was concerned in that, who alone was able to promote and
defend his word, he referred all to his divine Majesty, heartily beseeching him
that he would give him grace constantly to persevere in the true knowledge of
him to his life's end. That there was another thing he intended to speak of, and
that related to the Landgrave his Father-in-Law: that five years since he and
Joachim Elector of Brandenburg; had been in the Emperors name put in hopes,
that if the Landgrave could be persuaded, to come and humbly beg the Emperor's
Pardon, the Emperor would demand no more of him than what was contained in the
Articles of Peace accorded to, but would graciously dismiss him: that therefore
they had prevailed with him by Letters to comply, having bound themselves to
the Sons, Body for Body for the Father, that they should submit to the same
fortune that he underwent; that so he had come with full assurance to Hall, and
made his humble submission to the Emperor, then supped with the Duke of Alva,
and spent a good part of the Night pretty cheerfully; but that when he was
about to return to his Inn, he had been, contrary to all expectation detained,
and committed to Custody, wherein he had now for almost five whole Years
languished in great Misery; and that though his Sons, the Nobility and People
had ratified and approved the transaction, though he himself, the Elector of
Brandenburg, and Wolffgang, Prince Palatine had engaged as sureties for him,
that unless he did perform his Conditions, they would deliver him up into his
Hands, and that though according to the treaty of Pacification, his Fine was
paid, the Artillery with all the Ammunition delivered, the Castles and Forts
demolished, Duke Henry of Brunswick and his Son set at liberty, and the Copy of
the League and Confederacy exhibited; so that no more, indeed, remained to be
performed, nevertheless neither the Prayers nor intercession of himself, of the
Elector of Brandenburg, of his own Wife, who died for grief, of the People, nor
of other Princes could hitherto any way prevail: That he had often made his
application to the Emperor, and because many entertained a sinistrous opinion
of him, had earnestly begged of his Majesty that he would have regard to his
Honor and Reputation, that he would be pleased to have respect to the good
Offices that their Predecessors had rendered to his Ancestors, and to what they
themselves had deserved at his own and Brother King Ferdinands hands, and in
consideration thereof, set him at liberty: but that none of these Arguments
could prevail with him; nay, that on the contrary, he had compelled him being a
Prisoner, to answer Lawsuits, and, against all Law and Justice, especially in
such difficult matters, to plead his Cause under constraint; not to mention how
suspiciously, and with how great precipitation the matter was managed, a thing
not before known or heard of in Germany, that under that pretext of Law
forsooth, he might by degrees turn him and his Children out of all, and reduce
them to such streights, that they might not be able to maintain their rank and
quality for the future: That it highly concerned him not to suffer this, both
for the near relation he had to the House of Hesse, and the right he had to its
Succession: That this might seem strange indeed, were it not now obvious to all
Men, that these kind of Arts, tended mainly to the establishing of that
Monarchy, which for so many years had been a rearing. That the third and chief
thing he had to say, concerned all Germans, and their common and native Country
Germany, whose condition was certainly most sad and deplorable: for that
contrary to Laws and Treaties, foreign Soldiers had been brought into the
bowels of the Empire, where they now after many years continuance began to take
rooting, devouring other Men's Goods and Estates, both in City and Country, and
practicing all kinds of filthy Lust: that besides, new ways of raising Money
were invented, and the ancient Liberty many ways imposed upon, wherein no rank
nor state, no not the Electors themselves were spared: That the Ambassadors of
foreign Kings who grieve at these things, and who tender the welfare of
Germany, were kept at distance from the public Diets, quite contrary to the
custom of the Empire: That in short, it was fully resolved, that all should be
reduced under a foul and ignominious Bondage; upon which account Posterity and
those that came after, would have just cause to curse and detest the sottish
Cowardice of this time, wherein the fairest ornament of the Country, that is,
its Liberty was lost. That therefore, since the case was so, he and the
Landgrave William, the Son of Philip, moved by a just grief for his Father's
Calamity, having made a League with the King of France, whom the Enemy also
labored to undermine and turn out of all, had resolved to take up Arms for the
deliverance of his Father-in-Law and the Duke of Saxony, for the reparation of
his own Honor, and for recovering the common Liberty of all: That no Man
should then offer to hinder or disturb this his Enterprise, but that all
forward it, and declare and give good assurances of their resolutions so to do;
for that otherwise, if any Man did aid and assist their adversaries in any
manner of way, he should be looked upon as an Enemy. This Declaration was also
signed by John Albert Duke of Meckelburg, particularly for the maintenance of
Religion, since Duke Maurice had declared, The Declaration of Albert of
Brandenburg against the Emperor.
that for that cause also he had taken up Arms. Marquess Albert of Brandenburg
published in like manner a Declaration much to the same purpose, wherein he
complained that the Liberty of Germany was oppressed by the very same Persons,
who by their office ought to maintain and enlarge the same: that there was a
Council now held, said he, wherein some few were assembled to subvert the
truth: that many diets of the Empire were also called, whereof this was the
end, that with some cunning fetch, and by Men corrupted with Bribes and
Promises, Money may be raised to the weakening and impoverishing of Germany,
and that was brought about chiefly by the Churchmen, who had the most voices in
the Diets of the Empire: that matters were now so ordered, that the effect of
all consultations in a manner, depended on the will and pleasure of one single
Man, who was neither a Gentleman nor German Born, nor yet Incorporated into the
Empire, to the great prejudice and disgrace of all Germans: that if public
affairs must be thus managed; it were far better to have no Imperial Diets at
all; but that Money should be given freely and liberally as often as demanded;
for that by so doing, there would be a great deal of time saved, and besides
much charges spared: that by the same Artifices the great Seal of the Empire
was put into the hands of Strangers, which now Foreigners abused at their
Pleasure, to the detriment of Germany: that yet there was not a Man to be found
who durst bewail that, unless he would expose himself to the highest
displeasures: that nevertheless the affairs of the Germans were not in the mean
time dispatched, but put off by tedious delays; so that it was almost a public
Grievance: for that as matters went, the Germans had need to learn other
Languages, if they would solicit their own Business to any purpose: that in
like manner, it was contrary to the ancient Liberty of the Empire, that a
public Edict should be made, prohibiting any Man to serve in foreign Wars;
that the Protestants who were received into Favor, over and above most
grievous Penalties, should be forced also to submit to other inferior sneaking
Conditions: that great sums of Money were extorted from their Tenants and
Vassals for having served them in the Wars: that these Burdens had been also
laid upon other Princes and States, who had committed no fault, and, as if that
War had been made for the public good, Money had been imposed upon them for
defraying the charges thereof, and all with design, that no Sinews, nor Force
at all might be left in Germany: That it was to be reckoned up with the rest,
that civil suits of greatest concern, were not brought before the public
Judicature of the Empire, but before a few Commissioners; so that it was in
their Power, to make or to mar great Princes: besides, that it was ordered by
Edict, that no Prince should have his own Image stamped upon his Coin, that
through all the Cities of Germany almost, new Senators were appointed; that it
was a slavery imposed now generally upon all Germans, that they were forced to
bear with foreign Soldiers in their Country, who did much mischief, reduced
many to Poverty and Want, and practiced all sorts of Insolence and
Lasciviousness: for that neither had his own Country been favored, though he
had promised himself better Usage, for his Fidelity and the good Services he
had rendered the Emperor; but that when during the War of Magdeburg he was
absent in the service of the Public, Soldiers had been brought into his
Country, though his Officers had made great intercession to the contrary: and
that certainly both he and the other Princes also, who in the late War against
the Protestants, put lives, fortunes, and all to the risk for his Honor and
Safety, had been bravely rewarded for their Pains, in that History of the same
War, written by Louis D'Avila a foul-mouthed lying fellow, whilst he speaks of
all Germany so coldly, and with so much contempt and aversion, as if they were
a barbarous and obscure People, unknown in the World: that the indignity was so
much the greater, in that the Libel had been Printed with a special Privilege
and License from the Emperor: that many things indeed were now excused, by
Letters sent up and down Germany, but that the same was the cry still which was
up some years ago, and that all their talk was, that degrees were to be altered
according to the condition of the times, and that Men must obey the present
Commands or suffer Punishment: that therefore since some Princes had taken up
Arms, to shake off this yoke of Bondage and Ignominy, he was resolved to hazard
his Life and all with them in the common concern: That he openly declared this,
and required that no Man should aid and assist their Adversaries, but that all
should join with him and his Associates in that common Cause: for that though
some might take the contrary part; yet ought they not to expect better usage
from their victorious Adversary: Since then the state and condition of all
Germans would be the same, and their misery alike: that if any now did carry
Arms against him and his Associates, he was resolved to prosecute them with
Fire and Sword: that there went a report of him and his Associates, as if they
intended to call in foreign Nations, nay, and the Turk himself into Germany;
but that it was a false and absurd Calumny; for what madness would it be, to
put themselves and Country into so great a danger? That what was said of him by
some, was also false, as if he had engaged in this War only to enrich himself:
that for some years past he had served the Emperor and King Ferdinand in their
Wars, to the great prejudice of his Estate, without any other prospect or
design but the purchasing of Honor and Reputation by his Services: that fair
and ample conditions had been several times offered him also; but he had
rejected them, that he might espouse this War, for the Liberty and ancient
Dignity of his Country: That if perhaps in this War, the overgrown Power and
Authority of the Clergy, which is prohibited in holy Scripture, should chance
to be weakened and impaired, he was not to be blamed for that; since, to say
the Truth, the chief Bishops of the Empire had been the cause of all these
Evils: that it was not his design, though, that those religious Houses, which
were founded chiefly for the use of the Nobility and Gentry, should be
destroyed; but that the vices being rooted out, and those things reformed,
which could not be suffered, they might continue in their own station, nay and
flourish too: and that he would assist them therein, provided they were
willing, and did not suffer themselves to be persuaded by his Adversaries to
the contrary. The French King's Declaration against the Emperor.
The French King also made public Declaration, that it had been his chief
design, Religion being once settled, that he might do good to the public, but
especially to his Friends. That therefore immediately after the death of his
Father, he had restored Scotland to its ancient dignity, renewed the league
with the Switzers, recovered Boloigne, brought back the People that had been
dispersed up and down, into their own Lands and Possessions again; and made a
Peace and strict Friendship with the King of England: But that whilst he was
intent upon these things, the Emperor by close and clandestine Counsels had
contrived many things to his ruin, and oftener than once given him a cause of
War; but that to give some ease and refreshment to the public, and to his own
People also in private, he had been still, and, winking at these injuries, had
wholly applied himself to the settling of his Kingdom: that this his quietness
had been by his Adversaries interpreted Cowardice and Faint-heartedness
afterward: but that in the mean time, sad and grievous Complaints had been
brought to him from many of the Princes and States of Germany, who said, that
under the specious Pretexts, partly of Religion, partly of a Turkish War, and
punishing of Rebellion, designs had been carried on to bring them into Bondage,
and that through cunning and crafty counsels, Factions and Divisions were
fomented, and Germany totally exhausted; so that it was no longer to be
doubted, but that he aimed at an universal Monarchy for himself and the house
of Austria: that that truly had been a great grief to him, not only because of
the common origin of both Nations, but also of the ancient alliance and
friendship, which had always remained firm and unviolate, so long as the craft
and subtlety of the Emperor had given it leave: for that if the Government
should be changed, and Germany lose its liberty, he well understood how
dangerous and prejudicial that would be unto him: Germany the Bulwark of
Christendom.
that Germany was indeed the Bulwark, not only of France, but of all
Christendom also: and that therefore he had many times heartily wished and
prayed, that both People might have united their strength and put themselves
into such a condition, as not to need to fear any danger: but that since there
appeared no hopes of that, and that in the mean time many craved his
assistance, but on different accounts he could see no way how he could succor
the Empire so much rent and torn: Nevertheless that in this so weighty a
deliberation, God, the just Judge of all, had offered him a very fit occasion:
for that Octavio Farnese Duke of Piacenza and Parma, for whom the Emperor and
Pope Julius laid Snares, had implored help from him, and by laying open before
him all the injuries received, had persuaded him to undertake the Protection of
him and the Prince of Mirandula: that afterward came those complaints from the
Princes of Germany, who desired to enter into league with him, as being the
only way in their opinion, to restore the State: that he would not mention
those weighty and just causes, that the Princes had to take up Arms; since they
might be understood from their own declarations: but yet that any Man might
consider with himself whether this insatiable ambition of their Adversaries was
not a just ground of grief, who, having ruined the Wealth of Germany, swept all
into their own Coffers and Treasury? Were not the provinces of Utricht, Liege
and Cambray, sufficient instances thereof? And what was also Constance, and
many other free Cities oppressed? That the Burgundians now hovering over the
People of Treves, Cleve, and Wirtemberg, had left the Prints of their
footsteeps upon their Borders, and many ways made havoc of the Landgraves
Territories: that in like manner, and for the same purpose, the Emperor
excluded his Ambassadors from the Diets of the Empire, prohibited, by public
Edict, the Germans from serving foreign Princes in their Wars, cut off brave
and valiant Soldiers, and amongst those Vogelsperg, whom he himself, to glut
his revenge, saw executed at Ausburg. Was it not a thing of bad example that he
should encourage and hire Men to kill those who served in his Wars? That it was
not certainly to be expressed, what Arts their Enemies used: for such were by
them thrust in and admitted into the Judicature of the Imperial Chamber, and
Diet of the Empire, as might make it their whole business to bring about and
accomplish whatever they pleased; and that indeed, the blame of all the Evils
that had happened was to be imputed to those kind of Men, but especially the
Judges of the Imperial Chamber: That for these reasons, he could not refuse his
assistance to the Germans who desired it: that therefore he had made a League
with them, and not only done so, but was resolved also to employ all his force,
nay his very Person in that war: that he did not neither look for any private
profit or advantage thereby; but that it was only his intent, that by asserting
the Liberty of Germany, delivering John Frederick Duke of Saxony and the
Landgrave, whom he had detained in a tedious and base Captivity, he might
purchase to himself Praise and immortal Glory; as Flaminius had heretofore done
in delivering Greece from bondage; nor needed any Man to fear Violence: for
that since he had undertaken that War for the sake of Liberty, he would take
care that no Man who did not deserve it, should receive any hurt: that
therefore they might believe the Promise which he faithfully made to them, and
not give credit to their Adversaries, who gave it out that it was his design to
afflict and plague the Clergy: that he was so far from entertaining such
thoughts, that he took them all under his protection and defense, provided they
gave him assurance that they would not annoy him nor his Friends: for that he
had been put in good hopes by the Letters of a great many, that if Liberty were
once restored, the Peace of the Church might also be upon lawful terms
established, all ambition and desire of private lucre being set aside: That
these were the things he thought fit to declare unto them, that they might know
what his will and purpose was: That therefore he did require, that no Person
would offer to hinder or molest him or his Friends in the prosecution of so
just a War, and so necessary for the welfare of Germany: for that otherwise, if
any Man should so much forget the love and duty which he owed to his Country,
as to think of making resistance, he would destroy him with Fire and Sword: and
though it would be against his will to do so, yet if any such should be, he
must be cut off as a rotten and corrupt Member, from the rest of the Body, lest
he might hurt by Contagion, and so be restrained from doing of Mischief: That
they might learn the rest from his Ambassador the Bishop of Byonne, that he
sent to them with fuller Instructions, to whom he willed them to give Credit.

This Declaration was Printed and Published in the vulgar Tongue, with a Cap
betwixt two Daggers over head, The badge of Liberty.
and this Motto, The Emblem of Liberty; underneath was the title of the King,
The French King calls himself the Defender of the Liberty of Germany and of the
Captive Princes.
who called himself the Defender of the Liberty of Germany and of the Captive
Princes. Some say, that this cognizance was to be found on ancient Medals, and
was given by the Murderers of Julius Caesar. Whereas he said, that the Emperor
had allotted a reward to those, who should kill some of his Colonels; the
Story is this: The Emperor had by a late Edict again proscribed, the
Rhinegrave, Recrod, Rifeberg, and Scherteline, who all served the King of
France, as we said before, The outlawed Men, who served the King of France.
and had promised a reward of four thousand Florins to him that should bring in
any one of them dead or alive; for they were great promoters of the Cause, and
after the League we mentioned was made, went into Germany and there raised
Soldiers, whom they carried into France. Now Scherteline was in a manner forced
to fly over to the French King, after he had for some years in vain solicited,
but could not by any man's Intercession be received into favor again with the
Emperor nor King Ferdinand.

These declarations of the Princes and French King, being dispersed over
Germany, wrought hope in some, but in many fear and anxiety. Duke Maurice who
disguised all things, held a convention of the States of his Dominion on the
first of March, and amongst other things declared unto them, that being cited
to appear by the Landgrave's Sons, he could no longer shuffle with them, nor
frustrate their Expectation: that he was therefore going to them, that he might
fulfill his Promise and Engagement: that in the mean time they should obey his
Brother Augustus, whom he left to govern them in his absence, and to raise Men
for the defense of the Frontiers, that they might not be unprovided if any
thing should happen. The Elector of Brandenburg was present there, it being the
day he had been cited to appear on; but having obtained leave from the
Landgrave's Sons, to appear another time when he should be summoned to come and
fulfill his Promise; Duke Maurice takes the Field.
he returned Home. In the mean time Duke Maurice having settled all things at
home, and assigned some Counselors to his Brother Augustus, went with few in
Company to the Forces, which, as I said, he had lying in Thuringe, and marching
forwards a little, waited for the coming of the Landgrave's Son. Before he
parted from home, Henry Burgrave of Misnia, a Man of Illustrious Birth, and
Chancellor of Bohemia, had in King Ferdinand's Name treated earnestly with him
about an accommodation. Now when on the eighteenth of March, the Landgrave's
Son was come with his Forces to Erlebach, the French Ambassador being there
also, they both wrote to the City of Frankfurt, requiring them amongst other
things, not to admit a Garrison from the Emperor: and although their answer
from within was not plain enough, nor to their satisfaction, yet there was
nothing else done, because it concerned him to hasten his March forwards. Six
days after he joined Duke Maurice, and so in three days more, all the Army came
to Schuinfurt; there Duke Maurice told him, that King Ferdinand offered to
Mediate, and had both by Letters and Agents, plainly enough intimated, that he
had Power also to treat about his Father's Liberty. He therefore, making the
French Ambassador privy to it, was willing he said, to hear what conditions and
demands King Ferdinand would propose. That being resolved upon, they march in
great haste by Rotenburg, Dinklespiel, and Nordlinge^, to Donawert: at
Rotenburg they were joined by Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, Albert of
Brandenburg joins Duke Maurice and the Landgrave's Son.
with his Forces both Horse and Foot: wheresoever they past, they brought the
Towns-People under Subjection, and made new Magistrates in place of those the
Emperor put in, whom they turned out; making them also furnish Money and
Ordnance: and because Ausburg was but meanly Garrisoned, and that about the
same time, part of the Wall and Rampart was fallen down, on the first day of
March they set forward, and marching all night, came before it the first of
April, about noon, where, by making some Incursions, they showed themselves to
be Enemies. The Emperor had sent four Companies of Foot into the Town: Ausburg
surrendered to the Princes.
but when four days after the Towns-People surrendered the Place, they had leave
given them to March away. Then they summon the Cities of upper Germany, The
Cities are summoned to come to Ausburg.
and Norimberg amongst the rest, commanding them to appear at Ausburg by the
end of April: That also solicit Ulm, which is but nine Miles distant from
Ausburg, to assist them with all thins necessary, and enter into Society with
them.

Much about the same time, The Prince of Salerno revolts from the Emperor.
the Prince of Salerno, upon occasion of a quarrel which he had with the
Viceroy of Naples, revolted from the Emperor, and went into France. Whilst
these things are acting in Germany, the French King having taken the Field with
a vast Army, The French King takes Toul, Verdun, and Metz.
made himself Master of Toul and Verdan, two Imperial Cities upon the Frontiers
of France. After ward he marched to Lorrain, and sent the young Duke, a Boy of
nine years of Age, into France (though his Mother the Duchess Dowager had
begged earnestly to the contrary,) and promised to give him his Daughter in
Marriage. Whilst he himself is taken up about these affairs, the Constable Ann
of Momorency, who commanded the Van, possesses himself of Metz a famous
Imperial City, on the tenth of April, there being but a small Garrison in it,
and the French having made fair Promises, protesting that their King had taken
up Arms only for the defense of their Liberty. For when March the fifteenth the
King marched over the borders of France, by Letters and Messengers whom he sent
unto them, he desired only that they would furnish him with Provisions, and
that he might March with his Army through their Country, promising them all
Good Will and Friendship. Lenencour, Bishop of Metz.
He made use of the Cardinal of Lenoncour as his Agent, who commended his Zeal
and good Intentions to the Senate. The Constable had written to them also most
friendly: but when he was come nearer the Town with his Forces, The French King
takes an Oath of Allegiance of the Senate and People of Metz.
he desired to be let in, and obtained it: and next day he made himself Master
of the Gates, and all the Works and Fortifications. Afterward on the eighteenth
of April, the King himself came also, and stayed four days there. He obliged
the Senate and People to take an oath of Allegiance to him; and appointed
Monsieur Gonn^r to be their Governor, with orders to disarm them, to carry all
their Weapons into one place, and to fortify the Town; the same he did in
those Cities we mentioned: In Lorrain also, and by Messengers sent before to
Strasbourg, Haguenaw, all the neighboring places, and to the Bishop of
Strasburg, he demanded supplies of Corn and Provisions. Ausburg being taken, as
we said, the old Town-Council whom the Emperor had turned out, restored, and
the Power of Election also being again confirmed to the Companies; The Princes
go to Ulm, and besiege it.
the confederate Princes marched to Ulm, which had refused to enter into League
with them. When on the twelfth of April they were come thither, they rode about
the Town; but being shot at with the great Guns from within, they demanded
satisfaction for the Injury done unto them, and rated it at three hundred
Thousand Florins; which being refused, they fell to Hostilities. But Duke
Maurice went from thence to Lintz, a City of Austria, that he might understand
from King Ferdinand what the conditions of Peace were; for he, as I said, was
by consent of the Emperor, Mediator. The Emperor, in the mean time, had by
Letters exhorted the chief Princes of the Empire, to use their endeavors to
quench this Conflagration, and find out some means of Peace, wherein he would
not be wanting: and when some implored sucours from him, as being unable to act
any thing against so great force, to encourage them, he made answer, that there
was a treaty of Peace on Foot, which he hoped would take effect; but if
otherwise, that he would not be wanting neither to them nor the Public. The
Princes having besieged Ulm six days, on the nineteenth of April removed to
Stocach, a Town in Hegow: where they received three Months Pay in the French
King's Name, as it had been agreed, The German and French Hostages are set at
Liberty.
and Gamey de la Mark the French Hostage was delivered up; for the other de
Nantueil died on the way thither. The Hostages, whom the Princes gave the King,
were Christopher Duke of Meckelburg, and Philip the Landgrave's Son. April the
last, the Princes returned to the Danube some Miles below Ulm. In the mean time
Albert of Brandenburg burnt and destroyed the Towns and Villages belonging to
Ulm, Albert of Brandenburg wastes the Country about Ulm.
raised Contributions from them, and took their Castle of Helfenstein seated on
a high Hill, putting a Garrison therein. He also raised a Contribution of
eighteen Thousand Florins from the Town of Gislingen three Miles distant from
Ulm, and some adjoining Villages. When Duke Maurice came to Lintz, he offered
Proposals about the setting at Liberty the Landgrave his Father-in-Law,
Conditions of Peace propounded by Duke Maurice to King Ferdinand.
about settling the difference concerning Religion; the right Establishment of
the Government; about the making Peace with the French King their Confederate,
and the reception of the outlawed Persons into Favor. These were the
Rhinegrave, and others whom we mentioned before, amongst whom also was Count
Heideck, who some years before had put himself under the Protection of Duke
Maurice as has been said; but on whose head the Emperor had set no rate, that
he might not offend Duke Maurice as it is credible. To these demands King
Ferdinand, with whom were his Son Maximilian, his Son-in-Law the Duke of
Bavaria, and the Emperor's Ambassadors, made answer: that the Emperor did not
refuse, but that the Landgrave might be set at Liberty, yet so that they
presently laid down their Arms: that as to Religion and the regulation of the
Government, he was pleased, that the matter might be determined in the next
Diet of the Empire; but that the Emperor was very loath that the French King
should be comprehended: King Ferdinand's Demands.
that however Duke Maurice might learn of him upon what terms he would make
Peace: that the proscribed might also be received into Favor, provided they
would submit to the condition offered by the Emperor. King Ferdinand demanded
besides, that after the conclusion of the Peace, Duke Maurice his Answer.
Duke Maurice would assist him in Hungary, and that the Soldiers should not
take on under the French King. But Duke Maurice having answered that without
the consent of his Associates he could not conclude any thing, they broke off
the Treaty at that time, and appointed another meeting to be on the twenty
sixth of May, at Passaw, a Town lying between Ratisbonne and Lintz, where the
River Inn falls into the Danube: that the Princes, Mediators, and their
Deputies should also be there. On the first of May the Landgrave's Son, and
John Albert Duke of Meckelburg led the Army to Gundelfingen, and there lay
eight Days, waiting for Duke Maurice's return from Austria. Otho Henry, Prince
Palatine recovers his own Province.
Next day after he came, the Army was Mustered at Laugingen, a Town belonging
to Otho Henry Prince Palatine; for they had recovered his Province out of the
Emperor's Hands, and driven the Bishop of Ausburg out of his Country; Otho
Prince Palatine, having also joined in League with them. From thence they
direct their March toward the Alps; but it happened at this time, that King
Ferdinand obtained a Truce from them, which was to last from the twenty sixth
of May, The Emperor raises Soldiers.
to the eighth of June: In the mean time the Emperor was raising Forces at the
Foot of the Alps, who assembled at the Town la Rue. During these Commotions,
the Cardinal Bishop of Ausburg, who otherwise was not rich, and had suffered
much damage, went to Rome, that he might obtain from the Pope new Promotions
and Benefices to fill up the chinks again. After this the Judges of the
Imperial Chamber fled from Spire; The Judges of the Imperial Chamber fly from
Spire.
for both the French King and the Princes had in their Declarations hinted
their displeasure against them plainly enough, and cast the blame of all the
troubles upon them. The French King marched with his Army along the Borders of
Lorrain, and May the third, came to Saverne, a Town belonging to the Bishop of
Strasburg within four Miles of that City. He had before demanded a supply of
things necessary from the Strasburgers; The French King's demands from the
Strasburgers.
and therefore Deputies had been sent to him to Sarbruck, seven Miles from the
City, to offer him a certain supply of Corn and Wine; and the Deputies were
Peter Sturmey, Frederick Gottesseim and John Sleidan: but the Constable
undervalued that offer, as nothing answering his Expectation, and though the
Deputies left him with a promise to make their report to the Senate, and
afterward give him notice of their answer; yet next day he sent two Gentlemen
of Quality to urge an answer, highly extolling the Affection and Friendship
that the King bore to Germany, and insisting likewise upon the cause of his
taking up Arms, to wit, that he might retrieve the liberty of Germany from
oppression. Another demand they made was, that seeing the Soldiers were in want
of most things necessary, they might be allowed to come and buy in the City
what they stood in need of, and that Tradesmen might have leave to carry out
their Commodities and sell them in the Camp. The answer of the Senate of
Strasburg.
To these things the Senate made answer, that in matters of so great moment,
nothing was usually determined, without the consent of the whole State: that
having debated the matter, they would again send deputies, and acquaint them
with what their resolution was. They being thus dismissed, the day following
the same Deputies were again sent out to the Camp, which then was at Saverne.
When the Constable had heard their Discourse, wherein they offered more than
before, and gave their reasons why the Soldiers could not be allowed to come
into the Town, he began to speak more angrily, telling them in sharp Language
how partial Judges they were both of the King's Favors, The Constable chides
the Strasburgers.
and the Injuries received from the Emperor. The conclusion of his Speech was,
that the King would speak to them himself to Morrow, and confirm the same
things he had told them. They address themselves to the King.
Next day the Deputies being sent for to come to the King, with whom were the
Cardinal of Lorrain, the Duke of Vendosme and the Constable, they relate to his
Majesty what had past in two conferences with the Constable, and offer as great
a quantity of Oats as they had offered of Wheat before, and somewhat more Wine,
beseeching the King, that for the ancient amity which the Kings of France had
entertained with the Common wealth of Strasburg, and his own gracious
Disposition, to take in good part what was offered: That there were many
Soldiers in the City, and a multitude of People that had flocked thither out of
the Country. So that the City could not spare the Corn that they had for their
necessary subsistence. The King's Speech to the Deputies.
The King having conferred with his Council, began himself to tell the cause of
his coming into Germany, much to the same purpose as the Constable had done the
day before: that Victuals were absolutely necessary, and not to be refused to
any who offered to pay for them, unless it were an Enemy: That if Soldiers were
in want of Food, they commonly took a course to supply themselves; but how
inconvenient a thing that was, might easily be understood by any Man. The King
refused not indeed, what was offered, but he would have had it in Bread: on the
contrary, the Deputies offering Wheat, they could not agree upon the matter,
and so they departed, without coming to any Conclusion. The Deputies being
returned home, the Senate resolved, that seeing they could not spare any of the
Wheat which was in the Town, as much Bread as could be, should be baked in the
circumjacent places; for the Deputies had told both the Constable and King,
that neither the present condition of the City, nor the state of the times
would allow any thing to be sent out of the Town: but that if they could gather
together any thing amongst their Neighbors, they should have it very freely.
Now the Senate made this resolution, lest the Soldiers might Prey upon the
Goods and Substance of the Husbandmen, and other Country People. And so what
could be got together of a sudden out of the Towns and Villages about, was
carried to the Camp; but that was very little. When the Strasburgers were
informed of the seizing of Lorrain, and the City of Metz, Strasburg provides a
Garrison against the French.
they presently raised about five Thousand Soldiers for a Garrison to the City;
besides, they demolished a great many, both public and private Buildings about
the Town, cut down the Trees, and spoiled all the Gardens and Orchards, which
either hindered the Prospect, or might be advantageous to an Enemy, and raised
new Works and Fortifications where there was greatest need. That went against
the grain with the French, and in the last conference with the Constable, he
did not dissemble it to the Deputies: for it was believed, that they were
almost in certain hopes, that as they had been let into Metz upon a show and
fair pretext of Friendship, so likewise they would not be held out of
Strasburg; but when they understood that the Town was very well Fortified, and
saw besides how eagerly all things were making ready for a Defense, they
changed their purpose, as it is credible, and turned another way: for May the
seventh they removed their Camp, and marched first to Haguenaw, and then to
Weissemberg. Hither came to the King, Ambassadors from the Prince Palatine of
the Rhine, the Electors of Mentz and Treves, the Dukes of Cleve and Wirtemberg,
who, upon account of public affairs, were lately before assembled at Worms.
The demands of some Princes made to the French King.
Their demand was, that the King would refrain from wasting the Country, that
he would spare the poor People, and that since he declared that he made War for
the Liberty of Germany, he would put a stop to his Army; for that if he
proceeded, it would prove very prejudicial to the Empire: that they prayed him
to set his thoughts upon Peace: that they had already mentioned it to the
Emperor, and would do so again, in hopes that all would turn to the best: but
as to what he wrote of entering into a League, that he would have some
Consideration of their Honor and Reputation: for because of the Oath they had
taken to the Empire, they could not do that: but that they would use their
utmost Endeavors that public Peace might be Established: Moreover, that they
most earnestly besought him to spare the Territories of Strasburg, which was a
free City of the Empire, and use his interest with Marquess Albert of
Brandenburg, that he would deal more kindly with the Bishop of Wurtzburg. Duke
Maurice's Letters to the French King.
The very same day the King had Letters from Duke Maurice, giving him an
account of what was acted at Lintz; desiring him withal, since he proposed to
have his Majesty comprehended in the Treaty of Peace, to let him know upon what
Conditions he was willing to accord with the Emperor. The King having received
these Letters, and, as it was thought, finding the Contents thereof contrary to
his Expectation, removed his Camp two days after, The French King's answer to
the Ambassadors of the Princes.
and leaving Germany, retreated again to Lorrain; but before his departure, he
returned an answer to the Ambassadors of the Princes we mentioned; That now he
had effected what he came for with his Army into Germany, to wit, that the
Captive Princes would be set at Liberty; which had been the cause of the War:
that so he had purchased Glory enough; but that if at any time thereafter
Germany did stand in need of his assistance, he would spare neither Pains,
Cost, nor Danger to gratify them: that now he intended to return home,
especially since his Enemies had invaded France: that he was not a little
troubled at the Complaints of the poor People; however, no Army could be kept
in so strict Discipline, but that licentious Soldiers would still be doing some
Mischief: That nevertheless, he made it his chief Care that both, as little
damage should be done as was possible, and that offenses of that nature should
be most severely punished: that as to what they wrote of the Emperor and a
Peace, he expected they would be as good as their words: That Germany through
his Care, Pains, and Power, being now respited from those Calamities under
which it groaned, it chiefly concerned them to look to it, that they did not
basely lose that Liberty, which was restored to them by his Endeavors: That he
could not deny them the request they made to him concerning Strasburg: though
when he was in those Parts with his Army, the Soldiers of that City had behaved
themselves very sawcily and insolently toward his Men.

When the King was gone into Germany, the Emperor's Forces in the Netherlands,
under the Command of Martin de Rossem, entered France, Burnt and Plundered
Champaigne far and near, and took Asteney upon the Meuse, a Town within the
Territories of Lorrain, but lately seized by the French. This was thought to
have been one reason why the French King drew off his Army: another was, The
reasons of the French King's leaving Germany.
that he was not well pleased with what Duke Maurice had done; and then,
lastly, because he was disappointed in his hopes of Strasburg. Upon his removal
from Weissemburg, Ambassadors came to him from all the Cantons of Switzerland.
To King Ferdinand belongs the Province of Sontgow, which borders upon
Switzerland, and they of Ensissheim are the chief People of the Country: These
being apprehensive of their own Danger, had entreated the Switzers, that for
the Interest and Favor they had with the French King, they would interceed for
them; which they willingly undertook, having their charges born; and this was
the reason of their coming to the King, to whom also they recommended the
neighboring Cities of Colmar, Schlestadt, and Strasburg, alleging that this
whole Country was linked to them in strict Friendship, because of its
Neighborhood, from whence also, in time of need, they had plentiful supplies
of Corn; so that what damage was done to the one, the other must needs feel. To
these, the King made answer, May the twentieth, not far from Deux-ponts: The
French King's Answer to the Swisses.
That he pardoned the People of Ensissheim, provided they set at Liberty those
of his Soldiers whom they had in Prison. But as to the rest for whom they had
spoken, he had never intended them any hurt, and that though the Soldiers of
Strasburg had received his Men who went thither to buy Goods, somewhat roughly
before the Gates, and had turned them back; yet he would not break off
Friendship with them, were it no more, but for their sakes that made the
Intercession: That now he was in possession of Lorrain, and so they his near
Neighbors, he would act nothing contrary to the rules and customs of
Neighborhood: and that he expected from them the same Friendship and good
Offices. Before that, Ambassadors came to the King when he was at Saverne, from
the Senate of Basil, much about the same Business, and had also a gracious
Answer from him.

We told you before how Duke Maurice departed from Lintz: so soon as the
Conference was over, King Ferdinand also hastened to Inspruck, to give the
Emperor an account of his Negotiation. Now Duke Maurice returning to the Camp,
marched with his Associates toward the Alps, as has been mentioned before:
and being come pretty near unto them, at the instigation of the French
Ambassador, he resolved to fall upon the Soldiers whom the Emperor had ordered
to be raised in those Places. When then May the seventeenth he was advanced
almost as far as Fiessen, a Town lying at the entry into the Alps, upon the
River of Leck, he sent out Scouts to learn Intelligence of the Enemy, all of
them in a manner brought him back word, that they had fortified themselves in
the streights and passes of the Mountains, that there was no way to hurt them.
Wherefore the Princes sent out some choice Men picked out of the whole Army, who
having made an excursion, near the Enemies Camp, intercepted some Straglers,
and brought them with them back to the Army: These made several discoveries,
The Skirmishes the Princes had with the Imperialists.
so that next day the Princes advanced with the Foot, and having with them but
two hundred Horse, marched into Fiessen; and not far from La Rue, came to the
narrow Passes, possessed by about eight Hundred Imperialists, with two
Fieldpieces. Those they Charged, and forcing their way into the Streights,
drove the Enemy out, who flying to the Camp near La Rue, put their Comrades
into great Fear and Consternation. The Princes following close in the pursuit,
break in upon them also, and at length put them to flight; of whom about a
Thousand were taken, killed, or drowned in the Leck, with the loss of one pair
of Colors. Next Morning they march on to Erenberg, a Castle we have often
named; and having by good Fortune taken the Fort underneath the Castle, with
some great Guns, and by that means being Masters of the Passes, Erenberg again
taken.
they clambered up a very steep Hill over against them, and in spite of all
the Shot that were poured down upon them, got up to the Castle, which they took
upon Composition. There was a Garrison there of thirteen Ensigns, whereof they
took nine, and the other four got off, and of these three were of Germans, and
one of Italians; in all, were taken about three Thousand Men, with very small
loss on the side of the Princes. But Duke Maurice fell into great danger after;
for resolving to march forward, A Mutiny in the Camp of Duke Maurice.
the Soldiers commanded by Rifeberg, refused to move, unless they had some
extraordinary Pay in hand for taking of the Castle: but Duke Maurice told them,
that it was an unreasonable Demand, and at the same time commanded one of the
Mutineers, who bawled out louder than the rest, to be apprehended. With that
the rest make at him both with Pikes, and Butt of Musket, so that flying in
all haste, with much ado he saved his Life. May the twenty first, two Regiments
of Foot were detached to march over the Alps to Inspruck, two days Journey
distant, all the Horse, with one Regiment of Foot more, lying about Fiessen and
La Rue, to defend the passage. Duke Maurice and the associate Princes following
after, next day joined the Foot at Zirlen, a Town not above two good Miles from
Inspruck: but the Emperor having Intelligence of the taking of Erenberg, The
Emperor flies in the Night time.
in great haste fled from Inspruck by Night, with his Brother, King Ferdinand,
who came thither a little before, to negotiate a Peace, as has been said, and
taking his way through the Alps, as they go to Trent; And escapes to Villach.
he struck off to the Left Hand, and made his escape to Villach, a Town in
Carinthia upon the Drove; having a little before set at Liberty John Frederick,
The Duke of Saxony set at Liberty.
Duke of Saxony, whom he had kept Prisoner full five Years, that the Enemy
might not Glory as if they had done it, which the Prisoner himself did not at
all desire; who, though he had his Liberty, yet waited on the Emperor
whithersoever he went. The Emperor's Sister Mary, Queen of Hungary, Governess
of Flanders, A Convention of the States of the Low Countries about making a
League.
at the same time held a Convention of the States of the Low Countries at Aix
la Chapelle, about making a League with the Neighboring Princes. The Duke of
Cleve indeed, excused himself; but Adolph Archbishop of Cologne, went thither,
and made an Alliance with the House of Burgundy; so also did George of Austria
Bishop of Liege. When Duke Maurice came to Inspruck, The Bishops of Cologne and
Liege make League with the House of Burgundy.
all that belonged to the Emperor, the Spaniards and Cardinal of Ausburg was
plundered, but no damage at all done to the Goods of King Ferdinand or the
Towns-People. And because the Truce that was made for the future Treaty, as I
said, expired within three days, Duke Maurice went from thence to Passaw: but
the Confederate Princes returned by the same way they came to Fiessen, The
Emperor's House Plundered.
May the twenty eighth; and then by Messengers whom they sent, caused a
Proclamation to be published at Ausburg both in their own and Duke Maurice's
Name, The Declaration of the Princes, for restoring the outed Ministers.
to this Effect. Forasmuch, say they, as in our former public Papers, we have
declared, that we took up Arms chiefly for the defense of Religion and the
Liberty of Germany; the thing it self requires, and we are bound in duty, that
able Teachers be provided to instruct both the People and Youth. Now that it
has always been the endeavor of the Enemies of the Truth, by the oppression
of the Godly Teachers, to restore the Idol of Popery, and to breed and educate
Youth in those Errors and false Doctrines which might stick to them when they
were grown up; is so manifest in it self, that it needs no farther
Demonstration. For even at that time when they had the confidence to say, that
there was no design against Religion, they employed all their Power and Skill,
that they might utterly extirpate the purer Doctrine, nor did they only cast
the Godly Preachers into Prison; but even in this City with great Inhumanity
compelled them to take an Oath presently to depart out of the limits of the
Empire. And though that was a most impious Oath, and therefore contrary to Law
and Justice: yet to avoid all cavilling, we have recalled those Ministers and
Schoolmasters who were thrust out by our Adversaries, thinking it to be our
Duty to do so. Wherefore by these Presents we do absolve and free all those who
have been thus turned out, from that Oath which contrary to Law they were
forced to take, and restore them again to their liberty; enjoining them, that
not only in this City, but in other places also, where they have a Call, to
Preach the pure word of God, according to the confession of Faith heretofore
exhibited in this place, and rightly to breed up and instruct the Youth in all
Pious Learning, under our Patronage and Protection. We moreover command and
charge, that no Man upbraid nor molest them, as if they acted contrary to their
Faith and Promise: for since they have now for several Months lived in
Banishment, not for any fault of theirs, but only for the Profession of the
Truth; we make no doubt but good Men will pity their Condition, and think them
worthy of all favor and kindness. And because they, who in their absence have
taught in the City, are suspected and inconstant Men, so that by reason of the
different way of Teaching, they cannot conveniently be with those whom we have
recalled: we require the Senate to silence them from Preaching, The Princes
restore the Ministers.
and so to demean themselves, that this our Edict and Proclamation may have its
full force and effect. This Proclamation being published on the seventh of
June, five Days after the Ministers were restored, and Preached again in their
Churches, to the great delight and joy of the People. Before Duke Maurice was
come back from Lintz, Marquess Albert of Brandenburg, being detached with his
own Forces from the rest of the Army, Devastations made by Marquess Albert.
burnt and plundered wherever he came in the Territories of Wolfgang, Master
of the Teutonick Order, and having exacted Money from him, marched into the
Country of Norimberg, and on the fifth of May took by Composition the Castle of
Lichtenaw, five Miles distant from the City, with the adjoining Town, both
belonging to the Jurisdiction of that State. His Army consisted of two Thousand
Horse, and nineteen Ensigns of Foot. Next day he wrote to the Senate, to this
purpose; although, said he, the French King, and Confederate Princes, have by
public Declarations, made known at large, what their Intentions were as to the
public, and at the same time, that they would recover the Liberty of Germany,
Albert's Letter to those of Norimberg.
and settle Religion, in confidence, that not only all good Men would with
thankful Minds embrace their Design, but also to the utmost of their Power
assist it, as some indeed have done but as for you, ye have neither declared
what your Mind and Resolution is, nor, as I hear, have sent your Deputies to
the Assembly appointed to be held at Ausburg, but have prepared all things for
a Defense, planting Ordnance here and there upon your Walls and Works, and
raising new Forces, so that, as I am told, you brag that you will hold it out
to the last: which I am the more apt to believe, because hitherto you have sent
no Deputies to me to sue for Peace; a thing nevertheless, that has been done
by some Princes and Cities more remote. Since therefore, it has been publicly
declared by the King and confederate Princes, that they who either resisted or
did not actually aid and assist them in this their Enterprise, should be
accounted Enemies: again, since it is my charge in the same War, to bring
those, into whose limits I come, to do their Duty, and to leave no strong hold
behind us, from whence any force or eruption might be feared: for this cause
then have I taken from you, who have not hitherto answered Expectation, the
Castle of Lichtenaw, which much incommoded my Camp, having spared the Garrison,
whom nevertheless, I might have used more rigorously. But because the main
thing remains still to be done; I require you both in the name of the French
King, and of the confederate Princes, that you openly declare what you are
resolved to do, for the defense of the Liberty of Germany, and the settlement
of Religion, and send me your answer by to Morrow, that I may understand what
is to be expected from you, and how I ought to look upon you. Now it is to be
observed, that when Duke Maurice and the Confederates met at Schuinfurt, March
the twenty sixth, as has been said, they sent agents to the Norimbergers to
invite them into the League, and to demand of them Ammunition, Provisions, and
a great sum of Money: but after a long Treaty, when all the other Conditions
being set aside, they had paid down an hundred Thousand Florins, The treaty of
the Norimbergers with Duke Maurice.
they promised them Peace both in their own Names, and in the Names of all
their Associates, and thereupon gave them an instrument under Hand and Seal, in
most ample form. Being therefore, now attacked by Marquess Albert, they send
their Complaints to them: Their Complaint to the Princes.
and because Duke Maurice was not as yet come back from Lintz, on the third of
May, the Landgrave's Son wrote back to them from Gundelfingen, bidding them be
in good Hopes: but five days after, when Duke Maurice was come back, they both
wrote, promising to observe the Treaty, and disapproving the action of Marquess
Albert, as quite contrary to their Expectation: and they assure them besides,
The Answer of the Princes.
that they will endeavor to have all restored that has been taken from them,
and that they will instantly recall the Forces which they lent him. The
Norimbergers having received Marquess Albert's Letter, wrote him an Answer the
same Day, The Norimbergers Answer to Albert's Letter.
showing him what Duke Maurice and the Princes had promised them by Treaty, and
telling him, that that was the reason why they had not sent Deputies to him.
Wherefore they earnestly pray and beseech him to restore to them the Castle in
good condition, and thereby gratify his Confederates. He again wrote back three
days after, that since it was unknown to him what Transaction the Princes had
made with them, and that the case much concerned the French King, to whom he
was no less engaged than to them, he demands a safe Conduct for a person of
Credit, whom he would send into the Town, to whom they should show the
instrument of their Treaty: they comply, and produce the same. Notwithstanding
all this, though Duke Maurice and the Confederate Princes carefully interposed;
on the eleventh of May he again sent them a threatening Note, requiring them, in
the French King's Name chiefly, to give him within a few Hours a positive
Answer, whether they would obey what was commanded them or not: and having
received an answer not to his liking, he plundered, burnt, and razed to the
Ground the Castle of Lichtenaw, with the adjoining Town; and having exacted
Money of the Towns-People, Albert's cruelty toward the Norimbergers.
and forced them to take an Oath to be true to him, and his Cousin-German,
George Frederick, he laid Siege to the City. Wherefore the Landgrave's Son
forthwith recalled two Troops of Horse, which he had lent him against Wolfgang,
Master of the Teutonick Order, commanding them to return back to him, whereat
he was mightily offended: He therefore began a cruel War, and having Plundered
an Hundred Villages within their Territories, about seventy Manor, and
Farm-Houses belonging to the Citizens, with the Churches, he Burnt, not only
them, but also three Thousand Acres of Wood in a vast Forest of theirs, which
supplied both them and their Neighbors with Timber and Fuel: He had before
this declared War against the Nobility and others who lived thereabouts, if
they would not obey, and especially against the Bishops of Bamberg and
Wurtzburg, whom also in this state of Affairs, he forced to submit to very hard
Conditions: The Bishops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg severely fined by Albert.
Insomuch, that the Bishop of Bamberg, to save himself and whole Province from
imminent danger, bought a Peace of him at a very dear rate; for he was fain to
make over to him twenty Towns and Lordships within his Dominion, by Deed and
Conveyance which he Signed the nineteenth day of May, and therewith all his
Superiorities and Vassalls. But the Bishop of Wurtzburg paid him down two
Hundred and twenty Thousand Florins, and took upon him the Payment of his
Debts, which amounted to about three hundred and fifty Thousand Florins more.
The free Towns of Schuabia, which, as we said before, assembled at Ausburg to
the number of twenty six, but especially those of Ausburg, taking Pity on this
sad and deplorable condition of the Norimbergers, sent Deputies chosen out of
their whole number, to mediate an accommodation; who being come upon safe
Conduct to Norimberg, The Cities of Schuabia Mediators betwixt the Norimbergers
and Marquess Albert.
exhorted the Senate to Peace for many Reasons; telling them, that Erenberg and
the Passes of the Alps were all in the Power of the Confederates, and that the
state of Italy and Hungary was such, that no help nor relief was to be expected
from any hand; and then they show them the Conditions proposed by Marquess
Albert. The Senate gave them thanks for their Affection, and the Pains they had
put themselves to, and having represented to them, how that Marquess Albert had
no cause to make War against them, and how they had capitulated with Duke
Maurice and the Confederates; they plainly told them, that since the Conditions
were such, as neither they could perform them, nor if they did, could justify
themselves to the Emperor and King Ferdinand for so doing; they resolved to
suffer the Extremity, and commit their Cause to God; being so well satisfied
with their own Innocence, that they could make not only the Emperor, but all
Princes, nay the Relations and intimate Friends of Marquess Albert himself,
their Judges in the case. When the Mediators had in as soft and fair words as
they could, given Marquess Albert the Senate's Answer, and found him so far
from relenting, that he broke out into most outrageous threats; by Letters
dated the fourth day of June, they acquaint the Besieged that his Mind was
implacable, and that they could not by any means bring him to more reasonable
terms. In the mean time Marquess Albert, batters the Town again more furiously
than before, throws Fire into several places, and one Night gives the Assault,
burning at the same time one of the Suburbs for the greater terror. At the same
time came to the Camp, George Thannenberg, and William Schachten, Ambassadors,
sent jointly from Duke Maurice and the Landgrave's Son to treat of Peace. These
taking to them the assistance of the Deputies of the Cities, who otherwise were
about to depart, as despairing of any Success, The Norimbergers make Peace with
Marquess Albert.
after a tedious and laborious negotiation, prevailed with both at length, and
clapped up a Peace; for not only was Marquess Albert reinforced with fresh
recruits that came to the Army under the Command of James Dalbeck, and
Christopher Oldenburg; but Duke Maurice had written to the Senate also, that
though he was extremely troubled at what Marquess Albert did, yet he was not
able to remedy it at present. These were the conditions of Peace: that they
should pay two hundred Thousand Florins: deliver six pieces of Ordnance, with
their Appurtenances, and entertain amity with the Confederate Princes, as they
of Ausburg did: on the other hand, that he should restore all he had taken from
them. Wherefore about the twentieth of June, the Siege was raised from before
Norimberg, one, not only of the most famous, powerful, The Siege of Norimberg
removed.
and Wealthy, but also strongest Cities in Germany. The Marquess puffed up with
this so brave Success, wrote from the Camp to those of Ulm, to this Effect:
That the Norimbergers to their great loss, being now subdued by him, Albert's
Letter to the City of Ulm.
had accepted Conditions of Peace, and promised to submit to what should be
commanded them by him, and the rest of the Confederates: That he resolved to
besiege them, but in a far different manner, and more closely than had been
lately done: that if Fortune favored his Enterprise, he would not spare Man
nor Man-child above seven Years of Age, unless they returned to their duty in
time, and instantly sent Deputies to give him and the Confederates
Satisfaction, and so wipe off the stain of their late Rebellion; that he had
ordered him by whom he sent his Letter, to bring back their Answer, which he
commanded them to give positively, The City of Ulm's Answer to Albert.
that he might know their final Resolution. To this Letter they gave a very
short Answer; that so long as they had Health and Life, they would never
condescend to his Demands.

The French King upon his March out of Germany, having his Army divided into
three Bodies, came to Walterfingen, a small Town in the Dominion of Lorrain,
upon the River Sare. The French King wastes the Country of Luxembourg;
There all his Forces being united again, on the twenty fifth of May he
Marched, and having past the Mosel, entered the Duchy of Luxembourg, burning,
plundering, and wasting the Country wherever he came, being provoked by the
Example of Van Rossem, as they themselves affirm; he also retook the Town of
Asteney, deserted by the Garrison, for Van Rossem was now returned Home. And
sacks Danvilliers, and Ivey.
Having afterward Encamped, he took by Composition, the little Town of
Danvilliers, and soon after Ivey, one of the chief Forts in the Country. In
that Town was Ernest, Count Mansfield, Governor of the whole Province, with
the flower of the Youth, who fell all into the Enemies Hands: the Town was
afterward sacked by the unruly Soldiers, against the King's Will, as it was
said; but let us now return to Duke Maurice. He was gone, as we told you, to
Passaw, about the treaty of Peace. There on the first of June, having resumed
what was done in the Treaty at Lintz, he declared his Mind more fully and
plainly as to all Points. The Treaty of Passaw.
There were present the Emperor's Ambassadors, King Ferdinand, Albert, Duke of
Bavaria, the Bishops of Saltzburg, and Aichstadt; Duke Maurice's Grievances.
the Ambassadors of all the Princes Electors, as also of the Dukes of Cleve and
Wirtemberg, and many others. His grievances were, That the Government of the
Empire, which ought to be free, was in the Hands of Strangers; that the
Authority of the Princes Electors was impaired, and that many things were done
without their Advice or Knowledge: that some things also were dismembered and
alienated from the Empire: that ways were taken to deprive them of their right
of Electing the Emperor; that in the Diets of the Empire, the Opinions and
Votes of the Electors were almost slighted; that the private Assemblies of the
Electors, were out of a certain fear intermitted; that their Jurisdiction was
diminished, whilst contrary to ancient Custom, the Imperial Chamber admitted of
Appeals from them: that the Controversies of the States of the Empire were
purposely fomented, and never taken up, till both Parties had received Damage:
that it was a hard matter to be admitted to Audience in the Emperor's Court;
where Cases were often mistaken for want of understanding the Language: and
that not only the Charges was great, but much time also lost in waiting there:
that matters were not handled amicably in the Diets: and that if any Man made a
Proposal for the public good, it was taken ill: that by those frequent and
long lasting Diets, Germany was Exhausted, and Business often neglected at
Home, and nevertheless, the Public not a whit the better, but many times the
worse, and more entangled thereby: that severe Edicts were made, that no Man
should serve in foreign Wars: that such as made their Peace, were obliged not
to fight against the Provinces of the Emperor, and so were torn off from the
Empire: that they, who according to Duty, served their Lords in the Smalcaldick
War, were fined: that they who persevered in the Emperor's Friendship, were
also made to Pay, and that under pain of having their Lands and Goods put to
Sale, if they did not make present Payment: and that their Ambassadors, for not
assenting immediately, were commanded upon pain of Death, not to depart from
Court without Leave: that foreign Soldiers had been several times brought into
Germany, and after the last War was over, had been quartered up and down in the
Country, where they did many things dissolutely and licentiously, glorying that
Germany was subdued, and would be annexed to the Patrimony of the Emperor, who
would have Castles and Citadells built in the chief Cities thereof: that a vast
number of great Guns, and store of Ammunition, had been carried as in Triumph,
out of Germany, into strange Countries: that some out of Vainglory and
Ambition, had caused the Arms of German Princes to be put upon the Guns, which
were Cast for themselves, as if they had been taken from them: that Books were
Published, and that with Privilege from the Emperor too, to the great infamy
and disgrace of Germany, as if it had been Conquered, and brought under
Bondage* that in the public Diets, some, as representing the Emperor's
Provinces, were admitted into the Assembly of the Princes and States, and that
was done with secret Designs, that the number being increased, they might carry
all by Plurality of Voices: that four Years since the Judicature of the
Imperial Chamber had been Erected, and Laws made by a very few Persons, which
were afterward promulgated to the great Prejudice of many, especially of those
of the Augustan Confession; who were all excluded from that Bench: that
therefore the thing it self required, that these Laws should be reviewed, and
better examined in the next Diet. These, and other things of the like nature he
propounded, and forasmuch as they chiefly concerned the Emperor; he demanded
that they should be forthwith redressed, and the Empire restored to its ancient
Dignity; and others not suffered to baffle and despise it.

The Mediators having consulted together, The Opinion of the Princes Moderators
concerning the Grievances proposed by Duke Maurice.
were of opinion, that these Demands were very reasonable: but yet, that in
respect to the Honor and Dignity of the Emperor, which was concerned, and that
he might be the more easily persuaded, it was their Judgment that some things
which related to the public Reformation of the Government, might be referred
to a general Diet of the Empire. The Bishop of Bayonne, the French Ambassador,
was there; who on the third of June, made a Speech before the Princes, to this
Effect. That in old time, The French Ambassador's Speech.
and before the name of Francs was known, there had been so great a resemblance
of Life and Manners betwixt the Gauls and Germans, that the Germans are the
People whom the Romans long ago called the Brethren of the Gauls: but that when
the Francs had planted themselves in Gallia (now France) there was such a
Coalition of both Nations, that they made but parts of one and the same Empire,
under one Prince, and governed by the same Laws, but that when in the
vicissitude of time, the Empire devolved upon the Germans, the Dukes of Saxony,
and other Emperors, as deriving their Original from the Kings of the Francs,
entertained constant Friendship with the French; insomuch that Philip the
August King of France, caused that ancient League, which was almost worn out by
time, to be written of new in Golden Characters, and to be laid up in a more
Sacred place: and not without just Cause neither; for that so long as this
Union lasted, both People lived in a most flourishing State: That the force of
Germany was then so great, that they gave Laws, not only to the Hungarians,
Bohemians, Polanders, and Danes; but to the Italians also: and the Kings of
France again, who fought for the maintenance of Religion, obtained many
glorious Victories, in Europe, Asia, and Africa, over the Saracens and Turks,
the declared Enemies of Christendom: But that the times proved more unlucky
afterward, when some Emperors, as being ingrafted upon the Stock, but no
natural Germans, nor worthy of that Dignity, forsook the amity of the Kings of
France, and brought great Calamities upon the Empire: but that through God's
Blessing, this Wound was Healed, by the Illustrious Family of Luxembourg, which
has produced some Emperors, Princes of great Merit, and most intimate Friends
of the Kings of France: For the Father of Charles IV, died, fighting for the
King of France: that the Princes of the House of Austria have entertained the
same Amity and Kindness and particularly Albert the first, whom neither the
Promises nor Threats of the Popes, could move to make War against France; that
he mentioned these things with this Intent, that they might be convinced, how
little some of the Counselors and Courtiers of the most mighty Emperor,
Charles V. tendered the welfare of the Empire, whilst they make it their
Business, not only to divide, and rend asunder those two most renowned Nations;
but also did by their Arts and Cunning, so far prevail formerly, that King
Francis, a most excellent Prince, was by their Procurement judged an Enemy, and
no reason given why: That they did those things for their own private Gain and
Advantage, indeed, but to the great Prejudice of the Public: That this alone
was enough to show, how difficult it would be for them (so long as Friendship
continued betwixt both Nations) to infringe the Liberty of Germany, and to
erect their own Monarchy; that the fear of the French Arms made them now
proceed more remissly, and not so much urge their Spanish Yoke of Bondage as
formerly: that these were the Men, who by Prayers and Tribute obtained Peace
from the Turk, that they might under the Color of Religion and Loyalty, raise
Feuds and Animosities in Germany; that being aided by the Forces of Germany,
they might make War against Germany; that they might squeeze Money from all,
and reduce the Empire to a sad and miserable Condition, placing here and there
Spanish Garrisons, exhausting the Magazines, and making way for Arbitrary Rule:
For that matters were now brought to this Pass, that the great Seal of the
Empire, the Judicature of the Imperial Chamber, and the right and liberty of
Diets all depended on the Will and Pleasure of one Man, the Bishop of Arrus:
For what instance could be shown, or reason given, that freeborn Germans, who
for a livelihood served Strangers in their Wars, should be Punished,
Proscribed, and have Princes set upon their Heads? Not to mention so many
Murders, lascivious Practices, Devastations, plunderings of Towns, but
especially the varying and altering of Religion according to occasion, and the
turn of Times: That there was no doubt to be made, but that whatever had been
done of this nature for many Years past, tended only to this, that the Laws of
the Empire being Confounded, King Ferdinand either forced, or wheedled by
Promises, and the Princes of the Empire overawed, the Prince of Spain might be
designed Emperor. Were not Death more eligible to brave Men, than to live and
see the Sun with so great Misery? That no Man certainly could be imagined so
Barbarous, as not to be moved at these things: That it ought not to be thought
strange then, that some Princes should at length arise, and amongst others,
Duke Maurice, Elector of Saxony, who thought the danger of their Lives too
little for recovering the liberty of their common Country: But that finding
themselves inferior in Strength, they had implored the Aid and Assistance of
the King of France: and that he setting aside all the Provocations received in
former Years, had not only imparted to them his Treasure; but also employed
himself wholly in the Affair, having made a League with them, wherein amongst
other things it was provided, that no Peace should be made with the Emperor,
without the Advice and Consent of the King: Moreover, that Duke Maurice, though
he lay under that Obligation, yet that he might serve his Country, and comply
with the Desires of King Ferdinand, had lately demanded of the most Christian
King, that he would let him know upon what terms he would be willing to make
Peace: That the Proposal had been made somewhat contrary to his Expectation,
indeed, for considering what a great Favor he had done, he thought that in
matters concerning himself, he ought to have Treated Personally, and not at so
great distance: But that nevertheless, since he preferred the public far
before his own private Interests, he was not willing to deny any thing to a
Confederate Prince: That therefore, if the Wounds of the State might be Healed,
as they ought to be, and such Care taken, that they might not for the future
Fester again; if the Captive Princes might be set at Liberty, upon the
Conditions prescribed by the League; if the ancient Alliance betwixt France and
the Empire, and the League made lately with the Princes, might be confirmed, so
as it should be perpetual; if all these things might be procured, the King was
so well affected toward the Public, that he not only assented to the Treaty
of Peace, but would render hearty Thanks to God, that by Counsel and Assistance
he had contributed thereunto: That as to private affairs, since the Emperor
detained many things by force, and upon no just Cause had made War, the King
thought it reasonable, that he who had first done the wrong, should first also
make the Satisfaction: That for his part, though he did not distrust his
Strength, yet he would so behave in all things, that it should appear he was
not only desirous of Peace, but willing also to gratify Duke Maurice, and them
all. To these things the Princes make answer; The Princes answer to the Speech
of the French Ambassador.
that the Commemoration of the ancient Alliance betwixt Germany and France,
brought from the Records of former times, had been very pleasant unto them; nor
was it less acceptable to understand that the King preferred the Public before
his own private Advantages, and that he was willing the Confederate Princes
should make Peace with the Emperor: For that it was the Interest, not only of
one Nation, but of all Europe also, that it should be so, since the civil
Broils that disturbed the same, threatened no less than its ruin: That they made
no doubt but the Conditions which the King desired, would be obtained: For that
the Emperor, as before, so now in these intestine Commotions, was well affected
toward the Public, and would not have the Liberty of Germany depressed: That
there was great hopes also, that he would shortly set the Princes at Liberty:
But that as to the renewing of ancient Leagues, and confirming new ones, the
King in his own Prudence knew very well, that a matter of so great moment could
not be transacted in that Assembly: That nevertheless, they wished the
Friendship and Correspondence that had always been betwixt both People, might
remain firm and inviolable: That it was not only their chief Desire, that such
private Controversies as he had with the Emperor, might be adjusted, but that
they would also use their utmost Endeavors to accomplish it: That
nevertheless, since the King had hinted that the Emperor detained some things
that were his, and that he had somewhat to re-demand from him, it seemed not
unreasonable to them, that he would declare what his Pretensions were: For that
they were resolved to state the Controversy to the Emperor, and interpose as
Mediators: and that they earnesty prayed the King to take these things in good
part. Now as to the Relation that is betwixt the French and Germans, we
discoursed in the eighth Book: But as to what the French Ambassador spoke of
the Family of Luxembourg: Of the Family of Luxembourg.
the matter in short is this. Henry, Count of Luxembourg, had a Son Henry, who
was afterward Emperor, and the seventh of that Name. He again had a Son, who
by Marriage became King of Bohemia, and this Prince aided Philip of Valois in
his Wars against Edward the third King of England, and being present in a
Battle, wherein the English got the Victory, he was slain there, leaving
amongst others, an eldest Son, who was afterward the Emperor Charles IV. the
Father of Wenceslaus, and Sigismund, who were both afterward Emperors, and
Sigismund also King of Hungary, and Bohemia, he who procured the calling of the
Council of Constance. Albert of Austria.
Albert of Austria, of whom he spoke, the Son of the Emperor Rodolph, when he
became Emperor, entertained a firm Amity with Philip the Fair, King of France;
though Pope Boniface VIII. had eagerly incited him to War. Besides the delivery
of the Landgrave, Duke Maurice insisted chiefly on two things: First, that as
to those things which wounded the liberty of Germany, Duke Maurice insists
chiefly on two Points.
and had been reckoned up by him, King Ferdinand, his Son Maximilian and the
Mediators would themselves forthwith determine, and pronounce Sentence
concerning them, according to the Laws and ancient Custom of Germany: And then,
that Religion should be let alone in Peace, and no Man molested upon that
account, till all the difference should be fully agreed. The Mediators did not
disapprove this Course: But the Emperor's Ambassadors in his Name interposed,
and said, that their Master thought it but reasonable, that they who for their
Fidelity to him, had incurred Calamities, and sustained great Losses, should
have reparation made them. When some Points after much debate, had been
moderated, they came to this Resolution at length, that the Emperor should by
the third of July give his positive Answer, and that, The Mediators by Letters
exhort the Emperor to Peace.
in the mean time, there should be a cessation of Arms; wherefore on the
sixteenth of June, the Mediators wrote to the Emperor, and exhorted him to
Peace.

We told you, that after the taking of Erenberg, and the plundering of
Inspruck, the Confederate Princes took another way through the Alps, and about
the latter end of May, returned to Fiessen. Marching from thence, they came on
the nineteenth of June, with all their Forces, and Encamped at Aichstadt, and
Episcopal City upon the Frontiers of Bavaria, where they expected the coming of
Duke Maurice with great Desire, being in some Anxiety for his Absence. At
length he came and gave them a full account how Affairs stood; but on the last
day of June, took Post back again to Passaw, upon Horses purposely laid on the
Road, that he might be present by the day appointed: and the day following, the
Confederate Princes decamped, and after four days March, came to Rottenburg, a
Town on the Danube, bordering upon Franconia. Notwithstanding all this,
Marquess Albert still pursued his Point, and having brought Norimberg to accept
of Peace, compelled the Nobility and States in those Places to submit to his
Orders: For though he acted in the common Cause at first, as he promised in his
public Declaration he would, yet he was not joined in that Confederacy, and
after the siege of Ulm was raised, he began in a manner to act separately,
either because he would take all to himself that the Fortune of War gave him,
Albert of Brandenburg, deserting the Confederates, makes War in his own Name.
or that he disapproved what Duke Maurice had done, or else, that being put on
by the French King, he entertained other Designs: but yet he made those who had
given Oath, to be true to him, to swear the same also to the Confederates. His
next Expedition was into the Territories of the Archbishop of Mentz, where
along the River of Main, he did very much damage by Fire and Pillage, Albert
falls foul of the Electors of Mentz and Treves.
and demanded a vast sum of Money of him: but when Agents being employed to
treat, could not agree about the Sum, the Elector having first sunk his great
Guns in the Rhine, July the fifth; fled for his safety. The Elector of Mentz
flies for it.
At the same time, Marquess Albert, who left nothing unattempted, demanded of
the Archbishop of Treves, that he would put into his Hands the chief Castle of
his Territories: it stands where the Rivers of Rhine and Mosell do meet, Albert
demands of the Elector of Treves, his chief Castle.
upon a very high Hill, both strong by Nature, and very commodiously situated.
This demand he made, as he said, in name of the French King. But the Elector
having advised with his Friends, made Answer, that he could not comply with his
Demands. Because in the latter part of the Answer which the Princes Mediators
made to the French Ambassador, as we mentioned before, they had said, that it
seemed reasonable to them, that the King would declare what Pretensions he had,
and what he demanded of the Emperor. The Ambassador having received
Instructions from the King, wrote to them from the Camp at Aichstadt, June the
nine and twentieth: That the King had undertaken that War for no other Cause,
but merely for the public Good, and especially that he might retrieve the
liberty of oppressed Germany, having been thereto much solicited by some
Princes of the Empire: That he had not at all proposed to himself any private
advantage therein, as the thing it self might bear him witness: For that he had
not possessed himself of any thing in Germany, which he could easily have done:
That he had also given his Confederates Leave to manage the War at their own
Pleasure: and that though, whilst he himself lay still with his Army upon the
Rhine, the Enemy had invaded his Country at Home, yet he did not stir, till he
had Information from Duke Maurice, that those things, for which the War had
been undertaken, might be obtained in a peaceable manner: That he had not a
little rejoiced at that News, seeing matters went according to his own Hearts
desire: For that it had been his Advice and Counsel; first, that the Princes
should not let slip so fair an occasion as they had offered them; nor that they
should not be so far overseen, as to suffer themselves to be imposed upon, and
gulled, as formerly: and then, that since he had given them so eminent an
Instance of his Good Will and Friendship, a firm Amity might be settled betwixt
the two Nations, that so he might afterward have more leisure to mind the
other concerns of the Public: That now since Duke Maurice had desired to know
of him, upon what terms he was willing to listen to Peace: It was his Opinion,
and he must say it, that the Emperor had made War against him, for no just
Cause: but that it was not the Custom of the Kings of France to sue for Peace
from an Enemy, especially from one, to whom, neither in Strength, nor any thing
else, they were inferior: So that to propound any thing, unless there were
certain hopes that it would be granted, he did not at all think it proper: That
he entertained so good Thoughts of them, that he was confident, they would
require nothing of him, but what might stand with his Honor and Dignity: and
that he on the other hand, had so great a Love and Esteem for them, that were
they to Treat of the General Peace of the whole World, he would be ready, for
their sakes, to remit part of his own Right: That he was very willing they
should have the Cognizance and Determination of his Demands, provided the
Emperor submitted to the same, and earnestly wished, that with the first
occasion, some Meeting might be held upon that account: and that if so, then
all Men should understand, both how much he loved the Public, and how falsely
it was given out by his Enemies, that he had made a League with the Turks: But
that if nothing of what he said should take place, if all Consultations
conspired for his ruin, and that the Alliance which he had good reason to
expect with the Germans, should not be contracted; the blame ought not to be
imputed to him, if greater Troubles did arise. This Letter was publicly read
before the Princes, on the first of July.

Duke Maurice came to Passaw by the day appointed, and next day was the
Emperor's Answer brought to King Ferdinand; who having thereupon called a
Meeting, told the Princes, that the Emperor had written his Mind, but that he
did not assent to most things proposed: and that since it was so, it was to no
purpose to tell them what Answer he had given to every Particular: But
nevertheless, that he might make it appear how desirous he was of Peace, and
how well he wished Germany, he would go himself in great Diligence to the
Emperor, and doubted not, but that he might be able to persuade him: That in
the mean time he earnestly desired Duke Maurice would not be impatient, but
condescend to a short delay of eight Days, which was the least time he could
take to go and come in. Duke Maurice impatient of Delay.
This the Duke immediately refused, and King Ferdinand pressed it very hard,
but all in vain; for Duke Maurice calling together the Princes and Ambassadors,
His Speech in the Assembly of the Princes.
told them, that they themselves knew very well, who had been present at all
Transactions for the space of a whole Month, that he had omitted nothing which
might have contributed to the settling of a Peace, and doubted not but they
would upon Honor, testify as much: That therefore he desired them to continue
their Good Will and Favor toward him, and promote the common Cause of
Germany: That no more could be granted by him, and that because of his
forwardness to Treat, he began almost to be suspected by his Confederates. The
Princes having made him a generous Answer, and commended his Zeal for the
Public, apply themselves to King Ferdinand and desire that in the Emperor's
Name, he would come to a final Determination: That they believed whatever he
should do, would be ratified by his Imperial Majesty. King Ferdinand made
Answer, that he had no such Power granted him by his Brother; else he would not
offer to take upon him the trouble of that Journey: and that indeed, he durst
not transgress the Limits that were prescribed to him.

We told you before, The Emperor's Letter to the Princes Mediators.
that the Princes Mediators, had by Letters of the sixteenth of June exhorted
the Emperor to Peace: To these Letters now the Emperor wrote an Answer from
Villach the last day of the same Month, to this purpose: That from his first
entering into the Government, he had always been studious of Peace, and desired
nothing else at present: That they needed not then, to have recommended it so
much unto him, but to those rather who had been the Authors of these Troubles,
they should have have spoken in that Strain: and that by their Allegiance to
him, and the Empire, he required them to do so: That as to his own private
Concerns, he was ready for their Sakes to condescend to many things, provided,
that in the way of Treaty, the Imperial Authority might not be impeached, nor
matter left for greater Broils: but that as to the substance of the
Pacification, he had signified his Mind to his Brother, King Ferdinand, from
whom they might learn the Particulars: To these Letters they wrote back an
Answer, The Mediators Letter to the Emperor.
on the fifth of July, when King Ferdinand returned to the Emperor,
representing to his Majesty, that at his desire and suggestion, they came to
this Treaty, and the more willingly too, because he had declared, That he would
do any thing for the public Good: That with great Labor, Care, and Diligence,
they had found out a way of Pacification, and that therefore they begged, and
that most earnestly, that he would consider the case of their common Country:
That many, and those the chief States of the Empire had already suffered great
Calamity; and that the condition of Affairs was such now, and so little time
given to Deliberation, that the rest of the Princes and States, especially
those who were nearest the Flame, could not, how willing soever they might be,
perform the Duty and Loyalty they owed him; nay, that they were necessitated to
take such Courses, as might soonest rid them of the imminent Calamity and
Misery, wherewith they were threatened: That if he would not incline to Peace,
but try the fortune of War, sad disorders, and dangerous alterations would
thereby be occasioned in Germany, which might afterward be communicated to his
own Provinces: That he could not do better then, than to acquiesce to those
conditions of Peace, which they had so sollicitously sought out and Collected;
especially since the chief of them had been approved at Lintz, which Treaty
they had proposed to themselves as a Pattern to be followed: as also, since
those things which properly belonged to his Dignity and Character, had been
purposely referred to a Diet of the Empire, that there they might be handled
more conveniently, and with greater Moderation.

The same day this was done, Duke Maurice departed; and when on the eleventh of
July he was come to the Confederates, who then encamped at Mergetheins, Duke
Maurice returns to the Confederates.
he told them what had been done, and that King Ferdinand was gone to the
Emperor in great haste, so that he believed, he would speedily send
Commissioners with a full and definite Answer. However, that in this doubtful
state of Affairs, they might not be idle; and because in Franckfurt there was
an Imperial Garrison of seventeen hundred Foot, and a thousand Horse, under the
Command of Conrad Hanstein; so that Hesse, that bordered upon it, was in no
small danger; it was resolved, that they should march thither. Having then
burnt, and plundered, and done a great deal of damage to Wolffgang Master of
Prussia, in whose Country they then were, they marched through the ArchBishop
of Mentz his Territories, Duke Maurice besieges Francfurt.
and on the Seventeenth of July came before Franckfurt. But immediately upon
that, the Princes Intercessors, and the Ambassadors sent their Agents after
Duke Maurice to the Camp, to sweeten things, and promote the Peace. George Duke
of Meckleburg killed with a great Shot.
In that Siege George Duke of Meckleburg, having joined Duke Maurice, the same
who first of all made War against the Magdeburgers, was shot with a
Cannon-Bullet. So soon as the Siege was laid down before Franckfurt, the
Confederate Princes demanded a great many great Guns from the Elector Palatine;
The Elector Palatine unwillingly supplies the Princes with Cannon.
which once and again he denied them: But when he could not do otherwise, and
they threatened to come and fetch them with an Army, he gave them Eight of the
best he had, with all their Equipage. King Ferdinand, at the prefixed day,
returning to Passaw, declared to the Mediators the Emperor's Will and Pleasure
as to the several Points; to wit, that as to public Matters of the Empire,
Conditions of Peace proposed by the Emperor.
which Duke Maurice had proposed, as we said before, they should not be handled
by some few Commissioners apart, but by the whole Body of the Empire met in a
Diet. Again, That the Cause of Religion should rest till the next Diet of the
Empire: And that what should be thought fit to be done in that particular for
the future, by all the States in that Diet, The Emperor's Answer to the
Mediators Letter.
should be ratified and confirmed. The Emperor also, July the eleventh, gave
this Answer to the Mediators last Letter: That as they had by their Letter, so
King Ferdinand his Brother had also very earnestly dealt with him, that he
would accept of the Conditions; and thus he would willingly, indeed, have
gratified both of them; but that there were many Causes that hindered him, which
he had declared unto his Brother; for he could not approve and ratify all
indifferently. Now that some had underservedly fallen into calamity, through
the occasion of these Troubles, no man living was more sorry for it than he;
that yet their Sufferings were not to be imputed to their confidence and
relying upon him, since he had put no man into such hopes as he might securely
trust to: For that though when the Stirs did first break out, he had written to
some of the chief Princes, that they would endeavor to prevent that growing
Evil, promising them his best concurrence, yet it was not his mind to approve
of every thing that might be propounded: That it seemed indeed reasonable to
him, that such things as concerned the Empire in general, should be referred to
the public Diets thereof, wherein if any just complaint should be by any man
brought against him, he would not be wanting to that Duty, which hitherto he
had never neglected: That since no Demand of that Nature had ever been
presented to him as yet, which nevertheless ought to have been done before any
War had been attempted, he could not divine what would be demanded of him, and
much less give Instructions to his Ambassadors whom he sent to Passaw, what
they should answer to every Head; which, for the dignity of his Person and
Character, he thought it not fit to do personally: That, if therefore he
approved not all things, which some perhaps endeavored to persuade them to do,
no man ought to censure him for that; but that they who were the Mediators,
ought rather to incline and exhort them to reasonable and moderate Conditions;
especially since they were sensible, that hardly at last, and not before he was
forced to it by necessity, he had taken up Arms, which he intended not to make
use of now neither, if he might choose; and if they could hit upon an equitable
and proper Expedient for Peace: That, since the Case was so, he was very
confident, that they would show all Duty and Allegiance to him who was their
chief Magistrate, rather than listen to those, who contrary to Duty, had made a
League with his Enemies, and raised Stirs and Commotions: That, he was not
ignorant of the Evils and Calamities that did impend, when both Armies should
be ready to join in Battle; and that he was very much moved at the Damages
sustained by the State, but especially by the innocent People; wherefore he did
now, as at all times before, set his mind on Peace, and would not refuse any
reasonable Overture; but that he was not at all to be charged with this: That,
whilst he was deliberating about the Conditions sent to him at two several
times, some of the States had sustained wrongs; for that the Truce was to have
lasted all the time of the Treaty: That Marquess Albert, during the same time,
damnified several sorts of People, he was not to answer for it; since from the
very beginning he had been against the Treaty: That, neither had he ever made
any delay in answering; and if they had continued still on the same sort as
they proposed at first, but altered since, he could have answered much sooner,
and more distinctly too; nay, if they had not swerved from the Treaty of Lintz,
which they themselves mentioned, all things might have been longe're now
accommodated: That since they were sensible then, how he stood affected toward
the Public, he instantly required them, that together with his Brother King
Ferdinand, unto whom he had discovered all his mind, they would induce them to
reasonable Conditions, and therein have respect both to the Safety and Dignity
of the Empire: That he, for his part, was resolved to use the same Lenity and
peaceable Ways in time to come, as utterly abhorring all Civil War: But that if
Peace could not be had on these Terms, he expected from them all the Fruits of
Allegiance, that they were obliged to render unto him.

King Ferdinand made Answer also in the Emperor's Name, The Emperor's Answer to
the French Ambassadors Letter.
to the French Ambassador's Letter, lately read in the Meeting of the Princes,
as we said before: That his Imperial Majesty had had Peace with the French
King, which he punctually observed; and that, though some things had been done
by him insolently and haughtily, yet for public Peace sake, he had dissembled
them; but that though he had by his Ambassador promised great Matters, yet,
when he pretended no such thing, he had made War against him both by Sea and
Land, without any previous Declaration: That moreover, he, the Emperor, had
offered already, that if the Elector Duke Maurice, did propose in his name any
reasonable Conditions of Peace, that did quadrate with his past Actions, he
would not refuse them; but that no certain nor definite Proposition had been
made, it being his drift, that as he had laid the blame of the breach of Peace
at his door, so he would have him also make the first step toward an
Agreement: That moreover, he labored to vindicate himself from having made a
League with the Turk, as if it had been an aspersion cast upon him: But all
that was no more than a Sham; for if it were needful, the Memoirs of the French
Ambassador d'Aremont, written for the help of his memory at Constantinople, and
sent to the King by one Captain la Cost, might be produced and shown: That the
intercepted Letters of the Turks Lieutenant in Hungary, written to the Princes
now in League, and others, might also be exhibited: That it appeared manifestly
from them, that he himself was the Author of the damage done by the Turkish
Fleet last year, and did spur them on to have done as much this year, being
heartily sorry that they had not done more mischief than they did: That in
short, it was the Design of him and the Grand Signior, utterly to ruin him and
his Brother King Ferdinand, that they might afterward plunge their Neighbors,
and chiefly the Germans, into the depth of danger and distress; but that how
well these things agreed with his fair Promises, and how safe like to prove to
Germany, any man might easily understand; for the thing it self declared
plainly what mind he was of; how that the chief States of the Empire had been
most underservedly harrassed, oppressed, and almost utterly undone the same
year: That many others had been exposed to the worst of dangers: That by the
help of the Germans, who joined with him, some places of the Empire had been
reduced under his tryannical Power, and were now fortified by him, the whole
fault was his, and his only: That the Case being so then, he did not see what
credit was to be given to the Lies and Forgeries of his Ambassadors Letter; and
that it had been far better, in his Judgment, to have rejected it, than to have
admitted any such Answer: That if they carefully considered the Matter, he made
no doubt but they would see what Projects he was carrying on by means of his
Ambassador; and that since that Writing did not at all concern the Treaty in
hand, it seemed not to him necessary to make any further Answer to it. July the
Thirteenth, King Ferdinand sent Henry of the illustrious Plawen-Family,
Burgrave of Misnia, and Chancellor of Bohemia, to the Camp before Franckfurt;
who coming to Duke Maurice, on the twenty fourth of July; and having for some
time debated Matters with him, at length persuaded him to Peace. Duke Maurice
accepts the Peace.
So that on the last of July, contrary to all men's expectation, the whole
Matter was concluded, as shall be related hereafter. Amongst the other
Arguments used to persuade him, this was one; that he would consider with
himself, what danger he would be exposed to if he accepted not the Conditions,
both from the Emperor, who had a very strong Army on foot, and also from his
Cousin John Frederick, whom the Emperor had set at liberty, and was now upon
sending him home; and that the Landgrave's Son should consider also into how
great peril he must needs bring his Father in Prison, and the whole Province
too. After the Peace was made, the great Guns, which, as we said before, the
Elector Palatine was forced to furnish, were carried into the Town, that they
might not fall into the hands of the Marquess Albert.

In the Month of July, The French King reduces his Army.
the French King, having taken some Towns in the Duchy of Luxembourg, as has
been said before, brought his Army into Artois, but without any memorable
Action done; to refresh his Men, and save them from infection, he disbanded
them, and returned home himself, having fortified and garrisoned the Places
which he had taken, and given the Command of all to the Duke of Guise, The
Duchess of Lorain commanded to leave France.
a Prince of great Authority in France. But he commanded the Duchess Dowager of
Lorain, the Emperor's Sisters Daughter, to depart out of the Kingdom. She on
the Twelfth of July came to Strasburg, and staid there several days, having
with her her Husband's Sister, who was also sent going by the French King.
Wolffgang, Master of Prussia, driven out of his Country.
Wolffgang, Master of the Teutonick Order, mentioned before, who in the
Imperial Diets takes place next to the Archbishops, came also to Strasburg,
being driven out of his own Country. Marquess Albert, who had joined the
Confederates on their March to Frankfurt, leaving them at the Siege, Albert
persecutes the Bishops on the Rhine.
marched toward the rhine, and there forced Worms and Spire to submit, to pay
him Money, and furnish great Guns whithersoever he went; the Priests were all
fled before, or else changing their Habit, staid and pretended to be of some
other Profession. And when he came near to Franconia, the neighboring Bishops,
and other Prelates, all fled for their own Safety: the Archbishop of Mentz
also, who for fear of Marquess Albert, was gone before, as has been said, The
Bishop of Spire dies.
on the Twenty fifth of July came as an Exile to Strasburg; where having lodged
one night, he passed over the Rhine. The Bishop of Spire, a very aged man, fled
to Saverne, and not long after died there. The Bishop of Worms, by Mediation
of the Palatine, returned home, after he had paid a Composition of twelve
thousand Florins. Albert's Demands to the Senate of Strasburg.
Marquess Albert having taken the Cities we mentioned, on the twenty eighth of
July wrote to the Senate of Strasburg, both in his own and French King's Name;
requiring them to give him and the Confederates access into the City at all
times, to receive a Garrison when there should be occasion, and to take an Oath
of Fidelity; for that this War was carried on for the common concern and relief
of Germany; and that it would neither be honorable nor safe for them to stand
out, and not join with the rest, seeing he and his Confederates had now again
mustered all their Forces to accomplish that Design. The Answer of the Senate.
The Senate two days after wrote him back an Answer; That for many years past,
it had been their chief wish, that the true Religion of Christ, and the ancient
Liberty might flourish all over Germany; and that they had not only directed
all their Counsels and Actions to that scope, but also contributed their Money
and Goods at all times; That it was still their resolution, and they would
never be backward to do all that lay in their power at any time, for the
Dignity and Safety of their common Country; and that they knew it to be their
duty so to do, according to the Oath of Fidelity, whereby they were bound to
the Empire: That since it was so, there was no necessity, that they should give
any further Declaration of their intentions; That the King of France himself,
when he was lately in Alsatia, had demanded no such thing of them: That,
moreover the Writing which he mentioned to have been published by the
Confederates, concerning the Cause of the War, had never been sent or shown to
them; and that, therefore they entreted him to be satisfied, and not do any
injury to them or their Country. At the very same time, Marquess Albert,
having received intelligence that Duke Maurice inclined to Peace, left a
Garrison in Spire, and with his Army returning before Franckfurt, prosecuted the
Siege, which Duke Maurice, upon conclusion of the Peace, had now raised, having
encamped on a higher ground on the other side of the Town, and this side of the
River Main, from whence he might most commodiously batter the place. For he
was cruelly vexed at this Pacification, and spoke very reproachfully of Duke
Maurice, Albert besieges Franckfurt.
refusing to be comprehended in the Treaty.

The Conditions of Peace were, The Heads of the Pacification at Passaw.
That the Confederate Princes shall lay down their Arms before the Twelfth day
of August, and disband their Forces, so as they may serve King Ferdinand if he
please, and neither annoy the Emperor, nor Germany. At and before the same day
also, the Landgrave shall be set at liberty, and safely conveyed to his own
Castle of Rhinefelse, which he has upon the Rhine, having first given Security
for performing the Conditions imposed by the Emperor at Hall in Saxony: The
Duke Maurice, the Elector of Brandenburg, and Wolffgang Duke of Deux-ponts, who
were then Sureties for him, shall be bound and renew their Obligation for him
again: That the Suit which the Landgrave has with the Count of Nassaw,
concerning the Lordship of Catzenelbogen, shall be brought to a new Trial
before the Princes Electors, and such others as both the Plaintiff and
Defendant shall pitch upon for that purpose; out of whom the Emperor shall
afterward choose six, who shall finally determine the Matter; but so, that the
Cause be decided within the space of two years: That within six Months the
Emperor shall hold a Diet of the Empire, and then it is to be deliberated, by
what means chiefly the Difference about Religion may be composed: That, in the
mean time, all shall live in peace, and no man be molested for his Religion:
That what shall be decreed by the common Consent of the States, and Authority
of the Emperor, touching the manner of quieting the disturbances about
Religion, to wit, that the difference be taken up in an amicable, just and
pious way, the same shall be firm and stable: That those of the Augustane
Confession shall also be admitted into the Imperial Chamber: That all other
things that concern the Honor and Liberty of Germany, shall be handled in the
Diet of the Empire: That Otho Henry Prince Palatine, shall have the free
enjoyment and possession of his own Country: That all, who during this War,
bound themselves by Oath to be true to the Confederate Princes, shall be
discharged from all Obligation, and be their own men, as before: That they who
have received hurt and damage in the tumult of War, shall not bring any Action
for it against those who did the same. However, That the Emperor and States
may, in the next Diet, consider of some way how their Losses may be repaired,
As to what concerns the French King, since he has nothing to do with the
Affairs of the Empire, he may if he please, declare to Duke Maurice what
private Demands he has to be made to the Emperor, that so they may be all
communicated by him to his Imperial Majesty: That those who are Outlawed, shall
be received into favor again, provided they act nothing for the future against
the Emperor and States of the Empire; provided also, that they who serve the
French King, do within three Months time leave his Service, and return into
Germany: That Marquess Albert of Brandenburg shall be comprehended in this
Peace, provided he lay down Arms, and disband his Forces at and before the
12th. day of August: And that he who shall break this Peace, be reckoned an
Enemy. All these Articles were signed by the Princes of the first Rank, who
were present, and by the Ambassadors and Deputies of the rest: For the
Instrument of this Peace was drawn up at Passaw, The French King offended at
the Pacification of Passaw.
and was also signed by the Emperor. Upon the Conclusion of Peace, the French
Ambassador returned home; for the King was highly displeased at the
Pacification: But being informed, that the Landgrave was in great danger,
unless some Capitulation were made, he consented to it, and sent back the
Hostages safe into Germany. On the Third of August, Duke Maurice and the
Landgrave's Son, departing from Franckfurt, separated, and took two several
ways; the Landgrave's Son went into Hesse; but Duke Maurice led his Forces to
Donawert, and sent them by Water down the Danube to Hungary, against the Turk.
Rifeberg joins with Albert.
But the Regiment commanded by Rifeberg, past the River of Main, and went to
Marquess Albert, to the great trouble of the Princes, who feared that the
Emperor might take occasion hereby to detain the Landgrave still prisoner. Who
slighting the Peace, makes war against the Bishops of Mentz and Spire.
Marquess Albert having lain some time before Franckfurt, where he refused to
be comprehended in the Peace, on the Ninth of August departed, and passing over
the Rhine, came and encamped near to Mentz, making the Citizens take an Oath to
be true unto him. About the end of July, the Emperor came from Villach to
Inspruck, and from thence, taking his way through Bavaria, with the German,
Bohemians, Italians and Spaniards, who arrived at Genoua about the beginning of
July, under the Command of the Duke of Alva, The Archbishop of Mentz comes to
Ausburg.
on the Twentieth of August he came to Ausburg. When the Archbishop of Mentz,
who had for some days wandered as a Fugitive up and down Schuabia, heard of the
Emperor's coming, he went to Ausburg also.

About this time, The Sienese revolt from the Emperor.
the People of Siena, at the instigation, and with the aid of the French King,
cast out their Spanish Garrison, demolish a Citadel that was there begun to be
built by the Emperor's Command, and declare for their former Liberty. Marquess
Albert, in the mean time, demands vast Sums of Money of the Churchmen,
especially of Mentz and Spire; but when the Money could not be raised, Marquess
Albert robs she Churches of Mentz and Spire.
since most of them were fled, he robbed the Churches of both Cities, and began
to take the Lead off of the Cathedral of Spire; but at the intercession of the
Senate, he desisted: At Mentz besides, he burnt not only the Bishop's Castle
standing upon the Rhine, his own Quarters, but also five Churches, and all the
Vessels on the River, even those that were laden with Wine and Wheat. The same
he did at Spire, with a purpose to incommode the Emperor's Passage; and having
called out the Soldiers whom he had placed in Garrison there, he marched into
the Country about Treves.

On the Thirteenth of August, The Death of Herman Archbishop of Cologne.
Herman Archbishop of Cologne, now very aged, ended his Life in his own Native
Country, and had such an End as he desired; for many times he had wished, that
he might either be permitted to propagate the Gospel, and reform the Church
within his Territories, or else to lead a private Life; and being sometimes
admonished by his Friends, that he exposed himself to great hatred and malice
by that changing of his Religion; he used to answer, That nothing could
surprise him, and that he was long ago prepared against the worst that could
befall him. He was descended of the Noble Family of the Counts of Weden.

The Landgrave being set at Liberty, The Landgrave set at liberty, is stopped
again.
as it was agreed upon, and returning home, when he came to Maestricht, by the
Command of the Governess Queen Mary, who was there then, he was stopped again,
and committed to the Custody of the same Spaniards who had kept him Prisoner
five whole years before. Now the reason of it was, because Rifeberg, who had
served under the Landgrave's Son, went over to Marquess Albert with all his
Men, as we said before; by which Action the Queen alleged the Peace was
broken, and that therefore she could not let him go before she knew the
Emperor's Pleasure. Duke Maurice being, as has been said, advanced to the
Danube, August the two and Twentieth, Duke Maurice sends his Forces into
Hungary.
sent his Army before, the Foot down the River, but the Horse over Land; whilst
he himself made a start home about some private Affairs, with design suddenly
to come back to them again.

When Marquess Albert was upon his March to Treves, Those of Treves refuse a
Garrison.
George Count of Holen, one of the Emperor's Commanders, came to the Defense of
the City with ten Companies of Foot; but being kept out by the Towns-People,
who refused a Garrison, he marched back again with his Men into Luxembourg.
Marquess Albert, in the mean time, August the Twenty seventh, summoned the
Place to surrender; And receive Albert.
and being next day received, he quartered his Soldiers in the Town, and the
places about. The Bishop all this while was in the Castle; which, The Emperor
again changes the Senate of Ausburg, and restores the Ministers of the Church.
as we said, stands at the meeting of the Rhine and Moselle. And now the
Emperor having staid some days at Ausburg, turned out the Senate which the
Confederate Princes had lately established, abolishing, at the same time, all
the Companies and Fraternities, and restored the former Government and Senate
which he himself had appointed. Of the Ministers, he turned out three,
suffering the rest to preach and act according to the Form of the Augustane
Confession; which being declared from the Pulpit, caused great Joy amongst the
People. This happened on the Twenty fifth of August; when about the same day,
the year before, they had been turned out, as we related in the two and
twentieth Book. Departing from thence, on the first of September after, he left
a Garrison of six Companies of Foot in the Town, and two days after came to
Ulm; but the Army marched another way, till they came to the Confines of
Wirtemberg: which was done for the sake of the People of Ulm, that the Country
of those who had been so faithful to the Emperor, might receive no damage. The
Duke of Saxony and Landgrave return home.
The same day the Emperor departed from Ausburg, he dismissed John Frederick
Duke of Saxony, with most kind expressions, and large Promises of Favor; and
he next day set out also upon his Journey homewards. The Landgrave in like
manner, being released, September the fourth, returned home six days after.

About the same time was published the fourth Tome of Luther's Works.
Melanchthon congratulates the return of the Duke of Saxony.
Melanchthon in his Preface to it, largely congratulated the liberty and return
of the Duke of Saxony, and highly extolled the Constancy that he had shown in
the worst of Times. All the while Marquess Albert was at Treves, the Churches
were shut: having staid then, eight days there, and Burnt some Monasteries and
Religious Houses, with a Castle of the Bishops standing not far from the Town,
he left a Garrison of twelve Companies of Foot in the Place. Afterward
Marching to Kirchen, Marquess Albert's March into the Country of Luxembourg.
a Town of the Duchy of Lorrain, lying half way betwixt Treves and Mentz, on
the thirteenth of September, he there crossed the Moselle, and entered first
into the Duchy of Luxembourg, and then Lorrain, doing great Damage every where;
and there stayed to know what Conditions the French King would propose unto
him. How sadly he had afflicted the Bishops of Franconia, we told you before;
but they having made their Application to the Emperor, upon his approach
toward them, he rescinded the Capitulations they had made, The Emperor charges
the Franconians to recover what Albert had taken from them.
charging them not to stand to them, but to endeavor to recover their own. The
same thing he permitted to those of Norimberg, and after, advised them to make
a League for the defense of their Country. To the same purpose, he wrote to
those of Schuabia; to the Borderers on the Rhine, and others, as well Princes
as free Cities. Wherefore, the Bishops we mentioned, and Norimbergers entered
into a League together; and whilst Marquess Albert, upon the Emperor's coming,
was gone into Lorrain, those of Bamberg, about the end of August, and in the
Month of September, recovered Forcheim, and most of the other Towns.

The Emperor being come out of the Country of Wirtemberg, The Emperor marches
with his Army to Lorrain.
directed his March toward Spire: but when he came to Bretta, a Town belonging
to the Prince Palatine, changing his Mind, he struck off to the Left, and
Marched toward Strasburg. The Deputies of Strasburg desires of the Emperor.
When he was come within six Miles of the City, he was met by the Deputies,
James Sturmey, Frederick Gottesseim, and Lowis Grempen, who came from the
Senate, to beg of his Imperial Majesty, that he would spare their Country, by
sending part of his Army another way, and that he would not enter the Town with
too many Men, nor change any thing in the Government. The Emperor having
received them very graciously, told them, that he knew very well, His Answer.
and was sensible, how nobly and bravely they of the City had lately behaved
themselves, and how great a Kindness they had done to him and the Empire; a
thing he should never forget, and would upon occasion, make it manifest, how
much he was obliged to them upon that Account. He afterward made an ample
Excuse for his sudden coming; partly, because of the Vessels that were burnt,
by Marquess Albert, partly, because of the News he had, of the French making
Incursions into Alsatia, and partly, because of the Season of the Year, which
required Expedition, that he might, as soon as possible, come up with the
Enemy: That therefore, he would March his Army by the City, and none should
enter but he himself, and his Servants, to Dine only, but not to stay all
Night. So then, being on the fifteenth of September come to a certain Village,
a Mile from the City, he dispersed his Forces up and down in the Country about,
and stayed there five Days: Then, at length, all the Carriages and Baggage,
being got over the Rhine, with no small Difficulty, and the Army ordered to
March forward by Break of Day, The Emperor makes his Entry into Strasburg.
he himself with no great Retinue, made his Entry into the Town, a place he had
never seen before, about Noon, and was Kindly, and Honorably received by the
Senate. He chanced to pass by the Cathedral Church, where he alighted, and
being introduced by the Priests, stayed a little to perform his Devotions, and
then went straight to Dinner. Then the Senate, Where the Senate makes him a
Present.
according to the Custom of the City, brought his Majesty a Present, and prayed
him to accept it. He made them answer, that he took it very kindly; and
repeated what some Days before he told them, of his Good Will toward them, for
the stout Service they had done the Public, in a very doubtful and dangerous
time; assuring them, that he was sorry for the Damage that had been done by the
Soldiers, to the Orchards and Farms without the City: but that since all
Inconveniences could not be prevented, where so great a multitude of Men was
got together, he prayed them to bear with it patiently, especially, since the
War it self was carried on for the sake of the Empire. Toward the Evening he
departed, taking his way to Haguenaw, and lodged all Night in the next Village.
When he was at Strasburg, on his March to Metz, he ordered the Ambassadors of
foreign Princes, Foreign Ambassadors, with the Emperor.
who followed his Court, to go and stay at Spire. Richard Morison was then
Ambassador from Edward VI. of England, Richard Morison from England, and Marco
Antonio Amulio from Venice.
a Man of great Reputation amongst the Learned; as Marco Antonio, Amulio was
from the Republic of Venice, a Person of much Learning too, and a great Friend
to the Ingenious.

In the few Days time that the Emperor stayed by Strasburg, it is not to be
believed, what Damage the Soldiers did in the Country about, and it was a very
sad Spectacle to see the poor Boors, The Rapine of the Soldiers.
with their Wives and Children, come running into the City, stripped of all they
had. The Senate made complaint of it, indeed, Which the Duke of Alva did not,
or could not repress.
to the Duke of Alva; but though he professed to be much troubled thereat, and
that he would take Care to prevent such Abuses for the Future; yet nothing
could avail, and wheresoever they went, they Plundered all, according to their
Custom. The Duke of Alva was General of the Army, and all Complaints of that
nature were brought to him, no Man being admitted to Audience of the Emperor,
who was thought to have any such thing to say.

In the mean time, the French, under the Command of the Duke of Guise, strongly
fortified Metz and Nancy, and had conveyed thither all the Corn and Forage out
of the Country. In the Emperor's Service, were, John Marquess of Brandenburg,
Alphonsus, Duke of Holstein, the King of Denmark's Brother, and Philebert, The
outlawed Persons slight the Peace, and stay in France.
Son to the Duke of Savoy. The proscribed Persons we named before, rejected the
Peace, and remained in France. The Duchess Dowager of Lorrain, banished her
Country, met her Uncle the Emperor, at Strasburg, and then went into the
Low Countries. On the seventeenth of October, Caspar Hedio, Hedio and Osiander
Dye.
the chief Minister at that time in Strasburg, died; and the very same Day
Andrew Osiander Died at Conningsberg, a Seaport Town in Prusia. The Emperor
went from Haguenaw to Landaw, and having spent sixteen Days and more there, in
most excellent Weather, at which all Men wondered, at length began his March
toward Metz; and on the two and Twentieth of October, The Emperor besieges
Metz.
laid down Siege before the Town. Most of the Citizens and Senators had Leave
from the French King, and departed, some to Lorrain, and some to Strasburg.
Marquess Albert was then at Pont a mousson, a Town on the Frontiers of Lorrain,
Marquess Albert makes his Peace with the Emperor.
with fifty Companies of Foot, and a considerable Body of Cavalry: But since
the French King and he could not agree about the Pay of his Men, both for the
time past, and to come, by the Mediation of some, he made his Peace with the
Emperor, who both pardoned him for all his former Offenses, and also discharged
any Person from sueing or molesting him for Damages done in the War; confirming
also the Transaction that he made with the Bishops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg,
excusing him from the War in Hungary, and for his sake, pardoning the Count of
Oetingen, Father and Son, of whose Fortune, mention has been made before: as
also, Albert, Count Mansfield, and his Sons. This being known, the Duke
D'aumale, Brother to the Duke of Guise, who had been sent by the King into
Lorrain, with a great Body of Horse, resolved to fall upon Marquess Albert, of
whom they had suspicion, lest he might do some Mischief, for the French had
sliely drawn over one Regiment from him already, Rifeberg goes over to the
French King.
which was commanded by Rifeberg; for he went over to the King's Party: They
tampered besides with the rest of the Army also, with design, that being
forsaken, and left naked by his Men, for want of Pay, they might rout him with
Disgrace. D'Aumale had the Bishop of Bayonne to advise him; and he inciting him
to action, he Charged with all his Force: The Foot refused to Fight, A Fight
betwixt Albert and the French at Pont a Mousson.
for want of Pay; so that his safety depended wholly on the Horse, whom
Marquess Albert encouraging with Promises and fair Language, boldly gave the
Charge, and was seconded by Fortune; for breaking through the main Body of his
Enemies, he scattered, and put them to Flight, though they far exceeded him in
Number, many, and those of Quality too, being slain; the Bishop of Bayonne made
his Escape by Flight: The Bishop of Bayonne escapes and D'Aumale is taken.
but D'Aumale having received three Wounds, was made Prisoner; and this
happened on the fourth of November. Albert having obtained this Victory, came
before Metz, with D'Aumale his Prisoner, and Encamped by the Moselle, where his
Prisoner being cured of his Wounds, George Lichtemberg.
he sent him to be kept in Custody in Germany. George of the noble Family of
Lichtemberg, was his Lieutenant General, as he had also been, during the
Protestant War. Afterward he advertised the Bishop of Bamberg of his Peace made
with the Emperor, who had confirmed their Transactions, and admonished him to
keep his Promise, and restore to him his Towns: charging his Officers and
Governors of Places, to retake them by Force, if he did not Obey.

At the same time, The Imperialists take Hesdin.
the Emperor's Army in the Netherlands, invaded France, and took Hesdin, the
strongest Fort in those Parts, which some time after the French King regained,
The French King writes to the Emperor.
who wrote to the Emperor in Germany, a very sharp Letter, advising him to
continue in Amity with him, and not forget the Kindness he had done him, and
the Liberty, which by his means he had recovered. Much about this time, the
Judges of the Imperial Chamber, who fled, as we said before, return to Spire.
The Emperor, who hiterto had stayed at Dedehove, a Town upon the Mosell, four
Miles below Metz, on the twentieth of November came into the Camp. Then chiefly
began the Town to be furiously Battered, so that the Guns were heard not only
at Strasburg, The Siege of Metz.
but also four Miles beyond the Rhine; and Strasburg is eighteen long Miles
distant from Metz. Duke Maurice, who, as I said, went with his Army into
Hungary, for the service of King Ferdinand, returned Home about this time: and
now was Volrate Count Mansfield, the Son of Count Albert, engaged in War with
Henry Duke of Brunswick, and had almost driven him quite out of his Country.
The Duke of Brunswick again driven out of his Country by Count Mansfield.
Duke Henry therefore, came to the Emperor in the Camp before Metz, and there
having bewailed his bad Fortune, begged Assistance; but that proved to be at an
unseasonable time. Now Mansfield served under Marquess Albert, whilst he was
still on the French side. Whilst the Emperor besieged Metz, Wolffgang, Master
of the Teutonick Order, took the Town of Elwang: The Master of the Teutonick
Order takes Elwang.
There is a very rich College there, which for many Months he coveted after;
and seeing they of the House have the right of choosing their Superior, whom,
they call Provost, and that they had chosen one of a Noble Family, in Exclusion
of him, he for Grief and Anger at the Disappointment, came, and suddenly
surprised the Place. This coming to the Duke of Wirtemberg's Ears, whose
Assistance was implored by the Fellows, as being the Protector of their Rights
and Liberties, The Duke of Wirtemberg regains Elwang.
he quickly got together his Men, and coming in the Winter time, easily
regained it, taking a Town or two besides from him, which he resolved to keep
in his Hands, until he should be repayed the Charges of the War. The French,
who were besieged, made many Sallies, especially upon Marquess Albert's
Quarters, and amongst others, Lichtemberg, whom I named before, was grievously
Wounded. The Winter was very Cold, with much Frost and Snow: and, though the
Emperor had a vast Army, yet he abstained from storming the Place, and carried
on the Siege by Mines: but that was a vain Attempt, when both the time of the
Year was a great hindrance to it, and the Enemy also had Intelligence thereof
by Spies. The Officers who defended the Town, were Gentlemen of noble Families,
all picked and chosen; but the chief Governor was the Duke of Guise. When
Marquess Albert's Officers were bringing together their Forces by his Command,
the Bishop of Bamberg made his Complaint of it to the Imperial Chamber, and on
the nine and twentieth of December, procured an Order from that Court,
commanding the Albertines to desist from Hostility. The People of Ulm demolish
Helfestein.
The People of Ulm having retaken the Castle of Helfestein, out of which they
forced the Garrison, which Marquess Albert left there, The Emperor raises the
Siege of Metz.
razed it to the Ground. The Emperor being forced by the Severity of the
Winters Cold, and despairing of taking the Town, about the end of December
raised the Siege, and drew off to Dedehove: From thence returning into the
Netherlands, he ordered some Regiments to Winter in the Country about Treves,
amongst whom also was Marquess Albert; but the Army, what by Sickness, and what
through the excess of Cold, was lessened by a third Part. 1553.
On the two and twentieth of January, the French had Te Deum sung in the
Churches of Metz, for their good Success in maintaining the Town. Lutheran
Books burnt by the Hangman at Metz.
Next day after, search was made in the Houses of the Inhabitants, for Lutheran
Books, which were publicly Burnt by the Hand of the common Hangman: and then
the Duke of Guise having left a Deputy there, returned into France. The same
Month, Marquess Albert's Officers took many Places from the Bishop of Bamberg:
and when, after the Siege of Metz was raised, Albert having for some time held
his Winter Quarters at Treves, and received from the Emperor, Pay for his
Soldiers, was in the Month of February, upon his return into Germany, the
Bishop of Bamberg on the seventeenth of February, obtained two new Decrees from
the Imperial Chamber, the one renewing the former Command; and the other
enjoining the Nobility and Gentry in Franconia, and State of Norimberg; as also
the Prince Palatine, and John Frederick Duke of Saxony, The Imperial Chamber
order War to be made against Marquess Albert.
as being next Neighbors, to come in to his Assistance.

About the end of February, the French King, whose Courage was raised by the
Defense of Metz, published a Printed Declaration to the States of the Empire,
which sharply galled and reflected upon the Emperor; for the design of it was
to render him both odious and contemptible, The French Declaration to the
States of the Empire.
to wit, that he was no more to be feared now, since his Power was broken, and
the Arts he had used for many Years detected: and since he was become so crazy
and valetudinary, that he could scarce fetch his Breath: but that his
Inclinations would still be the same toward them, that is to say, Honorable
and Free, and though some, whom he had obliged by great Favors, were not so
grateful as might have been expected, yet he would not for all that, abandon
the Friendship of the rest. When Marquess Albert had notice of the Orders
issued out from the Imperial Chamber, he wrote many Letters to the Bishop of
Arras, the Duke of Alva, Marquess Albert's Complaint of the Franconian Bishops.
and to the Emperor himself, acquainting them with the Attempts of the Bishops,
and how they violated their Compacts, and that since his Imperial Majesty had
confirmed the Transactions which they made with him, he desired that they might
be threatened, and commanded to Obey. Next, he sent an Agent to the Imperial
Chamber at Spire, His Deputation also to the Imperial Chamber.
to represent to the Judges that the Bishops transgressed, not only their
Covenants, but also the Emperor's Commands; and therefore to desire them, that
they would not move any Process against him, but recall the Decrees which they
had made. To these desires, The Chambers Answer.
they made answer, that it was their Duty to do Justice to all Men; and that
they could not deny the same to the Bishops, who sued for it. He on the other
Hand, having made a long Refutation of what they had alleged, insisted upon
the same Demand as before: For that otherwise, said he, if he received any
Damage, he would have a just Title to demand reparation from them. The Emperor
writes to Marquess Albert.
March the twenty third, the Emperor wrote an Answer to Marquess Albert's
Letter; that he denied not, but that Transaction had been confirmed by him:
That he had also liberally given him his Pay, much to his own Detriment, when
at the same time the rest had had nothing: That it would have been very
grateful to him, indeed, if the Bishops had been quiet; having sent an
Ambassador to them to persuade them thereunto: But that, since they refused,
and had appealed to him, to the Princes Electors, and Imperial Chamber, he
himself might see, that he could not deny them that, especially since some
States had conceived Suspicions of him, and given out various Reports: So that
if now, he should condescend to his Desires, and command them to perform their
Compacts, it would both be said, that he did unjustly, and also increase those
Suspicions: That it was his Duty to administer Justice equally to all Men, and
to discharge all proceeding by Force and Violence: that the only way then, was
to agree the matter amicably, and that he doubted not, but if he did prudently
weigh with himself all things, he would take that Course: In the mean time,
that the Affair might be the more easily managed, and with greater Advantage,
he would recommend it to the Care of his own Kinsmen, the Dukes of Bavaria and
Wirtemberg to interpose their Mediation: That the Bishops had by several
Letters made heavy Complaints to him; but nevertheless, he was confident, they
would not refuse a Treaty: That he had referred it to John Marquess of
Brandenburg, to make an end of the difference betwixt Henry Duke of Brunswick,
and his Nobility: and that he had appointed the Duke of Bavaria and Wirtemberg
also, to take up the matter betwixt the Counts of Oetingen, Father and Son.

Much about this time, The Commissioners of the Dukes of Saxony, John
Frederick, and Maurice meet to make them Friends.
both Count Mansfield's Army was dispersed, and the Commissioners of John
Frederick and Duke Maurice met, to make them Friends. For the former, in all
his public Letters, and the Money he Coined, took to himself the title of
Elector, and gave the two cross Swords, which are the Arms and Cognizance of
the Electoral Dignity, as also by the Emperor's Permission, he again fortified
the Castle of Gothen. Now Duke Maurice took that heinously, and complained of
it to his own States. They were all unanimously of Opinion, that a Peaceable
Course should be taken, to adjust all Controversies betwixt them: and therefore
Commissioners were sent, as we said, but in vain. At this time also, the Bishop
of Metz, Robert Cardinal Lenoncourt, wholly addicted to the French King, came
to Metz, where he challenged all the Jurisdiction to himself, as being a Prince
of the Empire, and appointed a new Senate, The Ambition of Cardinal Lenoncourt.
into which some Churchmen were admitted; nay, besides, he fortified Marsey, a
Town upon the Frontiers of Germany, and put a French Garrison into it. Marsey
garrisoned by French.
Letters of his had been intercepted before, wherein he desired of the King,
that he would allow him the Jurisdiction, which the Bishops, his Predecessors,
had enjoyed: For that it was his purpose, to establish a new Senate, and to
admit no Man into it, but he that was wholly at his Majesty's Devotion; that
otherwise those of the Emperor's Faction would remain there, and others remove,
which would prove very disadvantageous to his Interest: For that unless all
suspected Persons were turned out, he needed not Promise to himself the quiet
Possession of that Town: That it was his great desire, to give him some Proof
of his Inclinations to gratify him: since it had been his chief End in
removing into those Parts, and accepting of that Bishopric, that he might do
him some signal piece of Service. At that time, Marquess Albert was at
Heidelberg, with the Elector Palatine, and had sent the Letters we mentioned,
to the Imperial Chamber from thence. Then came also the Dukes of Bavaria and
Wirtemberg by the Emperor's Command to Heidelberg, upon the account of
Pacification; the Duke of Cleve came thither also. Princes meet at Heidelberg
to make Peace betwixt Marquess Albert, and the Bishops of Franconia.
There the matter was long debated, but when the Bishops had offered vast sums
of Money, and especially Bamberg, that he might quietly possess his own Towns,
and the Mediators had approved the Condition; Marquess Albert, who would have
no less than the Performance of their Compacts, which the Emperor had ratified,
who had Officers at the same time, raising Horse in Saxony, and was now assured
of assistance from other Hands, departed without any Conclusion made, to the
great offense of the Mediators. Marquess Albert slighting Peace, betakes
himself to Arms, and publishes a Declaration.
He thereupon presently betook himself to Arms, and by a Declaration of the
twenty seventh of March, gave a full relation of the matter, wherein he heavily
complains of his Adversaries, for their Breach of Articles, refutes the
Argument alleged by the Bishops, that it was not lawful for them to alienate
any Church Lands, and declares that he was necessarily obliged to maintain his
Right by Force of Arms. The Duke of Wirtemberg was personally present, and the
Bishop of Bamberg had sent his Deputies. The Controversy that the Duke of
Wirtemberg had with the Master of the Teutonick Order, The Duke of Wirtemberg,
and the Master of the Teutonick Order are reconciled.
was by the Mediation of the Princes accommodated, and the Master, for the
recovery of his Towns, was to pay thirty Thousand Florins. On the second of
April, being Easter Day, Duke Maurice came also to Heidelberg to meet the
Princes, having made great haste in coming, but three days after, he hastened
as fast home again. The Mediators we named, entered into a mutual League to
defend themselves from Injuries, wherein the Archbishops of Mentz and Treves
were also Comprehended. When Marquess Albert, having rejected the Conditions
proposed to him at Heidelberg, was bringing together an Army; The Decree of the
Imperial Chamber against Marquess Albert; and who were enjoined to put it in
Execution.
the Bishops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg obtained an Order from the Imperial
Chamber, directed to them, the Archbishop of Mentz, the Prince Palatine, Duke
Maurice, the Master of Prusia, John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, the Duke of
Wirtemberg, the Landgrave, the State of Norimberg, and all the Neighbors,
commanding them to aid and assist them; and this was on the second of May. Duke
Maurice, who otherwise entertained Jealousies of Marquess Albert, and thought
himself also obliquely aimed at by that War, for his own Security, made a
League with the Duke of Brunswick, and promised Assistance to the Bishops, Duke
Maurice makes a League with the Duke of Brunswick.
and the City of Norimberg. In the mean time, Marquess Albert having mustered
his Forces, Advances, Plunders, and Burns wherever he came in the Territories
of Norimberg, and the Bishops, takes Bamberg, the Capital City of the Province,
declares War against the Nobility of Franconia, Albert Burns and Plunders.
if they did not comply with him, and takes Schweinfurt, an Imperial City, into
which he put a Garrison. The Norimbergers, who held some Towns and Farms, He
takes Bamberg.
in Fee of the Crown of Bohemia, Prayed King Ferdinand, that for the defense of
those Places they might have leave to raise Horse in his Territories; The
Norimbergers raise Bohemian Horse.
the King condescended and permitted them to raise five Hundred. But these were
intercepted by Marquess Albert upon their March, who seized also some of those
Farms and Towns we mentioned. On the other side, Henry Duke of Brunswick, who
had taken on a great part of Count Mansfield's Army, sent his Son Philip to
make War upon his Neighbors, who having ravaged the Countries of the Bishops
of Munster and Winden, of Duke Erick, his Kinsman, and the State of Bremen,
extorted a vast Sum of Money from them. At the same time, The Duke of Brunswick
plagues his Neighbors.
the Controversy which the Duke of Cleve had with the Elector of Cologne about
Jurisdiction, was composed by the Mediation of the Electors Palatine, and
Treves. Not long after, the Electors Palatine and Mentz, and the Ambassadors of
the Dukes of Bavaria and Wirtemberg, Cleve and Cologne made Friends.
by orders from the Emperor, met at Franckfurt, upon occasion of the War of
Franconia. The Emperor's Ambassadors there, were Lowis, Count Connigstein,
Renard Count Solmes, A convention of the Princes at Franckfurt.
and Henry Hasen; some were also there from King Ferdinand. And when then the
Bishops urged the Emperor's Abolition, but Marquess Albert, his Confirmation,
the Electors advised the Emperor's Ambassadors to write to their Master, to
know from his Majesty, which of the two he would stand by. The Emperor's Answer
to his Ambassadors Letters.
the Emperor on the seventeenth of June, made answer to this purpose: When the
Year before he had heard of the Trans^^^tion, made betwixt Marquess Albert and
the Bishops, he had at the desire of some rescinded it, and charged the Bishops
not to observe it, as being a bad President, that any Man should be forced to
truckle under another, for doing their Duty to him and the Empire: But that
then again, when Marquess Albert would not Capitulate with him, unless these
Compacts were Confirmed, to avoid greater Inconveniences, which then threatened
all Germany, he had complied with the Times, and that because he had a good
Army on Foot, that Count Mansfield raised Forces for him also in Saxony, and
that he being engaged in the French War, could not restrain him, there being
none in Germany, that could resist him, so much as one day, he had made Peace
with him, in Confidence that he might afterward please him; especially if the
Princes, who were his Kinsmen, would interpose their Mediation, and that truly,
if it had pleased God to have given him Success before Metz, he was sure of a
way how to have satisfied him: For that he had done him singular good Service
in that War, which made him desirous to gratify him: That when afterward the
Siege did not succeed, he had essayed to make an Agreement by their means: but
that he was much troubled, that he should have rejected the Conditions
proposed, and again fallen to War, wherefore he had appointed this other
Meeting at Franckfurt: That now he had Information, that he was making War, not
only against the Bishops, but others also; which both vexed him, and was also
contrary to his Articles: for that, when he was received into Favor, he had
promised to be faithful and true in all things, both to him and the Empire, for
the time to come: That if he would now be but Conformable and Obedient, he
would forget all that was past: but that, since he himself was suspected by
some, of being Partial; they should endeavor all they could, to bring matters
to a Pacification, and expect no farther Declaration from him: That by so
doing, they would very much gratify him, who was resolved for the future, to
act nothing without their Counsel and Consent.

But after all, there was nothing concluded at Franckfurt. Much about the same
time, The Counts of Oetingen force a good Father into Banishment.
the Dukes of Bavaria and Wirtemberg, met by the Emperor's Order at Laugingen,
to make Peace betwixt the Counts of Oetingen, Father and Son. For ever since
the time of the Smalcaldick War to the Siege of Metz, Lowis Father and Son, had
wandered up and down without any certain Habitation, because they had been in
Arms against the Emperor. However, his Sons, Frederick and Woffgang, who
differed from him in Religion, possessed all his Lands and Estate. When the
matter was brought to a Treaty, the Father accused them of the highest
Ingratitude; and though the Princes took extraordinary Pains to set things to
rights, yet nothing could be effected.

The End of the Twenty fourth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XXV.
The CONTENTS.
Whilst the War goes on in Piedmont and Tuscany, Maurice Duke of Saxony, and
Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, declared a War against each other; and a Battle
is fought betwixt them, in which Maurice is shot in the Belly by an Hand-Gun,
and dies two days after; but Albert was beaten. Augustus the Brother of Albert
succeeds him; from whom John Frederick demands Restitution of his Patrimony.
Nine Protestants burnt at L^yons. Edward the Sixth, King of England's Sickness,
Death and Character. Jane Duchess of Suffolk, proclaimed; but Mary prevails;
She restores the Roman Catholic Bishops, and holds a Parliament. Hesdin
destroyed, Cambray assaulted, Albert beaten in a second Battle, by Henry of
Brunswick; He retires to Hoff, and is Outlawed. Jane Gray and her Father, the
Duke of Suffolk, and many others executed on the Account of Wiat's Rebellion.
John Frederick and his Lady end their Days in great Piety and Peace. Albert
Outlawed again. A second Parliament, and the Marriage of Queen Mary and King
Philip. Pool reconciles England to the Sea of Rome. A Diet at Ausburg. The
Transactions of England, and the Condemnations of some of the Protestant
Bishops and others. The Opening of the Diet at Ausburg, and the Speech made by
Ferdinand on that Occasion. The Thoughts of men insinuated.

IN order to the appeasing these Commotions and Wars in Germany, the Emperor
summoned a Diet in May, to meet the Thirteenth of August; and, Terovanne
besieged and taken.
having toward the latter end of April, besieged Terovanne, a strong City of
Artois, but then in the hands of the French: The Twenty first of June he took
it, and exposed it absolutely to the Will of his Army, who plundered, burnt and
dismantled it. Francis, the Son of the Constable of France, who was Governor of
the City, was also taken Prisoner. The English had sent some Months before a
splendid Embassy, and solicited a Peace; which was also labored by the Pope's
Nuncio, English Affairs.
but with no Success. In May, John Duke of Northumberland, who after the
Execution of the Protector, the Uncle of Edward the Sixth, was become the first
Minister of State in England, marries Guilford Dudley his Fourth Son, to Jane,
the Eldest Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, and Grandchild of Mary, younger
Sister of Henry the Eighth; King Edward being then in great danger of Death, by
reason of a Sickness. There was at the same time a War in Piedmont and Tuscany;
the Emperor being intent upon the recovery of Siena, and to that purpose having
ordered Peter Duke of Toledo, then Viceroy of Naples, to prosecute this
Design, with the Forces of that Kingdom; but he dying, and the Turkish Fleet,
which had on Board the Prince of Salerno, who was sent from France, on that
occasion, to facilitate the Turkish Designs upon the Kingdom of Naples, being
then expected in Italy, the Army returned to defend that Kingdom against this
approaching and nearer danger.

Albert carrying on the War in Franconia, The War in Germany.
Maurice and his Allies sent an Army thither: Whereupon Albert putting
Garrisons into Schweinfurt and some other places, when he had levied great Sums
of Money, and carried away many of the Inhabitants of Norimberg and Bamberg as
Hostages, turned suddenly toward Saxony. At Arnstad the Ambassadors of John
Frederick Duke of Saxony, met him, and desired that he would not damnifie the
Territories of their Master; which he readily promised, and faithfully
performed. Entering therefore into the Territory of Erford, he plundered many of
its Villages. This sudden Invasion gave Maurice a great disturbance, his Forces
being then sent away into Franconia; whereupon he summoned first the Nobility,
and then the Commons to take up Arms, and gathered together what Forces he
could hire against him: On the other side, Albert passed through his
Territories without doing any Injury till he came to Halberstad; the Gates of
which City he surprised, and forced the Clergy of it to pay him a considerable
Sum of Money: From thence, he passed into the Territories of Henry Duke of
Brunswick, which with the Assistance of Erick, and the Nobility of that
Dukedom, he burnt and wasted. In the interim, the Forces of Henry Duke of
Brunswick, which, as we have related above, were sent into Franconia, under the
Command of Philip his Son, having without success attempted Schweinfurt, and
now seeing the War carried to their own doors, returned into Saxony; the Forces
belonging to Maurice, did the same; and under the Command of Hedeck, joined
Maurice at Northausen. Maurice being thus reinforced, and seeing Albert had
invaded the Territories of Minden, a City of Westphalia, conjecturing by this,
that Albert designed to pass by Hassia into Franconia again, he thereupon left
Northausen, and with his Army marched to Eimbeck, to prevent him in this
Design. At last, all the Confederate Forces met at Osterode, the first of July.
From hence, not only Maurice, but Henry Plaw, Chancellor of Bohemia, in the
Name of Ferdinand King of Bohemia, sent a Declaration of War to Albert;
affirming, The Declaration against Alcert.
That whereas the Emperor by the common consent of the Princes and States of
the Empire, had determined that Peace should be preserved in the Empire, and
command that none of the Princes should use any force, but prosecute their
Pretenses in the Imperial Chamber, where they should have Justice done them
according to the Laws; which was then so absolutely necessary for the
preservation of the Empire, Germany, after so many Civil Wars, being very much
weakened, and standing in need of a Peace: That therefore when lately a War had
arisen in the Empire, Ferdinand, with the assistance of some of the other
Princes, had very much solicited the restitution of the Peace, and had at
length obtained the Consent of the contending Princes and Generals, and with
the Consent of the Emperor had made a Peace. By the Articles of which, it was
agreed, That not only the said Treaty should be observed; but also, that if any
Infraction was made, Succors should be sent to any of the Princes that was
invaded.

But you (say they) have not only refused to submit to this Decree or Treaty,
but have also presumed to write openly to some of the Electors, That it tended
to the Dishonor and Damage of Germany, and was to be esteemed no other than a
betraying of the Empire; by which words you have sufficiently discovered your
disposition toward your Country. After therefore you had was sted with Fire
and Sword the Banks of the Rhine, and that your Affairs in France did not
succeed, the Emperor having then also an Army in the Field, you desired to be
received into the Treaty of Bamberg and Wurtzburg, which you at last obtained
of the Emperor, by the intercession of others. You had no sooner obtained this
Favor of the Emperor, (who allowed you no use of. Force) but you immediately
abused it, and by your Servants frequently threatened the two Bishops; that you
would compel them by the Forces of Mansfeld and Oldenburg, to perform the
Articles; as may be proved by the Letters of your Ministers. In order to this,
you commanded those Soldiers you dismissed after the Siege of Metz, to return
to their Arms again in the beginning of April: And although those Prelates
submitted the Controversies then depending, to the Arbiterment of the Emperor,
his Brother Ferdinand, and the Princes of the Empire, or to the determination
of the Laws, and the Imperial Chamber; and especially at Heidelburg, offered
such Terms as were approved not only by the mediating Princes, but by the
Emperor also, as appears by his Letter; yet at last, you rejecting all these
Offers, entered their Territories, and taking some of their Towns, you show no
favor even to the Women of the Nobility you found there; you have not only
plundered and put under contribution the Territories of those two Prelates, but
you have executed the same injuries upon them of Norimberg, who according to
the Laws of the Empire, and the late Treaties, came into the assistance of
these Prelates, you have burnt many Forts, Towns, and Villages, and together
with these Buildings, you have in some places cruelly burnt the Inhabitants
too. After this, in many places you took the more ancient of the Citizens and
Townsmen as Hostages for the Money you had imposed upon them, and when they
were not able to pay it, you carried them with you into the lower Saxony, and
with great inhumanity and tryranny led them about with you as prisoners
whithersoever you went: You have, against all Justice, declared a War against
the Nobility of Franconia, and injuriously seized and garrisoned Schweinfurt,
which is an Imperial City. By all which Actions of yours you have disturbed and
terrified your Neighbors, and given Germany a new and unheard of Example. To
all this I may add, that you have not shown the respect you ought to Ferdinand
the King of the Romans, though you are one of his Homagers, and by an ancient
League obliged to him; yet notwithstanding you have presumed to make inroads
not only into his Kingdom of Bohemia, but also you have treated the Inhabitants
of those Territories which he had granted to the City of Norimberg, with more
than ordinary cruelty, and have slain some, and impoverished others of the best
Families belonging to them. You fell upon those Troops which they of Norimberg
had raised by his permission in Bohemia, not to the intent they should injure
any body; but only that they might preserve the Territories of that City from
force, and having reduced them under your power, you disarmed them, and so
forced them to return home. Besides, you have entertained some that are
Traitors to that Prince, and declared Rebels by him. And you have greatly
threatened, and injuriously treated the King and Kingdom of Bohemia, though that
Prince has done nothing to incense you against him; but on the contrary, has on
all occasions promoted your Interests as far as he could: And although it is
now above a year since, in an hostile way you entered his Country, yet you know
how friendly he lately wrote to you, that you should make satisfaction for the
wrong you have done, and for the future be more careful.

And now, as to what concerns my self (said Maurice) though in all my Life I
never gave you the least cause of Offense, but have rather bestowed many
Benefits upon you, yet the last year, when after the Peace, I went from
Franckfurt, and levied and led some Forces into Hungary, for the Service of my
Country, and for the sake of Ferdinand, against the Turks; you may easily
remember what Arts you employed to seduce my Soldiers from me; and how
injuriously you spoke of me to your own Soldiers, and to others, when speaking
of the Pacification of Passaw, you called it a betraying of Germany, reflecting
more particularly upon Me and Plaw the Chancellor of Bohemia, my good Friend.
Nor am I ignorant of what you attempted the last Winter, when I was in Hungary,
to ruin me and my Countries by the Forces of the Earl of Mansfield, which then
quartered in the Dukedom of Brunswick. And after you were reconciled to the
Emperor, it is well known to those who were present in the Camp, how
frequently, sharply and injuriously, and sometimes how threatningly you spoke
of me and my Provinces, during the Siege of Metz: And when that Siege was
ended, and you were returned home, being desired by me, in a Letter to acquaint
me with the Truth of these things, and to let me know how you were affected
toward me, you proudly replied, That you well remembered what you had spoken of
me or others, and would not deny it; and as to your Affections, your Answer was
such, as I could not certainly tell what you meant. And after that, writing to
me from Heidelberg, and dissembling my former Enquiry, you suggested some
things concerning some of the Nobility, which I suppose was done that you might
bring me to suspect and distrust them: But on the other side, I took no great
notice of these things, but advised and persuaded you not to break the Peace,
and desired you to let me know what I must expect from you. But then, in your
Letters to the Elector of Brandenburg, though you spoke with some Moderation of
me, yet where you mentioned the Pacification of Passaw, you did not obscurely
hint how you stood affected to me; and within a short time after, you more
plainly declared your Mind; for in some of your latter Letters, you desired I
would recall those Forces, which I had in Franconia, in the Service of my
Allies, or otherwise, you should have just cause of a War against me. And after
this, you passed through mine, and my Brother's Territories, when you had not
before acquainted us with it, which is directly contrary to the ancient and
received Custom of Germany. You pretend indeed, that you did me no Injury in
this Passage, but I have received other accounts from my Subjects; and yet if
this were true, I should not attribute it so much to your good Disposition
toward me, as to the necessity of your Affairs. It is well known how fast you
Marched, and how weary your Soldiers were: not were you ignorant how easy it
was for me, in case you had used any Forces against my Country, to resist it,
considering the weariness and weakness of your Men, and the nearness of my
Forces, which were then in Franconia, and might in a short time have been
recalled; no, your Intentions were, to fall upon me in your Return, nor did
your Soldiers dissemble it. And in your March through Thuringe, you Plundered
some Villages belonging to Erfurdt, which City is under our Protection, and
this you could not deny in your Letters to me from Brunswick. And in your March
through my Brothers Territories, your Soldiers slew some of his Subjects, near
Bickling; and beat and took Prisoners two Gentlemen, who appealed to me.

Yet all these Injuries could not provoke me to take Arms against you, but I
rather chose to write to you, and to exhort you to Peace, which was then to be
Treated of at Franckfurt by Mediators, desiring also, you would inform me, how
you stood affected toward me, and my Allies. But then how Injuriously and
Passionately you replied, may be seen by your Letter; for you would neither
discover your Intentions as to the one; and as to the other, you pretended to
suspect the Treaty of Franckfurt, so that all that I could gather from that
Letter, was, that you were resolved to prosecute the War in Franconia, and that
I and my Allies were to expect no great Favor from you, as occasion served,
which appeared more clearly in the Treatment those of Erfurt and others
received from you. For you levied great Sums of Money on the Bishopric of
Halberstad, and over, and besides, you plundered their Colleges in the open
Country, and damnified them otherwise, though you knew that Diocese was put
under my Protection by the Emperor. You did the same by the Archbishopric of
Magdeburg, and you extorted Money also from the Cities of Northausen, and
Mulhausen, which are under my Protection. You Prosecuted also Henry Duke of
Brunswick with Fire and Sword, so soon as ever you knew there was a League
between him and me, though it was very just and agreeable to the Treaty of
Passaw, and after the same manner have you Treated all my other Allies; which
actions are very contrary to the Tenor of your late Letters.

Now therefore, though King Ferdinand, I, and my Allies do earnestly desire to
preserve the Peace of Germany, and ever since the Treaty of Passaw have made it
our greatest Care to keep the Empire in Tranquillity, and especially this Part
of it, which many of the Nobility of Brunswick who are now in your Camp, can
testify: yet seeing you have brought the War into these Parts, and by your
Invading, my Allies have not obscurely discovered your Intentions toward me,
and forasmuch, as there is a common Fame, that you are raising greater Forces
under hand, and in another Name, which you can enver maintain, except you
suffer them to Rob, Spoil, and commit all manner of Injustice, so that not only
Franconia, but the rest of the Neighbor Provinces are in danger of being
ruined by you, which you have not been able to dissemble neither, but have
given out Words, that your Condition should not be inferior to that of others;
for these Causes I say, and for that you have left us no other way open of
preserving the Peace, King Ferdinand, I, and my Alies being near Neighbors to
the Danger, are resolved to take up Arms for our defense, to the Intent, we may
repel your Force, and unjust Violence offered to us, defend our Country, and
restore the public Peace. For this is not only allowed, but commanded by the
Laws of Germany; and we are also enjoined by the Supreme Authority of the
Imperial Chamber, to assist and defend our Neighbors in Franconia. And
although now you are Levying Forces, you pretend to do it in the Name of the
Emperor, and give out, that you have his Order for it, yet we are certain, this
is a mere empty Pretense: for the Emperor has not discovered his Mind to you
only, but to us and others also; and in a short time, you shall have a further
Account of it. And whereas our Enterprise tends to the Public Good, and
therefore we were not strictly obliged to make any Previous Declaration of our
Intentions, yet lest you should pretend Ignorance, we have thought fit to let
you know, that we are resolved to put a stop to your Lawless and Tyrannical
Cruelty, as the necessity of Affairs requires we should: and we, And our Allies
do further declare to you and yours, that you ought to be resposable for all
the Calamities which shall ensue in this War, you having refused to submit to
any just and equal Conditions of Peace. And we do not doubt but that Almighty
God will rather assist us, who seek nothing but the Preservation of our
Country, than you, who have committed great Injuries in, and began an unjust
War against it.

When this Declaration was delivered to Albert, Albert's Answer.
the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandenburg were in his Camp, who were come
to persuade him to a Peace. And he having read it, called his Commanders
together, and asked them if they would try their Fortunes with him, which they
promised him they would; and thereupon he called the young Gentleman, who
brought him the Letter, and speaking to him said; Your Prince has already
thrice broke his Faith with me, and done ill by me, and this is his fourth
Action of the same Nature: Let him come, and I will try what he can do; and
this tell him from me. And thereupon, having according to the Custom given him
some Crowns, he sent him away. Whereupon the Ambassadors, who were come to
Mediate a Peace, addressed themselves to him, and said, What, then Sir, shall
we do nothing? No, (said he) you may go Home.

But having a little more closely reflected on the Consequences of the War, the
third of July, he sent Erick of Brunswick to the Emperor to inform him, That by
the Cunning of some Men, many Enemies were stirred up against him, to the End,
that not only the Pacts that had been made with him, might not be performed;
but also that he might be driven out of his Country, and deprived of his
Possessions, that there was no doubt, but if Fortune favored their Designs,
they would soon declare for the French Interest. For in truth, France had
invited them with the Proffer of great Advantages, to enter into a new
Conspiracy, as he could prove. And that some of the Electors and great Princes
had already conspired to set up a new Emperor: That the Imperial Chamber was
the only Promoter of the Designs of the two Bishops against him, and therefore
he desired the Emperor, his Majesty would not take it ill, that he had been
compelled to make use of Force against them. He further insisted, That his
Enemies, in order to excite the public Envy against him, had spread abroad a
Report, as if he had Combined with the Emperor, to oppress the Liberty of
Germany; and that some of the Princes had objected this to him; and he said,
there were Letters to the same purpose spread about Germany, which were
pretended to be written from Arras, that he Levied Forces to assist the Emperor
in this Design. For that the Emperor intended to send his Son, the Prince of
Spain, and the Duke De Alva to the next Diet, that he might there be declared,
Successor of the Empire: That King Ferdinand was so fully persuaded of the
Truth of this, that he had entered into a League with his Enemies, and has
(says he) declared a War against me: he said he had excused this very
carefully, and to many, but yet the suspicion got strength every Day, and that
in truth, all the Dangers and Difficulties to which he was exposed, arose from
no other cause, than his adhering to the Emperor. Therefore he did most humbly
supplicate his Majesty to confirm his Treaty with the Bishops, and to undertake
the Protection of him and his; in Consideration of which, he promised he would
bring nine Thousand Horse, and one Hundred Foot Companies into the Emperors
Service, whenever his Majesty should require them.

In the mean time, Albert's Territories Invaded.
the Forces of the City of Norimberg, and the two Bishops in the Absence of
Albert invaded his Territories. Whereupon he put out a Declaration against the
City of Norimberg, accusing them of breaking their Faith and Promises to him,
and insinuating, that by joining in a League with those two Perfidious Bishops,
(as he called them) they seemed well disposed to re-imbrace the Roman Catholic
Religion. They on the other side Printed and Published an Answer soon after,
relating all things in the order they had happened, and beginning with the
Actions of the former Year, they show how cruel a War he had begun, what Pacts
they had made with him, how with the Consent of the Emperor they had entered
into a League with their Neighbor Bishops. How Albert had rejected the most
equal Terms the Bishops had offered to him, and had nevertheless begun a War
upon them, how he had lately again Invaded the Territories belonging to this
City, only because, pursuant to their League, and in obedience to the Commands
of the Imperial Chamber, they had sent Succors to their Allies. Amongst other
ill things which they charged him with, they mention this as an Instance of
Cruelty, which had never been practiced by any Man before him, That when he had
made himself Master of Altorfe and Lawffe, two Towns in their Territories, he
shut up in them, not only the Inhabitants of these Towns, but a great number of
Men, which he had brought together out of the Neighboring Country, together
with their Cattle, and then had Fired the said Towns in many places, at the
same time, and especially at the Gates, designing apparently to burn all these
People with the Towns, and that in this Fire, many Women and Children, and Aged
and Sick Persons, who could not make their way either through, or over the City
Walls, were miserably burnt to Death. And as to what he alleged, concerning
their changing their Religion, they show that Pretense was vain; for that the
League was only entered to the Intent, to preserve themselves and theirs from
unjust Force: And as for Albert, they said it was well known, how little he
regarded any Religion, as they could show by many Instances, which they would
certainly have inserted here, but out of Reverence to the noble House, of which
he was descended, and some other Princes that were his near Relations, they
would forbear doing it.

The fifth day of July, Sigismond King of Poland.
Sigismond, King of Poland Married Catherine, one of the Daughters of
Ferdinand, King of the Romans, which Lady had before been the Wife of the Duke
of Mantoua, Sigismond had before this in the Year 1535, Married Elizabeth,
another of the Daughters of Ferdinand, and Sister of Catherine, as I have
related above, in the fifteenth Book of this History.

Edward the sixth, Edward VI. Dies.
King of England, a Prince of great and unquestioned Virtue and Hope, died the
sixth day of July, as was commonly given out, of a Consumption, being about
sixteen years of Age; to the great Grief of all Pious Men. There followed in
England after his Death, great Changes, as I shall relate hereafter. There was
soon after, a report spread abroad, that he was Poisoned.

However it is certain, Europe has not in many Ages produced a Prince of so
great Expectation. From his Infancy he was well instructed in Religion, and
Literature, and he did not only understand the Latin, but the Greek and French
Tongues, and very much loved the Reformed Religion; he also Entertained and
Protected the Learned Men of Germany, Italy, France, Scotland, Spain, and
Poland.

Albert having passed the Weser, A Battle in which Maurice, Elector of Saxony
is Slain.
and the two Armies lying near together in Saxony, the ninth day of July, in
the Afternoon, they Engaged, and after a sharp Fight, Maurice, who was
strongest in Horse, gained the Victory; but then being shot through the Belly
with a Dagg, he died two days after of the Wound. Albert however, escaped to
Hanover without any Hurt. There was about four Thousand slain, the greatest
part of which were Horsemen, but then the number of the Prisoners was very
great. Henry Duke of Bunswick lost Charles and Philip, two of his Sons, in this
Battle. The day after the Fight, five Hundred Bohemian Horse, which were sent
by Ferdinand, King of the Romans, came into the Camp. The Lantgrave of Hassia
had also sent to Maurice his Assistance, about seven Hundred Horse. Thus by a
wonderful Change of Affairs, the Lantgrave, Henry Duke of Brunswick, and the
Bishops, sent their Forces to Maurice: And Erick of Brunswick, who had Married
the Sister of Maurice, sent his to Albert. It was also the Opinion of many,
that as Ferdinand, King of the Romans, openly espoused the Interest of Maurice,
and sent his Forces against Albert, so the Emperor underhand encouraged
Albert, and increased his Numbers, but then the Letter which the Emperor wrote
afterward (which I shall give the Reader in due time) takes no notice of this.
It is also reported, that the King of France had then entered into some new
designs with Maurice, and that he was very much afflicted for his Death.

Maurice being carried into his Tent, sent that Night, a Letter to the Bishop
of Wurtzburg, Maurice Duke of Saxony dies.
on of his Allies: and in it desired him to shut up the Passages, and endeavor
to take Albert in his Flight, or at least to intercept his Retreat that way. He
said, whatever the event of his Present Condition were, he enjoyed the comfort
of a good Conscience; for he had entered into this War for no other ends, but
to repel that Destroyer, and to restore the Peace of Germany; he died in the
three and Thirtieth Year of his Age, and was buried the fourteenth day after
the Fight, at Fridberg, a Town of Misnia, by Henry his Father, and Albert, an
Infant of his own. His Presence is thought to have contributed very much to the
Victory, many of his own Horse having fled in the Fight, and that nothing else
deprived Albert of it. There were fifty Foot, and fourteen Horse Colors taken
from the Enemy in this Battle, and presented to Maurice that Evening. Thus
Maurice, Duke of Saxony lost his Life, but then he very much weakened the
Forces of Albert, he never afterbeing able to bring a considerable Army into
the Field.

When the Body of Maurice was carried through Leypsick to be Buried, Prodigies
which seemed to foretell his Death.
Joachimus Camerarius made a Funeral Oration in Commendation of him;
enumerating also the Prodigies which preceded his Death, observing, that drops
of Blood were found upon the Leaves of some Trees, that the Dogs howled more
than was usual, and that some Dogs had torn others, the neighing of Horses, the
clashing of Armor, and many other such noises, which were very dreadful: That
his Tent was blown down by a Whirlwind, when none of the rest were: And lastly,
some ominous Words which fell from the Duke, and seemed to presage his Death.
And in truth, as to what concerns the drops of Blood, they were observed in
many Places, (and amongst the rest, at Strasburg) to be found frequently in the
beginning of July fallen upon Herbs, the Leaves of Trees, Stones, and the Tiles
of Houses. There was then a vast flight of Butterflies, and there were some
that were of Opinion, that these drops of Blood proceeded from them, but then,
others thought they were Presages of something that was to happen. Maurice and
Albert being Princes of an equal Degree and Honor, had till then, lived in the
greatest Friendship and Conjunction. They had served the Emperor together, in
the French, Smalcaldick, and Magdeburgian Wars. And they were in the beginning
of this fourth War, united against the Emperor: But some differences arising
between them, as I have said elsewhere, their Friendship ended in this dreadful
manner. When Maurice died, Augustus his Brother, was with his Wife in Denmark,
with his Father-in-Law, the King, and therefore the Nobility, and States of
Saxony, retained with them a part of the Army for the security of the Province,
that is, about twelve Companies of Foot, and five Troops of Horse, the rest
were dismissed, and for the most part, after the Funeral returned Home.

The eighteenth of July, Albert sent a Letter to the Subjects of Maurice,
wherein he insinuated, that when he passed through their Country, into Saxony,
he did not commit the least act of Hostility; because he had not any anger
against them: That on the contrary, Maurice had not only injured his Subjects,
but that he might gratify some wicked and perfidious Bishops, had without
cause or example broke the ancient League, which had been so long between the
Houses of Brandenburg and Saxony, and made a War upon him: And therefore seeing
they had assisted their Prince contrary to the Commands of the Emperor, who had
signed his Treaty with the Bishops, he was now to consider how he might
retrieve his Loss, and recover his Damages, and to that end, he in his turn did
now renounce all those terms of Friendship, which till then, had been between
him and them.

The Emperor's Army having taken and destroyed Terovanne, Hesdin taken.
marched from thence to Artois, and took the Castle of Hesdin in the Month of
July by Storm. In this Action Horatius, a Son-in-Law of the King of France was
slain, and many of the Nobility of France were taken Prisoners, and amongst
them, Marchiane, one of the Marshals of France, and an Inhabitant of the
Forest of Ardenne.

The account of the Battle of Saxony was brought in a very few days to the
Emperor; The Emperor's Advice to the Princes of Germany*
who the Twenty second of July answered Erick of Brunswick, who had been sent
to him by Albert, as I have above related; That he was very sorry the
differences had been carried so far, that he had much wished the Quarrel might
have been composed, and that he feared if it were not here ended, it would have
ill effects upon the Empire, and especially upon Albert; considering the great
number of the Princes of great Note which were leagued against him, and
concerned in it. That therefore it was his Desire and Command that they should
lay down their Arms, and consider of the Means of procuring a Peace: That if
Albert were so content, he would take care to persuade those of the other Party
to acquiesce in this his Opinion: He desired very earnestly that Albert would
not deny him this, because otherwise in the present state of Affairs, he (the
Emperor) could not make use of Albert's Service, witout increasing the
suspicion which was then in Germany: That this would be a very great affliction
to him who desired nothing more than the Peace and Tranquillity of the Empire.

In the beginning of August, Augustus Brother of Maurice, succeeds.
Augustus the Brother of Maurice, returned out of Denmark; a few days after,
having consulted with his Council, he caused his Subjects, and amongst them,
those of Wirtemberg, to take an Oath of Allegiance to himself and his
Heirs-Male, and that if he had no Male-Issue, that then they should return
under the Subjection of John Frederick and his Sons, if he were obedient to the
Emperor, and observed the Treaties made some years since: but if he did
otherwise, then they were to admit the Landgrave. This being thus done, he was
proclaimed Electoral Prince, and summoned a Diet of his States to meet the
Twentieth of August. The Seventeenth Day of August there was a very great
Earthquake at Meissen in Misnia.

At the Day appointed the States assembled, The Diet of Saxony.
and a numerous Diet was opened at Leypsick; Augustus proposed to their
consideration in the first place, Whether they would enter into his late
Brother's League with King Ferdinand, the Princes and Bishops, and prosecute
the War against Albert. Secondly, What should be done in order to a Peace with
John Frederick, the late Elector; because in the absence of Augustus, that
Prince had sent Ambassadors to the Great Men, and demanded to be restored to
the Electoral Dignity, and to his Possessions which had been taken from him by
the Emperor, and conferred upon Maurice?

After Deliberation, the States gave Answer, That they were of Opinion, that he
should make a Peace with both Parties, and that Albert the Elector of
Brandenburg should be induced to enter into a Treaty of Peace, and to that
purpose there passed an Act of State, though Ferdinand King of Bohemia, very
diligently solicited them by Henry Plaw his Chancellor, to continue in the
late League. To this Convention John Frederick sent another Ambassy, and
demanded to be restored to his Inheritance, with some sharpness of Words; and
it was seconded also by those which were his Subjects, in this Assembly, but it
had no effect, Augustus pretending, that he was not obliged to a Restitution
and adhering to the Articles and Agreements made by John Frederick with the
Emperor when he was taken Prisoner; yet he said, he would consent to a
Continuance of the Claim, and not reject all Treaty thereupon. During this
Convention of the States, Henry Duke of Brunswick desired the Aid of Augustus
Duke of Saxony against Albert, who was then levying new Forces.

So soon as ever John Frederick heard of the Death of Maurice, he sent John
William, one of his Sons, to the Emperor, into the Low Countries, to solicit
his Restitution; and almost at the same time the Nobility and States, in the
absence of Augustus, sent Ambassadors to recommend him to the Emperor. John
Frederick at the same time also sent Ambassadors to Ferdinand, and to the King
of Denmark about the same Affair. In the mean time, the Bishop of Wurtzburg
besieged Schweinfurt, which had been Garrisoned by Albert, as I have said
above, and the Forces of the Bishop of Bamberg, and of the City of Norimberg,
when they had sometime besieged Collebach, levied the Siege, and joined with
the Count of Plaw, who then lay before Hosie, a Town belonging to the Elector
of Brandenburg.

In this Month Nine Persons were condemned to be burnt at Lions; Nine Persons
burnt at Lions in France.
some of them having been imprisoned above a year. There were Questions
proposed to them one by one, concerning the Presence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist, Purgatory, the Mass, Auricular Confession, the Ceremonies of the
Church, Invocation of the Virgin Mary and the Saints, the Primacy of the Pope
of Rome, Free Will, Justification by Works, concerning the Church, the Power of
the Bishops, the Monastic Vows, the Choice of Meats, Extreme Unction,
Confirmation and Images. They all of them severally made the same Answers to
every one of these Questions with great constancy; alleging for what they
said, the Testimony of the Scriptures. Whilst they were yet in Prison, they
comforted one another by their Letters, and they sent others to their Friends,
and to the Neighbour-Churches, wherein they gave an Account of what had
happened. One of these Prisoners, Lewis Marsac, a Soldier, reciting several
Passages out of the Sacred Scriptures, the Inquisitors who examined him, asked
him if it were fit for him to read the Scriptures, and how he knew these things
were in the Gospels? The King's Lieutenant also said there were only two
Evangelists, Matthew and John, the other two and Paul picked up a few Scraps or
ends of the Story, and patched them together: He said also, That if the Doctors
of the Church had not given Authority to the Writings of St. Paul, he should
not have regarded his Epistles more than he did Aesop's Fables. When on the
other side, Marsac replied, That there were very excellent Testimonies in the
Scriptures concerning the Vocation and Apostleship of St. Paul, especially in
the 1st. Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians: He replied, That is nothing
to the purpose; for he bears witness to himself. The Executioner had order to
put an halter about the Neck of each of the Prisoners when they were carried to
Execution; but Marsac having served the Crown as a Soldier, the Judges had
ordered he should be led without that Mark of Disgrace: But Marsac turning to
the principal Judge, said, Is their Cause better than mine? I Pray Sir, why do
you not bestow the same Chain upon me? Why should not I too be admitted into
the Fellowship of this Noble and Illustrious Order of Knights? Alluding to the
Custom used by Princes, who to honor and exalt their particular Friends, admit
them into their Order (as they call it) and give them a Chain or Collar of
Gold, as an honorable Badge of it. Five of these, who were Frenchmen, had been
Students in the University of Lausanne, where they had been maintained by the
Canton of Bern, in which that City stands; and when they heard these Students
were taken up, and in great danger, the Canton sent a Memorial to the King, and
desired these Students might be returned to them: But the King disappointed
them in this, pretending, that by Law he could not do so. It is thought the
Cardinal of Tournon blew the Coals in this Affair.

We have already spoken of the Death of that Illustrious Prince Edward the
Sixth King of England. English Affairs.
He had before been consumptive, and in the beginning of January he fell sick.
His Disease increasing, he became very sollicitous for his Kingdom and the
State of Religion, and began to consult his more intimate Friends, Who was the
fittest Person to suceed him? For though his Father had by his last Testament
made Mary and Elizabeth, his two Sisters, his Heirs, as we have above related;
yet because now he was come to somewhat a more advanced Age, he thought it
belonged to him to appoint his Successor, and the rather, because there was a
general and common Dispute concerning their Legitimacy, and Mary did also
profess the Roman Catholic Religion; and if she should succeed, he had reason
to fear the Religion which was then established would be subverted, and the
Nation be endangered to be brought under the Dominion of a Foreigner. He
resolved therefore after great deliberation to choose Jane, Duchess of Suffolk,
Grandchild to Mary, the younder Sister of Henry the 8th. for his Successor.
This Resolution being approved by his Council and Nobility, and the Mayor of
London, the Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of all England, was sent for
to Court to sign it: But he refused to do it till he had spoken with the King;
being accordingly admitted into the King's Chamber, and having with great
freedom discoursed this Business with him, at last he consented, upon the
King's extreme importunity. The King died (as I have said) the 6th. of July,
and the fourth Day after Jane was proclaimed Queen of England; and the
Instrument was read at the same time; reciting how King Edward, for great and
weighty Causes, had, with the Consent of his Peers, disinherited Mary and
Elizabeth his Sisters, and transmitted the Succession of the Kingdom to Jane
his Cousin. The Nobility and People of England were much displeased with this,
not so much out of affection to the Princess Mary, as out of hatred to the Duke
of Northumberland; there being very few or none who did not look upon him as
the Author of this Project, that he might bring the Crown into his own Family.

Whilst these things were thus in agitation, the Princess Mary fled to the
Castle of Framingham in Sleidan has Norfolk.
Suffolk, and assuming the Authority of a Queen, implored the assistance of her
Subjects. This being known at London, Northumberland levied Forces, and with
the consent of the Council, marched out of the City with an Army to take the
Queen: But in the Interim, that part of the Council which continued in London,
seeing the dissatisfaction of the People, and that great Forces came in to the
Assistance of the Queen in Suffolk, they thereupon changed their Minds, and
proclaimed Mary Queen, and detained Jane a Prisoner in the Tower. As Soon as the
News of this change came to the Camp; the Army, which neither willingly
embraced the Cause, nor loved the General, revolted also, and upon the Receipt
of a Letter to that purpose, seized the Duke of Northumberland at Cambridge,
and brought him the 25th. day of July a Prisoner into London. It is incredible
with what Reproaches the People entertained him: Some called him Traitor,
others Parricide, and other, the Murderer of a most innocent Prince. For his
attempting to set his Daughter-in-Law upon the Throne, had caused a mighty
Jealousy, that he had a long time been forming this Project, and in
conclusion, had hasted the King's Death. Afterward his Children and his
Brother were taken into Custody, and some other Noblemen, and Sir John Cheek,
the King's Tutor, a Person of great Learning and Virtue; but this last was soon
after dismissed, when they had stripped him of almost all he had.

The Third of August, Queen Mary enters London.
Queen Mary entered London, and going to the Tower, she immediately released the
Duke of Norfolk, who had been almost seven years a Prisoner there; Tonstal,
Bishop of Durbam, and some others, who being of the Roman Catholic Religion,
had been removed from their Sees; whom she also restored to their Places again.
The Story of Gardener.
And as for Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, though he had in a Printed Book
defended the Divorce made by Henry the Eighth, of Catherine, the Mother of
Queen Mary, as I have set forth in the Ninth Book of this History; yet she
notwithstanding made him Lord Chancellor of England, which is an Office of the
greatest Dignity and Power in that Kingdom. When Queen Catherine urged in her
Defense the Bull of Pope Julius the Second, in Approbation of her Marriage, the
King on the other side, said it was invalid, and sent Gardener, who was not
then advanced to the Dignity of a Bishop, to Pope Clement, to procure that Bull
to be by him declared void. He coming to Rome in February, in the Year 1529.
earnestly pressed his Errand on the Pope. Clement, according to the Proverb,
had then got a Wolf by the Ears, and though he was very desirous to please the
King, yet fearing to offend the Emperor, he only said he would write to the
Emperor to produce the true Bull. Gardener consented to this, but desired it
might be done in two Months; and when that time was elapsed, that if the Bull
were not then produced, it might be declared false. The Pope thought this way
of Proceeding was contrary to the Custom, and unjust, and endeavored to
appease and quiet the King by good words: But Gardener said on the other side,
that if what the King desired, were not done, it would bring great Mischief on
the Sea of Rome. The Emperor and Ferdinand his Brother, the 27th. of April, by
their Ambassadors expressed their discontent at this, and expostulated with the
Pope, as too too much inclined to favor the King, and for that he had
permitted the Case to be heard in England; and at the same time they appointed
Proctors to prosecute the Suit in their Names at Rome, with large Commissions
and Instruction. Thereupon the Pope commanded Cardinal Campeio to return back
to Rome; to which he was induced by a Letter which he had received from Wolsely
Archbishop of York, wherein he had given the Pope an Account of a new Love the
King had entertained, as I have set forth in the said Eleventh Book.

The Twenty second Day of August, Northumberland beheaded.
the Duke of Northumberland, having before been tried, and found guilty of High
Treason, and received Sentence of Death, was brought upon a Scaffold on
Tower Hill, where he made a Speech to the People, and amongst other things,
exhorted them, That they should continue steadfast in that Religion which they
had received from their Ancestors; affirming, that he thought all the
Calamities which had befallen the English, especially since the Death of Henry
the 8th, proceeded from nothing but their having separated themselves from the
rest of Christendom. He had for some years before pretended to be of a contrary
Opinion, and had openly renounced the Roman Catholic Religion; and it was said
he had been prevailed upon to discourse thus, upon Promises of a Pardon. And
although he ended his Speech with a Protestation, that what he had said, came
from his heart, yet some thought he repented it, when he had looked about him,
and saw there was no refuge to be expected, and that he had been imposed upon
by flattering Promises. Sir Thomas Palmer Knight, who was beheaded at the same
time, professed the Protestant Religion with great constancy. Northumberland
was (as I have said) convicted of Treason and Rebellion; and although, there were
great Suspicions that he had poisoned the late King, yet this, at his Trial,
was never, or very little at most, urged against him; and in the Sentence or
Judgment pronounced against him, it was never mentioned.

We have said above how Peter Martyr the Florentine, Peter Martyr.
about six years since was sent for into England by the late King Edward, and
upon his Arrival, made Professor of Divinity at Oxford. He was much honored
and esteemed, both for his signal Virtue and Learning; but then there were
others who did no less envy and hate him. Upon the Death of the King, he was
commanded not to depart, or carry away what he had, without the leave of the
Magistrates, and severely threatened if he did any thing to the contrary; he
readily obeyed this Order at first; but when he perceived Delays were made use
of, he wrote to the Council, and acquainted them with the Condition he was in,
and desired, that if any thing were laid to his Charge, he and his Accusers
might be heard face to face before the Council. When, by this means, he had
obtained their leave to be gone, he went to London: There he found the
Archbishop of Canterbury, his good Patron and Friend, who, by the Preachers,
was (at the instigation of the Roman Catholic Bishops) represented as one that
was unsteady; that the Mass was restored at Canterbury by his Order; that he
himself was to say Mass at the King's Funeral, and that he had promised the
Queen he would do so. And at the same time, there was a great noise of a
Disputation that was soon after to be. So soon as the Archbishop heard this, he
put out a Paper to vindicate himself; One Thornton Suffragan at Dover.
wherein he confesses, That a certain Priest, without his knowledge or
consent, had said Mass at Canterbury. The other Report, concerning the King's
Funeral, he denied; adding, that if the Queen would grant him her Leave, he
would prove, that the Communion-Service, and the Articles of Religion set out
and established by King Edward, concerning the Lord's Supper and several other
things, were consonant and agreeable to the Holy Scriptures: but on the
contrary, the Papal Mass was contrary to the Institution of Christ. To the
proof of which Assertion, he did not need the Aid and Assistance of many, but
only desired that Peter Martyr and a few Four or five.
others might be permitted to be his Companions and Seconds in this Affair. And
whereas they of the Church of Rome made great Boasts of the Antiquity of their
Religion, and pretended it had stood above Fifteen Hundred years, he said, they
could never prove this; but he undertook to show that the Religion which was
settled here under Edward the Sixth, and which was yet the established Religion
of England was the genuine and truly ancient Religion which was delivered to us
by Christ and his Apostles. This This Manifesto is extant at large in Dr.
Burnet's History of the Reformation.
Manifesto being by him made public at London about the Fifth Day of
September, Peter Martyr came about the same time from Oxford to him, and being
by the Archbishop acquainted with this Paper, he commended it, and said he
would not decline any labor or danger that could befall him in the defense of
it. Whilst they were expecting a Disputation, the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, The Bishop imprisoned.
and the Bishop of London, Worcester, and some others, were for their Religion,
and for some Sermons they were said to have Preached against the Queen, by the
Order of the Council, before she was proclaimed Queen, sent to the Tower, the
Fourteenth of September. Hugh Latimer was also taken up, whom King Edward had
delivered out of Prison, his Father having confined him on the account of his
Doctrine. In the mean time, though Peter Martyr saw clearly the danger he was
in, yet having done nothing contrary to the Laws of England, he relied upon his
Innocence, and would not depart without a Passport or public Dismission. When
therefore he had obtained this, Signed by the Queens own Hand, he arrived first
at Antwerp, and from thence went to Cologne, and so to Strasburg; from which
place he went when he was sent for into England, and here he found Bernard
Ochin, who was come thither not long before him.

It was reported in Germany, that the Emperor had advised Queen Mary, his
Cousin, that she should govern her People with great Clemency, The Religion
changed in England.
and not change the Religion she found settled, nor marry a Stranger, he himself
having learned by sad experience the great dangers which attended a Change in
Religion. Whether this were so or not, I cannot affirm; but the Event seems to
prove the contrary; for she having commanded all the Protestants which were
Foreigners, to depart the Kingdom, and imprisoned many of the Natives, quickly
resetled the Roman Catholic Religion, as I shall show hereafter: the first of
October the Queen was Crowned, and the Tenth of the same Month a Parliament
began.

The Emperor had summoned a Diet to meet the Thirteenth of August, German
Affairs.
as I have said in the beginning of this Book, which was first Prorogued to the
First of October, and afterward to the Month of January. After the Battle in
which Maurice of Saxony was slain, Henry Duke of Brunswick, and Albert Marquess
of Brandenburg, began each of them to recollect their scattered Forces, and to
levy more; the Bishops and Norimbergers supplied Henry with Money for that
purpose: But then all men wondered from whence Albert had these Nerves of War:
And there was a Report, that Mary, the Emperor's Sister, furnished him with
Treasures; which was again denied by the Imperialists, and they pretended too
to wonder that men should be so silly to think so. But the Moneys coming in
somewhat slowly to Henry, and this being known to Albert, he reduced him to
great danger, by soliciting his Soldiers to a defection, who bore the delay
of their Pay with great impatience; but the Tenth day of September, in the very
moment of time when the Soldiery was in their Ferment, and just entering into a
Mutiny, the Remedy came, and all that Tempest was quieted. And Henry, for the
better supporting his Interest, made a Peace with Erick his Kinsman, who had
till then served under Albert, against him. The King of Denmark some time
before this, had sent Ambassadors into Saxony, to promote the Interests of
Augustus his Son-in-Law, and they being assisted by the Ambassadors of the
Elector of Brandenburg, made a Reconciliation between Albert and Augustus. The
Conditions were, That Augustus should not prosecute the War begun by his late
Brother, nor send Succors to the Enemies of Albert: And Albert promised the
same for his part; and that if the necessity of the War enforced him to march
his Forces near the Territories of Augustus, he would do him no damage.
Augustus was to take great care that none of his Soldiers when they were
disbanded, should enter the Service of Albert's Enemies; and lastly, That the
ancient League between the Houses of Saxony and Brandenburg should be renewed
as soon as could be. Albert defated again.
The next Day, which was the Twelfth of September, Albert marched his Army out
of Brunswick, and falling upon the Enemy, which was then near the City, he was
beaten: Henry had greater numbers of Men, and in them about 20 Foot-Companies;
but Albert had no Foot; yet he made so vigorous a Defense, that Henry found it
a Bloody Victory. And Albert retreated again into Brunswick. Hoffe taken.
In the mean time, those who were besieged in Hoffe, were in great streights,
Count Plaw and his Allies having battered the Town extremely with his Cannon;
and Albert being beaten, so that no Relief being to be expected, the Place was
surrendered, and Plaw took an Oath of Fidelity to himself and his Children, and
left one Foot-Company and some Cannon, to keep it for him.

We already mentioned the Turkish Fleet, Corsica taken By the French and Turks.
which coming this year into the Tyrrhenian Sea, some French Ships from
Marseilles, joined them, and they entered the Isle of Corsica, belonging to the
States of Genoua, and reduced all (but a few Towns) under them. We have also
said how the Emperor took Hesdin, which he demolished in the same manner as he
had Terovanne.

In the Interim the King of France was gathering an Army at Amiens, The Waa in
France.
and expected the coming of the Swiss, whom he had sent for to assist him. The
Emperor having ruined Hesdin, had some thoughts in the latter end of August to
send his Army against Dourlens: But the Constable of France having had some
notice of this Design, he suddenly brought a great Body of Horse, and some Foot
into the Field; and falling sooner than was expected, upon the Imperialists,
put them to flight, and slew and took Prisoners many of them. And when after
this, in the beginning of September, ten Thousand Swiss were come up, the King
coasted the Sum (a River which runs by the City of Amiens) and went up to
Corbie, and from thence sent some Troops of Horse toward Bapaume, as if he
designed to besiege that Town. The seventh day of September he sent an Herald
to Cambray, to know how the Inhabitants stood affected to him. Cambray besieged.
It is a great City, and a Bishops See, and belonged anciently to the Empire.
In all these Wars between the Emperor and France, it had hitherto stood Neuter,
but at this time was more inclined to the Emperor's Interest. The King
therefore sent to them, that if they would stand to their Pacts, he would do so
too, provided they opened their Gates to him, who was the Protector of the
Empire, and were ready in all things to show him the same respect they did to
the Emperor. When the Governor of the City had communicated this Message to
the Emperor, he received this Answer; That seeing the French had wasted their
Territories by Plunder and Fire, they should make use of Forces against them.
But before this Answer came from the Emperor, the French entered into acts of
Hostility against the City, and after some Skirmishes for some days, besieged
the City, but finding that there was no advantage gained by it, the thirteenth
of September he raised the Siege, and marched within two Miles of the Emperor's
Camp, which lay then by Valenchiennes, a City of Hainault upon the Schelde, the
next day he came nearer, and it was thought a Battle must have followed, but
the Event was this, the King coming so near the Emperor's Camp, and losing many
of his Soldiers, the eighteenth of September drew off his Army, and marched
away, wasting the Countries through which he passed. An account of this being
given by both sides, the French pretended the Imperialists had refused to
Fight, which they denied; but the King of France however soon after returned
home and dismissed the Swiss. In the same Month, the six Foot Companies, which,
as I have said in the former Book, the Emperor put into Ausburg as a Garrison,
were disbanded also.

About the same time the Elector Palatine, Several Princes of Germany meet.
the Archbishop of Metz, and the Dukes of Bavaria and Wurtzburg, met at
Hailbrun, and the Ambassadors of the Elector of Trier, and of the Duke of
Cleave; the Bishop of Passaw was there also in the behalf of Ferdinand, King of
the Romans. This Summer, there was a great and a raging Plague in Paris, and
yet at the same time, many were burnt for Lutheranism. The King had a The
Duchess de Valentois.
Mistress, who was now a Widow, but had formerly been the Wife of a Gentleman,
who had been Governor of Normandy. Aumal and Marchian, who, as I have said
above, were taken Prisoners, were her Sons-in-Law. And Albert demanded of Aumal
a Hundred Thousand Crowns, but that was more than he was able to Pay. There was
at the same time, a strong report that this Lady had so great an Interest in
the Affections of the King, that she obtained from him a grant of the Estates
and Goods of those who should be Convicted of Lutheranism, that from the Sale
thereof, she might raise so much Money as would (without his Charge) redeem her
two Sons-in-Law out of their Captivity. The custom of France being such, that a
condemned Person does not only forfeit his Life, but his Estate also to the
King. When therefore this Game was once started, it is said, many were
endangered by it. Whether this were so or no, I will not affirm; but however,
nothing is more certain, than that the Blood of innocent Men has in France and
other Places been shed, not only for the Pleasure and Satisfaction of others,
but also for their Profit and Enriching.

Albert, Albert retires into France.
as I said, fled from the unfortunate Battle which he had Fought, into the City
of Brunswick; but understanding soon after that Henry intended to besiege that
place, he ordered his scattered Forces to Rendezvous in Thuringe, and there to
attend his coming to them, and sending to his Kinsmen and Relations for
Succors as soon as they came up, the fifth of October he marched with great
Expedition, and preventing the Expectation of all Men, arrived at Weimar, where
he was very kindly entertained by John Frederick, late Duke, and Elector of
Saxony, with whom he staid two nights to refresh his weary Forces, and then
went for France. The Count of Plaw, and his Confederates then lay before a Town
of his called Birut, but hearing of his sudden Arrival, they raised the Siege,
and retired to Bamberg. Albert in the mean time going out with a small Party of
Horse to see what they were doing at Hoffe, the eleventh day of October, found
the Garrison Soldiers carelessly diverting themselves without the Gates, and
suspecting nothing: Taking this opportunity, and exhorting his Men to second
him in it, he immediately set upon them, and forced them to shift for their
Lives. The Townsmen being overjoyed at the sight of their Prince, took Arms at
the same time also, and sallied out so opportunely upon the Garrison, that they
were almost all slain. He found there some great Cannon, and some Fieldpieces,
but without any Carriages, because the Enemy had carried all that there was in
the Town of that Nature, to the Siege of Birut; leaving therefore a Foot
Company to defend Hoffe, he went to Blasseburg, his Principal Castle.

When Albert was retired, Brunswick sieged.
Henry with his Army sat down before the City of Brunswick, and battered it
very furiously with his Cannon; but the Bishops and the Norimbergers, who
maintained his Army, sending for him, he demanded of the Inhabitants of
Brunswick, about fourscore Thousand Crowns, they denied this at first, but the
Garrison within the City refusing to bear Arms any longer for their defense
without Pay, forced them at last to promise Payment of it. And Henry having
appointed his Soldiers the day when they should receive their Pay, marched
away, and passed through Thuringe. This being known to John Frederick, Duke of
Saxony, who till then had not been reconciled to him, he left his Lady, who was
then sick at Weimar, and with his three Sons went to Gothen to that purpose.
But Henry being then on his March, wrote a Letter to the Duke to this Effect.
Though ( said he) I have had a just Provocation, and not been destitute of an
Opportunity of late Years to revenge the Injuries you have done me in former
times; yet because then you were the Emperor's Prisoner, I never attempted any
thing against either your Children or Subjects, but committed my wrongs to the
Determination and Judgment of the Laws. But you Sir, were so far from
acknowledging your former Injuries that you have lately entertained, comforted,
aided, and with your Council assisted the Marquess of Brandenburg, the
destroyer of Germany, and my particular Enemy; and although you did this very
privately, yet I was well acquainted with it. If therefore my Army has in its
March done any damage in your Territories, you have no reason to complain,
because you began your self. Henry had in truth resolved to waste the
Territories of Albert and Volrate, Earls of Mansfield, upon the account of the
War the last Year; but Augustus Duke of Saxony had interposed his Mediation at
their Request, and put an end to that difference; upon the receipt of this
Letter, John Frederick sent Ambassadors to Henry, and endeavored to allay his
anger, so that Henry came to Weimar with two Troops of Horse, and two Foot
Companies, and quartered the rest of his Army in the neighboring Country: And
here he was met by Minquice, the Duke's Chancellor, and having entered into a
Treaty with him, at length he disposed him to terms of Amity. And whereas Henry
had before demanded great Sums of Money, he persuaded him to remit a great part
of it, and after two days stay in that City without doing any damage, he
friendly and quietly marched away.

The eighteenth day of October there was a Conference or dispute began in
London, by the command of the Queen concerning the Presence of Christ (as they
call it) in the Sacrament of the Altar. It was continued six days, though not
without some heats, and ill Language. One He was Prolocutor of the lower House
of Convocation, and Dean of Westminster; but the Dispute began the twenty third
of October, though it was proposed the eighteenth in the Convocation.
Weston a Roman Catholic Divine, who was the principal Mannager of the
Dispute, behaving himself very Intemperately. What was the Issue of this
Dispute, we shall set forth together with the Laws which passed in this Session
of Parliament.

About the end of October, one Michael Servetus a Spaniard was burnt at Geneva.
He had many years since Printed several small Books, in which amongst other
things, he had discoursed concerning the Trinity, contrary to the Sense of the
whole Church: And coming this year to Geneva, the Senate being informed of his
being there, commanded him to be apprehended, and ordered Calvin (who had
before written against his Doctrines) and the other Ministers of their Church,
Servetus a Spaniard burnt.
that they should enter into a Conference with him. There was a long, and a
sharp dispute between them, Servetus without any Modesty, often giving Calvin
the Lie. In the Interim, the Senate being very desirous to proceed with great
deliberation in a thing of this weight, consulted the Doctors of Berne, Zurich,
Basil, and Schafhouse; who all said, that these Doctrines were very Blasphemous
and Injurious to the Majesty of God: But Servetus not only stood to his
Opinion, but defended it with ill Language and Reproaches, and was thereupon
sentenced to Death. When he came to the place of Execution, William Farel
exhorted him to call upon Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, but he refused
so to do, nor did he express the least Sign of Repentance, yet because he did
not defend his Doctrine before the People, it brought a very great Envy upon
Calvin: whereupon he set forth a Book, wherein he gives an account of his
Doctrine, and of whatever else had passed in this Affair, and teaches that the
Sword may be lawfully employed against Heretics.

The thirtieth of October, Sturmius dies.
James Sturmius, a Man of great Prudence and Integrity, and on the account of
his rare natural endowments and extraordinary Learning, esteemed the Glory of
the German Nobility, died at Strasburg, having been for two Months afflicted by
a Quartane Ague; he lived something above Sixty three Years.

About this time Reginald Pool, Cardinal Pool detained in Germany.
one of the Cardinals, who was sent from Rome through Germany to the Emperor;
when he was now arrived at Dillinghen, a Town upon the Danube, in the Borders
of the Palatinate, belonging to the Bishop of Ausburg, was ordered by the
Emperor (who sent James Mendoza on that Errand to him) to stay there till the
Emperor should give him leave to come to him.

Henry of Brunswick left Weimar, The War against Albert Prosecuted.
and the seventh day of November arrived in the Camp of the Confederates, which
was then at Lichtefelse, a Town in the Bishopric of Bamberg; they had shut up
in this Town nine Companies of Foot, which were put into it by Albert, which
were the same that had before been at Birute, and the Count of Plaw had some
time before sat down before the Place with his own, and the Forces belonging
to the Confederates, to which those under the Duke of Brunswick being now
added, and some Cannon being sent from Norimberg to batter the Town, the tenth
day of November they yielded themselves at discretion: Some of the Captains
being taken thereupon into Custody, the rest disarmed and sent home without
Colors. This being done, they Marched to Culembach, a Town in the Territories
of Albert, and with their Cannon furiously battered it; when therefore the
Inhabitants saw they could not defend it, they removed their Goods into the
Castle of Blasseburg, and having set Fire to their Houses, retreated thither
themselves; upon this the Enemy rushing in, put some few they found in the
Town, to the Sword, and putting out the Fire, took what was left. Count Plaw
having thus taken Lichteberg a Castle, Hoffe and Birute, two small Towns and
dismantled them, sat down before Basseburg the strongest place belonging to
Albert, and then very well Garrisoned.

About this time the French suddenly marching out of Piedmont, surprised
Verceile, a Town belonging to Savoy, and then in the Hands of the Spaniards:
But then considering that by reason of its vicinity to the Dukedom of Milan,
and being informed also that Gonzaga the Emperor's Lieutenant was marching
toward them with his Forces, and that it would be very difficult to defend it,
they Plundered the Place, and in good time marched away, laden with the Spoils
of it.

Not long after this, an account was given from Venice, and other places, that
Solomon, Emperor of the Turks, had caused Mustapha his eldest Son to be
Strangled upon a suspicion of Treason and Disloyalty toward him. The report
was very strong, that a second Wife of Solyman's had put him upon this Murder,
in order to the advancement of her own Son, which she desired might succeed his
Father in the Empire.

I have already given an account of the Commitment of the Archbishop of
Canterbury; English Affairs.
he and the Lady Jane, with three Sons of the Duke of Northumberland were
brought to Trial in the Month of November for Rebellion and Treason, and found
Guilty: But according to the custom of that Kingdom, they were remanded to
Prison, and upon the Intercession of some on their behalf, they were reprieved.
Sebastian Schertilingen, whom I have often mentioned, upon whose Head and Life
the Emperor had set a Price, as I have said in my twenty fourth Book, was about
this time reconciled to the Emperor and Ferdinand his Brother, and recovered
his Estate again. At the Solicitation of the Bishops and their Confederates,
the Judges of the Imperial Chamber in the usual form Outlawed.
Proscribed Albert of Brandenburg, the first of December, as a disturber of the
public Peace, and of the Empire, and sending their Letters to all Parts to be
publicly affixed, exposed his Life and Fortunes to the will of any Man that
would make a Prey of them.

In the Interim, Henry Duke of Brunswick having left Count Plaw to carry on the
Siege of Blasseburg; he marched the sixth of December with his Forces to
Schweinfurt, which is a City of Franconia, seated upon the Mayn, which Albert
then held with a strong Garrison. The Forerunners of Henry's Army was a
reinforcement of Soldiers, sent from Norimberg and Forcheim: But Albert
foreseeing this Siege, had beforehand carried into the City whatever Victuals
could be found in the Neighborhood, and then had burnt down all Houses near
it, that he might make it impossible to carry on a Siege against it in that
dead time of the Year. So not being able to effect any thing, and having also
lost some of his Men in a Sally, which Albert made out of the City, this
General was soon forced to retire, and marching with a small Retinue, he passed
through the Territories of John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, without doing him
any Damage in his return Home. When Albert heard that he was Outlawed,
Proscribed, he appealed to the Emperor, and beseeched him to reverse the
Sentence: But the Emperor said, he ought not to hinder the Execution or
Administration of Justice. Whereupon Albert refused to submit to their
Judgment, pretending it was obtained by Purchase and Bribery, and soon after
published a Protestation or Remonstrance against it. The Chamber in the mean
time, commanded the neighboring Provinces of the Empire to put this Decree in
Execution.

The tenth of October, A Parliament in England.
a Parliament was begun in England, which sat till the sixth of December, and
then was dissolved, in which all the Laws of Edward the sixth, concerning the
Lord's Supper, the Ceremonies of the Church, and the Administration of the
Sacraments, the Marriage of the Clergy, the Election of Bishops, the Ordination
of Ministers, and the public Liturgy, and all other things of that Nature were
repealed; and all things pertaining to Religion were reduced to the same State
they were left in when King Henry the eighth died. That no disturbance should
be given to those Priests and Ministers of the Church, which should hereafter
be Licensed, and the Divorce of Catherine the Mother of Queen Mary, was
declared Illegal. There was also a Proposition of the Marriage of the Queen to
Prince Philip, the eldest Son of the Emperor, made to the Lords of the upper
House, for the obtaining their Approbation. There had before been a Fame
spread, that he was to Marry his Cousin-German, the Daughter of Emmanuel, King
of Portugal, and of Elenora his Queen. This Marriage with Queen Mary of England
being at last agreed ( after the rising of the Parliament which opposed it) the
Emperor sent for Cardinal Pool to him out of Germany, where, till then he he
had detained him, as I said before. This Procedure caused a Report, That Pool
being descended of the Royal Family, and much esteemed by the English Nation.
It was suspected he might have possibly put some stop to this Marriage. There
were also other Bishops ordained in the Sees of those whom I have mentioned to
be Imprisoned about this This was not done till March of the next Year.
time. The Emperor also sent a very splendid Embassy into England, for the
Solemnization of the Marriage between Prince Philip who was absent, and Queen
Mary, the principal Person, in which was Count Egmondt: They arriving in London
in the beginning of January, 1554.
after a Treaty of some few days Continuance, concluded this Affair. The People
were much enraged against this Match, and some of the Nobility having
Communicated their Counsels to each other, broke out into a Rebellion, the
Principal Leader in which was one Sir Thomas Wiat, he raising an Insurrection
in Kent, caused grievous and sharp Sermons to be Preached against the Queen and
her Council, as designing by this foreign Match, to involve England in a
perpetual and most wretched Slavery, In this our Author seems to be
^isinformed, for he said nothing of Religion in Public.
and also that she had extinguished the true Religion, and restored the
Roman Catholic again. Kent is one of the most Eastern Counties of England,
ennobled by the City of Canterbury, and lying upon the Streights of Calais,
over against France. The report of this Commotion coming to London the twenty
fifth day of January, there came soon after News, that Henry Duke of Suffolk
was raising Men in Devonshire; whereupon the Queen levied what Forces she could
get together, and made Thomas Duke of Norfolk, whom she had lately discharged
out* of the Tower, her General; who marching toward Rochester Bridge, was
deserted by his Soldiers, who went over to Wiat, so that he got back to London
with great Difficulty.

For the appeasing these Tumults, and avoiding of the Dangers that threatened
them, the Emperor's Ambassadors took Ship in the beginning of February, and
returned into Flanders. The same day the Queen went into the City of London,
and in the Guild Hall made a sharp Speech against Wiat, saying she knew all his
Projects; and expressing the tender Love she bore to her People, and saying she
had done nothing in it without the Advice of her Council: That she had now
lived a considerable part of her Life in Virginity, and that even now it was
none of her Desires to Marry; but would willingly have continued Single, if the
States had thought it convenient. That she was very much afflicted to see her
Kingdom endangered, and filled with Slaughter and Bloodshed on the Account of
her Marriage: She desired therefore that they would persist in their
Allegiance, and assist her in revenging the Perfidy of those wicked Men who
were in Rebellion against her, whom they had in Parliament, freely declared to
be the lawful Heir of her Father. When she had thus calmed their Minds, she
appointed some to defend the City, and ordered the Earl of Pembroke to take
care of the Suburbs. She had before this, Proclaimed Wiat a Traitor and an
Enemy to the Nation, and had ordered some Propositions he had sent her, to be
openly read to the People at the same time, which are said to be, That the
Queen should put her self into his Custody: That he should have the disposal of
her Marriage, and the determination what Privy-Counsellors should be continued
or dismissed. Three days after, a Pardon was tendered to the Multitude, upon
Condition they deserted the Authors of this Sedition, and a vast reward was
promised to whoever could take Wiat. The Duke of Suffolk was at the same time
Proclaimed Traitor. That day the Rebels came up to the City, and the Queen
ordered the Drawbridge to be broken down, that none out of the City might join
with them. The next day they took Southwark, believing that the Citizens of
London would rise and join with them, but they were kept in awe by the Queens
Forces. In the mean time, the Duke of Suffolk was taken in another part of the
Nation, by the Earl of Huntington, who was sent with some Horse by the Queen on
that Errand. The Rebels having spent two days in attempting in vain to pass the
River at Southwark, they marched to Kingston, about eight Miles above the City,
and there passed the Thames, and bore directly down upon the City, where Wiat
was at last taken by the Forces under the Earl of Pembroke, and sent to Prison,
and all his Forces were dispersed.

The next day, which was the seventh of February, there was a Proclamation put
out, that it should be Death for any Man to harbor any of the Rebels, and not
forthwith discover and produce him. A few days after, the Duke of Suffolk was
brought a Prisoner into the City. The twelfth day of February, Guilford Dudley,
Son of the Duke of Northumberland, and the Lady Jane his Wife, the eldest
Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, who had been declared Queen by Edward VI. The
Lady Jane Beheaded.
as I have said, were publicly Beheaded upon a Scaffold raised in the Tower of
London for her Principally; because they had aspired to the Crown, contrary to
the Laws of the Succession. Though her death was hid from the Eyes of the
People to prevent or abate their Compassion; yet the greatest part of them
heartily lamented the hard Fate of the Lady Jane: She was thought a most
innocent young Lady, brought up like a Princess, very Learned, and was now
involved in this Calamity, not because she sought, but for that she did not
refuse a Crown that was offered her. She made a Pious and Modest Speech to
those that were present at her Execution, and having implored the Mercy of God
through Jesus Christ, she caused her Maids that waited upon her, to cover her
Eyes and Face with a piece of Holland, and then submitted her Neck to the
Executioner. The same day Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, who after many Years
Imprisonment, had lately been discharged out of the Tower, was again taken into
Custody upon suspicion of having been concerned in this Rebellion. After this
in London and Westminster where the Queen then was, many were hurried to
Execution, and amongst them some of the Nobility. And some also escaped, the
Principal of which was Sir Peter Carew, who found refuge in the Court of
France. The Duke of Suffolk was Tried, and found Guilty the seventeenth day of
February, and Executed the twenty first of this Month.

Whilst things went thus in England, The Deaths of the Duke and Duchess of
Saxony.
Sybilla of Cleve, Wife of John Frederick Duke of Saxony, died the same twenty
first day of February at Weimar, and the eleventh day after, the Duke followed
her himself, having been sick some time before. They both died in the true
Knowledge of God, and it was observed, that when he gave order where his Lady
should be Buried, he commanded them to reserve a place for himself by her side,
because it would not be long e're he should follow her, nor was he deceived in
his Expectation. The third day of March following, having heard a Sermon as he
lay in his Bed, implored the Divine Mercy, and commended his Spirit into the
Hands of God, he departed out of his Miserable and wretched Life to enter into
his heavenly Country.

There was before his Death a Treaty concluded between him and Augustus Duke of
Saxony. The differences between him and Augustus.
In order to this, the King of Denmark sent some time since an Embassy, which
after a Debate of six Months continuance, a little before his death brought
their Dissentions to a final Conclusion on these Terms. John Frederick departed
from his Right in the Electorate Misnia, and the Mine-Towns, upon condition,
that if Augustus should die without Issue-Male, the same should return to John
Frederick and his Issue-Male: That in the Interim the said John and his Issue
should enjoy and use the Title of Elector, and the Arms of the Family of
Saxony, both in sealing and stamping Moneys: Augustus on the other side,
granted to him and his Children certain Governments, or Baylywicks and Towns,
and in lieu of certain Debts due to him from Maurice, and in Arrears at the
time of the Death of the said Maurice, Augustus was to pay the sum of one
hundred thousand Crowns: He was also to redeem the Town and Castle of
Koningsperg in Franconia, which was mortaged to the Bishop of Wurtsburg for
forty Thousand Crowns, and to restore the same to John Frederick and his
Children. Lastly, That the Hereditary League of the House of Saxony, which of
late years had been so much violated, should be renewed and confirmed. This
Agreement was signed and confirmed by John Frederick in his last Sickness not
long before his Death; and he commanded his Children also to subscribe and seal
it. Thus having with great constancy surmounted all those Calamities and
Miseries which fell upon him, he joyfully and peaceably ended his Days, by the
illustrious Goodness of God, not under the custody of Foreign Soldiers, as
some had designed, but in his own House, after he was restored to his Liberty,
to his Children, and to the Freedom of his Religion, and that when he had
settled his Children and People in Peace. His Lady also had her most earnest
Wish fulfilled before she left the World. For she had often said, she should
die with extreme satisfaction, if she might but live to see her Husband safe
and at liberty: which she often begged of God with Sighs and Tears. The same
day she died, Alexander the Son of Augustus, was born.

Much about the same time, all the Strangers which then remained in England,
The Strangers leave England.
and with them many of them Natives of that Kingdom, seeing the great change
that was made in the Public Religion, and the Laws, betook themselves to
Germany, some to Wesel, and others to Franckfort and Strasburg. John Alasco, a
Polander, of Noble Birth and great Learning, who was the Brother of Jerome,
before this Winter began, went thence to Denmark; but being not so kindly
entertained there, on the account of his differing from them in the Point of
the Eucharist, and being denied an Habitation on the same score in the Lower
Saxony; at length he went to Emden, a City of Friseland, and there he settled.
The Fourth Day of March, the Queen put out a Book of Articles or Injunctions;
wherein she commanded the Bishops and their Vicars not to admit any man into
Holy Orders who was suspected of Heresy: That they should extirpate Heresies,
suppress and destroy hurtful and pestilent Books: That they should prescribe
certain Rules to all Schoolmasters and Preachers, and suppress those who did
not conform: That they should deprive all Married Priests, and punish them as
their wickedness deserved, but that those who with the consent of their Wives
should promise to divorce themselves, and to abstain for the future, should be
treated with more gentleness, and that they should restore all those that would
do Penance for this Offense, to their Livings again: That all Public Prayers
should be in the Latin Tongue, and according to the ancient Forms: That all
the ancient Holy Days, Fasts and Ceremonies should be again observed: That all
Children already Baptized, when they grew up, should be brought to the Bishop
to be confirmed: And that they should be taught in the Schools how they are to
minister to the Priest in the Mass at the Altar. When Henry the Eighth
abolished the Papal Supremacy in England, as I have observed in the Ninth Book
of this History, he passed an Act of Parliament, that no man should be admitted
to any Ecclesiastical Function or Dignity, unless he had first taken an Oath,
in which he acknowledged him and his Successors Supreme Head of the Church of
England: and that the Pope had no Authority over the Church, nor was better
than a Bishop of Rome, with whom they would have nothing to do. This Oath the
Queen even now remitted, and commanded the Bishops not to exact it of any man,
and thereby did tacitly restare the Pope's Supremacy. That which concerns the
Public Prayers, went thus; Henry the Eighth had commanded them to be said in
the vulgar Tongue; and in them, amongst other things, they prayed that God
would deliver them from the Seditions, Conspiracies and Tyranny of the Bishop
of Rome; and this Printed Form of Prayer was by this Order of the Queen
abolished.

Soon after this, The Princess Elizab. committed to the Tower.
Elizabeth, the Queens Sister, a Lady of great Learning, was committed to the
Tower, because she was suspected to have had an hand in Wiat's Rebellion. In
the End of March, the Enemies of Albert, Marquess of Brandenburg, returned to
the Siege of Schweinfurt. In April there came over into Germany Sir Richard
Morison Knight, whose Embassy I have mentioned in the Book before this, Sir
Anthony Cook, and Sir John Cheek, Knights, both the King's Schoolmasters, and
Men of great Learning, and these all afterward traveled into Italy. And soon
after Dr. John Poinet Bishop of Winchester came over also; who, together with
many other Bishops, was about this time displaced by reason of this Change of
Religion.

The Forces of the Duke of Florence, The Siege of Siena.
and the Pope besieging Siena about this time, Peter Strozza, who defended that
City in the Name of the King of France, learning something of their state by
his Spies, on a sudden made a Sally upon them, and slew a great number of their
Soldiers; but they recruited their Army, and continued the Siege for all that
Loss; whereupon the King of France levied Three Thousand Swiss for the relief
of that Place. The Duke of Florence also marries his Daughter to Ascanio the
Pope's Nephew; and the Methods of advancing his Fortunes by this Marriage, were
taken into consideration. About this time also Ferdinand Gonzaga, Governor of
the Duchy of Milan, came into Flanders to the Emperor: Baptista Castaldus, whom
the Emperor had sent some years since into Hungary (as I have said) came also
about this time to him.

About the middle of April Sir Thomas Wiat was executed at London. Sir Tho.
Wiat executed.
He declared, that neither the Lady Elizabeth, nor Courtney Earl of Devonshire,
were acquainted with the Rebellion. About the same time, Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Hugh Latimer Bishop of London, were removed first to Windsor,
and then to Oxford; and a Disputation being managed against them by the
Students both of Oxford and Cambridge, the 16th. 17th. and 18th. of April,
concerning Transubstantiation and the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, and
they continuing steadfast in their Former Opinion, they were again committed to
Prison. A Parliament.
At the same time there was a Parliament sat in England, wherein the Queen
especially recommended to the States her Marriage, and the restitution of the
Pope's Supremacy. The first of these she carried upon certain Conditions; but
the latter was so vigorously opposed by the Upper House, that she could not
then bring it about. In the mean time, Cardinal Poole, having spent some time
with the Emperor in Flanders, went to the King of France, and endeavored to
bring these Princes to make a Peace; but his Mediation had no good success. In
the end of April, Albert of Brandenburg, having received 60000 Crowns, set
Aumale his Prisoner at Liberty. A little before this time, Holansperg, another
of his strong Places, was taken from him by the Confederates. Not long after
this, the Emperor being then at Brussels, by his Letters confirmed the Outlawry
decreed the last Winter in the Imperial Chamber of Spire, against the Marquess
of Brandenburg; in which, having complained, that the Marquess had with
impunity committed such Ravages, and made such Devastations in the Empire, he
in the next place severely commands all the Princes and States, and especially
those that lay next him, to execute the said Sentence against the Marquess.
There had before this been two Meetings at Rotenburg, a City of Franconia, upon
the River Tauber, in order to the putting an end to this War; but they being
both frustrated, the Emperor put out this Decree against him; which was set up
in all places: and soon after, there was a Diet of the Circle of the Rhine,
holden at Worms concerning this Business.

I have often mentioned the General Diet which was summoned in August; The Diet
of Germany.
but the Emperor being hindered from being present in it both by Sickness and
Wars, Ferdinand his Brother, at his Request, undertook the management of it,
and solicited the Princes to meet, who excused their Appearance there, on the
account of the troubled state of Germany. The Emperor had already sent thither
some of his Council, and amongst them the Cardinal of Ausburg; but none of the
Princes coming thither, for the Causes aforesaid, it was deferred to a fitter
opportunity. Albert had published a Remonstrance against the City of Norimberg,
written with great spite and bitterness; insinuating, that in the late War,
they had underhand joined with the French King and his Confederates, and
furnished them with Money: That they and the Bishops, their Confederates,
suspected the Emperor, and had said many things of him, which discovered their
adhering rather to the French King, than the Emperor. That they had stirred up
this War against himself, and labored for nothing more than that the Bishops
might not keep their Pacts and Promises to him: That they of Norimberg were the
Aggressors in this War, and had forced him to defend himself: That they
designed to ruin all the Nobility and Princes of Germany; That they had
violated that Faith which they had given under their Hands and Seals: That they
had made a wicked, and a cruel War upon his Subjects: That they had bribed the
Imperial Chamber against him: Lastly, The Norimbergerr Answer to Albert.
he spread Pamphlets in Germany, in which he called them Traitors. This being
known to the Norimbergers, who in the Sack of Holansperg, found some of these
Papers, the 18th. of May, they published a large Answer, addressed to all the
States of Germany; in which they refuted all his Accusations in order;
retorting the greatest part of them upon himself: They showed upon what
Conditions they had furnished Maurice with Moneys, and showed who was the
Author of the present War: For (say they) at the very time when the Princes who
were the Mediators, met at Heidelburg, he, by his Emissaries, underhand levied
what Forces he could in Saxony, which may be proved upon him by the Letters
which William Grumpach, one of his Couriers or Messengers sent to him, Dated
the 29th. of March, and by several others. That if King Ferdinand, Maurice Duke
of Saxony, and Henry Duke of Brunswick had not opposed all their Forces, and
hazarded their Lives against him, he had certainly caused an horrible
Desolation throughout Germany. He had indeed necessitated the Bishops of
Franconia to submit to most unjust and unreasonable Terms; but then the Emperor
had cancelled that Treaty, and had permitted them to recover what was their
own. That the Bishop of Bamberg had recovered some Towns and Bayliwicks out of
his Hands before he was reconciled to the Emperor; and then, when being
involved in the guilt of Treason, not only his Estate, but his Life might
lawfully have been taken from him. As for us (say they) by the Command of the
Emperor we entered into a League for the defense of our own Territories, as
others have also done. After this, he was indeed reconciled to the Emperor, and
obtained a confirmation of this Treaty; but it was upon condition that he
should be faithful to him and the Empire. But then he (say they) though the
Emperor had not allowed him the use of any force, from the Camp before Metz,
wrote to his Subjects, That they should terrify the Bishops, and if they did
not presently restore what they had taken from him, that they should take it by
force. Whereupon his Subjects in the Month of January falling suddenly upon the
Bishops, in a short time, by Force and Arms, recovered all the Places they had
retaken before from him. Whereupon the Bishop of Bamberg sent an Account to his
Allies, and desired them to send him Succors according to the League; yet we
(say they) being desirous that nothing might rashly be done, sent Letters and
Envoys more than once to exhort and persuade the Marquess to preserve the
Peace; but he on the other side, with great pride and contempt, said, That the
more Enemies he had, the more Glory they would bring him. He said this in the
beginning of March, and a short time after the Treaty of Heidelburg was began.
And when there were very advantageous Terms offered to him, and rejected by
him, though some of his near Relations and Kinsmen, who were the Mediators,
persuaded him to Peace; when he returned home from that place, and was raising
an Army; we being again (say they) solicited and called upon by the Bishops,
did then first profess our selves Enemies to him; which was in the beginning of
April of the last Year; And whereas he has made a bloody and cruel War in
Germany, beyond the Example of all Stories, he now endeavors to lay this Crime
upon us: But in truth what he says is false; and there has been no complaint of
our Army brought to us by any Person besides he: But then his Soldiers have
omitted no sort of Cruelty; and they have sometimes in our Sight, hung up the
poor Plowmen they causally found in the field at Work, old and young; they
forced the Women they found alive, and dug up the Graves of those that were
dead. One Nicholas Eglofstein, a Nobleman of Franconia in the Month of May,
last year, being forced to surrender his Castle of Conrut, the said Marquess
not only burnt it, but also commanded forty Countrymen which he found in it,
together with a Minister, to be Hanged in the Garden, near the Castle, and
carried his Wife and Mother Prisoners away with him. It is true, he endeavored
to excuse this Action afterward to the Nobility of Franconia, but to small
purpose. How he treated those he made Prisoners, during the War, is well known
to both our own, and the Bamberg Hostages, who were shut up every where in his
Goals. He was not contented to demand great Ransoms of those he took, but he
also cruelly tormented them, and starved some of them to death with Hunger and
Cold, and others were forced to cut off their frozen Limbs to save their Lives.
And some of them having nothing to redeem themselves with, or to buy them
Bread, he forbad any Victuals should be given them. And if the Garrison
Soldiers had not been melted by their Lamentations and miserable Cries, and had
not cast them some dry, moldy fragments of Bread, which no Beast or Vermin
would have eaten or touched, but in the extremities of Hunger, these had all
Perished to a Man. And when some of them had from their Friends obtained some
Money for their subsistence, they were hardly able to get Water and Straw. Thus
many of them were destroyed with Hunger and Thirst in the horrible, nasty,
stinking recesses of his Prisons, in which there was nothing but Worms,
creeping things, and filthiness. And when they were thus dead, their Carcasses
were not drawn out and removed, but were left amongst the Living and the Sick.
On the other side, how well we treated those Soldiers of his which we took
Prisoners, and amongst them those very Leaders and Captains which deserved the
worst of us, though they yielded themselves into our Hands at discretion; he
may know if he please from themselves. How averse he is to Peace will easily
appear by the two Treaties at Rotenburg, which is known to those Illustrious
Princes, who were there in Person, or by their Ambassadors. For though we have
been grievously injured by him: And though also the Outlawry was then published
against him: yet in the first of those Meetings we offered, that if he would
lay down his Arms, and commit the case to the Determination of the Law, with
good Security; we also would lay down our Arms, and submit our Cause to the
Arbitriment of the mediating Princes, or to the Judgment of the Emperor and the
States: and the same Condition was tendered by the Bishops also, by the Advice
and Command of the Ambassadors of King Ferdinand. The Council of the mediating
Princes, out of a desire of Peace, proposed, that if the Confederates in the
Circle of Franconia would promise to restore him his Territories, as they then
were, both sides should lay down their Arms, and take new Securities for the
future, that then the Proscription should as to that part be ^oid, and the
whole Controversy should be committed to a friendly and a legal Treaty.

But he in Contempt and Scorn, called the Intercessors, his Enemies Broakers,
and said he would not suffer himself to be reduced into such Streights, that he
did not desire, the Outlawry should be reversed, that he would hazard the loss
of what was left, and many other such like things, using light and scurrilous
Reflections, mixed with Threats against all the Princes and States, as may be
shown in his Letters Printed at Holansperg. And in the next Congress, though we
offered him more advantageous terms, yet he was never the more inclined to a
Peace; no, his whole design then was to prevail against us by Frauds and
Ambushes, which deserved no great Commendation, and are very unworthy of a
Prince. For at the request of the Mediators, he promised to lay down his Arms,
and to referr the whole Case to the Emperor and some Princes. This Compromise
was accordingly confirmed by the Emperor's Letters of the fourth of April from
Brussells, wherein he commanded the States of Franconia to lay down their Arms,
and to commit the Affair to his Diligence and Faith; but the close design which
Albert had in this was (as it appears by what followed) to stop the Emperor's
Proceedings for a time, that the Execution of the Outlawry might not be
committed to the other Provinces of the Empire also, that in the mean time he
might bring that Army he was then underhand Levying, into the Field, and
oppress us before were aware. But by the Blessing of God this Project was
discovered, his Letters about that time, which he sent to his Captains, who
were dispersed here and there, being Intercepted: In which he said, that he had
submitted to the terms Proposed at Rotenburg, that he might gain time, and
surprise his Enemies, that if the Interceeding Princes should require them to
disband, they should not comply with them in it, but should continue in a Body,
and upon no terms be separated: and that by way of Excuse they should allege,
there were many Months Pay due to them, and that they could not disband till
they had that Money; but that they would remain where they were, without doing
any Injury, till their Arrears were Paid. To the same purpose also are his
Letters to his Commanders, to fall promiscuously, and without distinction upon
whomsoever they could. When therefore his secret Treachery was thus discovered,
and his Ambassadors at Rotenburg would give ours no positive and certain
Answer, whether he would stand to the Arbitriment of the Emperor or no; by the
advice of the Ambassadors of Ferdinand, we were forced (as we say in our
Letters sent then to the Emperor) to commit our Cause to God, the Emperor and
Empire. This being the true state of things, any Man will hereby be able easily
to understand, that we are loaded with so many Reproaches, Slanders, and
Miseries, only because in Obedience to the Emperor, and the Imperial Chamber,
which is our Supreme Court, we have endeavored to repress his Violence and
Fury: And therefore we earnestly desire all those who love Virtue and Justice,
and hate Force and Injury, that they would consider, that if the Sentence given
against him by the Imperial Chamber be not put in Execution, and his Insolence
humbled, not only we, but they too will thereby be equally in danger. Let no
Man therefore give him any Assistance, Refuge, or Protection, but as it becomes
Princes, and the Lovers of their Country, let them not only not hinder the
Execution of the Decree, but with all their might, promote the Execution of it,
and in all things act so, that others may by this Example be deterred. And we
beseech them not to give any Credit to his defamatory and slanderous Libels
against us, and that if he shall again enter into any Designs against us, that
then they would lend us their Help and Advice. Albert goes into Saxony.


In the Month of May, Albert, having received the Money abovementioned, for
the Ransom of Aumale, went into Saxony, and getting some forces together,
marched by unfrequented ways toward Schweinfurt, and the tenth of June, he
entered the Town on that side it was not Besieged, with eight hundred Horse, and
seven Foot Companies. But finding the Town very much Impoverished, the third
day after he entered it, he Plundered it, and in the Night time drew out all the
Soldiers, as well Horse as Foot, to the number of eighteen Companies, together
with the Cannon, and leaving no Guards to secure the Gates, he marched in the
dead time of the Night to Kitzingen, a Town seated a little lower upon the
Mayn. When the day broke, and the Besiegers saw the Gates of the City without
any to defend them, they gave the Ala^^ in the Camp, and began to prepare to
follow him; but in the Interim, many of the Soldiers and especially those that
served under Henry Duke of Brunswick, rushed into the Town, and took and
destroyed what the other had left. So that the Princes and Commanders were
forced to set Fire to the Town in several Places, to compel their Soldiers to
return to the Camp, that Albert might not have time to escape whilst they were
Plundering the Town. Though Albert had the advantage of some hours in his
March, yet being retarded by the Cannon, and other heavy Carriages, he was
easily overtaken, and forced by the Vanguard to make a stand to defend
himself, but the rest of the Army soon coming up, when he saw that he was not
able to defend himself against so great a Number, advising his to shift for
themselves as well as they could; he with a few Horsemen took his Flight, and
Swimming over the Mayn, arrived safely at Kitzingen, with the loss of all his
Baggage and Cannon. The eighth day after, his principal Fortress called
Blasseburg, was surrendered, and fell into the Hands of Ferdinand, King of
Bohemia. Henry Plaw, Chancellor of Bohemia, the indefatigable Enemy of this
Place died before it, some few days before it was yielded. Thus Albert,
Marquess of Brandenburg was driven out of all his Territories.

Whilst things went thus in Franconia, Henry Duke of Brunswick demanded Money
of most of the Princes, Nobility and Cities in the Lower Saxony, and forced
them of Meckelburg, Lunenburg, Anbalt, and Mansfeld to pay it. Another part of
his and the Bishop's Forces having beat Albert, and taken Schweinfurt, as I
have said, they Treated Rotenburg an Imperial City, and the County of Henneburg
very severely, and seemed resolved that if they did not contribute to the
Expenses of this War (which they pretend did belong to all) they would levy it
by Force, but by the Interposition of others, this difference was Composed, and
no Force was made use of.

About this time, The Duke of Savoy dies.
Charles Duke of Savoy, who, as I have related above, was stripped of the
greatest part of his Territories, died, leaving as his Heir Philibert his Son,
who had served many Years as a Soldier undr the Emperor.

Ferdinand, The Edict of King Ferdinand concerning Religion.
King of the Romans, published an Edict, commanding his Subjects not to change
any thing in the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and that
according to the old Custom, they that received the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, should content themselves with one of the Spectes, the Bread only: But
the Princes, the Nobility, and Cities, having often before Petitioned him in
this Business, did now by a Letter very humbly desire, that, according to
Christ's Command and Institution, and the custom of the ancient Church, which
they backed also with many Reasons, they might be allowed the partaking of the
whole and entire Eucharist. The King answering this Letter the twenty third of
June from Vienna, said, he did not in the least suppose, when he published that
Edict, that it should be made by them the Subject of a Dispute and Cavil. For
(said he) my only design was, that the People in my Dominions should remain in
the ancient and true Religion, and in the Obedience of the Catholic Church,
out of the Communion of which none can be Saved, and that they might receive
this most excellent Sacrament, according to the Laws and Customs of the Church,
and that they might not be perverted from that duty they owe, both to the Civil
Magistrate, and the Church; either by the perverse Opinions of some Men, or by
a certain over great Curiosity or Pride. He said, this was the only intention
and design of that Edict; and that he had not in it commanded any new thing,
but had required only the continuance of an ancient Institution, which has been
brought down to me from hand to hand, by my Ancestors the Emperors, Kings, and
Dukes of Austria, and which has to this Day been diligently observed by me, as
becomes a Christian Prince, and which I have heretofore frequently commanded my
Subjects to continue in. And therefore I did not in the least suspect, that you
would attempt any thing against the tenor of this Edict; who so earnestly
contend that in all other things no change may be made, and that you may enjoy
your Laws and Rights without Violation. For certainly this is a new thing, and
of late taken up by you upon some Opinion, which you argue so largely for; as
if it befitted you to judge of my Commands, who am your principal and highest
Magistrate, and as if that ought of right to be allowed you, which some of you
of late years have of their own Authority privately assumed to themselves and
usurped, contrary to the Canons of the Church, and against my Will. But then it
being, as you say, a grave and difficult question, as you your selves aver, I
will think further of it, and in due time I will return such an answer to it,
as shall show that I am very much concerned for the Salvation of my People. But
in the mean time I expect all manner of submission from you, and that you
should not in the least act any thing contrary to my Edict.

To this Letter the States made a reply in Writing also, to this Effect, What
we have so often said (most serene Prince) concerning the Command of our
Savior, we now again repeat; for he instituted his Supper in clear and
perspicuous Words, that it might be received by all in the self same manner as
he prescribed: And it is not lawful for any mortal Man to change or alter his
Institution and Prescription: This was also the ancient custom of the Church,
and that which is now used, crept in by insensible degrees, as we can
demonstrate. For the Council of Constance confesses that it was so instituted
by Christ. Seeing therefore this pertains to the Salvation of our Souls,
certainly neither Curiosity nor Pride have put us upon it. And upon this very
score, we the rather hope that you will direct your future deliberation by the
Commands of Christ and his Apostles, and the practice of the ancient Church,
and in no wise oppress our Consciences; which just request we make to your
Majesty by all that is sacred, by the Glory of God, and by the Salvation of our
Souls. We acknowledge that by the Will of God you are our Supreme Magistrate,
and we do this with the utmost willingness, and we say, that there is nothing
which you may not, or ought not to expect from us, but in this one thing we
desire you would spare us.

In the Diocese of Wurtzburg in Franconia, Papal Queries.
there is a Monastery, called Nenstadt, the Abbot of which John Frisius,
falling into the suspicion of Lutheranism, was cited the fifth day of May to
appear within six days after at Wurtzburg, and answer to such things as should
be then enquired of him. The Interrogatories then administered to him, were;
Whether it be lawful to Swear; Whether a Man is bound by his Vow; Whether it be
lawful to make a Vow of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; Whether such Vows
oblige; Whether Matrimony or Celibacy does best become the Ministers of the
Church; Whether there is one true and Apostolical Church; Whether she is
perpetually governed as the Spouse of Christ, by the Holy Ghost; Whether she
does always decree what is true and Salutary; Whether the Church is to be
deserted for the Vices and Errors of some Men in it; Whether she, upon the
account of the Head, the Vicar of Christ may rightly be called the
Roman-Church; Whether all the Books of both Testaments which the Canon has, are
lawful and true; Whether the Sacred Scriptures are to be interpreted according
to the Sentence of the Holy Fathers, the Doctors of the Church and the
Councils, or according to that of Luther, and such others; Whether besides the
sacred Scriptures, there be not need of other Traditions, such as those of the
Apostles, and others of the same Nature; Whether the same Faith, Authority, and
Obedience, is due to these Traditions, which is due to the sacred Scriptures;
Whether the civil Magistrate is to be obeyed in Politic or Civil Affairs, and
the Ecclesiastic in Sacred or Holy things; Whether the Sacraments of the
Church are Seven; Whether Children are to be Baptized; Whether Baptism ought to
be administered in the Latin Tongue; Whether Salt, Oil, Water, Characters and
Exorcisms ought to be made use of in Baptism; Whether original Sin is
altogether obliterated in Baptism, so that the Concupiscence which remains
after Baptism, loses the name of Sin; Whether the Bread be changed and
Consecrated into the Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood, by virtue of
the words which the Priest speaks; and whether it continues such, though it is
not presently received; Whether an Eucharist so Consecrated, is to be
worshipped; Whether it be carried about in honor of Christ, or carried to the
Sick, or reserved shut up; Whether Christ is to be adored under the Species of
Bread and Wine; Whether whole Christ be under each of the Species; Whether
confession of Sins prepares a Man to the worthy receiving of the Eucharist;
Whether the Mass is a true and perpetual Sacrifice; Whether both the Canons of
the Mass are to be retained; Whether the Sacrament of Confirmation is to be
Exercised; Whether there be three Parts in Penance, Contrition, Confession,
and Satisfaction; Whether the Priest can forgive a Man those Sins, who has not
Confessed them before; Whether none but Priests have the Power of the Keys;
Whether the Souls of Holy Men have not Charity for us; Whether they interceed
with God on our behalf; Whether the Saints are to be Invocated; Whether the
Holy Days consecrated to the Saints, are rightly Celebrated; Whether the
Relics of the Saints are to be worshipped; Whether the Souls of the Pious
which are not thoroughly purged are relieved by Masses, Prayers, Fasts, and
Alms; Whether there is a place of Purgation; Whether Lent, and the other Fasts
instituted by the Church, ought to be observed; Whether Men are to abstain from
eating Flesh on the days it is forbidden by the Church; Whether the People is
to be incited to Religion by Ceremonies; What Ceremonies are Pious, and what
not, or less Pious. To all these questions he answered the twenty seventh of
May at large; but though he confirmed his Answers, not only by the Testimony of
Scripture, but also by those of the Fathers; yet the twenty fifth day of June
he was condemned and removed from all his Offices or Functions.

Toward the end of June, The French War i^ the Low Countries.
the King of France marched with his Army out of Champagne, and passing down by
the Maes, in the Provinces belonging to the Emperor, he took Bovines and Dinant
amongst many others, and having plundered and dismantled them, he took
Marienbourg, and Fortified and Garrisoned it. The Emperor with his Forces
leaving Brussels, marched to Namur, which stands upon the Sambre, and the Maes,
five Miles below Dinant. The King seemed inclined to come to a Battle; but when
he saw the Emperor delayed it, he turned off into Hainault, and took the Town
of Binche; and a Castle which Mary Queen of Hungary extremely loved, being
surrendered into his Hands, he plundered and burnt it, and with Fire and Rapines
wasted all that Province. Then entering Artois, he sat down before Renty, a
Town upon the River Aa. But the Emperor coming up, his Forces being all by this
time come up to him, the King of France raised his Seige, after which, there
happened only some light Skirmishes between the Armies.

In the same Month of August, In Italy.
the French Army in Tuscany, under the Command of Peter Strozza, was surprised
and defeated by the Imperial Forces, under the Marquess di Marignano. In this
Battle, the greatest part of the Swiss, which I mentioned above to be sent
thither by the French King, were cut off.

In the mean time, Prince Philip arrives in England.
Prince Philip, the Emperor's Son, arrived the nineteenth day of July with a
considerable Fleet from Spain, at Southampton in England, the twentieth he
Landed, and the twenty fifth he was Married to Queen Mary, at Winchester, by
Gardener, Bishop of that City, and then Chancellor of England, in a vast
concourse of the Nobility of both Nations, amongst which was the Duke de Alva.
The day before his Marriage, he had a long Conference with the Queen, but the
Marriage was deferred to the next day, because it was the Festival of St.
James, the Patron of Spain. The Emperor's Ambassador was at this Solemnity, and
presented the Bridegroom with a Resignation of the Kingdoms of Jerusalem and
Naples, Naples Resigned.
in consideration of the Marriage. After a short stay here, the King and Queen
went to London, into which they made a splendid and magnificent Entry.

In August there was another small Diet of some of the States and Princes of
Germany, at Worms. The Emperor urging the Execution of the Sentence given
against Albert, Marquess of Brandenburg; who being driven out of his
Territories in the manner I have above related, retired first into Lorrain, and
from thence went to the Court of France, the King not denying him his
Protection. There was thereupon a Jealousy arose in the Mind of the Emperor,
lest this restless Prince might attempt something against Alsatia, or some
others of the German Territories, bordering upon France. To prevent this, the
Circles of the Rhine sent some Troops to the Borders of Lorrain about the end
of September, to secure the Passes; but there being no occasion for these
Forces, they returned without having done any thing, but impoverished those
places where they were quartered, and made some inroads into Lorrain. In
October there was another Diet held at Franckfurt, The Diet of ankfurt.
on the account of this, and some other Affairs. In this Convention, a Letter
of the Marquess of Brandenburg's was read, in which he complains very much of
the Militia, that was employed of late to secure the Borders, and especially of
those that came from Artois; he reflected severely amongst others, on the
Bishops of Trier and Strasburg, and (...) the Landgrave, and said this Party of
Horse were bloody Men, and that they privately designed his Death.

The first of October, The French King's Letter to this Diet.
there was a Letter read in the same Diet, written to them in the German
Tongue, by the King of France. In which, speaking first of the ancient Union
between France and Germany, he said, that the adverse Party made it their whole
Business to put an end to it, and of late years they prevailed so far, that my
Father was declared an Enemy by the Empire: yet notwithstanding, when ahout two
years since, the State of the Empire was very miserable and disordered, I laid
aside the memory of that Injury, and gave a clear demonstration of my
Affections to you, following in this the Example of my Ancestors, who have in
all times made the dignity and enlargement of the Empire, one of their
Principal Cares. For it cannot be shown that the Kings of France have at any
time injured the Empire: But then our Enemies have endeavored many ways to
deprive you of your Liberties and Fortunes, not only by inventing various Arts
of Levying Money, but also by inflaming the Factions in the Illustrious
Families, as you may easily see. And though the Truth of this is clear, yet by
the persuasion of our Enemies, some of the States which are next my Kingdom,
have, as I hear, taken Arms against me, when I expected no such thing, and that
without any Declaration of War. Now this to me appears the more strange,
because between me and you there is not the least cause of offeuce. For as to
the report that I should send Succors to the Marquess of Brandenburg against
you, that is entirely false. But then as to the favor I have of late shown to
him, I have only done it upon the account of the ancient Union which I
mentioned, and in compliance with the hospitable Custom of the Crown of France,
which has ever given entertainment and protection to all afflicted Princes, and
in a more especial manner to those of Germany, in their Distresses. In truth I
should have been much better pleased to have seen him flourishing at home, and
enjoying his own, than thus to see him ruined, driven out and deserted: I say,
I should rather have desired he should not have fallen into this calamity, or
that at least, now an end might be put to it by a just and equal Treaty. But
now that I see him reduced into this distress by the fault of my Adversary, who
first pronounced the Sentence void, and yet afterward confirmed it, why am I
suspected if I compassionate his Fortunes? But as to the giving him any
assistance against the Empire, that never entered into my Thoughts, and you may
rest assured that I will not now do it, if you do not your selves first break
the League of Friendship. And now I have given you assurance that you shall
meet with nothing but Peace and Kindness from me; I desire that you would not
be so far circumvented by the Artifices of those who have as little kindness
for you as they have for me, as to take up Arms, or to contribute Men or Moneys
against me; for their whole Design is to make their own private a public
Concern. It rather befits you to continue the Amity, and to accept of the
Conditions I proffer you. I desire also that you would give me a clear
assurance by him who delivers you this Letter, what you intend; and that
according to the ancient Custom, and the Treaty of Passaw, my Ambassadors who
are to attend in the next Diet, may have sufficient Pasports.

The Answer he received was, That as to the Troops sent by the Borders of
Lorrain, there was no Affront intended to his Majesty, but it was done to the
intent, that if the Marquess of Brandenburg should make any irruption into the
Empire, his Attempts might be hindered: That as to what concerned his
Ambassadors, and the public Peace, they had no Commands from their Principals,
but they would give an Account of his Demands to them, and they did not doubt
but they would do what was just and fit.

About the end of October, Milan resigned to King Philip.
the Emperor delivered up to his Son by his Ambassadors, according to the
accustomed Ceremonies, the Dukedom of Milan. The King of France, soon after the
raising the Siege of Renty, in the manner I have expressed, dismissed the
Swiss, and put the rest of his Forces into Quarters. And the Emperor having
found a convenient place not far from the Castle of Hesdin, which he took and
demolished the last year, began the foundation of a new Town and Fort; and for
the building of it with the greater security, kept his Army together, which in
the Month of November wasted with Fire and Sword the Country of Bolonois, and
the Territory of Amiens. Thus the whole force of the War on both sides fell on
the miserable and unarmed Multitude. Afterward he dismissed the greatest part
of the Army, and kept only with him one or two Regiments. About the same time
the King of France sent some Forces into Italy, and amongst them some Germans,
for the Relief of Siena, which was then sharply besieged by the Forces of the
Emperor, and of the Duke of Florence.

The Twelfth Day of November a new Parliament began in London; A Parliament in
England.
thereupon Cardinal Pool, who was then in Brabant, had some Persons of great
note dispatched to him, to bring him over into England; the Principal of which
was the Lord Paget; the 24th. he came to London, and was honorably received
wheresoever he came, and was The Attainder was reversed the 22th. of November.
soon after restored to his former Place, Honor, Family and Estate, by the
consent of the States, which had been taken from him by Attainder in the Reign
of Henry the Eighth. The 27th. day of November he came into the Parliament, and
in the Presence of King Philip and the Queen, he discovered the Cause of his
Legation, and exhorted the States to return to the Communion of the Church, and
to restore to the most Holy Father the Pope of Rome his due Authority, who was
willing to receive them with the utmost Clemency and Affection: He admonished
them also that they should offer up their Thanks to God, who had given them
such a King and Queen. Then returning them his Thanks for their restoring him
to his Inheritance and Family, which he esteemed a very great Benefit; he said
he was so much the more obliged to restore them also to their heavenly Court
and Country, which he wished above all things. Having said this, he withdrew,
and the Bishop of Winchester (Gardener) who was Lord Chancellor, having
repeated his Speech, and with many words exhorted them to Union and Concord; He
added, that great Thanks were due to Almighty God for his immense Goodness and
Mercy, in that he had raised up a Prophet of their own Seed, to wit, this great
Cardinal, who would wholly employ himself in the promoting of their Salvation.
The next day, when the Upper House had approved the Cardinal's Speech, England
reconciled to the Sea of Rome.
there was a Bill drawn in form of a Petition, wherein the States supplicate
the King and Queen to intertcede with the Cardinal on their behalf. In it they
say, that they earnestly repent of the Schism, that they had denied the
Obedience which was due to the Apostolic See, and that they had given their
Assent to Acts of Parliament against it: That for time to come they would be in
the power of their Majesty's, and do all that ever they could, that all such
Acts might in this Parliament be repealed: and therefore they did most
earnestly beseech their Majesty's that they would interpose, and obtain an
Absolution of their Sin, and a Remission of the Censures which by the Canons of
the Church they had incurred: That they might be received into the bosom of the
Church as penitent Children, that in the obedience of the Sea of Rome and of
the Pope, they might serve God to the Glory of his Name, and the increasing
their Salvation. The 29th. day, when the King, Queen and Cardinal were present,
the Chancellor arose, and openly declared what the States had consented to in
relation to the Demands of the Pope's Legate, and thereupon he delivered to the
King and Queen the Petition of the States in writing, Signed and Sealed by
them, and begged they would receive it: the King and Queen receiving and
opening it, they again delivered it to the Chancellor, that it might be read;
which being done, the Chancellor asked the States if they ratified it? Which
being affirmed by them, the King and Queen rose up, and presented it to the
Cardinal. He having read the Petition, delivered to them the Bull of his
Legation; which was also openly forthwith read, that all might know that the
Pope had given him Power to absolve them; after which, he made a Speech,
wherein he showed them how acceptable Repentance was to God, and how much the
Holy Angels rejoiced in the Repentance of a Sinner; and having given them many
Examples of this, he gave God great Thanks, that inspired into them a Mind
desirous of Amendment. This being done, he arose, as did also the King and
Queen; and their Majesty's kneeled down whilst he addressed himself to God,
imploring his Mercy, and beseeching him to look mercifully upon the People, and
to forgive them their sins. And saying, that he was sent as Legate from the
Pope, Christ's Vicar, to absolve them, he lifted up, and stretched out his Hand
over them, as their manner is, blessing all of them, and absolving them at the
same time. From thence they went to the Chapel, where solemn Thanks were again
offered up to God with much Music, and all the Signs of a Festival Joy,
according to the Custom of the Nation. They who were intimately acquainted with
Cardinal Pool, and had enjoyed his Conversation, and knew his Customs, did much
admire this Action, and did expect something from him very different from what
they found.

The 18th. of December, The Emperor's Letter to the States of Germany.
the Emperor from Brussels sent a Letter to all the Princes and States of the
Empire; the Contents of which were these; The great Causes for which Albert
Marquess of Brandenburg, was about a year since outlawed by the Imperial
Chamber of Spire, and declared guilty of High Treason, have been clearly shown
to you by the Letters of that Chamber, which were publicly set up, and also by
those Letters and Commands you afterward received from us. And whereas I am
informed that he stubbornly continues in his said turbulent and seditious
Counsels, and does certainly design new Troubles, that he may yet further
afflict and vex Germany, which is our common Country; and lastly, because he
has made his Retreat, and found shelter and refuge with some, I think it
necessary to renew the former Sentence, for the Welfare of our Country. I do
this the rather, because I believe there is not one amongst you, who does not
love his Country, and desire that care may be taken for the preservation of
himself, his Territories and the People, and that the ill designs of the said
Marquess and his Adherents, may be hindered and retarded: Wherefore, upon the
Penalties heretofore proposed, I again command, That no man presume in any wise
to assist him or his Adherents, with Help, Counsel, Entertainment, Money,
Victual, or Ammunition and Arms: As also, I will that every of you make it his
greatest care, that neither he nor his Adherents may be suffered to gather any
Forces, or list any Soldiers in the Territories belonging to any of you, and
that every of you do to the utmost of his Power, hinder those within his
Territories from running over to the said Marquess, and punish all such as
shall be found Breakers of this our Order, and disobedient to our Commands.
This Letter was Printed, and sent into all Parts.

The Twenty Ninth Day of December, Ferdinand comes to Ausburg.
Ferdinand, King of the Romans, came to Ausburg on the account of the Diet, I
have so often already mentioned; but finding none of the Princes or States
there, two days after he sent Letters and Envoys to the several Princes,
representing to them, That seeing that there being many things of the greatest
moment to be transacted in this Assembly, he to his great loss and trouble, had
left his Territories, and was come thither that he might consult with them;
That they might together consider of the necessary and safe Means of relieving
the afflicted state of Germany: He therefore earnestly desired that they would
forthwith personally come thither, and not send their Deputies; for such was
the greatness of the Cause now under consideration, that it could not be well
otherwise dispatched: That the Emperor his Brother, had given him a full Power;
and that he would not detain them longer than was necessary.

The Sixteenth of January the Parliament of England was dissolved. 1555.
Amongst many other Acts passed in this Parliament, The Parliament of England
dissolved.
after the Repeal of the Act of Attainder against Cardinal Pool, the Acts made
in the times of the former Kings, ( R. 2. H. 4. and H. 5.) against Heretics,
and in favor of the Bishops, were revived: The Papal Power was entirely
restored, and whatsoever Acts of Parliament had been made against the Sea of
Rome within Twenty years last past, were repealed. Most thought the Crown of
England would in this Parliament have been given to King Philip; but there was
nothing of that Nature done. In the beginning of February there were Five
condemned to be burnt for persisting in the Protestant Religion, Five burnt in
England.
and refusing to return to the Roman Catholic Religion; John Hooper, Bishop of
Gloucester, John Bradford, Lawrence Sanders, Rowland Tailor, a Lawyer, and John
Rogers, all men of eminent Learning. The last of these was burnt in London,
where he had been a Preacher; the rest were sent into their respective
Countries, Gloucester, Manchester, Coventry and Hadley; who all of them
suffered Death with great Constancy. The 30th. of March, Ferrar, late Bishop of
St. David's, was burnt also at Carmarthen, by Morgan his Successor in that See.
There were also three Ambassadors sent from England to Rome, to thank the Pope
for his great Clemency shown to them, and promise his Holiness an entire
Obedience and Fidelity for the future.

The Fifth Day of February King Ferdinand opened the Diet at Ausburg (though
few of the Princes were then arrived there) by a Speech, The Diet opened in
Germany.
wherein he told them, That they very well knew for what grand and necessary
Causes this Diet had been first appointed to be held at Ulm by the Emperor; who
had afterward commanded it to be opened in this City the 13th. of November:
That he for his part, desired to have begun it that day; pursuant to the Desire
and Command of his Brother; but that he was kept at home by the necessity of
Affairs, that so he might secure his Countries from the Insults of a near
Enemy, in case any Attempt had been made upon them, and that he might so order
his Affairs at home in this Interval, that all things might go regularly
forward during his Absence: That after this forced Delay, he arrived here the
29th. of December, in order to the holding this Diet. He said, The Sum of the
Emperor's Desire was, That whatever tended to the Glory of God, and the
Tranquillity of the Empire might be established by the Council of all the
Princes and States: That as to the Diligence, Study, Labor and Care which the
Emperor, pursuant to the Love he bears to his and our Country, has in the mean
time employed for the extinguishing of all Offenses and Disquiets, and the
establishing of Religion, that was known to all, and would be testified not
only by all his other Actions, but also in a more signal manner, by the Edicts
made in the two last Diets. That whatsoever he then undertook or promised, he
had since exactly performed: But then they all knew what pernicious Commotions
both foreign and domestic, contrary to the expectation of all men, had since
happened, by which those salutary Edicts were not only hindered and disturbed
from having that effect which might have been expected; but they were also in a
manner destroyed, to the great detriment of the Empire, so that it was needless
for him to insist any further or longer upon them: That the Emperor ought not
in the mean time to be at all blamed, because he had given no cause of Offense,
but had acted sincerely, and with constancy had sought the Public Good,
whatever the Slanders of his Enemies might insinuate to the contrary: He said,
he did not doubt but that they themselves were of this Opinion, and would
become the Emperor's Advocates. That the Emperor had assembled this Diet for
the procuring a Remedy for all these Calamities, and had designed to have been
personally present in it himself; but was in this prevented by Sickness and
other Affairs; and yet being unwilling it should be any longer delayed, he had
commanded the Diet to be forthwith opened, that so this growing Mischief might
be curbed, and he might not be wanting in any thing to his Country, than which
nothing is dearer to him. That therefore he had appointed him (his Brother) his
Lieutenant, and had given him a full and unlimited Commission, and had
delegated and sent some others to join with him, to the intent that they,
together with the States and Princes, might enter upon the Consideration and
Establishment of such Laws as should be good and useful to the Empire: That
Religion should be their first and principal Concern, because this lasting
Diffention in that Matter, was the Head and Fountain of all their Disturbances
and Calamities, which had not only cost the Lives of so many Thousands, but had
also endangered the loss of more Souls, and was a thing so apparent that it
needed no further explication: That it was a sad and lamentable Spectacle to
see them who were partakers of the same Baptism, and united in the same Name,
Empire and Language, thus divided one against another in the Profession of that
Faith which they had for so many Ages received by Tradition from their
Ancestors: But it was yet more to be lamented, that not only one or two, but
that every day new Sects did arise, whilst every man endeavors to defend his
own private Opinion; which is injurious to the Majesty of God, a dissolution of
the Bond of Charity, and so far disturbs the Minds of the ignorant Multitude,
that they know not what to do or believe. But that which is the most afflictive
of all, is, That in this great variety of Errors, most men are brought up in
such manner by degrees, that it is possible perhaps to find many not only
amongst the prime Nobility, but also in the lower Stations, who not at all
concerning themselves for any Religion, believe none, and therefore never
trouble themselves with the Rules of Reason, Honesty or Conscience: This turns
to the grievous Mischief of our Youth. It is certainly a deplorable thing, that
Germany, which has now for so many Ages possessed the deserved Praises of
Virtue and Piety, and has, on that account, flourished above other Nations,
should of a sudden so degenerate and sink, that in time to come it will not
bear a comparison with the most profane Nations; and even now it ought not in
this to be preferred before the Turks and Barbarous Nations, or thought any
wise better than they. Now the Reason why there has been no remedy found out
for the stopping this Disease, though there has been Conventions of the States
for that purpose, is because so very few have made it their business, and that
they, who in the first place ought to have promoted the Cure of it, have either
connived at it, or following the bent of the times, have endeavored to find
their own private Interests in it: Therefore the immortal God has now for a
long time afflicted Germany in general, and many of its States in particular,
with various Calamities, insomuch that this Region, which heretofore so
abounded with Men, Cities and Strength, that it could easily repel any Force
that was employed against it, being now torn by Contentions, and harrassed by
Civil Broyls and Foreign Wars, is reduced to the utmost degree of Weakness, and
hastes to a Dissolution, if God does not wonderfully save and preserve it. That
therefore it was absolutely necessary, That every Magistrate should in his
place take the utmost care of Religion, and do his Duty in that part in which
the Glory of God, and the Honesty of Humane Life were so much concerned: That
there had been various Methods proposed in former Diets, for the composing this
Difference in Religion, but the holding a general, free, and holy Council, has
been thought not only by the Emperor, but by you also from the first, the most
effectual way; because it being a Controversy concerning the Faith, it belongs
not to one single Nation, but to all the Christian World, and therefore all
Nations were to be assembled, that whatsoever is any where faulty, may be
reformed and taken away: That therefore the Emperor, as became his Station, and
at their Request, had at last obtained the Calling of such a Council; which
accordingly had not only been indicted, but also several times begun; but then
what had intervened for the hindering it, and the obstructing its good Effects,
he would at present leave unspoken, nor did he doubt but that the greatest part
of them who were present in that Council in Person, or by their Ambassadors,
knew very well the Reason why the Commonwealth had as yet reaped no Benefit
from that Council. And if it was their desire still that the way of a Council
should be pursued, and have its place in their Considerations, which seemed to
be a thing they ought most earnestly to ask by their Prayers of God: That then
he would not only willingly consent, but with all possible Study, Fidelity and
Diligence procure the same: That in this case, they were to consider how those
things which had hitherto hindered the good effects which were expected from the
Council, might now be removed; But if by reason of the Wars, and that* Tempest
which then lay heavy upon the Commonwealth, it seemed good to them to defer it
to a more quiet time; then he was pleased that they should treat of some other
pious and tolerable ways: That in the mean time, the People and States of
Germany might live in Peace, and be under an honest Discipline, the Glory of
God, and the Consciences of men being in Safety.

That of late years a National Council of Germany had been often proposed, A
National Council of Germany long disused.
as extremely accommodated to the present state of things; but forasmuch as the
Name, Mode and Form of it, was not (in his opinion) so well known, and by use
established, he therefore would not at present determine any thing concerning
it: The third way, by Conferences and Disputes, had been often tried, and
though hitherto no good fruit had proceeded from thence, yet, many things might
by this means have been discovered, and the principal Differences might have
been determined, if they had been managed with a truly pious Affection, and if
there had not on both sides been too great an Attachment to their private
Interest; which Affirmation he nevertheless desired might not be extended to
the injury of any man. That therefore this way was to be further considered:
And although the faithful Council and Design of the Emperor was some years
since misunderstood, and so became ungrateful to both the Parties; yet if they
thought so fit, he did still think that way might be useful, if the contending
Parties would act sincerely; and if they would lay aside their Passions, and
discharge all Obstinacy, and seek nothing but the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of Men, that then he would assist them in it with fidelity and
industry: That for the present he could not bethink him of any other convenient
and useful Way: But that if they could find out any one that was more fit and
easy, they should have his good leave to produce it.

The next Thing to be considered of, as he said, was the Peace of the Empire.
That the Emperor and they too thought, That the Measures they had then taken
for the preservation of the Public Peace, had been such as would certainly
have had a good effect; but then since the Event has showed them all, that they
were mistaken in this, because they had agreed that Rebels and Seditious
Persons should not be condemned or outlawed till they had first been cited, and
convicted according to the Forms of Justice, which in the interim gave them
time and opportunity of ruining many innocent men; It was also then Agreed,
That if any Force were employed against any man, his Neighbors should assist
and defend him: But then you are now abundantly convinced what variety of
Impediments may intervene to hinder this. That therefore they should
deliberate, and seriously consider how these two Heads of the Laws may be
amended, That unquiet men might be kept in Aw, and that those who were faithful
to the Empire, might be well assured that they should not fail of Assistance in
time of need. That this might now be dispatched with so much the greater ease,
because the Foundations of such a Regulation had been laid by the late
Conventions at Worms and Franckfurt, and they should do well to prosecute the
Consultation which had been begun there, and bring it to a good end. He desired
also that they would consider of the constituting the Public Justice, of the
Public Contributions, of the Money, and all other things relating to the
Government: That they should direct all their Thoughts to the finding out ways
for the total abolishing their intestine Evils, Contentions, Riots, Seditions,
and unjust Force and Violence. That in all these Deliberations they should in
the first place consider the State of the Empire, and reflect upon the great
Danger which now threatened Germany, not only from the devouring Turk, but also
from some nearer Enemies, who sought the Ruin of the Empire as much as the
Turks did. That therefore they should deeply consider what great Advantages
their Enemies took of these Offenses and Civil Broyls which they craftily
stirred up and nourished, that in this division of the States, they in the
Interim might do their Wills, and when time served, they might with great
Forces fall upon the Empire, and enslave it to them: That the Neighbour-Nations
which had been thus conquered and circumvented by them, ought to be a Caution
to Germany, and excite in it a mighty care to pursue those Counsels, by which
the Tempest and Ruin which now hung over her Head, and threatened her, might be
averted: That the Authority and Strength of the Empire might be preserved, and
that all external Force might be no less valiantly resisted now than
heretofore: That whatever Help or Counsel the Emperor or He were able to
contribute, they should not fail of doing it with all willingness, and in such
manner too, that all men should from thence understand how greatly they loved
their Country; and of this he desired they would rest certainly assured.

When this Speech of King Ferdinand's came once to be spread over Germany, The
Effect of this Speech.
it was attended with a Report, That he had banished about 200 Ministers out of
Bohemia; and it was also said, That the Cardinal of Moron would be sent from
Rome, to this Diet; who was to try if he could not make Germany follow the
Example of England, and do what Pool had already done; for that the Pope and
all his Patry was thought to have been so exalted by the reduction of England,
that they had thereupon entertained vast, but deluding Hopes: For, because the
Thing went as they desired, therefore they concluded, That God was now
appeased, and was become the Defender of their most just Cause, and that their
Church could not be convinced of any Error; for thus at this time they boasted
more than they were wont. And when they send any Legates into Germany at any
time, they do it not to confess any Offense they have committed, but as they
pretend, that they may heal the Infirmities of men.

About the End of February, Albert, Duke of Mecklenburg, whom we have mentioned
above, as an Ally to Maurice Duke of Saxony, and whom Henry Duke of Brunswick,
the last year, whilst he carried the War into Saxony, very much afflicted,
married the Daughter of Albert Duke of Prussia. About this time also I received
an Account out of England, That Bradford, whom I have mentioned above, to be
condemned, was kept a Prisoner, an^ that the Minds of many were much astonished
and stupefied with the Constancy of those who had Sacrificed their Lives.
Bradford was burnt in July following.

The End of the Twenty Fifth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK XXVI.
The CONTENTS.
England submits to the Church of Rome. The Castle of Blaffeburg taken and
levelled with the Earth. Augustus, Elector of Saxony, excuses his not coming
to the Diet. The Prince of Saxony writes to the Emperor. Cardinal Pool
endeavors to make a Peace between the Emperor and the King of France. The
Emperor writes to the States of the Empire. The Turk besieges Piombino, a Town
in Italy. The Town of Vulpiano destroyed by the French. The Parliament of Paris
answers the King's Edict against the Lutherans. A Controversy about the
County of Catzenellobogen. Charles the Emperor resigns the Government to his
Son. The Answer of the Roman Catholics to the Demands of the Lutherans. Those
Bishops that change their Religion, are to be removed. A Parliament in England.
Libells against the Spaniards spread about London. John Gropper offered a
Cardinal's Hat, which he refused. The Deputies of Austria ask of Ferdinand a
Liberty to embrace the Reformation. The Duke of Prussia professes the Augustan
Confession. Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury Burnt. The Bavarians desire to
embrace the Reformation. A Truce between the Emperor and King of France. The
Cardinal of Ausburg's Apology. The Diet opened at Ratisbone, Transylvania
revolts from King Ferdinand. April 10. 1556.
The Emperor and his Sisters set Sail for Spain. The Death of John Sleidan, the
Author of this History.

I Have given an account how England returned under the obedience of the Sea of
Rome in the last Book; England submits to the Court of Rome.
when the account of this Revolution, which was sent with the utmost Celerity,
came to the Knowledge of that Court, there was a vast Joy expessed in the City,
and extraordinary Processions were made to the Churches, and the twenty fourth
of December, the Pope published a Declaration to this purpose. After I had
heard (says he) that England, which has now for some Years been separated, and
torn off from the Body of the Church, was by the immense Mercy of God, and the
extraordinary Diligence, Faith, Study, and Labor of King Philip, Queen Mary,
and Reginald Cardinal (of England) reduced to the Communion of the Church, and
the obedience of this See: My Mind was filled with a mighty Joy, and as was
fit, I forthwith rendered to God^s great Thanks as I could, nor have I since
omitted any thing which might tend to the Communicating the Fruit and Benefit
of this my Joy to the whole City. But then, as the Father in the Gospel who
received his Prodigal Son, was not satisfied with an inward Exultation, and
private Joy, but invited others to his Feast, that they too might rejoice with
him, and make merry. So that the whole Earth may understand the greatness of my
Joy, I will and Command that public Thanksgivings and Prayers be made. And
also by the Authority and Power which I have, I allow every Man the Liberty to
choose what Priest he likes best, 1556.
and that having rightly confessed his Sins to him: I allow also that Priest a
Faculty to remit all sorts of Sins, how Atrocia.
abominable soever they be, even those Sins which belong only to me to remit,
and which are wont by Name to be excepted. And that he shall not only remit the
Guilt, but the Penalty or Pain due to those Sins which are so confessed. That
he shall impose what satisfaction he thinks fit, and relax all Vows, except
those of Chastity, and religious Orders, and so as they be commuted into other
works. And trusting in the Mercy of God, and the intercession of St. Peter, and
St. Paul, I grant a full and entire remission of all Sins, which is only
granted at the Determination of fifty years at other times, to all those, who
with an humble and contrite Heart, shall turn to God, and perfectly confess
their Sins as soon as they hear of this my Bull, and shall twice or thrice in a
Week endeavor to appease God, by Fasting, Alms, and other Pious Exercises, and
shall after this receive the Holy Eucharist with Thanksgivings, beseeching God
in their Prayers, that he would illuminate those that walk in the darkness of
Error with the Light of his Countenance, that he would send us Peace, and
incline the Hearts of Kings to Concord. And I grant the same Benefit to those
who are hindered by Age or Sickness, from performing what is above required. And
that these our Letters may be every where Published, I command all Patriarchs,
Archbishops, and the like, so soon as they receive the Copy hereof, that they
forthwith divulge it throughout their several Provinces, and as it is a free
Gift, that they propose it every where without any gain.

I have said in the former Book, Blasseburg ruined
that Blasseburg was the principal Fortress the Marquess of Brandenburg had in
all his Country, and that it was surrendered to the Confederates: These Princes
considering, that being by one means or another recovered, it might be the
occasion of greater Mischiefs, and about this time, entirely ruined and
demolished it, to the great Exasperation of the whole Family of Brandenburg,
and of all the Kindred of it.

In the Interim, Ferdinand invites the Princes to the Diet.
Ferdinand, King of the Romans, both before he left his Territories, and after
he arrived at Ausburg for the holding the Diet, did continually by his Envoys
and Letters, solicit the Princes to hasten thither, as I said in the last
Book. His first and greatest Care, was to persuade Augustus, Elector and Duke
of Saxony: He had before this alleged for his Absence, the unsettled State of
Saxony, and now again sent his Deputies to the Diet with the same Excuses, and
occasionally mentioning the Turks, he endeavored to show the great danger
Germany was exposed to, which heretofore having been Potent and formidable to
her Enemies, was now almost exhausted and depopulated by the many Mischiefs and
Wounds she had suffered. He said, this Calamity received a great Improvement
from the disaffection and distrust which the States of the Empire labored
under. That the Emperor and his Majesty had omitted nothing which might procure
a Remedy against this Disease. But that hitherto all their Labor had been in
vain; for that the Minds of Men were so Exasperated, and such ways were open to
the admitting new offenses, that it was not reasonable to expect any
mitigation. His Brother Maurice some years since (he said) had commanded that
some Ceremonies and other things of an indifferent Nature, should be retained
in the Churches of his Provinces; but then this Command was not only slighted
and disobeyed, but was attacked by many Libels and rude Reproaches, so that
afterward it was not in his Power to re-establish those things, unless he
would have exposed himself; and that by this means some other Princes had been
deterred from attempting any thing of this Nature: But now those who are of the
other Party, and oppose the Augustan Confession, have given apparent Signs that
they intend not the least Pious and Legal Reformation, by the Actions of the
former times, when this affair was considered either in Councils or
Conferences. Seeing therefore after so many fruitless Labors, the loss of many
Years, and the disappointment of many Councils, no way to an Agreement and
Union could be found out, because perhaps it was the Pleasure of God thus to
punish the Sins of Men, therefore he desired very earnestly that the Confession
of Faith, delivered in at Ausburg, as a Sum of the Christian Religion, might
not be thought by his Majesty an impious Book, but that it was a pure and a
Pious Writing, which show that the Son of God was the Author of Salvation, that
the Doctrine of it did exactly agree with the Primitive Church, and first four
Councils, that it commends and teaches those Works which are truly Christian,
and exhorts the People to obey their Magistrates. So that if a firm and certain
Peace may be established in this Diet, there was no doubt but the Emperor and
his Majesty might obtain great Succors from the Germans against the Turks, but
then those who had embraced the Augustan Confession, and for the most part had
been brought up in it, would constantly persist in that Faith, so that if there
were not such a Peace made, as should include Religion, and confirm the
Possessions of the Church Revenues where they now were, though this affair were
only referred to another Diet, as has already been frequently done, and one day
spent after another in Delays, whilst the People were left in a miserable
uncertainty of enjoying what they had: That in this case, it was very doubtful
whether all Men would patiently bear it; for though he and the rest of the
Princes should sit still, acquiesce and do their duties, and continue in their
Obedience, yet it might happen that those that were mean Men, and of no regard,
might cause Troubles by means of this uncertainty of Danger, and of this fear
for Religion, especially in those Places which lay most exposed, and afforded
the greatest opportunities for Insurrections of this Nature: That this being a
thing, in which the fortune of the Empire consisted, he desired earnestly, that
his Majesty would apply his Thoughts to it, now he had obtained a full and
plenary Power from the Emperor. That besides, this Condition was some years
since proposed by his Brother Maurice at Passaw, that if perhaps the
differences in Religion could not be Composed, that yet nevertheless, an
inviolable Peace should be Established till things could be entirely Composed:
And though the Emperor would not then admit this offer, because as he said, all
the States were concerned in it; yet seeing he did not neither totally reject
it, and in the Treaty or Decree expressly promised, That he would take Care that
things might be equitably discussed in the Diet, and there should be no Arts
used to suborn the Votes of Men in the business of Religion: He was confident
on this account, that in the entrance or beginning of this Diet, He would
solicit not only those States and Princes who met then at Passaw, but all the
rest of the States to embrace a Peace. When the Deputies of the Duke of Saxony
had made this Speech in the Diet, the fourth of February, the next day, the
King of the Romans made a reference or proposal of it to the States, in the
manner I have set forth in the conclusion of the last Book.

About this time the Learned Men of Misnia and Wittemberg, The Protest^ne
Ministers Comfort the banished Bohemians.
and especially Melanchthon, sent their Letters of Consolation to those
Ministers which were Banished out of Bohemia, as I said in the end of the last
Book, wherein they show the Craft of the adverse Party, who alleged, that they
only desired to preserve necessary Order in the Church, and that those who
either had no Episcopal Ordination, or who were Married, ought not to
distribute the Holy Sacrament; for they only pretended this Cause of their
Banishment, that they might not seem to intend the oppression of the true
Religion. But then these Learned Men sufficiently proved, that it was a mere
Tyranny to deprive Ministers of their Functions, only because they were
Married; for that the Devil was the Author of the Prohibition of Marriage, as
appears sufficiently in the sacred Scriptures: That Orders were not to be
sought from the Hands of the Bishops, who were the declared Enemies of the
Gospel and defended Idolatry, but that they were to be sought from that Church,
which embraced the true Doctrine, and therefore had the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven: That it was extremely absurd and dangerous to ask Shepherds of the
Wolves: That the Church has ever had a Right to elect fitting Ministers, and
that so it was decreed in the Council of Nice: That those that were thus
Elected and Tried, were confirmed by those that presided in the Holy Churches:
That this Custom was still retained, and therefore it was a mere slander, when
they pretended the Protestants disturbed or broke the Order of the Church.
Therefore since this was the true state of things, and for that they were
Banished for the Profession of the true Religion, they ought to bear their
Sufferings with the greater moderation of Mind, for that God in due time would
take Care of them, and they, and the Neighbor Churches would afford them the
best Hospitality and Charity they could.

The French having taken Jurea, The French War in Pi^dmont.
a City of Piedmont, upon the River Doria, under the Command of Brisac, the
thirteeenth day of December, of the last Year: This Year, the third day of
March, they took Casale, a City standing near the Po, by surprise; though there
was in it a Garrison of Spaniards and Germans, the Castle held out for some
time, and then was forced to yield too; after this they possessed themselves of
several other Towns, and amongst them of Valenza and Salvadora, both which they
beat down and levelled.

The sixth of March, Augustus the Elector of Saxony, Joachim Marquess of
Brandenburg and Elector, the Children of John Frederick, late Elector of
Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, The Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, and
other Princes League together.
and several of the neighboring Princes met at Naumburg upon the River Saal,
and there renewed the Hereditary League between these Families which I have
mentioned before in my twenty fourth Book; and at the same time mutually agreed
to stick to the Augustan Confession, and that no suspicion might thereupon
arise af any underhand Combination, the fifth day after their Meeting they
gave the Emperor an account of the reason of this congress, The Letter of these
Princes to the Emperor.
in this manner: The last year when there was a Treaty concluded between
Augustus, and John Frederick, Electors of Saxony, it was then determined that
the ancient and Paternal League should be renewed, which was begun above a
hundred Years since, and afterward confirmed by a Law: That they were then met
to renew that League, and as it had been very beneficial to their Ancestors and
their People, so they hoped that for the future, they should reap the same
Advantage from it, seeing they sought nothing from it but the Public Peace and
Welfare, and did not design to offend any Person, and they said, that pursuant
to the old Custom, they had excepted his Imperial Majesty, and his Brother the
King of the Romans out of it, and that as they desired to live in Peace amongst
themselves, so they would perform that Duty which they owed to the Public, and
which became obedient Princes of the Empire: That as to Religion, they would
not exceed the terms and limits of the Augustan Confession, but then because
those Heads of the Christian Religion which were contained in it, had not the
least mixture of any Seditious or Impious Doctrines, by the Blessing of God
they would persevere in it. That they would not fail to promote the safety of
Germany, as far as it was possible for them by their Labors, Counsels, and
Estates. That seeing in these unquiet times, they were necessitated to stay at
home to prevent greater Inconveniences, which would have attended their
Absence; they had therefore sent Deputies to the Diet, to whom they had given
order in all things to promote the public Peace, and to take Care that neither
Religion, nor any Civil Cause whatsoever should occasion the fear of Force or
Danger. For that, if a Peace were once well settled, all other Controversies
would so much the more easily be Adjusted: That the present state of the Empire
was such, that it was needful to join and unite all their Forces and Minds to
prevent the nearer approaches of the Turks toward them. They said, they knew
how much his Imperial Majest desired a Royal Army should be raised to repel the
Insults of the Enemy, that if such a Peace were once settled, there was no doubt
but the States of the Empire would freely spend their Moneys in that War, which
had hitherto been hindered by their Domestic Commotions and Calamities. That
for their Parts, they would not be wanting in this Case, and they had given
their Deputies order to say the same things in the Diet. The same day they
wrote to King Ferdinand, and almost in the same Words as Augustus had ordered
his Deputies to speak in the Diet. For they insisted upon that Article of the
Passaw Treaty, showed their desire of Peace, their Esteem of the Augustan
Confession, persuaded the settling a Peace, and desired that no Credit might be
given to those who made it their Business to disquiet the Empire.

The fifteenth of March, The Elector of Mentz dies.
the Elector and Archbishop of Mentz died; he had been a Member of the Council
of Trent, and was afterward severely Treated, and forced to seek his Safety in
a Flight, as is set forth in the twenty fourth Book of this History; Daniel
Brendel succeeded this Prelate in his See.

The twenty third day of March, Julius III. dies.
Julius III. Pope of Rome, died of a Dropsy; because, contrary to the Opinion
of all Men, he had so easily reduced England under the Obedience of the Sea of
Rome, he had taken up a vast hope that he should recover Germany also, as was
then believed: And he had sent the Cardinal of Morone to the Diet at Ausburg,
who arrived there the day after the Pope died; but hearing eight days after,
the news of his Holiness his Death, the last of that Month, he and Truccesio,
Cardinal of Ausburg, left the Diet, and returned to Rome, that they might be
present in the Election of the new Pope; but the Cardinals which were then at
Rome, made more haste than is usual, and without expecting the Arrival of those
who were abroad, they chose Marcellus, the second of that Name, who, with the
Cardinal of Farnese, was sent Legate to the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, as I
have said above in my thirteenth Book. The Cardinal of Ausburg some days before
he left the Diet, to go to Rome, sent a Letter into the Convention, wherein he
signified to the Princes and Deputies, That he did by all means desire a Peace;
but he would never consent to any advice, whereby the dignity of the
Apostolical See, and the old Religion should be violated.

In the Interim, Siena taken by the Emperor's Forces.
which from the time of the defeat of Peter Strozza, had been besieged now
eight Months by the Forces of the Emperors, and of the Duke of Florence, being
reduced to extreme want of all things, and seeing no possibility of Succor,
the twenty first day of April yielded it self to the Emperor, who put a
Garrison into it. In the Tear 1558. This City was afterward sold by Philip the
Second, to the Duke of Florence. The Emperor's Forces were Commanded in this
Siege by the Marquess di Marignano, a great Soldier. About three years since,
the Inhabitants of this City having by the assistance of the French, beaten the
Spaniards, and destroyed their Citadel, they thereupon sent Ambassadors into
France to give the King their Thanks, and to assure him they would for the
future commit their Fortunes to his Protection.

Marcellus the Second, Marceilus II. dies. Paul the IV. Elected.
who was chosen Pope, sat but twenty two days, and died the last of April.
Hereules Duke of Ferrara, and Guido Ubaldo, Duke of Urbino. were according to
the Custom, just then come into Rome to pay their Respects to this new Pope,
who being nearer, had thereby the opportunity to come before some others who
designed it too. The Cardinals being shut up in the Conclave, the twenty third
of May, they Elected Cardinal Theatino Pope. His Name was John Peter, and he
was a Neapolitan by Birth, and then Dean of the College, a Son of the
Illustrious Family di Caraffa, a Man of great Age, and of more than usual
Learning. He changed his Name, and was called Paul IV. because Paul III. had
made him a Cardinal. This was the Man who instituted a Sect of Men, who are
called Jesuits, and have since nestled, not only in Italy, but in Germany too,
and some other Places. A small time after, he made his Brother's Son a
Cardinal, who was a Soldier, and had been a Captain, and for the most part had
served in the French Camp.

In the former Book, Cardinal Pool's Letter for a Peace.
I have given an account how Cardinal Pool went to the Emperor and King of
France, to persuade them to a Peace, which he endeavored by Word and Writing,
and amongst many other Arguments he told them, that whilst they went on with
this Civil War, the Turks took the opportunity of enlarging their Bounds both
by Sea and Land, they having in this time taken In 1521.
Belgrade and In 1522.
Rhodes, and opened their Passage to the Possession of Buda, and the Dan^be:
That if God had not stirred up a War between them and the King of Persia, it is
not unlikely he might have made himself Master of all Christendom by this time.
That from hence bad Christians had also increased to such a number in many
Places, to the great weakening and corruption of all Ecclesiastical and Civil
Discipline, that it was not now in their Power to curb and restrain them; as
might be seen by the Rebellions which were stirred up in all places, the
neglect of the Offices of the Church, and the Heresies and Schisms which have
arisen and spread themselves in this time. In the next place you ought to
consider, that you are the Princes of the Christian Religion, and that though
God has suffered Satan, who is the Author of all Evil, and whose Business is to
fifth the Church of God as Wheat, to stir up a War between you two, who are the
Principal Members of the Church, yet he has not suffered his wickedness to go
further than civil and common affairs and things. For he has preserved both of
you sound in Religion, of the same Mind, and united to the Body of the Church,
without which it would scarce have been possible to have reduced you to
Concord. And when so many other Princes have made a defection from the Church,
and that Enemy of Mankind has invented such variety of Stratagems against you,
yet God in his divine Goodness has looked upon you, and defeated the devices
and attempts of the Devil. By which he has given us a certain Token, not only
of his Goodness and Clemency toward you, but also of his Intentions to use
your Services, and to unite you two to his Vicar on Earth, for the taking away
these destructive Contentions, and restoring a general Peace, both as to Church
and State. These, and many other such Arguments, did that Cardinal offer to the
Consideration of these Princes, threatening them also with the Wrath and
Vengeance of God, if they did not desist, and suffer their People, which was
grievously Harrassed and impoverished, to recover. Now though these Arguments
did not prevail then, yet when he went into England, he went on with his design
of reconciling them, and at last he prevailed so far, as to dispose both the
Emperor and King of France to send their Ambassadors to treat of a Peace.

The Queen of England, Queen Mary mediates between the Emperor and King of
France.
who was the Mediator in this Treaty, appointed a place between Calais, Ardee,
and Graveling, three Towns, belonging to these three Princes, in the Center of
which, she chose out a dry and convenient place, in the middle of a Plain, and
having moted the same, she caused four houses to be built, which though not
intended for any long duration, were yet made very convenient and Beautiful. In
this place the Ambassadors met the twenty third of May. There met for the
Emperor amongst others, the Bishop of Arras; for the King of France, the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Constable; and for the English, as Mediators, were
present Cardinal Pool, the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget. A Rumor spread
it self throughout Christendom, which caused great Expectations, and various
Judgments in the Minds of Men, and especially in those who were best acquainted
with the Controversies of these Times; for that in this Treaty, the Dukedoms of
Milan and Burgundy, Savoy, Piedmont, Corsica, Navarr, Lorrain, and Luxemburg,
and the Cities of Toul, Verdun and Metz, were to be contended for, and settled.
The Affair being much, and long debated, and the Mediating English insisting to
have some of these things referred to the determination of a Council, nothing
at last was done, but the Treaty was broke up.

The tenth of June, The Letter of the German Princes to the Emperor.
Ferdinand and the States of Germany wrote a Letter to the Emperor, wherein
they desired him, that in this Treaty, he would particularly concern himself
for the restitution of those Places, which the King of France had taken from
the Empire. When therefore the Meeting was ended without any Effect, His Answer.
the Emperor, the twenty fifth of June, wrote to the Diet, to this Purpose. It
is very grateful to me, to see you thus affected with the Calamities of those
who have been so much afflicted by the public Enemy of the Empire, and of me,
and truly their Cause was most dear to me, and I accordingly, before I
received your Letter, had commanded my principal Ambassadors, who were to
attend this Treaty, that they should persist in the restitution of these places
to their former State, with the utmost diligence, and they should not remit any
thing as to that Article. And although I for my part, having opened all the
ways I could to a Peace, thought that the King of France would for the sake of
Peace not have been stubborn and refractory; yet after all, the Congress is for
the present broke up without any good Effect. Yet however, that I may consult
the good of Christendom, I will not refuse to make a Peace, if any tolerable
Conditions are offered, and when time serves, I will do my endeavor to have
those places restored to the Empire, and to put them for the future into a
better Condition than they were before.

The Emperor had a little before sent the Duke de Alva into Milan, that he
might take care of the War there, as his General. Ferdinand Gonzaga having
obtained a release from that Post, and being about this time gone from
Flanders, to live privately at Home. There was also a strong Report, which
prevailed much about this time, The Persecution in England.
that Mary, Queen of England, was with Child. About this time also the
Persecution in England grew sharper. Bradford, who was condemned to be burnt in
the manner I have set down in the end of my twenty fifth Book, and was
afterward respited and kept in Prison, was burnt in July.

Frederick, the eldest Son of John Frederick, Duke and Elector of Saxony,
Married Agnes, the Daughter of the Landgrave of Hesse, and which had been the
Wife of Maurice, the last Elector of Saxony. Many of the neighboring Princes
met on the occasion of this Marriage, and appointed a second Meeting at
Naumburg to consult of their affairs. About the same time, Joan, the Mother of
the Emperor died, An Insurrection in Geneva.
and Ferdinand her second Son, celebrated her Obsequies at Ausburg. About the
same time there was a tumult raised at Geneva in the night time by some of the
Senators of that City, who designed by this means to make themselves and their
Party, Masters of that Commonwealth; these Men had also a great aversion for
John Calvin, who had fled thither on the account of the Persec^tions in France,
and now the driving him out of this City, was one of the principal Motives of
this Insurrection: In the night time, there was a sudden Commotion made in
several parts of the City, and the Cry was, The French are in Arms, and the
City is betrayed. The French in the mean time keeping within their Houses; and
so the design miscarried, and many of them who were in this lewd Conspiracy,
were Executed, and some others were forced to fly for the safety of their
Lives. The reason why they would have had the French Banished out of the City,
was because many of the French Fugitives and Sojourners in the City had been
lately taken into the number of the Citizens, by which they believed their
Party was weakened, and the other increased.

The Turkish Fleet came this Year into the Tyrrhenian Sea, The Turks. Fleet.
as it had done several years before, and much terrified Tuscany. That
therefore there might be the less damage done by this Navy, Porto Ercole taken.
the Marquess di Marignano General of the Emperors Forces, about the thirteenth
of June, suddenly set upon Porto Ercole, which was then in the Hands of the
French, and by the Valor of his Soldiers, took the Castle and slew all the
French that were there in Garrison, after this, the Turks too besieged
Piombino, but receiving great Losses in their Attacks, and not being likely
ever to take it, they left that place, and attempted the Island of Elba,
belonging to the Duke of Florence, but to no purpose neither.

About this time, there were some Civil Laws published by the King of France,
at Metz, that Prince having established there, a Garrison, a Governor, and a
President of Justice; amongst other things it was there enacted, that if any
Brother, Sister, Uncle, Tutor, or Guardian Prostituted any Woman or Maiden that
was under their Charge, he should have an Iron Hoop put about his Neck, and be
so exposed for some time to the scorn, hatred, and reproaches of all Men, and
he should be beaten afterward with Rods, and Banished the City; and if any
Father or Mother should do the same, it should be Death. Many Men wondered at
these Laws, and thought it was rather in order to teach Men Crimes that were
rarely or never heard of, than to restrain them from these Faults. But in truth
it shows the Corruption of our Times.

We have often already mentioned the famous Controversy which has been so many
Years depending between the Landgrave and William Count of Nassaw,
Catzenellob^gen.
concerning the Dominion of Catzenellobogen, in the Landgravat of Hassia; that
an end might be put to this Difference, and the rise of greater Mischiefs
prevented, some of the Neighbor Princes interposed as Honorary Arbitrators. To
this end, the Elector Palatine, Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg, and William
Duke of Cleve met in the beginning of July at Worms, and the Landgrave sent
William his eldest Son to manage this Treaty for him. There were some
Conditions proposed, and a Debate insued, but at last they resolved to take
further time to consider of it, and appointed another time to meet and
determine it.

In the mean time the French destroyed as many of the Castles in Montisferrat,
as they had in their Possession, for fear any of them, being surprised by the
Spaniards, might be employed to hinder the supplying of Casale with
Necessaries. There was in this Dukedom, a strong Castle, called Vulpiano, which
has belonging to it, a Town of some moment, and was then in the possession of
the Spaniards, and upon the reception of the Duke de Alva, great part of the
Forces in these Parts being assembled, to welcome their new General, he took
this opportunity to furnish that Place with Provisions; and about the same time
the French re-victualled Marienbourg, a Town in Hainault, which they took the
last year from the Emperor. About this time also the King of France published
an Edict by the persuasion of his Friends, commanding all his Presidents to
Punish, without delay or any regard had to any Appeal, all those who by the
Ecclesiastical Chancellors, and the Inquisitors should be condemned for
Heretics. This Edict was by the Cardinal of Lorrain brought into the
Parliament of Paris, that according to the Custom of France they might approve,
publish, and register it. But those Senators being surprised with the novelty
of the design, because it took away all benefit of Appeals, took time to
consider of it, and some time after sent some of their Members to acquaint the
King with their Thoughts of this Edict, as I shall set forth in due time.

There is a City in Switzerland, called Lucerne, which is the Capital of one of
their Cantons, and lies not far from Italy.

The Inhabitants desired they might be suffered to embrace the Reformation.
those Cantons which were of the Roman Catholic Religion, hereupon differed
amongst themselves, whilst some were for the granting this Liberty, and others
opposed it, and it was thought this would have caused some intestine Commotions
against them, but at last the Party prevailed, who were for maintaining the old
Religion, and that those who were not for it, might have their liberty to
withdraw. Whereupon a great number of the Inhabitants of that City went to
Zurich, which City was very Hospitable toward them, and assisted them with
great Liberality.

About this time, The English Ambassadors Return from Rome.
the English Ambassadors, who were sent to Rome, as I have said in the end of
the last Book, returned home. The Pope much approved their Repentance and
begging his Pardon: But then he would not allow of the retaining of the Church
Lands. Amongst these Ambassadors, was Thirlby, Bishop of Ely. The Danish Navy.
The King of Denmark had also sent a Fleet to the Northward, which caused
various Discourses amongst Men, for some said it was done at the Instigation of
the Emperor, who designed the putting his Son or Brother in the Possession of
Scotland; others said, it was for the Service of the French King; others said
it was to prevent any attempts might be made by the Emperor, or his Son, who by
the accession of the Crown of England to his other Dominions, was become very
formidable, and it was also thought, that on this Score, the Hanse Towns
ccontributed to the Charge of this Fleet. After all these various Reports had
been bandied up and down, at last they all vanished, and it was said that the
Navy was designed against none but the Pirates.

The State of Rome at this time, was also very unquiet, the Pope having some of
the great Men in suspicion, and thereupon having doubled the Guards, and fixed
the military Stations in several places of the City, he ordered the Cardinal of
Santa Flora, Sfortia, and Can^llus Colona to be Imprisoned. Because these were
Creatures of the Emperor, most Men thought the Pope designed something further
against that Prince; which distrust was yet more increased afterward, upon the
Pope's demanding a vast sum of Money, which had been lent to Alexander de
Medices, Duke of Florence, and one of the Emperor's Favorites, by the two last
Popes, Clement VII. and Julius the III. during the Seige of Siena; but in a
short time those great Men were discharged upon Bail.

About the same time, a Fleet failed from Spain for Flanders, laden with all
sorts of Merchandise, this coming upon the Coast of Normandy, the French, who
had long before heard it was coming, set upon it with great Force, and there
followed an horrible Engagement, in which many of their Ships on both fides,
were burnt and funk, and great numbers of the Men perished by Fire and Sword,
and drowning but in the end the French took some of Spanish Ships, and carried
them into the Port of Dieppe, from whence they came, this happened in the Month
of August, in the end of which Month, King Philip left England, and went to his
Father to Brussels, attended by great numbers of the Nobility of England. Some
few Years 1549.
since, Truccesius Cardinal of Ausburg had opened an University at Dili^gbon, a
City upon the Danube, in the Diocese of Ausburg, by the Permission and Consent
of Julius the III. who confirmed this University by a Bull, and gave it great
Immunities and Privileges, as may be seen in this Bull, which has since been
published in Print. Amongst many others, who about this time retired to this
Place, was Peter Asoto, a Spanish Dominican, who had been many years the
Emperor's Confessor. This Year, this Person began an Answer to the Book which
contains the sum of the Christian Faith, which Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg
tendered, as I have said by his Ambassadors to the Fathers assembled in the
Council of Trent, and he dedicated his Answer with much Assurance to that Duke;
whereupon John Brentius wrote a large Reply, and exposed all his Sophistry.
This last Piece was Translated into the Italian Tongue, by Vergerius, that the
Italians might understand it, and judge of the Controversy, and which of the
sides had the concurrence of the Scriptures. About the middle of September,
George Count of Monbeliard married B^^baria, a Daughter of the Landgrave's.

After the Arrival of the Duke de Alva in the Dukedom of Milan, the French King
sent more Forces, and many expert Leaders under Brisac his General: They
finding the Town of Vulpia^o, which was then very strong, and well Garrisoned
by the Spaniards, to be very troublesome to the progress of the French Arms in
those Countries, because that Garrison was able to make Inroads as far as
Turin, and sometimes further, That they might remove this almost only Obstacle,
and open a way to the Supplies they might want, besieged this Place with all
their Forces, about the end of August. They suffered much in this Siege, and
acted great Things against the Town; but the 22. of September the Place was
yielded to them, and they presently dismantled both the Town and Castle, and
reduced it into a mere Village: Some few days after they took Moncalno, a Town
and Castle between Casale and Aste.

That Controversy concerning the Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist,
or Lord's Supper, which had now for Thirty years together so much exercised the
Pens of Learned men, about this time broke out again; the Ministers of Breme
and Hamburg publishing some Pieces against Calvin and John a Lasko by Name:
Calvin answered with great sharpness, and Bullinger bore his share in this
Controversy; and John a Lasko wrote a Book, which he dedicated to the King of
Poland, in which he complains, That this Difference was not treated of by
comparing the two Opinions, and then debating them in Conferences, but they out
of mere prejudice condemned his Opinion, and after the manner of the Roman
Catholics, would not hear of Arguments or Scriptures, but thought to bear all
down that stood before them, by Force and Authority. About the End of
September, Magnus, the Second Son of Augustus Duke of Saxony, was born, whose
Godfathers were Henry Duke of Brunswick, and John Frederick Duke of Saxony.

I have said already how Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Latimer and Ridley
burnt at Oxford.
Ridley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer, were sent to Oxford, and having
there defended their Faith against the Roman Catholic Divines, they were for
it condemned to be burnt; yet they were after this kept in Prison, and the
16th. of October this year they were both burnt at one Stake before
Baliol-College in Oxford. I suppose our Author was misinformed as to this
Particular.
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, was then brought out also, and at the Stake
openly implored the Mercy of God; but he was after this remanded to Prison:
Hugh Latimer was very old.

In this Month the Cardinals of Lorain and Toures went to Rome, The Parliament
of Paris Answer to the King's Edict.
and about the same time the Parliament of Paris made an Answer to the Edict
brought them from the King by the Cardinal of Lorain, as I have remembered
above; which was to this effect: Your Majesty's Edict which was published above
four years since, has reserved to Your Majesty and Your Judges, the sole
Cognizance and Correction of the Lutheran Heresy, nor is there any thing
excepted, but when the Heresy may need a Declaration, or the Sentence was to
be pronounced against a man in Holy Orders; but this Edict which is now under
consideration, is directly contrary: For it puts the People of your Kingdom
under the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the Inquisition, and diminishes
that Dignity which You now enjoy above all other Princes, and it gives Your
People a just Cause of Discontent to see themselves deserted by Your Majesty,
and subjected to a foreign Jurisdiction. But there will much greater Mischiefs
follow, when the Lives, Fortunes, Safety and Honor of all Your Subjects shall
be put into the hands of these men without the benefit of an Appeal: For in
truth, Appeals are the Sanctuary and Refuge of wronged Innocence. But now if
the Inquisitors and the Bishops Officers shall once have a Right and Power
given them of judging (all Appeals being taken away) this will certainly open a
Window, and plain a Way for the condemning of the innocent, and the spoiling
them of their Lives and Estates: For when these men shall once see themselves
Masters of this Regal Power, they will soon forget their Duty, and no longer
regard any thing, when they see all Orders of Men made subject to them, and
they have in their hands the Lives and Fortunes not only of Your meaner
Subjects, but also of your Princes and Great Men. Your Majesty may make use of
this as a middle Way, That Your own Judges may still take cognizance of these
Causes, and hear and determine them; and if there be any Doctrine that is
obscure, it may be defined by the Ecclesiastics, and those that are in Holy
Orders may be tried only by the Clergy. And as for Appeals, let a Bull be
desired of the Pope, for the allowing them to your Judges. And when Judgment is
to be passed upon these Appealers, let some of the Clergy, who are of Your
Majesty's Privy Council, be joined with Your Judges; or if there be none such,
then let other eminent and fit men supply their Places. And in all
Inquisitions, let this Order be observed, That the Pope's Inquisitor choose, and
send into the Provinces good Men, and of unspotted Fame, and let the Bishop,
and not the Parties who are accused, bear the Charge of the Inquisition, but
so, that when the Case depending is determined, the Charge may then be paid by
those that ought to pay it. The Design of all these Provisions is, That all
Suits of this Nature, may be kept within some Bounds and Limits. Moreover, it
appearing that all the Executions which have been made of Heretics, though
they are necessary, have yet rather made the Crime detestable, than amended
those that were infected; and it being much better to prevent a Disease, than
to give it time to get strength, and then attempt the Cure, it will be fit Your
Serene Majesty should in this follow the Custom and Footsteps of the Ancient
and Primitive Church: For she was neither established by Fire nor Sword, but
the diligence of the Bishops supplied the want of these, by their frequent
Preaching of the Word of God, and the good Examples of an holy Life, which She
gave the People. The Church then having been thus at first established, it may
without doubt now by the same ways be preserved; if Your Majesty would but be
pleased to do all that You lawfully may do toward it. May then Your Majesty be
pleased to take care that the Bishops, who are the Shepherds, should in person
govern their own Churches, and that the same be done by the inferior Clergy;
That they live piously, and Preach the Word of God diligently, or cause it to
be Preached by fit men; and that for the future no man be admitted into these
Functions, but such as can teach the People themselves, and not turn them over
to be taught by Curates. This is the Root which Your Majesty ought to
cultivate. This is the Foundation on which the Church must be built; and then
we may hope that in a short time Heresies will vanish; but if this way is
neglected, there is great reason to fear they will increase, whatsoever other
Remedies or Edicts are provided against them. The 16th. Day of October this
Answer was made by the Deputies of the Parliament of Paris, and in a Letter.

About the same time, Ca^zenellobogen.
the Mediators in the Difference concerning the County of Catzenellobogen, met
again, according to their former Agreement, first at Bacheren, and after at
Worms, on the Account of the Sickness of the Elector Palatine. At last, this
Controversy was determined by a Sum of Money to be paid by the Land^grave to
the Count of Nassaw, the Territories in the mean time being to remain in the
possession of the Landtgrave: But then when the Count of Nassaw insisted, That
this Agreement should be void if the Money were not paid within the time
limited and appointed; and that in this case his Claim should be as it was
before; but the Landtgrave (who had sent his Son the second time) refused to
submit to this, the Meeting broke up without any effect.

In the same Month the Emperor called all the Nobility and States of the Low
Countries to him to Brussels, The Low Countries resigned by the Emperor to King
Philip.
and having amongst other things, spoken of his want of Health, he said, he
would retire into Spain, and therefore laid down the Government, and conferred
upon his Son Philip all the Right and Power of those Countries, exhorting them
to perform their Duties to him. The Fame of this flew over all Christendom, and
a Fleet was forthwith prepared for his Passage; and the 13th. of November was
appointed for his setting Sail; but then this Rumor cooled by degrees, and it
was said, because the Winter was coming on, the Voyage was delayed till the
Summer.

It is now time to show what was done in the Diet which was now Sitting at
Ausburg. The Diet of Germany.
Ferdinand King of the Romans, had, in a Speech made the 5th. of February (as I
have said in the End of the last Book) proposed what was to be transacted in
this Convention: But the Deputies and States coming slowly in, there was no
beginning made till the 9th. of March; and then the Deputies of the Electoral
Princes began to consult what was first to be done. And although there were at
first some Dissenters, yet at last they all agreed to begin with the Business
of Religion; and this Resolution was approved by all the other Princes, and the
Imperial Cities. After a long Debate. it was Agreed, That a Peace of Religion
should be granted, but then the great Controversy was because those who had
Embraced the Augustan Confession insisted to have this Peace Communicated
indifferently to all, that they might all alike follow their several Doctrines,
and yet enjoy the benefit of this Peace. But this was vigorously opposed by the
Enemies of the Reformation, who would not suffer any of the free Cities which
had received the Decree made at In 1548.
Ausburg concerning Religion about seven Years since, and commonly called the
Interim, nor any of the Ecclesiastics in any Case whatsoever, to be
comprehended in this Peace, but they stood stiffly to this: That if any Bishop
or Abbot changed his Religion, he should be removed, and another put in his
Place. This Point was sharply debated, the Protestants saying, that the
Promises of God both in the Old and New Testament, which concern our Salvation,
belonged equally to all Mankind, and therefore it was not lawful for them to
restrain them within any limits, or to streighten them, for fear they thereby
might exclude both themselves and others out of the Kingdom of Heaven: That
there was no Turk or Jew that was well affected to his Religion, but desired
all Men should embrace it; and therefore it was much more reasonable that we
should labor to do it, who are Commanded by God so to do, upon the severest
Threatenings. And therefore in this matter, all were to be left at Liberty: They
said also, that they were able from the sacred Scriptures, and the Decrees and
Canons of the Fathers and Councils, to prove, That those, who, to the great
dishonor of God, assumed the Title of the Ancient and Catholic Religion, had
done very ill things in the matters pertaining to Religion, and abused the
Revenues of the Church: Yet for Peace sake they were contented to suffer them
to enjoy their Laws, Rites and Ceremonies, together with their Goods,
Possessions, Tolls, Rights and Privileges, till this difference in Religion
could be Composed; and therefore that they could not consent that they on the
contrary should impose such Conditions on the Bishops, because the consequence
of it would be, that they must hereafter be obliged to oppress the approvers
and friends of their own Religion, and by consequence they must defame their
own Cause. For this would be (say they) to confess that our Doctrine and
Religion is such, as it does not deserve the Church Revenues, and therefore
those which have already been given to the Ministers of our Churches, are ill
bestowed, and we shall hereby seem to confess that their Doctrine which is
Impious, and their Ministry, are founded upon the Scriptures, and that the
Church Revenues are consecrated to their impure Lives, Laws, and Ceremonies.
Now who can tell how great the offense this may give, will be, if we should
seem to defend the Cause and Power of those Men who afford the Church no useful
or necessary Service? And if on the other side, we should betray and desert
those whom we ought to esteem above all others, The Allegations of the
Roman Catholics.
because they profess the Religion we do? Those of the Roman Catholic Religion
alleged on the other side, amongst many other things, that if Liberty were
granted to the Ecclesiastics to change their Religion, their Bishoprics and
Colleges would be profaned, and by degrees be torn from the Church, and fall
into the hands of the Princes, and by them be made Temporal Inheritances; but
the Protestants said, this was no part of their Intention, but that all that
they desired, was, that being reduced to their first Institution, they might be
applied to their true uses, and for ever continue annexed to the Church: and
that there might be no place left for this Scruple; They were contented that in
those Bishoprics and Colleges in which the Religion should happen to be
changed, nothing of the Revenues should be alienated, and that after the Death
or Resignation of the Bishop or Abbot, both the Election of the Successor, and
the Administration of the Revenues, should be left free to the Colleges or
Chapters. When therefore, after a tedious debate, they could not agree amongst
themselves, both Parties gave their Reasons in writing to King Ferdinand, and
desired him to find out some way. They were got but thus far the thirteenth of
June, because the Proceedings were very slow, and most Men thought that the
reason was, because they would first see the Event of the Treaty between the
Emperor and the King of France, because this would afford both Parties some
considerable Advantage.

The Roman Catholics at the same time, A Virulent Paper put in by the
Roman Catholics against the Protestants.
put in a third, and extraordinary Paper, Penned with great Passion and
Bitterness, that they might recommend their Cause so much the more to the King.
In the first place, say they, those who follow the Augustan Confession have
proposed five Conditions. First, That the Catholics should approve that
Doctrine, which many Ages since, and again in our times upon its first
appearance, has ever been Condemned by the ordinary Magistrate. Secondly, That
all the Sacriledges they have perpetrated within these thirty Years, should be
confirmed and approved, and that neither Law, nor any other of the Pious and
Natural ways should be left open for the Church to recover her Revenues: And in
the interim, they would have a Peace made with them, when all Communion with
them is forbidden. Thirdly, They would be permitted to institute their wicked
Ministers in the Churches and Chapters of the Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics,
and to Preach in these Churches their lewd and condemned Doctrines, and
abolishing the true Ministry and Ceremonies of the Church, they would set up in
their stead, new and wicked Ceremonies, and maintain those false Preachers with
the Revenues of the Church, contrary to the ancient Laws and Customs of the
Church. Fourthly, They would have it lawful, that all those Ecclesiastics and
Lay-Princes, who do yet adhere to the Roman Catholic Religion,may freely
desert their true Religion, and pass over to their Camp. Lastly, They desire
that when any Bishop or Prince makes a defection to their Party, that this
should not affect his Person only, but that it should extend it self to the
People which are subject to him, and also to the Church Revenues, and whole
sacred Administration and Jurisdiction which belonged to him. Now (say they)
though these things are contrary to all Laws, both humane and divine, and to
the Oaths taken by the Emperor, the King,a nd the Bishops, so that Catholics
cannot well receive them without violating their Faith and Oath, yet because
they stuck stiffly to these Proposals, and threatened to make use of Force, the
Catholics at last yielded in the Treaty of Passaw as far as they could, and
have since in the Diet explained themselves, by showing that they cannot-grant
a Promiscuous Liberty to all that will, to change their Religion. For then (say
they) the Empire would be dissolved, and that high Honor would be taken from
the German Nation. For it is the Duty of the Archbishops, and Bishops, not only
not to suffer any condemned Religion, but peaceably to dissuade and affright
all Bishops and Churchmen, and all Laymen too who are inclined to make
defection, or if they will go on in the Error, then they are to represent them
to the Roman Catholic Church; for this Custom has ever been observed from the
times of the Apostles, as may be proved by many Testimonies out of the
Councils, especially from the Council of Chalcedon. Nor is it fit that any Man
should think that those who make defection, are to be left to their own
Consciences; because in things pertaining to the Faith, no Man's Conscience
should be free: But whenever any Man departs from the common Consent of the
Church, be ought to be punished and restrained. That if he will not obey that
Church, he is to be Excommunicated by the example of the four Principal
Councils which condemned Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutyches, and that
of Chalcedon condemned Dioscorides, and removed him from his See for defending
Eutyches. For whereas they pretend that every Man was to be left to the freedom
of his own Judgment, that neither Christ nor his Apostles compelled any to
Believe, and which is yet more, that when many deserted, no Man was retained
against his Will. All these Pretenses are without Foundation, and are
abundantly refuted by St. Augustine in his two Hundredth and fourth Epistle.
But if now the Bishops should be suffered to desert the Catholic Religion, and
make defection to another, they will certainly never leave their Bishoprics,
because they will say, they cannot do it with a quiet Conscience, but on the
other side, they will implore the assistance of the Protestants, for the
Preservation of their States, and People in that Religion. And if this be done,
there is no doubt but they will undertake the Protection of them, and pretend
it is their Duty so to do, for the security of their Administration, and the
maintaining them in the possession of their Lands and Goods. But then, whereas
they pretend, that they ought to admit others into the Society of their
Religion, and not to exclude any Man out of the Kingdom of Heaven, this does
not excuse them, because there is but one Faith which all Christians ought to
profess and preserve. And this Faith has heretofore been approved and
confirmed by the oaths of our Emperors, Kings, Princes, Governors, and the
People of this Empire. This is that Catholic Faith, which we Germans have from
the beginning followed, to this time, those only excepted who have revolted
from it. Therefore nothing is to be innovated, but every thing ought to be
referred to this Faith, and Men ought to submit their Souls to the obedience of
the Catholic Church; and he that does otherwise, and assumes unto himself a
peculiar Religion, if he does not submit to the Admonition of his Superior,
Liberty of Conscience contrary to Catholic Religion.
is to be Excommunicated and removed from the exercise of his Function; and his
Goods are to be saized by the Civil Magistrate, and his Person is not to be
endured in the Empire. For the Fathers have ever rejected the Liberty of
Conscience, and Toleration of Religion, as a dissipation of the Faith, and have
made it a fixed Law of the Church, that those Articles of Faith which are once
defined by a Council, shall neither be disputed, nor called in doubt, so as to
establish any thing to the contrary. For History informs us what disturbances
followed the general toleration of all Sects, granted by Valentinian the
Emperor; and if it be once granted that he who differs from the Catholic
Religion, shall be excused by his Conscience, than are the Anabaptists,
Zuinglians, and Schwinkfeldians to be excused also on the same account, and to
be comprehended in this Peace. They say, that the Promises of God, pertaining
to Eternal Life, belong to all Men, and that they ought not to restrain them:
as if these Promises belonged to none but those of their Profession, but in
truth the thing is quite otherwise; for seeing they have forsaken the Communion
of the Church, they are excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven, even by their
own Judgments: And seeing there is no Salvation out of the Church, how can the
Kingdom of Heaven belong to them, who have rejected the Sacraments of the
Church, and despise the Priesthood, to whom Christ has given the power of
Binding and Loosing? Now if there are no Priests ordained amongst them, how
shall they obtain remission of Sins? and if their sins are not remitted, how
shall they be made Partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven? Therefore the Promises
of the Kingdom of Heaven belong not to them alone, but they are rather to be
esteemed in the number of them, which Christ faith he does not know. They boast
that they can show how the Catholics have many ways abused Religion, and the
Revenues of the Church, let us see then what is to be blamed in this
Particular. According to the sacred Scriptures, and the Canons of the Councils
and Fathers, the Revenues of the Church are to be distributed to the Bishops
and the Ministers of the Church, the Poor, and the Buildings belonging to the
Church, and if need require, to the Redemption of Captives in Slavery to
Barbarians. For above thirteen hundred Years, the Custom has ever been to
employ these Goods in the maintenance of the Ministers of Religion, and other
such Uses, as the saying Mass, the Preaching the Word of God, the repairing and
building Churches, the maintaining the poor Monks and Nuns. But now do the
Protestants dispose of them: They Banish the Bishops, and set others in their
rooms, who are a sort of mere Lay, and profane Prefects, on whom they bestow as
little of the Revenue as they can possibly: under him they set other Ministers,
who lead the miserable Multitude into Errors, whilst they despise the sound
Doctrine, and the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and give the People the whole
Sacrament indeed, which is nothing but unconsecrated Bread, a Creature instead
of the Creator, and thus under the show of true Religion, they exercise
Idolatry. They say, that hereafter they will employ the Revenues of the Church
to no other use but that of Schools, and that they will take no part of them to
themselves; be it so: But then by this very use, the Catholic Religion is
altogether profaned and oppressed, and this is a worse use of them than if
they were applied to mere profane uses, and therefore this use is not to be
approved by Catholics. This Writing, as I said, was composed privately, and
without order.

As soon as the Protestants knew of it, The Protestants Answer.
they answered it, and first, they show what was the true Doctrine, to wit,
that which was contained in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and then
they show how contrary to this the Doctrine of the Papists was, who had so many
ways profaned the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, who had brought in such
abominable Errors concerning Purgatory, and the Invocation of dead Men, who
take away, and deny the remission of Sins, by teaching Men perpetually to doubt
of the Favor or Grace of God. That they had contumeliously treated Marriage,
which was instituted by God, and in the mean time had in their pretended
Celibacy, contaminated themselves with those lend and horrid Villainies, Romans 1.
which St. Paul Commemorates. From these things (say they) it will manifestly
appear who have made a defection from the true Religion, and seeing this is the
true state of things, they ought not to neglect those Ecclesiastics, who now
do, or hereafter shall embrace the pure Doctrine: And as to the Revenues of the
Church, every thing with the Roman Catholics was wonderfully corrupted; the
Benefice was instituted for the maintaining the Office, but let us see what
kind of Episcopal and Priestly Office theirs is, without which the Church
cannot be: and Care ought also to be taken of Schools, as has been observed
from the times of the Prophets. Their Bishops in the Interim make it their
greatest Care to gain into their own Purses all those Revenues which should of
right be given to the Ministers, to Teachers, Scholars, Schools, Hospitals,
and Almshouses, that thereby they may be enabled to live in all manner of
Luxury, and after the same manner they used the Religious Houses. Was not their
Bishop a kind of Lay Lord, who, when he first entered his Diocese, came usually
with a Guard of two Thousand Horsemen? This is their usual Practice, whilst
none of them regard their Duty and Ofice; what Reason, what Conscience do they
show in any thing? do they object Sacrilege and Rapine to others? Their
Doctrine (they confess) was condemned by Princes, but it happened through the
wickedness and fraud of those who made this Objection, who dissuaded Princes
from reading their Writings. But then, that the Pope and the rest of his
Followers condemned and rejected their Doctrine, was no wonder, for that Christ
and his Doctrine was treated in the self same manner by Anna, and Cayphas, and
the Sanhedrim of the Pharisees and Priests. That they alked much of Councils
and the Church, but then neither the Councils nor Church had any Power to
propose any new Doctrine, or to command us to receive any other than what was
left us by the Prophets and Apostles. That what they said of the Consecration
of Ministers was ridiculous; for that ridiculous, and ludicrous Unction was of
no good use: Lastly, that this Paper was full of reproaches, and injurious
reflections, but that they committed to God, and chose rather to set forth the
state of their Case in a few words.

When things were in this Posture, King Ferdinand, who had been desired by both
the Parties to find out a way to an accommodation, as I have said above, about
the beginning of August sent four deputies to the Electors, The Answer of King
Ferdinand.
and some of the other Princes, to represent to them, that in Obedience to the
Emperor his Brother, and in order to consult the welfare of his Country, he
came the thirtieth of December last past, to Ausburg, to the great damage and
hindrance of his own Affairs; That finding few or none of them here, he had
been forced to attend a great while before he could propose any thing to them,
that is, to the fifth of February, and then he had first opened the Causes of
the calling this Diet, but then the Debates had been very long, and no answer
had been returned him till the twenty second of June, and then upon one head
only of the Consultation, to wit, concerning the Peace of Religion; and that
very Answer not fixed and agreed, but contrary and opposite one part to the
other. That he feared long since that this would be the event, and therefore he
had desired the Electors to be present in the Diet, and if in this they had
complied with him, he was of an opinion, the thing might have been brought to a
desired Issue. As to the other head which concerned the public Peace, he had
something to offer to their Consideration, but because it was not likely that
it could be dispatched in a short time, and for that the present state of his
own Provinces required his Presence, because the Turks seemed to be preparing
for some new Enterprises against them, and threatened high, though he was then
in Treaty with them, and because nothing could to any good purpose, be debated
and determined, if the Electors were not present in Person, he thought it was
the best way to prorogue the Diet to another time, and that in this Convention
a Decree should be made to this Purpose. Because by reason of the absence of
the Princes no Decree can now be made, The form of the Recess pr^posed.
We are pleased to deferr all the further Transactions to another Convention of
the States, which shall be holden at Ratisbon about the beginning of March in
the next Year, and then the Princes shall be present in Person, that they,
together with the Emperor or King of the Romans, may determine and fix those
things which have been now debated, or which shall then come under
Deliberation. And that in the mean time, the Pacification of Passaw shall
remain in its full force, and whereas that contains a Resolution; first, That
in a Diet of the Empire of Germany, should be considered, whether the
differences of Religion might be ended by a general National Council, or by a
Conference; and lastly, That this question should be determined by the common
advice of all the States, and by the ordinary Authority of the Emperor:
Therefore he who loved Peace and Agreement, was resolved to exhibit in the next
Convention, a Writing concerning the way of determining those things which were
now in Controversy. That there should be nothing of Fraud in it, and that what
was offered, should only aim at the appeasing the present Offenses, and the
mitigating their mutual Exasperations, and give them means of considering with
the greater certainty, whether the way he should then propose, could put an end
to the differences, or whether it would be necessary to seek out another.
Therefore he desired they would approve this Prorogation, and that they would
in Person attend at the next Diet, as he had given them an Example, who for the
sake of the Commonwealth, had in this been so many Months absent from his own
Provinces: That he had chosen Ratisbon, because, by reason of the impending
Dangers which he feared from the Turks, he could not conveniently go further
than that City from his own Bounds: That therefore they should assure him what
their Intentions were, that he might be certain the thing should not be any
longer delayed, that so the better part of that time too might not be spent in
a vain Expectation, as has often happened already. These Demands being made,
the greatest part of the Princes were of Opinion, that they should not part
till the Peace were confirmed, for that all Germany was in great Expectation
this would now be done; and that seeing they were now nearer an Agreement than
at any time before, therefore they desired to see this dispatched before his
Departure, that so in the next Diet they might proceed to the business of the
Turks, and the other affairs of the Empire, with the greater Expedition. As to
what concerned the Book he mentioned, some of them said what happened about
seven years since to a former Book, written and published concerning Religion,
would certainly be the Fate of this. For that they could well remember the
Reproaches it met with; and whereas it was proposed, and by a Law established
by the Emperor only for Peace sake, it became the occasion of very great
Offenses and Contentions; when Ferdinand about the Twenty fifth of August had
received this Answer from the Deputies, the thirty first of the same Month he
gave in an Answer to the Papers delivered him by both the Parties, in which he
shows what was his own Opinion, and especially as to what concerned the
Bishops; that is, that if any of them changed his Religion, he should
immediately be removed from the Administration of his Bishopric, and be
deprived of the Revenues belonging to it, and he very largely exhorted the
Protestants to yield their Consent to this.

For (said he) this Condition takes nothing from you, Ferdinand's Answer to the
Papers.
but only takes Care that if any Bishop deserts his Order, and falls from the
ancient Religion, the Benefices or Diocesses shall nevertheless continue in the
same state they were at first Instituted, which in it self is agreeable to the
Law, the Statutes of the Empire, and the Pacification of Passaw; which last in
express terms says, That all those who follow the ancient Religion shall not
be disturbed, whether they be Laymen or Ecclesiastics, in their Religion,
Ceremonies, Goods, Possessions, Rights, or Privileges, but they shall quietly
use and enjoy all these, without the interruption of any Person whatsoever.
That I do not see (says he) why this condition should be refused, which tends
directly to the same end, that is, that they may quietly enjoy what is their
own, which it is certain they cannot do if they part with this Security; for
then it will follow, that those who have deserted the ancient Religion, and yet
will retain the Administration, and the Possession of the Revenues will thereby
hinder the Colleges or Chapters from dealing with them according to their Laws;
and another inconvenience will follow upon it, which is, that there will be no
great affection between their Bishop and them. Seeing therefore it is fit, that
according to the Laws of their Institution, fit Persons should govern and
administer the Diocesses, and that if they act contrary to the Laws, and make a
^efection from their Order, that then their Colleges should remove them from
their Places, and take Care that this Defection may hurt only one Man,
therefore surely this Demand ought not to be denied. And therefore I do with
great earnestness exhort you, that you would not persist any longer in this
Refusal. For amongst other things, you are to consider they do not prescribe to
you after what manner and form you shall act in those Bishoprics, Colleges,
Chapters, or Benefices, which are all ready in your Possession, nor how you
shall treat the Ministers of your Church, who shall violate your Laws, and
neglect their Duties. For as it would be very troublesome and grievous to you
if they should desire that such of your Ministers, who have deserted your
Religion, and do make it their Business to oppose it, should yet be retained by
you: So it must be much more grievous to them, if theirs must still retain the
Administration of their Diocesses, and the possession of their Revenues, who
have cast off their Religion, and oppose it, for what can be expected from
hence but Suits, Offenses, and Contentiens? So that the very Foundations of the
thing we are seeking in this Treaty, Peace, shall be hereby rained, and
entirely destroyed.

The eighth day after, the Protestants replied, that it was not their intention
to prescribe a Rule to the Ecclesiastics, The Protestants Reply.
and much less that the Revenues of the Bishoprics should be dissipated, or
that the nature of them being changed, they should be turned into Civil or
Lay-Fees. It is apparent to us, that a part of the Empire depends upon, and is
founded in these Sees; which we do not in the least desire should be diminished
or imbezelled, but by all means we would have them preserved. It would have
been to our great satisfaction, if this question had never been moved, but that
we might have pursued the decrees of the former years, made at Norimburg,
Ratisbonne, and Spire, which include all them that embrace the Augustan
Confession: And at first, the Legates of the three Electoral Archbishops did
also wisely consider this; but when some others had started and exagitated this
Doubt, then they joined with them. They who first moved this question, had
perhaps some reason for it, but what has since followed, is apparent. For if
this Rub had not been cast in our way, we had long e're this been at our
desired End, and all things in our Opinions had been determined; but then there
are many grave and pious Reasons why we should not admit that Condition. For
any Man may see what a contempt and detriment it will be to our Religion, if we
suffer those that embrace it, to be put out of their Places, deprived of all
Dignity, and to be treated as Heretics: we will now in silence pass over the
first Institution of Colleges or Chapters, and the Corruptions which by degrees
crept into them: But nevertheless, we are of Opinion, that very much of that
Institution is no way repugnant to our Religion. And for us to consent, that no
Bishop that embrace our Religion, which we profess as true and Christian,
should continue in his Station, is a great Wickedness; because by this act we
should condemn it as impious, and unworthy of the order of Priesthood, whose
duty it is to promote and exercise it. Wherefore great Sir, we humbly beseech
your Majesty to consider this seriously, and according to the Power given you
by the Emperor, to cause this Clause to be struck out, and omitted.

But he answered, Ferdinand's Answer to the Protestants.
that no more could be granted, and that they had obtained what they could
never gain before in the many years they had endeavored for it: That they
should have some Consideration for him, for otherwise the Diet should be ended,
and nothing done, which if it happened, and any Inconvenience ensued, there was
no reason the Blame should fall either upon the Emperor or him, who had so
sweetly and patiently Treated of this Affair, and attended upon it thus long,
but could now stay no longer. Therefore he would give them ten days more, that
in that time they might send home to their Princes, that so he might have a
positive Answer. When that day came, they having shown their utmost Diligence,
that in all other things the good of Religion might be promoted, and
considering that it belonged to the Emperor and King, and not to them to limit
this Article, the King also on his side remitting some things, as shall be said
hereafter, they (upon these Considerations) gave their Consent. So the twenty
fifth of September the Decree was publicly read according to the Custom, which
is as follows.

Neither the Emperor, The Decree then made.
nor Ferdinand King of the Romans^ nor any of the other Princes or States in
the Empire shall in any manner whatsoever, hurt or injure any Man for the
Confession of the Augustan Doctrine, Religion, and Faith, nor shall they by
Command, or by any other way whatsoever, force any Man to forsake his Religion,
Ceremonies or Laws which he has already instituted within his Dominions, or
which those of the Augustan Confession shall hereafter Institute; nor shall the
said Emperor, King, or Princes contemn the same, but shall suffer them freely
to profess this Religion, and also quietly to enjoy their Goods, Estates,
Tolls, Possessions and Rights; and this Controversy in Religion shall not be
attempted to be Composed by any other than by Pious, Friendly, and quiet ways.
Those of the Augustan Confession shall behave themselves in the same manner
toward the Emperor, King Ferdinand, and all the other Princes and States which
join in the ancient Religion, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and toward all
others of the Clergy, and their Colleges, whither soever they shall travel to
dwell, provided they exercise their Ministries in manner and form following.
All which shall be suffered freely to enjoy their Religion, Ceremonies, Laws,
Possessions, Tolls, and all other their Rights, and shall not in any way be
hindered in the peaceable enjoyment of the same: and if any Difference or Suit
shall arise, it shall every where be tried, and determined by the Laws and
Customs of the Empire, and those that embrace neither of these Religions, shall
not be included in this Peace. If any Archbishop, Bishop, or Prelate, or other
Clergyman, shall make a defection from the ancient Religion, he shall
presently relinquish his Bishopric, Diocese, or Benefice, and shall lose all
those Fruits he should otherwise have received from the same, which yet shall
not in any wise tend to the Infamy of the said Person: And it shall thenceforth
be lawful and free for the Chapter, or those to whom the E^ection shall belong,
by Law or Custom, to elect and constitute another in his Place, who is of the
ancient Religion, whereby the right of Institution, Election, Presentation, and
Confirmation, together with the peaceable Possession of all the Goods thereunto
belonging, may be fully preserved to them. Yet nothing shall hereby be taken to
derogate from the intended Reconciliation abovementioned. And because some
Princes of the Empire, and other States, or their Ancestors have assumed some
Ecclesiastical Revenues, Districts, Chapters or Colleges of Monks, and other
such Church Revenues, and have assigned them to the use of their Ministers, to
Schools, and to other good uses, they shall not on this account be troubled nor
brought in question, but such Goods which do not belong to any of the other
States of the Empire, or to other Persons who are Subject to the Empire, the
Possession of which was not at the time of the Treaty of Passaw, nor since in
the possession of Ecclesiastic Person, shall from henceforth continue as they
now are, and be comprehended in this Peace; and it shall not be Lawful for the
Judges of the Imperial Chamber, upon the account of these things thus taken and
alienated, to hear, or determine any thing against the said Princes and States.
The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction shall not be exercised, or take place against
those of the Augustan Confession, their Religion, Faith, Rights, Laws, and
Ecclesiastical Ministry: But shall be suspended and stopped, and shall not give
them the least disturbance, till the difference in Religion be entirely taken
away. But in all other things which do not concern the said Religion,
Ceremonies, Laws, and Ministry, it shall be of the same force, and be exercised
according to the ancient Laws, and Customs. And all the Revenues, Tolls, and
Rights belonging to the Clergy, shall be entirely reserved to them: But so that
those Princes and States, in whose Territories the same are, shall not hereby
lose that civil Right they had before this difference of Religion, in and to
the said Goods. And moreover, that they may with the same Goods, provide for
the necessary Services of the Churches, Parishes, Alms, Hospitals of the Poor
and Sick, according to their first Constitution, without any Consideration of
which of the Religions the Person is, who shall be thus assisted or relieved,
and maintained. And if upon the account of this Alimony, or the manner of it,
any Difference or Suit shall arise, they shall mutually, or by consent choose
Arbitrators, who having heard the Controversy, shall within six Months
determine and appoint what shall be deducted for such Uses and Services, and
conferred, or bestowed upon the same. And in the mean time, till the Suit is
thus determined, they who are to pay this Allowance, shall not be interrupted
in their Possession, but shall continue to yield and pay during the Suit, what
they anciently used to give or Pay.

In October and November there was a Parliament held in England, A Parliament
begun the 21st of October, in England. The Pope requires the restitution of
Abby-Lands.
and most Men thought the Crowning King Philip, would have been one of the
principal Affairs of it, but this was never proposed. But the Queen solicited
the restitution of the Abby-Lands, because the Pope required it, but the great
Men, and Nobility had got them, and therefore nothing could be done in that
Affair: But the Queen restored the first Fruits, and the tenths to the Church.
During this Session of Parliament, certain sharp and virulent Pamphlets were
spread abroad in London, in which were some things tending to stirring up the
Minds of the People against the Spaniards, and others for alienating the Mind
of the Queen from King Philip, her Husband, and an Inquisition being made after
the Authors of them, Bishop Gardener Dies,
nothing could be found. Before the end of this Parliament, Gardener, Bishop of
Winchester died of a A suppression of his Urin.
Dropsy the twelfth of November, who was then Lord Chancellor of England,
which Office, in February following, was given to Heath, Archbishop of York,
who had traveled with Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, in Germany, and did
then profess the Reformed Religion.

About the fifth of November, died the Wife of John Frederick, Elector of
Saxony, who was the Daughter of the Landgrave, whose Marriage I have mentioned
above. A Duke of Venice deposed.
Francisco Venerio, Duke of Venice, was deposed for having unfaithfully managed
the business of the Corn, and sought his own private, more than the public
Good.

When the Emperor had resigned the Sovereignty and Government of the Low
Countries, King Philip and Ferdinand send Ambassadors to the Princes of Germany.
Philip his Son sent Ambassadors to the principal Princes, and Cities of.
Germany, to acquaint them with it, and to offer them his Friendship and
Alliance. And at the same time, the Ambassadors of King Ferdinand solicited the
said Princes and Cities to be present at the day prefixed for the opening of
the Diet, because a great danger hung over his Head from the Turks, who had
demanded of him the resigning into his Hands of the Principality of
Transylvania, which was very strong by Nature, and exceeding Fruitful, and
afforded great numbers of Horsemen. He called also a Diet of his own Provinces
for the same purpose, in which, the States of lower Austria desired to have
Liberty of Conscience granted them. But the King turned them over to the
general Diet at Ratisbon for an answer to this, and he also appointed them to
meet again the thirteenth of January of the next Year, at Vienna. The Marquess
di Marignano dying at Milan, the Emperor, or his Son, sent the Cardinal of
Trent to supply his Place, and the Duke de Alva was made Viceroy of the Kingdom
of Naples. About Christmas, the Pope, according to his Custom, created some new
Cardinals, amongst whom he named John Gropper, Coadjutant to the Archbishop of
Cologne, who has been often mentioned by me (who refused the acceptance of this
Dignity.) And then Cardinal Pool was first promoted from a Cardinal Deacon, to
a Cardinal Presbyter, and began to say Mass, which by the Papal Laws is not
allowed to the Deacons.

In the beginning of January, there were horrible Tempests in Saxony, Misnia,
and Bohemia, attended with Thunder, Lightning, and violent Winds, which every
where did great damages, especially to the Churches. In the same Month, at
Wintertbur, a Town of Switzerland, two Miles from Zurich, in the Night time
after Supper, a Fire appeared in one of the Turrets of the Church, which seemed
by its noise and brightness to threaten the Ruin of that Fabric, but when the
Inhabitants came to put it out, it was a delusion, and they found no Fire; this
happened twice in this Month, viz. the fourth and the fourteenth day. Some of
the Cantons being after this solicited by the Pope, went to Rome, which caused
a very great Suspicion in many.

King Philip being to enter upon his new Government, King Philip enters upon
the Government of the Netherlands.
upon the Resignation of his Father, began it with a pompous and splendid
Entrance, the eighteenth day of January, into Antwerp, which was then the
Principal City of those Countries. The Persecution of the Protestants in
England was then very sharp. The thirteenth of January, the Deputies, and
States of Austria met at Vienna as they had been Commanded; when the King
showed them, in a long and grave Speech, how great the danger was which
threatened them from the Tarks, and therefore admonished them forth with to
expedite their Succors, and to grant him Money, that he might be in a
Condition to repress his Cruelty and Rage. Then those which belonged to the
lower Austria acquainted him that they were commanded linded by their
Principals in the first Place to transact the business of Religion. The Address
of the States of the Lower Austria, for Liberty of Conscience.
That therefore they informed his Majesty what they had been doing for fourteen
years last past, how often they had addressed to him, and supplicated him in
this affair, and what kind of Edicts he had in the mean time issued out
contrary to their Expectation: And therefore (say they) seeing all our Counsels
against the Turks have been disappointed, and as yet we have been so far from
repressing him, that he has rather more and more prevailed against us, and has
taken many Cities, Towns, Castles, and strong Forts in Hungary, and Sclavonia,
and now hangs over our Heads; we may therefore justly aver, that it is a
manifest Judgment of God, who chastises us for our Sins, and afflicts us
because we have not amended our Lives, and that in such manner, that it is
visible, that if his Word is not received, and a Reformation of Life promoted,
we shall lose not only our Lives and Fortunes, but Eternal Salvation too. For
though the whole Earth were to Arm against that Enemy, whilst it remains in
this unreformed state of Life, there is no Victory to be hoped for, but instead
of it, Ruin and Destruction, as has often heretofore happened to the most
flourishing Kingdoms. We did something toward this in the last Convention,
when we Petitioned your Majesty, that we might not be forced to act against our
Consciences, but then your Majesty referred this Cause to the Diet at
Ratisbone. But you may be pleased in the mean time, to consider how grievous it
is to those who do most ardently desire the Salvation of their Souls to be
turned off to an uncertain time. When in the interim, the Mind is in Anguish,
and in this anxiety and doubt many Thousands must end their Days. Certainly,
the Word of God, which was revealed to us by Jesus Christ our Savior, ought to
be the only Rule which the Church should follow, and if any thing has crept
into the Church contrary to that Word, how ancient soever it may seem to be, it
is to be rejected: For God will be Adored and Worshipped in the manner he has
Prescribed and Commanded, and not as Men shall think and feign. God has always
inflicted horrible and fearful Punishments on those who have neglected his
Commandments, and in the stead of them have introduced the observation of
humane Inventions, as may be shown from the Calamities of the more ancient
Kingdoms; and those which are nearer, and have happened in our own Countries,
seem to speak the same thing. Therefore after the most diligent Search, we can
find no other Remedy, than the casting away those manifest Errors and
Corruptions which have been brought into the Church, and the receiving, and
free Profession of pure Doctrine, attended with such an administration of the
Sacraments, as Christ himself has instituted and appointed. For it is utterly
unlawful for us to depart, and turn aside from so plain and clear a Command of
God, as we have often already shown. For we are first to seek the Kingdom of
God, which being done, he will be present by his Spirit with us, and govern our
Actions and Counsels. That therefore he may deliver us from these so great
dangers, and be the Counselor and Leader of us in this War, stand for us in
the Battle, and protect us from our Enemies Rage. We beseech your Majesty, by
the Death of Christ, by the Salvation of our Souls, and by that judgment which
shall pass upon all Men, because this thing tends to the perpetual Felicity of
your Majesty, your Children and Countries: That it may be lawful for us, who
are not corrupted by any Sect, with your good Leave, to live in the true and
pure Religion, and to enjoy the benefit of that Peace which you lately made in
the Diet, with those who profess the Augustan Faith. For seeing we are all
Baptized alike in Christ, we desire our Condition may not be worse than theirs,
and that you would not deny us what you have granted to some other of your
Provinces, and that you would recall those Edicts you have put out concerning
Religion, and deliver us from the Fears which now afflict us, and we desire you
would by a new Edict, secure the Peace of those Ministers who teach according
to the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and distribute the Sacraments in
form abovesaid; and that our Schoolmasters may not be Banished or Imprisoned
till they have defended themselves before a Lawful Judge. And if your Majesty
please to do this, as we verily believe you will in this extreme danger, then
we do not at all fear, but that God will abundantly recompense the same, and
the States of the Empire will grant greater Supplies, than they have at any
time heretofore; and we, for our Parts, will not be wanting in our Duty, but
will cheerfully give whatever shall be requisite for the defense and safety of
our Country, and will, to the utmost of our Abilities, omply with all your
Demands.

About this time the Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King of France met
again, and not being able to conclude a Peace between their Princes, the fifth
of February they agreed on a Truce for five Years, by Sea and Land, as well in
Italy, and the Low Countries, as in all other Places. That both of them should
in the interim possess those Places which he had gained during the War: That
the Fugitives of Naples and Sicily should be excluded out of this Truce, and
that the Pope should in the first place be comprehended in it, and after him,
all the Kindred and Servants of both the Princes, as the manner is: This Truce
was soon after Proclaimed by the King of France in his Kingdom, and at Metz;
and some time after, it was Proclaimed by the Emperor in his Provinces. There
was soon after a Report, that the Pope was displeased with this Truce, and that
he endeavored to persuade the King of France to break it. On the other side,
some said the Pope was the great Promoter of it, because he was then contriving
a War against the Lutherans. In this Truce, nothing could be brought to an
Agreement, which concerned the Captives. The Principal of which, were the Duke
of Aresco^, a Low Country Nobleman, and the eldest Son of Montmorency,
Constable of of France, who was taken about three Years since in Terovanne.

The States of the Lower Austria addressed to the King, King Ferdinand's Answer.
as I have shown above, the thirty first of January, that Prince the eighth day
after having in the Preface deplored the Calamities and Disorders of the Times,
and the Wrath of God, he assured them of the great Inclinations of his Soul to
serve the Commonwealth; but then (said he) whilst I consider diligently my
Condition and Place, and that I have from my Infancy followed the Precepts of
the Christian and Catholic Church, as my Ancestors have ever done, from whom
this Religion and Discipline have been handed down to me: In truth I find that
I cannot lawfully grant what you ask: Not because I would not gratify my
People, but because I see it is not lawful for me to prejudice the Christian
Church, and to change her Laws, and salutary Decrees at my Will and Pleasure,
seeing, as Christ says, I am rather bound to hear her. Yet nevertheless,
because I have many years since observed what grievous Calamities have been
occasioned by this dismal division in Religion, I have been laboring with my
Brother, the Emperor, that theremight be a Composure of them: and the thing has
been attempted in many Diets, and in some Conferences; and by our means there
has been once or twice a Council begun at Trent; but then, that the acts of it
have produced no Fruit, ought not be charged upon us; and it is not so
obscurely carried, but it is known by what Councils and Arts the same has been
hindered. And now whereas you desire the benefit of the pure Religion, and of
the peace of Religion lately made, may be granted to you: Truly, as I never yet
forced any Man from the true Religion, so for time to come, I shall not in the
least do it; nor are ye less comprehended in that Peace of Religion, than the
Subjects of any other German Prince. The plain meaning of the Decree of the
said Diet being, that the People should follow the Religion of their Prince,
and it grants all Princes but the Ecclesiastics, a Liberty to choose which of
the two Religions they will embrace, because the People ought to be content
with the choice of the Prince; but so that those who are not pleased with the
Religion which the Prince has chosen, have a liberty to sell their Estates,
and to remove whither they please, without any detriment to their Reputations.
It is therefore your Duty to continue in the old Catholic Religion, which I
profess. And I have never hindered the Gospel from being Preached purely,
according to the Interpretation which the Church has received from the Holy
Apostles, Martyrs, and Fathers. And as to the Lord's Supper, though it was
instituted in both Species, yet in the ancient Church, it was distributed under
one, as may be shown at large. It was not therefore first changed in the times
of the Council of Constance, but that Custom was much more ancient than that
Council; and thence you may easily infer, that it is not lawful for me to
change and abolish by my own private Authority, or Law, what has been received,
and approved by the Canons of a Council, especially now when a Peace has been
so lately made in the business of Religion, and when in the next Diet it is
designed to Treat of an Union, in which I am resolved to extend all my Powers
for the taking totally away of this Difference; but if this cannot be done,
then I will enter upon such Courses as may secure both your Fortunes, and
Salvations. And in the mean time, that you may see how much I am inclined to
help and favor you, I will put a stop to that part of my Edict which relates
to the Lord's Supper; but upon condition, notwithstanding, that renouncing all
Sects, you shall change nothing in the Laws and Ceremonies of the Church, and
that you shall expect the Decree of the next Diet. The Ministers of the Church,
and the Schoolmasters, so long as they follow this form, shall not be
molested, nor have I suffered any Man to be injured without Law; so that being
thus disposed toward you, I hope you will desire nothing more, and because the
public necessity is now very urgent, it befits you to consult together, and to
grant what is needful.

To this they answered the twelfth day of February, The States of the Lower
Austria reply.
That in the greatest of all Cases which pertained to their Salvation, and to
that of their Children, that they should be so far denied, was a very grievous
affliction to them. That which your Majesty affirms concerning the present
Custom of distributing the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, having been received
by the ancient Church, may be largely refuted by the sacred Scriptures, and
also thereby their Error may be shown, who persuade themselves it was so. And
whereas you say, the meaning of the Decree made at Ausburg was, that the People
should accommodate themselves to the Religion of their Prince.

Certainly then, seeing many Years before this Decree was made, by the common
Consent of the Diet, we have at all times supplicated to you for the freedom of
our Religion, if this Answer must stand, we shall be allowed also to sell our
Estates, and with our Wives and Children to go and live elsewhere. But then,
who is there who does not see the mischief of this, and how sad and mournful
the Report of this must necessarily be to your People? When they shall be told,
that they who after the manner of their Ancestors, have been accustomed to
spend their Blood and Lives for the Honor and Safety of the House of Austria,
must now desert their Beloved Country, which has for so many Ages been
inhabited and cultivated by their Ancestors. And therefore this Answer, as to
this Part of it, is not received, nor allowed by us, but as often before, so we
now again beseech your Majesty, by all that is Sacred, to grant us that
incomparable Treasure, the Word of God, and that you would not in this, put any
obstacle in our way. But if this were a thing of that Nature, that you only
were to answer to God for it, certainly as in all other things, so in this we
would have obeyed you. But seeing every Man must give an account for his own
Action, and that there is no respect of Persons with God; and seeing every
moment may be the last of our Lives, and that there is nothing more uncertain
than our Lives, we cannot but with the utmost Study and Industry desire, and
pray, that we may be secured by the Grant of this Petition.

The fourth day after, the King answered, that he did not think there was any
reasonable Cause why they should not be satisfied with his former Answer. For
that (said he) I have allowed that you should be taught, as the Apostles have
delivered, and as the Martyrs and Fathers received by the Church, have
interpreted the Scriptures. What do you require more in this Particular? For
seeing God has promised his Holy Spirit to his Church, Salvation is not to be
sought any where else. You say that you are not corrupted by any Sect, of which
there are many, as Anabaptists, Sacramentarians, Zuinglians, Schwenckfeldians,
and the like, this indeed is true; but if a promiscuous Doctrine is once
allowed, which is not restrained within those Bounds I have prescribed, how
long do you think this Purity will last? When every Man will boast he has the
Word of God for him, and that it is not subject to any Creature, nor any Being
but God, and none of them will submit to any Censure as we see comes to pass in
many Places, where every thing is filled with disorder, whilst every Man
defends his Opinion with Obstinacy, despising absolutely the Authority of the
Church. And because you recite the last decree of the Diet in your former
Address a little otherwise than it is, therefore I have explained how it is to
be understood, not that I would have you leave my Country: and that I might
abate your Solicitude, I have suppressed that part of my Edict which concerns
the Lord's Supper, promising my best Endeavors that there may be a
Reconciliation. I have shown my reasons why I cannot make a defection from the
Laws and Ceremonies of the Church. For that Christ has commanded us to hear the
Church; and Experience teaches us that the former Age, which did not innovate,
but continued in the Religion of their Ancestors, were more quiet and happy in
all things than this is, wherein all Places are disturbed by Sects and
Dissentions, and the greatest part of Mankind are tossed, and driven hither and
thither with every wind of Doctrine. And even for this Cause, I thought you
would not have answered in this manner. And now, though it were very easy to
make a large Reply to your last Paper, yet because it is necessary at present,
to enter into the consideration of the Contributions and Subsidies, and to take
a speedy Resolution, except ye are resolved to feel the greatest of all
Calamities, and Miseries, I will not be larger now, and I trust you will in
this, do what the necessity of Affairs, and the consideration of your Duty
shall require. But they on the contrary, urged the same things over again, and
said, they could not desist, and if they obtained nothing, the consideration of
the Supplies would thereby be obstructed and hindered; because they had no
Command to promise any thing till they had obtained a sufficient Security for
the freedom of Preaching; their Religion, their Ministers and Schoolmasters.

In this Month of February, Henry Duke of Brunswick Married the Sister of
Sigismond, King of Poland, and about the same time John Isemburg, Archbishop of
Trier Died, and was succeeded by John Ley. The twenty sixth of the same Month,
the Elector Palatine, Frederick died at Alzem, in a great old Age, and Otto
Henry, his Brother's Son succeeded him, who had before embraced the
Reformation, and had thereby run the hazard of being deprived of all his
Fortunes. He having taken the Oath of Allegiance of his People, presently put
out an Edict, that no Man should say Mass, or use the other Ceremonies of the
Church in his Dominions.

In our twenty second Book, we have given an account of the disturbances raised
in Prussia, by Osiander, who had brought in a new Doctrine concerning
Justification; but the greatest part of the Learned Men disliking his Opinion,
Albert, Duke of Prussia, by a public Declaration, set forth, that he was
resolved to follow the Doctrine of the Augustan Confession; and therefore he
Commanded the Ministers of the Churches to Teach according to it, and promised
them to pass by what was past, if they obeyed thi^ Edict for the future. That
therefore this Controversy might be truly composed, and not break out afresh,
John Albert, Duke of Meckelburg, the Son-in-Law of the Duke of Prussia, a
Prince of very great Learning, went thither, and calling in the Assistance of
some other Learned Men, he reduced John Funcius, the principal Man of the
Osiandrians, to an open acknowledgment of his Error, and obtained a Promise
from him, that he would, for the future, Teach according to the Augustan
Confession; and this being done by the other Divines of that Province too,
there was a Reconciliation made between the Parties, and that Church was settled
in Peace.

The fourth day of March, a Comet appeared, and was seen for twelve days
together, and in the same Month, the Deputies of the German Princes and Cities
met at Ratisbon, and began with the consideration of the Case of Albert,
Marquess of Brandenburg, because his Adversaries in the last Diet, had desired
the Assistance of the Princes against him. But his Kindred interposing on his
behalf, it was at last decreed, that he should have the public Faith for his
Security, and that this Cause should be determined by Arbitrators, and upon his
return into Germany out of France, in the Month of February there was
accordingly a Treaty begun, which was now assumed by the Diet, the affairs of
the Empire being delayed to the Month of April.

Cranmer, English affairs.
Archbishop of Canterbury, had been long since The 12th. of September. Cranmer
Burnt.
condemned, and after the Death of Ridley and Hooper, was returned back to his
Prison, as I have said, but now the twenty first of March, he was burnt at
Oxford. Some few days before, upon promise of Life, and at the urgent
Persuasion of some that were sent to him, he had recanted most of his former
Doctrines, and appeared unconstant; but when he saw he must die, he made an
Exhortation to the People; wherein he spoke much of Repentance, and amendment
of Life, the People being very attentive to him; then he said, how much he had
offended God by denying the Truth, and recapitulating the principal Points of
Doctrine, he shortly explained his Belief as to each of them, and proved that
the Papacy was the Kingdom of Antichrist. Here he was interrupted, and after
many Reproaches he was hurried to the Place of Execution. When he was tied to
the Stake, and the Fire was kindled about him, he stretched forth his Right
Hand, saying, This has Sinned by subscribing those wicked Doctrines which the
Enemies of the Truth proposed to me, and therefore it shall first be Punished;
he thereupon thrust it into the Flames as far as he could that it might first
be Tormented.

Thus was the Primate of England Burnt, a Person of great Learning and
Authority. At the time, the Papal Character was taken from him by what they
call a Degradation, which is attended with many Ceremonies, he was forced to
wear mean Clothes (made of Canvas) and he was now brought out in this Habit,
that he might be scorned, but it had a contrary Effect, for that the greatest
part of the Spectators commiserating his Condition, could not forbear weeping
over him, though they did not doubt but he was changing this miserable Life for
an Immortal one, and passing into his Heavenly Country. Cardinal Pool soon
after was enriched with his Spoils, and made Archbishop of Canterbury, having
the Winter before been made a Priest, for he was only a Cardinal-Deacon when he
came over.

As the Inhabitants of the Lower Austria solicited King Ferdinand to grant
them the free Exercise of the Lutheron Religion, The Subjects of Bavaria
petition for Liberty of Conscience.
so the Subjects of the Duke of Bavaria, about the same time, became very
troublesome to Albert their Duke upon the same account. This Prince observing,
that King Ferdinand his Father-in-law had yielded something, he also, having
then need of Money, did for a time comply with his Subjects, and granted them
liberty to take the Sacrament of the Lord's Supperin both Kinds, and to eat
Flesh on the days prohibited, in case of great necessity: Yet, at the same
time, he made a long Protestation, That he would not desert the Religion of his
Ancestors, nor suffer any thing to be changed in the Ceremonies and Rites of
the Church; which he said was not lawful for him to do, without the consent of
the Supreme both Civil and Ecclesiastical Magistrate: And that he granted these
two things for so long time only, as till there was a public Order made to the
contrary, or a Reconciliation between the contending Parties; for that it was
his will, that all his former Orders concerning Religion should be exactly
observed in all other Points but these Two, and that in these he would take all
the care he could that the Metropolitans and Bishops should confirm these his
Concessions, and should not on these accounts trouble any of them. This Edict
was dated the last day of the month of March.

About this time some of the Nobility of Transylvania revolted from King For
dinand, Transylvania revolts.
whereupon he commanded the Diet to be prorogued to an uncertain day, and began
to levy Forces, which were afterward sent down the D^^ube toward Hungary.
There is a Town called Oberen, seated in Alsatia, three miles from Strasburg;
an Inhabitant of this place, who was a Vine-Dresser, being then in great
Poverty, took the opportunity, when his Wife was abroad, and murdered all his
Children; the eldest was a Girl of seven years of age, the second a Boy of four
years old, and the youngest an Infant of about six months old, and in the
Cradle: This Murder was committed the 10th of April. There was then also a
strong Report, That the Pope and his Partisans had entered a secret Combination
against those of the Augustan Confession. This Opinion was the more easily
entertained, because it was certainly known that the Pope was much incensed
against the Decree made the last year at Ausburg, by which Peace and Liberty
were granted to those of that Religion: And it was believed he had solicited
the Emperor to declare that Edict to be void; for he saw that men daily made a
defection from his Kingdom, and he well knew what had been desired by the
Inhabitants both of Austria and Bavaria: To this was added, a meeting of the
Archbishops of Ments, Trier, and Cologne, at the Batbes, and it was suspected
this meeting was not for nothing.

King Ferdinand having put an end to the Diet of Austria, went into Bobemia,
and summoned a Diet of that Kingdom, and of the near Provinces at Prague, in
which he demanded and obtained Moneys for his defense against the Turks. After
this, he sent Letters to the Deputies, who had now expected him some months at
Raticbon; in which he excused his not coming to them, and acquainted them with
his being necessitated to go to Vienna before he could come thither, and then
he prorogued their Session to the first of June. After King Ferdinand was
returned out of Bobemia, the Lgndtgrave went into Misnia, and staid some time
with Augustus Duke of Saxohy. The 10th day of May the Duke of Areschot, who was
a Prisoner in the Castle of Vincenne, which stands not far from Paris, made his
escape, and came safely home. The Cardinal of Ausburg about the same time being
returned from Rome, where he had continued about a year, and hearing how
suspitiously most men spoke and thought of him, as one that was engaged in
close Designs with the Pope for the Ruin of Germany; In the end of May, he put
out a Vindication of himself in the German-Tongue, which was to this purpose:

When the last year after the Death of Julius II. (says he) I went to Rome,
The Cardinal of Ausburg's Apology for himself.
as the duty of my Place obliged me, I was one of those who elected the present
Pope; I then intended to take the first opportunity of returning into Germany,
but I was detained by the Pope, who was then deliberating about the Reformation
of the Church; and having for that purpose chosen some Learned Men of all
Nations, he was pleased to appoint me for one, though I was not worthy of such
a Trust, because I was a German: But then, because my Bishopric required my
presence here, I at last obtained leave of the Pope to return home, which I
could not obtain till the last day of March, immediately after which I began my
Journey hither. Now, though I have, ever since my Advancement to this Dignity,
and before, behaved my self so, that no ill thing can truly be laid to my
charge, (which I desire may not be taken for a proud boast;) and although I
have ever been an Adviser and Promoter of Peace, to my great damage and
hindrance, and have ever taken all the care I could for the Honor and Safety
of my Country: yet, as soon as ever I arrived in Germany, I was acquainted by
my Friends, who are worthy of credit, That during my absence there was a Book
printed here to defame me, as if I had entered into a Combination with the
Pope, and other Italian Princes, to involve Germany, and especially those of
that Nation who embrace the Augustan Confession, in a calamitous War. Now they
pretended in this Paper, That the cause of this Attempt, and of this close
Treaty, was, that the Pope was very much offended with the Decree made in the
last Diet at Ausburg; that he had labored to persuade the Emperor to reverse
it; that he had absolved that Prince from the Oath he had given them; that he
had promised the Emperor all the help and assistance he could give him for the
Conquest of Germany, provided the Emperor would assist him in the Recovery of
his Spiritual Jurisdiction in Germany; that he had to that end procured a Truce
between the Emperor and the French King, that both their Forces might be
employed in this Work. And they added, That German Soldiers were at present to
be listed, and no other, to the end the Design might be the better concealed;
that the King of England was to send 8000 Horse, and to be General in this War;
and that Levies were made in several places. In short, that all things were
managed with that care, that all the Forces were to begin their March at the
same time, and suddenly to in vade the Empire, whilst most of the Princes were
from home at the Diet of Ratisbon; that both the Pope and the King of England
had sent Envoys to several of the Princes of Germany, and made them great
promises, the Pope especially, that he would send a great Body of Horse and
Foot to their Assistance; that I have traduced Otto Henry, Elector Palatine,
Christopher Duke of Wirtemburg, and Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, as
Lutherans, Seditious men, and worthy to be driven out of their Countries; that
the Lantgrave was in the mean time much commended by me in an Assembly of the
Cardinals, because he had made a defection from his Religion, and one of his
Ministers, called Titelman, had both by Word and Writing recanted his Religion
at Rome. Now, because these slanders do not only affect the Pope and the
Emperor, but Me also, and my Reputation; and because it is the duty of a good
man to justify his own and his Princes Honor and Innocence, it is fit I
should answer all the Accusations.

In the first place therefore, I say, it is a great affliction to me to find
there are still some men, who, contrary to the old German Virtue, Constancy,
and Fidelity, can be induced to lend an assent to such slanders as these, and
seem to design by these lewd Libels and Reports to excite the minds of the
Princes of the Empire against their Head, and to engage them in a cruel and
wicked War amongst themselves. I believe many can remember that dismal,
turbulent, and dangerous Galumny, which about 32 years since was invented and
spread abroad, That King Ferdinand, the Archbishops of Mentz, Saltzburg, and
Wurtsburg, the Elector of Brandenburg, William and Lewis of Bavaria, and George
Duke of Saxony, were all combined in a League against John Elector of Saxony,
and the Landtgrave; which prevailed so far, that it had like to have ended in a
destructive War. Certainly the Princes ought not to forget those times: For
that Villainy was discovered, the several Princes, as they were obliged, having
printed each of them a Vindication of himself, wherein he denied the matter
charged upon him; and thereupon the Author of this Calumny being discovered, he
was deservedly executed: And I hope this here will have the same event, and
that God, who is the just Avenger of such ill Practices, will discover the
Authors of this pernicious Invention. In the mean time, I offer up my Prayers
to God, That he would give them a better mind, and disappoint their wicked
Counsels, that they may not prevail to the Destruction of our Country. For
seeing this slander is of the same nature with the former, it may easily be
concluded the Authors of this had the same Design with the former; or rather,
that it was made by it, that what was discovered and prevented then, may now
have its effect. Now the main design of this Calumniator is to create a belief
that the Pope and the Emperor have resolved to rescind the Decree made for the
Peace of Religion, by a War, and that the King of England and the Bishops of
Germany are to lend their assistances to it. Now, I say, this feigned and false
Invention is designed for the exasperating the minds of Men, that their
Prejudices and Disaffections being increased, a Civil War may be stirred up
amongst us, to overwhelm our Country with the Blood of its Inhabitants. And
although I do not doubt but the Emperor, and the oath Princes who are injured
by this Seditious and Infamous Libel, will take care to defend themselves, and
to right their own Cause, yet at the same time I believe it is a part of my own
Duty to clear the Reputation of our Supreme Magistrate. And I protest, whilst
I was at Rome, in my presence, or to my knowledge, there was not one word
spoken concerning the Peace of Religion: and therefore it is very falsely laid
to the Pope's charge, that his main design is to persuade the Emperor and
other Kings to destroy that Decree by Force and Arms: I say, this is false, and
can never be proved; and by consequence what is charged upon the Emperor is
false too; for seeing there has been no Treaty between them, how can a War be
agreed, and the recovering the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the Conquest of
Germany be resolved on? This Slander pretends, That the Truce is made between
the Emperor and the King of France, to the intent that the Soldiers which are
disbanded on both sides, may be employed in in this War: Now the causes of that
Truce are sufficiently set forth in the printed Copies of the Treaty; and the
Soldiers which were thereupon disbanded are not entertained by any Prince,
except what Forces King Ferdinand has ordered to be levied and sent into
Hungary against the Turk, and some few which have been taken into Pay by the
Bishops of Ausburg, Norimburg, Bamberg, and Wurtsburg, that they may not be
taken altogether unprovided. So that all this Invention, as it relates to the
Pope, the Emperor, and the Bishops, is false in all its parts.

Now, as to what concerns my self, I have hitherto followed the Ancient, True
and Catholic Religion, as becomes a German, pursuing the footsteps of my
Ancestors, and continuing in the Communion of that Church in which I had my
Education, as I have already declared by a Letter I sent to the last Diet, and
by my Deputies which I sent thither; and I intend by the blessing of God to
continue in this Opinion, nor will I do any thing which is contrary to Honesty
and my Duty; and yet, after all, I desire to live peaceably with all men. And
whereas I am said to have entered into a secret Treaty with the Pope, the
Emperor, the King of England, some Princes of the Empire, and some private
persons, to stir up a War; this is most false: and that also which concerns the
Elector Palotine, and the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the Marquess of Brandenburg,
is most false, and can never be proved; and those who spread such Reports of me
by Word or Writing, are Slanderers, and the Enemies of our Country. That which
relates to the Elector Palatine stands thus: The Office and Dignity I enjoy
requires me to endeavor the preservation of the Rights of my Bishopric, and
that I should preserve the People committed to my Charge in the Ancient and
Catholic Religion: being therefore informed, that Otto Henry, Elector
Palatine, endeavorued to gain over to his Religion some Towns that were in my
Diocese, and that he had placed Preachers in them, I could not but take this
ill, and I had just cause given me to defend my self against him by a Suit at
Law; and thereupon, I being absent, my Council by my Order commenced a Suit
against him in the Chamber of Spire, where it is still depending; nor have I in
any thing else, so much as in Word, hurt or injured his Honor, so far have I
been from designing any thing against his Countries; and if it had lain in my
power to have served him, his Countries, or People, I would not have omitted
it; and for this I believe his People would be my Witnesses, because they know
I have kept my Faith to them, and have assisted them sometimes when they were
in great distresses. To which I may add, That I have ever had particular
affection for the Palatine Family, and I have ever been ready to do it all the
good I could; nor is that Disposition at all changed in me: and I have the same
kindness for Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg, who is a Good, Wise, Politic
Prince, and a great lover of Peace: upon the account of these rare qualities, I
have had a great propension for him ever since I first knew him, and have
studied to make this appear in my actions. But then, as to the driving Him or
the Elector Palatine out of their Countries, it never entered into my thoughts;
and if I had known of any Design which had tended to the damage of their
Reputations or Estates, I should certainly have been very much grieved, and
have done what was in my power to prevent it. I have hitherto so behaved my
self at all times, that I believe no man can find any thing in my actions which
is contrary to my Profession; and for the future I will ever carry my self so,
that I will raise a greater belief than I now have in the minds of men, out of
an hope, that as I have given no just cause of offense to them, so they at last
will be prevailed upon to remunerate me with an equal degree of kindness. And
as to the Case of Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, he himself knows how greatly
I am concerned for his misfortunes: for what is it which I have not done and
tried, in order to restore the Peace of the Empire, and to put a stop to that
Quarrel? In truth I took so much pains and care in that Affair, that though I
aimed at the Public Good by it, yet at last I was suspected by some as one
that favored his Interest too much, and would for his sake prejudice others.
But then how heartily I managed that business, will appear by my Letters to
him. Seeing then I have been thus disposed toward him, and he cannot charge me
to have omitted any thing which it became me to do for him, I have great
confidence that, as becomes his natural Virtue and true Nobility, he will
believe my Words, or rather my Actions, which are full of light, than these
seditious men, who, like Bellows, endeavor to kindle a Fire amongst us.

With how great charity and kindness I have ever entertained all Germans
whilst I was at Rome, out of a kind remembrance I have of my dearest Country,
may be easily known from the Ambassadors of many of the Princes; and many of
the Nobility will bear me witness, who were then at Rome when I was there,
insomuch that the Nobility of Mentz, Trier, Cologne, Saxony, Brandenburg,
Magdeburg, Bavaria, Brunswick, Passaw, Osnaburg, Minden, and Basil, did all as
one man repair to me, who heard all their Affairs with great fidelity; and by
my Interest and Commendations I procured some of them Commanders Places and
other Employments which were convenient for them. And now, as to what concerns
the Landtgrave, what a silly fiction the story of one Titelman is? for I never
had any discourse with the Landtgrave or his Sons about this Affair, nor do I
remember I ever mentioned him all the while I was at Rome, or in Italy. It is
equally as unknown to me what the Ministers of his Countries Teach or Recant;
and I may truly aver, that, to my knowledge, there was no such Recantation made
at Rome; and therefore I do not question but, if he be asked, the Landtgrave
himself will confute both this, and the story of his Commendation, as false.
Now, seeing the Authors of this wicked Libel have basely made all that is in
it, that they might by these Lies revive that Fire which they kindled so many
years since, to the end that it might break out afresh, and burn with equal
Rage; it is fit the Princes and Magistrates should diligently preserve
themselves from the danger of them, and when they shall be discovered, to make
them such Examples of their Justice, as may terrify others from the same
Offenses. Lastly, If there should happen to be some who on the account of these
slanders have taken up and ill Opinion of me, I most earnestly desire them they
would lay by their hard thoughts of me, and that they would certainly believe,
that as I am a German by Birth, and descended of an Illustrious and Noble
Family, so I will do nothing unworthy of the Virtue of my Ancestors, and the
Dignity of my Family. Having, as I said, published this Paper the 27th of June,
he sent ^everal Letters to the same purpose to the Princes of Germany, and then
returned back to Rome at the same time that Bona, the Mother of Sigismund King
of Poland, returned to Naples, her Native Country.

In the mean time there were (as is reported) some Commotions in England, and
some were Imprisoned, and others Beheaded, and others escaped into France, in
which number was Andrew Dudley, Brother to the late Duke of Northumberland; and
two of the Princess Elizabeth's Servants were taken up. The 15th of May Peter
Cart, who had fled some months before for a Sedition, was reconciled to King
Philip; and Sir John Cheeck, who had been Praeceptor to Edward VI. and was come
into the Low Countries to meet his Wife, and going from Brussels to Antwerp,
they were both taken, and treated with great Indignity, and at last shipped for
London* In the end of June Thirteen were tied to one Stake and burnt near
London for their Religion.

In the mean time Charles Marquess of Baden received the Augustan Confession,
The Marquess of Baden embraces the Augustan Confession.
and borrowed Ministers of the Neighbor Princes and States, to instruct People
and reform his Churches. The Chamber of Spire had before this time admitted one
or two Ministers of the Gospel. Maximilian, the eldest Son of King Ferdinand;
going about this time from Vienna, with Elizabeth his Lady, a Daughter of the
Emperor's, the 17th of July they arrived at Brussels, which Journey they
undertook after a long solicitation to it.

Peter Martyr the Florentine, who has been often mentioned by me, Peter Martyr
goes to Zurich.
lefe Str^^burg about this time and went to Zurich, upon the account of the
revival of the old Quarrel concerning the Lord's Supper, he having been ill
treated in some Books written on that Subject, which inclined him the more to
setle in Zurich, where he should have greater liberty to write upon it, and
teach his Judgment in this Point. Conradus Pelicanus, the old Professor of
Hebrew at Zurich, died also about this time, and thereupon the Ministers of
that City persuaded their Senate to write to that of Strasburg to send them
Peter Martyr to be his Successer. The 13th of July he left Strasburg, to the
great sorrow of many, who loved him for his incomparable Learning, exquilite
Judgment, great Civility, and Modesty, and his other rare Virtues.

About the same time the Archbishop and Cardinal of Pisa, who was a Sicilian by
Birth, traveled through Bafil to the Emperor in the Low Countries, to whom he
was sent by the Pope; the Cardinal of Carassa, a near Kinsman of the Pope's,
having been sent some small time before to the King of France. There was a
Report, which was also confirmed by Writing, That there were great Debates
between the Pope and the Emperor, and that things, tended to a War; for that,
amongst other Grievances, the Pope had disposessed the Family of Colonna of
their Estates in Campagnia di Rome, which was esteemed an Injury to the
Emperor; and besides, he would not admit King Philip, the Emperor's Son, to
the Succession of the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, (which are Fees holden of
the Sea of Rome) but upon very hard conditions; those Kingdoms paying a Tribute
to the Popes of Rome. This ended in a War the next year.

The 15th of July Albert Duke of Bavaria, in the Name of King Ferdinand, began
the Diet at Ratisbon, he being in the mean time detained from coming hither at
the time appointed by his Dyets in Austria and Bohemia, which, as I said, he
was now holding: Hereupon he acquainted the States with the great Difficulties
which oppressed him, and the Reasons why he could not be present in this Diet.
He said, That all Transylvania had revolted to one John, by the procurement of
one Peter Petrowich; a Subject of his; and, when there was no necessity, nor
any just cause of War, solicited the Turk for Succors The cause by them
alleged was, That Ferdinand, contrary to his promise, had put Spanish
Soldiers into their Towns, which ruined their Country. Thuan.
; That after this Francis Beveck and George his Son had raised a Rebellion
against him in Hungary, and, with the help of the Walachians, had taken several
Towns and Castles; That the Turks had sent a Bassa to govern Buda; That another
Bassa, in the time of a Treaty of Peace, had besieged Sigeth from the 11th of
June, and had battered it with all the violence imaginable; That the Town had
been taken, but the Castle still held out but much The Inhabitants and Garrison
finding the Castle too little to be defended, made a sudden Sally, and
recovered the Town; and the 23d of July the Turks were forced with great loss
and shame to draw off.
oppressed by the Cannon of the Enemy; That he had received Accounts by Letters
and Messengers, That the Bassa of Bosnia was assembling great Forces to in vade
Sclavonia; That the Beglerbeg of Greece was drawing great Forces together at
Sophia, and then designed to come forward, and that Solomon himself would come
into Hungary in Autumn to Winter there, or at least that he would be there
early in the Spring with a vast Army to take Vienna; That in a time of so great
distress he was not at leisure, nor durst he leave his Provinces, but was
wholly taken up in providing for the Defense and Security of them; and because
he would not have the Diet held any longer in suspense, which was contrary to
the Interest of the Empire, he had committed the management of it to the Duke
of Bavaria, that he might begin it, and preside till he could come thither
himself; That he had sent a splendid Ambassy to treat of a Peace or a Truce
three years since with Solomon, and his Ambassadors were detained at
Constantinople; and, although a Truce had been concluded till the Ambassador
should return home, yet the Turk had broke his Faith, and had taken many Towns
and Castles in the Borders of his Kingdom of Hungary; and seeing he was now
battering Sigeth, it was not reasonable to expecta firm and lasting Peace upon
tolerable Conditions. This being the state of things, (he said) a great and
terrible Danger was threatened thereby, not only to the Remainder of the Kingdom
of Hungary, but to Austria, and all Germany, and therefore it was needful to
come presently to a Resolution of sending Succors, and levying money for the
defense of it, which might be deposited in certain Places to be issued out by
public Treasurers, as need should require; That the King had solicited other
Princes to send Supplies, and that he was resolved to spare no Treasures, and
to hazard his own Person and his Sons: But then, his Hereditary Countries being
exhausted by a War which had lasted so many years, were not now able to grapple
with so formidable an Enemy alone, but it was absolutely needful the Empire
should assist them, and that speedily. And seeing in the last Diet it was
resolved, That the composing the Differences of Religion should be considered
in this, he earnestly exhorted them to consider, whether it was possible to be
done, and by what way. They were to consider also of the Which was then said to
be much debased and corrupted, to the damage of the People.
Money, and of the establishing the Peace of the Empire. But then the Turkish
War ought not to be postpon'd or delayed, but to be one of their first and most
important Considerations, that so the present and impending Danger might be
averted.

The 15th day of September the Emperor having a fair Wind, and a promising
Season, set Sail with a good Fleet for Spain, and took along with him as his
Companions in this Voyage Mary Queen-Dowager of Hungary, and Leonora
Queen-Dowager of France, his Sisters. These short Accounts seem added by
another hand after the Author was dead, if not that of the Emperor's Journey.
But before his departure he had resigned to his Son Philip the Government of
the Low Countries, and to his Brother King Ferdinand the Empire of Germany; to
which purpose he had sent a Letter to the Electors, wherein he desired they
would accept of him, and acknowledge and obey him as Emperor of Germany.

The last day of October John Sleidan, I. V. L. a Person worthy of great
Commendations on the account of the rare Endowments of his Mind, and his great
Learning, died at Strasburg, and was honorably buried.

FINIS.
A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION To the End of the COUNCIL OF
TRENT, In the Year 1563.

Collected and Written by E. B. Esquire;

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.
BOOK I.
The CONTENTS.
The Introduction. The Revolt of Transylvania. The Siege and brave Defense of
Sigeth, a Town in Hungary. Charles V, resigns the Empire: He goes to Spain.
John Sleidan's Death and Character. Paul III, a Furious Prince: The War between
him and King Philip in Italy: The Peace between them. The Affairs of England.
The Diet of Ratisbonne. The Death of Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the Order
of Jesuits: And of Albert Marquess of Brandenburg. The unsuccessful Conference
at Wormds, between the Romish and Protestant Divines. The War between France
and Spain. The Siege, Battle and Taking of S. Quintin. Charles V, his Letter to
his Son. The Spanish Army disperse, and the French increase. A Persecution in
France. The Siege and Loss of Calais: The Situation and Form of that Town.
Guines taken. A Turkish Fleet land in many Places in Italy, and carry many into
Captivity. The Dauphin Married to Mary Queen of Scotland. The first Overtures
for a Peace between the Kings of France and Spain. Andelot Marshal of France
ruined by the Arts of the Duke of Guise. Thionville Besieged and Taken by the
French. The Defeat of the French near Graveling. An unsuccessful Expedition of
the English against France. The Treaty of Cambray began. The Parliament of
England meet; and Queen Mary Dies. The German Affairs, the Death and Character
of Charles V. The Succession of Queen Elizabeth. The Scotch Affairs, and the
first settling of the Reformation in that Kingdom.

IT was the Misfortune of this Great Man, John Sleidan, to die in that nick of
Time, when the Fates of the two contending Religions, and of all Christendom,
were just upon the settling: The Introduction.
It is true, he lived to see the Augustane Confession settled in the Diet of
Ausburg, and perhaps he might hear of the Resignation of the Empire by Charles
V, to his Brother Ferdinand; but then Death surprised him before he could give
any account of it; for with it he designed to have begun the next Book, in all
probability, and to have filled up this with some other Accidents; such as a
large account of the Revolt of Transylvania, and the Siege of Sigeth would have
afforded him. But then had he lived till the Year 1563, he should have seen the
Death of Queen Mary, Henry II of France, and Charles V, and the settling of the
Roman Catholic Religion, by the Determination of the Council of Trent,
contrary to the Expectation of all Men; which seems to be the first Period of
the Reformation, and absolutely necessary to give the Reader a clear Prospect
and full View of the first Joint of this great Revolution. I have therefore
persuaded the Stationer to add a Suppliment to this Version, for that purpose;
and because I am a Member of the Religion by Law established, and not willing
to offend them of the other Persuasions, I resolve to advance nothing in it but
from Authors, who lived and dyed in the Communion of the Church of Rome,
showing the matter of Fact with great Brevity, and making few or no Reflections
of my own: That so the Reader may be left entirely to himself, to think what he
Please, and God shall direct him.

I will begin with the Business of Transylvania: John the last King of Hungary,
dyed of Joy for the birth of his Son, in the Year 1539: His Son being left thus
an Infant, his Mother the Queen Regent, put him under the Protection of
Solomon, Emperor of the Turks, The Revolt of Transylvania.
to secure him from the Violence of Ferdinand, who claimed that Kingdom; and
thereupon a sharp War ensued, which ended in the advancement of the Turkish
Interest, and the loss of both those Princes, the Turk taking Quinque
Ecclesiae, Gran and Albaregalis, in the Year 1544; Temeswar, Lippa, and some
others in the Year 1548: Whereupon Ferdinand finding himself too weak to deal
with that potent warlike Prince, in the Year 1549 offered him 30000 Ducats of
yearly Tribute for Transylvania: But this Design failing, in the Year 1551, he
forced the Queen of Hungary to resign Transylvania, to whom in lieu of it he
gave Cassovia, and a Pension of 100000 Ducats yearly. And in the Year 1552, he
made Stephen Dobus, who had performed great Services for him against the Turks
this Year in the Defense of Agria, Vaivode of Transylvania: He continued
quietly in the Possession of it, till the Year 1556; and then another
Disturbance arose in this Principality, which is shortly hinted at by King
Ferdinand, in his Letter to the Diet at Ratisbonne. Among other things,
Ferdinand had promised, That he would not burden Transylvania with any
Garrisons of Foreigners; But whether out of Necessity, or for fear of the
Turks, he had kept a strong Guard of Spanish Soldiers there, who had done great
Injuries to the Inhabitants; whereupon one Peter Petrowic, underhand, dealt
with Solomon for supplies, and began a Revolt in favor of one John, whose
Family is not known, who then aspired to this miserable Principality, and hoped
by drawing the Turks into Hungary, to gain the greatest part of that Kingdom
for himself, and had called a Diet at Thorda, in March, 1555, which was
disappointed by the Spaniards. The Turks were not without their Complaints too,
for though Ferdinand had sent Ambassadors to treat a Peace, yet Solomon being
engaged in a War with the Persians, he was not at leisure, or perhaps not much
inclined to make a Peace with Ferdinand, but kept his Ambassadors two Years at
Constantinople, to little or no Purpose; and Ferdinand being thus held in
Suspense, was forced to keep great Garrisons in his Frontier Towns, and among
them the Heyducks were employed, who having no Pay, made frequent in roads into
the Turkish Quarters toward Quinque Ecclesiae, and often surprised the Turkish
Boats, as they passed upon the Rivers; nor was it in Ferdinand's power to
restrain them, as things then stood. Hereupon the Turks began a War with the
Town of Kaposwar, which was treacherously resigned to them by the Garrison, and
after it Babotz, and passing on, they attempted Sigeth, and came within
Cannonshot of it; but Ladislaus Kerezen, the Governor, gave them such a warm
Entertainment, that the Bassa's Tent being pierced with a Cannon-shot, he was
forced to remove farther off, and three hundred of his Men being slain in two
Sallies, and Winter coming on, he was fain to Withdraw. This passed in the Year
1555.

In the beginning of the next Year, Sigeth besieged and most bravely defended
by the Germans.
Solomon sent Haly an Albanian, whom he had recalled from the Wars of Persia,
to be Vizier of Buda; but with a Command not to enter that City, till he had
taken Sigeth: He coming to Sirmish, sent a Messenger to demand Sigeth of
Ferdinand, who replied, He had Ambassadors at the Port, treating of a Peace;
he had done no Injury, and therefore desired he might receive none, but was
resolved to defend himself if he were attacked. Whereupon the Bassa comes on,
and finds Mark Horwatch Governor of the Town, who had sworn the Garrison,
consisting of two thousand Foot, and one hundred and eighty Horse, to defend
the Town to the utmost. The Situation of Sigeth.
It is seated in a marshy Plain, and on the North it has Dikes, which bring the
Waters of the River Alme into the three Ditches, which strengthen the Town; On
the East it has a strong Castle, which had two Bastions, and the nature of the
Site made it impossible to make use of Mines against it; and it was then a very
Populous Place. Haly came before it the tenth of June, and finding nothing but
Force could take it, the thirteenth he raised a Battery of nine Canon on the
South side: Whilst this was battering the Town on that Side, he played his
Grenades on all the other, which burnt most of the Houses, and a part of the
Walls, which were made of Clay and Straw; the twentieth of June, the Turks took
the Counterscharpe, and the next Night they filled the second Dike with
Faggots, and built another Battery on the West Side of the Town, which the
Defendants were not able to destroy. The next day, a great Breach being made in
the second Wall, though the Town had burnt ten thousand Loads of Wood, which had
been thrown in to fill the Dike, yet the Turks, after four furious Assaults,
which succeeded not, took the Town at the fifth, and the Garrison retreated
into the Castle. The Turks drew a Trench between the Castle and the Town, to
secure themselves; but the Townsmen and Soldiers finding themselves too much
penned up for want of Room, made so furious a Sally upon the Turks, that they
slew eighty of them, and recovered the Town. The next day, which was the
twelfth of July, Haly renewed the Battery on the West Side, and that Night
erected a third Battery against a Tower called Haney, and a Gate near it, and
drew a Trench round the Town to drain the Dikes, which he endeavored to fill
under the new Battery, and in this Work he spent five Days. When by this means
he had drained the Dikes, he raised a fourth Battery over against the Castle,
and began to play it with great Fury against the Castle, twenty thousand Carts
being employed, in the mean time, to fill the Dikes, on the East Side with
Wood; but the Defendants fired that too, and under the Cover of the Smoke, made
a furious Sally on the Turks, who were laboring to put the Fire out, and slew
seven hundred of them. They made the same Attempt of filling up the Dikes, and
with the same Success, on the West Side, the Wood being burnt, and four hundred
Turks cut off by a Sally. Haly by this time began to find his Hopes of
prevailing by Force abated, so he fell to fawning and Flattery, and made them
very kind and obliging Promises, if they would surrender; but this was to no
purpose, so he fell to fill the Dikes with Sacks of Earth, and to raise Works
with Skeps to beat off the Defendants. The twelfth of July he raised another
Platform against the Castle, and battered it with that fury for five Days, that
the Town was almost reduced to Desperation, and sent a Messenger to King
Ferdinand, to beg Relief; but considering how long they must stay for it, they
reassumed their wonted Courage, and made a brave Irruption, in which they
fired all the Wood that had been thrown into the Dikes. This abated the Fury of
Haly so effectually, that he lay only pelting the Town with his Cannon to the
twenty first of July, and then was glad of an Opportunity to draw off to
succor Babots, Babotz besieged.
which was assaulted by one Nadasad, who fought this Army, and made a great
slaughter among them: And after this, the Christians retreating toward Canisa
lost two hundred of their Men, and among them a Brother of Nadasad's. Upon this
small Advantage Haly returned to the Siege of Sigeth, but was entertained with
Scorn and Laughter. He began another Battery against the Castle, and used all
the Arts and Wheedling and Terror to persuade the Garrison to yield; but the
Besieged returned his Courtship with military Sallies, and slew a great many of
his Men, and in one of them they maintained a Fight eight Hours against all the
Turkish Forces, so that though the Town was above half ruined, yet the Turkish
General was forced the twenty ninth of July to draw off to Quinque Ecclesiae;
after he had sent away his Cannon and Baggage, he spent above two thousand of
his best Men in this Seige, and yet he slew not above one hundred and sixteen
of the Defendants; but then he satiated his Fury on the smaller Places. This
Haly was an Eunuch of small Stature, The Character of Haly, the Turks General.
but very Corpulent, Tawny Complexioned, of a Sour Countenance, fierce Eyes,
broad Shouldered, short Necked, and having two Fore-teeth like a Bore's Tusks,
so that a more ugly contemptible Personage was never seen; but he was a Man of
great Courage and Subtlety. Whilst he lay before Sigeth, Gran surprised by
Scalado.
the Germans surprised Gran by Scaldo; a poor Turk came to give him an account
of this Loss with so much Consternation in his Looks, that Haly clapped his Hand
between his Thighs, and said in scorn, This was the dreadful Loss when I was
deprived of my Virilities. He was not long after forced, with great shame and
Dishonor, to enter his Government of Buda, where he dyed of Rage and
Discontent. I have insisted the longer upon this, because it was one of the
most memorable Sieges in that Age.

Our Author has already given an account of the Resignation of the Kingdom, of
Naples and the Dukedom of Milan by Charles V, Charles V, resigns the
Netherlands and Spain to his Son.
to his Son Philip, soon after his Marriage to Queen Mary; and this Summer he
resigned the Netherlands and Spain to him; so that he had nothing left but the
Empire. This great Prince stripping himself by degrees of all his Greatness and
External Majesty, and feeling a great Pleasure in the lightning his Burden,
being then at Sudbury in Zealand, and just ready to imbark for Spain, he made a
Resignation of the Empire to his Brother Ferdinand the seventh of September, in
this form. CHARLES, by the Divine Clemency, And the Empire to his Brother
Ferdinand.
Emperor of the Romans, August, etc. to all and every the Electoral Princes,
as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, the Prelates, Counts, Barons, Knights,
Nobles, Captains, Viscounts, Governors, Lieutenants, Magistrates, Judges,
Burgomasters, Consuls, Citizens and Commonalties, and all other the Subjects of
the said Empire, our Faithful and beloved People, of what State, Dignity or
Condition soever, We wish Friendship, Grace, and every Good Thing. We being
admonished by many and great Reasons, and very much burdened with Our great
Age, and with continual Annoyance of our Infirmities, which has almost
overpowered Our Natural Strength, and rendered Our Body in firm, which makes Us
unfit for Business; and having long since determined, That Our Kingdom of Spain
should go to the most Serene Prince, Philip Our Son, King of Spain and England:
And having thereupon abandoned Our usual Palace, We have removed with Our Court
hither, in order with the first good Wind to embark for Spain, all things being
now ready for that purpose, so that Our Voyage can be hindered by none but God:
Wherefore by this Our Absence, the Government of the Sacred Empire belongs to
the most Serene and Potent Prince, Ferdinand King of the Romans, Hungary and
Bohemia, and Our dearest Brother, as being lawfully elected King of the Romans,
and the next uncontestable Successor after Us; the which Government has even
already many Years since, by our Assent, been managed by him, in our Name, with
great Affection, he having born the Weight of of it (for us) with a true
brotherly and kind Solicitude. That therefore the Christian Commonwealth, and
especially the Sacred Empire, may sustain no Damage (which God prevent) whilst
We are a far off; and that Our said Brother, the King of the Romans may
transact all Affairs with the greater Authority, We have resolved and declared,
That as King of the Romans, he shall have Power absolutely of himself, without
Our Concurrence to do, treat, and command all those things, which to him shall
seem necessary and convenient, to the Dignity, Profit and Increase of the
sacred Empire; in the same manner as We could have done the same as Emperor of
the Romans. In truth there is nothing which We desired so much, as to have been
present in Person in your Diet, before this Our Voyage, which is now assembled
at Ratisbonne, one of our Imperial Cities, and to have brought the Public
Affairs to their desired End, by your Advice, and then to have committed the
Government to Our Brother, the King of the Romans, in it, in our stead, whereby
we might have admonished you, to pay him that Obedience, which is due to him.
But Our Indisposition of Body, which is known to all, would not suffer Us to
take so long a Journey, and especially by Land. Besides, We consider, that the
Slipping this favorable Season for Sailing, is a thing of great Consideration
-- Wherefore, we being not able personally to come to the Diet, as We desired
and determined to do; nor to bring Our Designs to their Effect: Yet We were
desirous to make known Our Affection and Devotion to you all by this Edict, and
discovery of our Mind; and thereby expressly to command all and every of you, by
the tenor of these Letters, and by the Imperial Authority, under Pain of our
greatest Indignation, That ye, as has been often said, yield to the said King
of the Romans Fidelity, Obedience and Reverence, in Our Name, and stead in all
his Edicts, Commands and Actions, and that ye do not resist or disobey him in
any thing, but observe him in all things, as You ought to do to us, if we were
present in the Empire; lest by doing otherwise, or suffering your selves to be
persuaded to the contrary, you do excite and procure Our greatest Indignation.
And this is Our express and last Will. Given under our Seal at Sudbury in
Zealand, the seventh Day of September, in the Year of our Lord 1556, and in the
thirty sixth Year of our Empire. I have sought up and transcribed this rare
Piece from the Italian Copy, in Alfonso Volla, in his Life of Charles V. It was
penned in Latin, but I could no where find the Latin Copy, and perhaps it was
never printed, at least I am sure it is very scarce; and not likely to be ever
used again by any Prince, till Time shall be no more.

The Emperor knew very well, The Emperor's Ambassadors to the Electoral
Princes.
says Thuanus, that next to God, the Right of Electing and Receiving the
Resignation or Surrender of the Empire, was in the seven Electoral Princes, and
that without their Consent and Authority this could not be done; and to dispose
them to approve and allow this Act of his, he had appointed William of Nassaw
Prince of Orange, George Sigismond, Seldius Vice Chancellor of the Empire, and
Wolfang Haler, one of his Secretaries of State, to be his Ambassadors to them:
But a War soon after breaking out between the King of France and his Son King
Philip, by the breach of the late Truce, it was two Years ere that Command of
his took its effect.

In the mean time John Archbishop of Trier, of the Family of the Counts of
Isemburg, died, and John Laien succeeded him; and Adolph Archbishop of Cologne
was succeeded by Anthony his Brother.

The Emperor set sail the fifteenth of September, The Emperor sets sail for
Spain.
with a Fleet of sixteen Spanish, and twenty Flemmish Ships, all Men of War,
besides the Admiral, in which he and his two Sisters went. At Portsmouth seven
English Ships joined him, and at the Isle of Wight seven more. He arrived
safely at Laredo, a Port in Biscaye, where he was entertained by a great
concourse of the Nobility, and Deputies of the Cities of the Kingdom of Spain.
So soon as ever he set his Foot upon the Shore, he prostrated himself upon the
Earth, His Speech at his landing.
and kissing it he said, Hail my beloved Mother, naked came I out of my
Mother's Womb, and now I return naked to thee again, as to another Mother; and
here I consecrate and give to thee my Body and my Bones, which is all the
Acknowledgment I can give for all thy numerous Benefits bestowed upon me. His
next care was to make a formal and a public Renunciation of the Kingdom of
Spain to his Son Philip, in this great Assembly. After this he spent two Days
at Valladolid with his Grandson Don Carolo, instructing that unfortunate
Prince in the Rules of Glory and Virtue; and doubtless it was a noble Lecture
which so great a Prince, like another Patriarch, made to his supposed Heir.

From hence this Glorious Prince retired to a Place he had chosen, The
description of the Place in which he lived.
to spend the remainder of his Life, being a Valley in the Borders of Spain and
Portugal; equally Delightful for the Temper of the Air, and the Pleasant Crown
of Hills which incircled it, and supposed to be the Place where the famous
Sertorius was basely murdered. It is well watered with Springs and Rivolets,
and rarely Fruitful, and lies about eight Spanish Miles from Placentia, a City
of the Kingdom of Leon, by the Town of Scaradilla; this Place he had remarked
in Hunting, and had ordered a small Apartment of seven Rooms, fourteen Foot
square to be built for him; and here he lived with twelve Servants, and one
Horse for his own use, having reserved an hundred thousand Crowns for his
Subsistence, which was not over well paid neither, spending his Time in the
innocent Arts of Grafting, Gardning, and Reconciling the Differences of his
Clocks, which yet he could never make to strike together; and therefore ceased
to wonder, He had not been able to make Men agree in the Nicities of Religion.

Here he first heard of the breach of Truce between his Son and the King of
France; Thuanus.
and though he was something concerned at it, yet he concluded the Rashness of
the Old doting Pope, and the Perfidy of the Caraffa's would end in the Ruin
of the Prosperity of France, as it came afterward to pass.

The last Day of October (says the great Thuanus) John Sleidan, John Sleidan's
Death and Character.
when he had brought down his History to that time, with an exact Faith and
Diligence, dyed of the Pague at Strasburg, in the one and fiftieth Year of his
Age. He was born at Sleidan, a Town in the Dukedom of Juliers, near Dueren, and
from thence he took his Name; a Person, who for his Learning and great
Experience in Affairs was much esteemed by that Age: He had spent the greatest
part of his Youth in France; and being entertained in the Family of Bellay, had
both learned and done great things in the Service of Cardinal John Du Bellay;
but a sharp Persecution arising in France against those that were suspected of
Lutheranisme, he went and lived at Strasburg, and served that Free City, and
being by his own Employments much informed of the Carriage of Affairs, he added
to what he had seen, what he had learned from Men worthy of Credit, and wrote
his Book of Commentaries.

Paul IV had succeeded Marcellus, Natura iracundus and pene implacabilis.
Natalis Comes. Paul IV a furious Harebrained Prince.
a short lived Pope, the twenty sixth of May, in the Year 1555, as John Sleidan
has set forth in his last Book; he was a Man of a Furious and unquiet temper,
and made it his great Design to raise the Sea of Rome to its former Greatness
and Authority; but not considering the present state of things, mistook his
Measures: The Submission of England had raised in him extravagant Hopes of
Reducing Germany too, under his Obedience; but then the Peace of Religion
appeared so contrary to that Design, that it irritated him to the utmost, and
he threatened the King of the Romans and the Emperor, That in a short time he
would make them know, to their Sorrow, how much they had offended him, if they
did not prevent it by revoking and disallowing the things they had granted.
That he might have no occasion to proceed as he intended to do, not only
against the Lutherans, but even against them too, as Abettors of them. But all
this Ranting Zeal missing its due Effect he began his Revenges on King Philip,
the Son of the Emperor, who was the best Friend that See had then in
Christendom, by denying to admit him to the Kindgom of Naples.

Marc Antony Colonna, a Favorite of Philip King of Spain, had about this time
dispossessed Ascanius his Father, who was a Subject of the Popes, but had a
great Estate in the Kingdom of Naples, of all that lay in that Kingdom upon
pretense that he was infected with Heresy, that he favored the French
Interest against the Emperor, and that he lived a dissolute Life: And the
Accusation had been countenanced and encouraged by King Philip to that height,
that the Father, as much as in him lay, at his Death disinherited his Son,
giving his Estates in the Papacy to the Sea of Rome, and those in the Kingdom
of Naples to Victoria his Daughter, the Wife of Garzia de Toledo. This was made
the Pretense of the ensuing War between the Pope and the King of Spain, into
which the French and English were drawn too, and all Christendom almost
imbroiled again.

The Pope however, considering that he was not able to deal alone with so
Potent a Prince as King Philip, under pretense of sending Cardinal Caraffa into
France, to congratulate the five Years Truce, employed his Interest with the
King of France, to persuade him to break his Faith so lately given, and to
renew the War with Philip. The Pope had before, upon several Pretenses, clapped
up the leading Cardinals, and great Men of the Spanish Faction: And when the
King, with all the Respect his Zeal for that See could inspire him with, by his
Ambassador, desired the Discharge of these Prisoners, and the Restitution of
Marc Antony Colonna to his Fathers Estate and Castles in the Papacy, the angry
Pope Replied, That he had Authority and Right to punish his Subjects for their
Offenses. And commanded his Ambassador to write to his Master, not to meddle
with what did not belong to him, and that he should permit him as Pope, to
exercise his Sovereignty freely on his own Subjects. And accordingly he seized
all Colonna's Castles and Estates in the Dominions of the Church, pretending to
revenge the Wrongs he had done to Ascanius his innocent Father, with the
consent of his Mother, who was also severely treated by the Pope; and not
contented with all this, he declared the Kingdom of Naples forfeited to the Sea
of Rome, because King Philip had neglected the Payment of eight thousand Crowns
due as a yearly Tribute for that Kingdom, He annexes the Kingdom of Naples to
the Sea of Rome.
and now many Years in Arrear; whereupon his Holiness published an Edict, by
which he annexed that Kingdom, as forfeited to the Sea of Rome; and began to
fortify Paliano a City of Champagna di Roma, thirty miles from Rome to the
East, and put a thousand French into it for a Garrison, which the more
exasperated the King of Spain.

The Duke de Alva, who was then Viceroy of Naples, did all that was possible
to mitigate the Pope; The Duke de Alva begins a a War upon the Papacy.
but his Submissions and Protestations more incensed him, his Flatterers
persuading him they proceeded more from Fear than a Reverence of the Holy See,
which he so much pretended. Whereupon the Viceroy raised twelve thousand Foot
and fifteen hundred Horse, and entering the Popes Territories, he took Ponte
Corvo, upon the River Garigliano, one of the Pope's Towns, in the Borders of
Terra di Lavoro, without resistance, and after that Frusilione, the Pope's
Forces flying out of it in the Night. Hereupon the Pope also levied ten
thousand Italian Foot and seven hundred Horse, to which he added two thousand
Gascoigners, which were old Soldiers, sent him by the King of France; and
imprisoned one Lofredo, who was sent by the Duke de Alva to persuade the Pope
to a Peace, before the War was begun, and staid at Rome for the Pope's Answer.

The Duke de Alva, hearing this, presently marched to Anagni, another City in
the same Province, Anagni taken.
which the Pope had made his Magazine; but here meeting some Resistance, he sat
down before it, and sent the Duke of Toledo to take Veruli, in which he found
some Difficulty, which he revenged by plundering the Town: Another of his
Commanders took Babuco, and beat out the Pope's Forces; the other Places made
no resistance. In the interim, the Walls of Anagni being ruined, the Governor
in the nightime blew up the Powder and fled, and left the City to the Mercy
of the Spaniards, who plundered it with great Security.

Whilst this was doing, Commilo Orsino fortified Rome, and prepared it for a
Siege, by cutting down all the Trees, Rome prepared for a Siege.
and destroying all the Houses, Walls, Gardens and Vineyards about it, to the
Damage of ten millions of Crowns; which enforced the Citizens to seek all the
means that were possible to prevent this Devastation and Ruin, but in vain;
and there was no less Care taken of the Castle of S. Angelo, five Bastions and
a Counterscharpe being added to its former Works. But when the Noise of the
taking Anagni and the other Towns came to Rome, nothing could consolate the
Citizens, but fearing another Sack like that of Bourbon in the year 1527, they
would not be quiet till the Pope sent Ambassadors to Alva to Treat of Peace.

In the mean time Alva took Valle di Montone without resistance, and finding
himself deluded with the pretense of a Treaty, he took Palestrina and Segni;
after this he marched to Tivoli, which submitted without any dispute to his
will, who received the City under his Protection, and would not suffer his
Soldiers to enter into it. Those of Vico-Varo, a strong and populous Town upon
the Teuerone, promised Orsino to defend themselves bravely; but seeing their
Fields, Gardens, Vineyards and Country Houses go to wrack, they desired Orsino
to provide for himself, who thereupon sent to Alva for leave to march away with
Drums beating and Colors flying, as if no enemy had been near, which the civil
good natured enemy granted, and thereupon he entered the Town; and though he
promised to leave but sixty Spaniards in garrison, took the liberty afterward to
do as he thought fit. This Town by reason of its Greatness, Strength and
Populousness, might have defended it self against a greater Army than that of
the Spaniards if they had had the Courage; and was surrendered very opportunely
for the Spaniard.

The Pope began to want Money, but durst ask none of the Citizens of Rome,
because they were at great charges to fortify the City: He solicited the
Venetians also, to enter into the War, but they were for a Peace between the
Parties; but then there was so much Pride on the one side, and so much Anger on
the other, that nothing could be effected. The French that were in the City
were very troublesome to the Romans for want of their pay, which occasioned
many Thefts and Robberies, and that in the day time. Alva having refreshed his
Forces a small time after the taking Vico-Varo, drew them into the Field and
took Toscolano San Marino, Grotta Ferrata and Gandolso, and from Grotta Ferrata
marched toward Ostia. The inhabitants of Nettuno submitted to him, and
defended his men against those of Velletri, who assaulted them in the Suburbs
of Nettuno. The Pope seeing his weakness, sent again to the French King to
declare a war against the Spaniards, and at last obtained his desire in that
point.

The Duke De Alva coming before Ostia (this City was heretofore a very
considerable place, The Seige of Ostia.
but being ruined by Wars and time, and now almost desolate, though the
Governor had bestowed some time and pains in fortifying it) but however this
place preserved it self and beat off the Spaniards with great loss several
times, but at last the Castle of it was taken too, after which a Truce ensued,
and Alva returned into the Kingdom of Naples with the Spanish Horse, leaving
the Foot in the Towns he had taken. The Duke of Guise was on the way for Italy
with a great supply, and the Pope in the time of the Truce, was very earnest
with the Venetians to join with him, but to no purpose. And thus stood Affairs
in the beginning of the next year in Italy.

In France, Henry the Second having been won by the Arts of Cardinal Caraffa to
break his Oath, 1557.
the Admiral Coligni the Sixth of January attempted to surprise Doway, but was
discovered and prevented, The French Affairs.
but he took and plundered Leus, a Town in Artois, using the people with great
barbarity. In the mean time the Duke of Guise had passed the Alps, in the depth
of the winter, with an Army of Twelve Thousand Foot and Five Thousand and Three
Hundred armed Horse, and Eight Hundred and Eight Light Horse, with which Forces
he besieged Valenza, a strong Town in the Duchy of Milan; Valenza taken.
and after he had battered it five days, stormed and took the Town the
twentieth day of January, and a few days after the Castle. He dismantled the
Town, but at the request of the Pope, he preserved the Castle. From thence he
passed into the Dukedom of Ferrara, where he was respectively entertained by
the Duke, who had declared for the Pope, but he would not go with him to
Bononia, fearing his Countries might be invaded by the Spaniards and their
Allies in his absence; but however the Duke of Guise went thither with his
Forces, where he found an hearty welcome, but no Forces to join with him, which
much displeased him.

In the mean time the Pope finding the inconvenience of having Ostia in the
enemies hands, Ostia retaken by the Pope.
which deprived Rome of the benefit of the Sea, and sending some Forces
thither, it was Surrendered, after a short defense, upon the account of an
Inundation of the River. After which the Pope recovered most of the other Towns
as easily as he had lost them.

In the Spring the Duke of Guise began the War with the Sack of Compli, a small
City of Abruzzo, The War in Italy under the Duke of Guise.
which being taken by Scalado was severely treated; the Spoil of this City was
estimated at two hundred thousand Crowns, great part of which was found in the
Ruins of the City, where it had been hid many Ages, and was unknown to the
Inhabitants. The 24 of April, the Duke of Guise sat down before Civitella, a
City of Abruzzo, built upon an high Hill, and very steep on the North, on the
top of which it had a Castle, ruined by its own Inhabitants, in the time of
Charles VIII, for fear it should have been Garrisoned by the French. This City
would not yield, and therefore the Duke of Guise was forced to stay before it
till the Cannon could be brought from Ancona and Ferrara to batter it; but when
all was done, this small place, by the nature of its situation, and the Courage
of its Inhabitants, baffled all their Attempts, and forced the French, after a
long Siege, to retire, and leave it. The Women of this Town contributed very
much to the saving of it, not only by working at the Breaches, though many of
them were slain by the Enemies Shot, but also by taking men's Clothes, and
appearing in Arms among them in the sight of the Enemy, so that the Defendants
seemed more numerous than indeed they were.

In the mean time, The Duke de Alva takes the Field.
Alva having brought an Army of 16000 Foot and 2000 Horse, consisting of
Spaniards, Germans and Italians, together with a good Train of Artillery
brought him by Sea, he marched out of Pescara, May 10, and drove the French out
of Givlia, a Sea-port-Town, about ten miles east of Civitella; whereupon the
Duke of Guise having lost above half his Army, left Civitella, the 15 of May,
when they had lain before it twenty two Days.

The Duke of Florence took the Opportunity of this distracted State of Affairs,
and by pretending he was much inclined to join with the French and Pope against
the Spaniards, which would certainly have ruined their Power in Italy, forced
King Philip to give up the City and State of Siena to him, who accordingly took
Possession of it July 19. This whole intreague is described at length by
Thuanus, but I am forced to be very short, the nature of this Supplement not
admitting such long Digressions.

Toward the latter end of the Summer, Segni taken by the Spaniards.
Segni, a strong City of Compagnia di Roma, having made the best Defense it
could, fell at last into the Hands of the Spaniards, who plundered and burnt it,
and slew the greatest part of the Inhabitants. When the Pope heard the
deplorable News of the Sack of Segni, he fell into a fit of Melancholy, and
said, He desired to be with Christ, and would with great Constancy and
Satisfaction, expect the Crown of Martyrdom,; As if (says Thuanus) this had
been the Cause of God: And that he had not been brought into this great Danger
and Trouble, by a War which his Relations had involved him in, with great
Rashness and Ambition.

Those that were about him could not forbear Smiling; and knowing very well,
That as the Pope had begun this War without Cause or Provocation, so he might
end it when he pleased upon Just and Honorable Terms, King Philip, and his
General, the Duke de Alva, being both extremely addicted to the Sea of Rome:
And therefore taking this Opportunity, they persuaded the Pope to send
Alexander Placidi, a Knight of great esteem, to the Duke of Alva, to treat
about a Peace, by whom also the Cardinal of Sanfloriano sent a private Account
of the beating the French at S. Quintin, which as it sunk the Pope's Interest,
so it raised the Spanish.

Upon this the Duke de Alva took up a Resolution to surprise the City of Rome
by Night, and treat with the Pope within the very Walls of Rome; and he came
very early in the Morning under the Walls of Rome, and found the City in a
profound Quiet, and altogether unprovided, so that in all probability he might
have surprised it without the least Resistance; but as he took an Oath of the
Captains, That they should not suffer their Soldiers to plunder or sack the
City, so it is verily thought, upon great Reasons, That his Fear the Switz and
Germans would have done this whatever he or his Officers could have done or
said to prevent it, made him stop, and by his Presence try if he could affright
the Old Pope into a Compliance. However, Thuanus is of Opinion, he truly
designed to surprise the City, but that his Heart failed him, when it came to
the Point of Execution.

At the same time there came Letters from the King of France, The Duke of Guise
recalled.
to recall the Duke of Guise into France, where his Presence was absolutely
needful, and the Pope had his Hostages returned, and was left at Liberty to
take the best care, he could of his own Affairs: Yet when the Duke of Guise
came to ask the Pope's leave to return, upon the account of the great Necessity
of his Master's Affairs, there was a sharp contest between the Duke and the
Pope, insomuch that his Holiness told the Duke, He had done very little toward
the advancing his Masters Interest, or the Good of the Church in this Voyage,
and much less for the Improvement of his own Honor and Reputation. In the mean
time the Duke de Alva withdrew his Army to the Town of Colonna.

The Duke of Florence had now obtained what he desired, A Peace between King
Philip and the Pope.
by gaining the State of Sienna, the Duke of Guise was gone for France, the
Pope's Forces were sufficiently baffled, and his Towns lay at the Mercy of the
Enemy, his Treasures were spent, and the Venetians had absolutely refused to
assist him; So that the Pope was now forced to come to a Treaty of Peace, in
good earnest, and it was well he had the King of Spain and the Duke de Alva to
treat with, considering in what State his Affairs were.

The Peace was however agreed at last, upon these Terms. I. That the Duke de
Alva, in the Name of his Master, should beg the Pope's Pardon, and it should be
granted. II. That the Pope should renounce the Amity with France. III. That the
King of Spain should restore to the Pope one hundred Towns and Castles he had
taken in this War, the same being dismantled first; and that they should
restore those Estates they had seized, to the proper owners. IV. That both
Parties should remit all Wrongs, Injuries and Losses Sustained during the War,
and Pardon all that had taken Arms on either Side: And that Paliano should be
put into the Hands of Bernardo Carbone, a Kinsman of the Caraffa's, to be kept
by him for both Parties, with a Garrison of eight hundred Men, till they should
otherwise dispose of it by mutual Consent. These Articles were publicly signed
at Cavii^
Cava the fourteenth of September; but there was a private Article signed the
same Day, That John Caraffa should have such a Recompense for Paliano as should
be adjudged an Equivalent by the Senate of Venice, who were the Arbitrators in
this Treaty. The Place meant was Rossano, a Populous and Rich City in the
Kingdom of Naples, which was to be granted to him by the King of Spain, with
the Title of a Principality, which he might transfer to whom he pleased, if not
an Enemy of the King of Spain's. That upon the delivery of this Grant and
Place, Paliano should be dismantled, and Caraffa should yield up all his Right
in it to the King of Spain, which he also might assign to whom he pleased, if
he were not Excommunicated, or the Pope's sworn Enemy; which was added to
exclude Mark Anthony Colonna, and was easily granted by the Duke de Alva, in
compliance with the Morose and Inexorable Humor (they are Thuanus's Words) of
the Old Gentleman, who would soon die, and then the King might dispose of
Paliano as he thought fit.

The Duke de Alva, in a short time after went to Rome, and on his Knees begged
the Pope's Pardon, with as much Humility as could have been wished: And the
Pope absolved him and his Master with as much Haughtiness as ever need to have
been used.

The great Desire I had to lay all this Italian War together, has made me omit
some things that happened in the former Year, among which one was the Death of
Francis Venero, Duke of Venice, to whom succeed Laurentius Prioli, a Learned,
Wise, Eloquent and Magnificent Gentleman; so that for many Years after his
Death, the Venetians regretted the Loss of him, and wished for such another.

In England the Persecution was so far from extirpating the Reformation, The
Affairs of England.
that it made it spread; but the Quarrels at Frankford, among our English
Exiles, about the Liturgy, had a more Pestilent Influence upon that Religion
then, and in after Times, than the former had. The Queen, in the mean time was
very busy in raising the Religious Houses, and had nothing to disgust her,
till the breaking off of the Truce between her Husband and the King of France,
which very much afflicted her every way.

The Duke of Guise shipped his Men at Civita Vechia for France, and himself
took Posthorses, and went by Land. The Cardinal of Caraffa went soon after,
the Pope's Nuntio, to King Philip, and Augustino Trivultio, to the King of
France, to procure a Peace between those two Potent Princes, who had been
engaged in this War by the Pope and his Relations.

In the Interim the Duke of Ferrara was exposed to the Resentment of King
Philip, Ferrara rescued from Ruin by the Duke of Florence.
and had certainly been ruined, if the Prudence of Cosmo Duke of Florence had
not prevented it: First, by sending slow and small Supplies against the Duke of
Ferrara, and then by maintaining and fomenting Differences between the Spanish
Commanders at last, by representing to the Duke de Alva, who visited him at
Legorn, That the King of Spain had no other way of settling his Affairs in
Italy, than by quieting those Commotions his just Resentment against the Duke
of Ferrara, had raised: That all Italy being weary of Wars, promised themselves
a Peace would follow upon the Victory of that Prince; but now, if he should go
on to make one War the cause of another, he must expect to lose their
Affections; and that mere Desparation would enforce them to take other
Measures, and seek new Allies and new Counsels. This convinced that Duke, That
it was his Master's Interest to make a Peace with Ferrara, because then there
would be neither Prince nor Commonwealth in Italy, that would have any
dependence upon France.

Our Author John Sleidan has only given us the Letter or Speech which began the
Diet at Ratisbonne, The Diet of Ratisbonne.
but dyed before he could give us any account of the Transactions there: After
they had consulted of those things which related to the State, and the Turkish
War, there arose some debate concerning the composing the Differences of
Religion. And here it was first agreed, That all that had been done in the
Treaty of Passaw, and the Diet of Ausburg, concerning the Peace of Religion,
should remain firm and immovable. But then those of the Augustane Confession,
presented to King Ferdinand, by their Deputies, a Protestation, in Writing, to
this purpose.

That King Ferdinand had performed a most useful Office, A Remonstrance of the
Protestant Princes.
for the good of Christendom, by settling a Peace, in the Matters of Religion,
between the Princes and the States of Germany: But then he had annexed a
Limitation, which was very Grievous, That no Archbishop, Bishop, Abbat, or
other Ecclesiastical Person, should receive the Augustane Confession, but that
he should resign his Office, and be deprived of the Revenues thereunto
belonging. That those of the Augustane Confession did not consent to this
Limitation, nor can they now consent to it; because this was a denying them the
Benefit of embracing the Saving and True Doctrine of the Gospel, by which not
only the Bishops but their Subjects too, were driven out of the Kingdom of God,
which was not fit to be done. Besides, it was a Reproach to their Religion, to
suffer those who should embrace the Augustane Confession, to be judged unworthy
of the Sacred Ministry: And therefore they could not approve this Restriction
in the Diet of Ausburg, without doing Injury to the Glory of God and their own
Consciences; neither can they now consent to it. That this Limitation was an
Hindrance to the so much desired Union of Religion, seeing thereby the Bishops
were deprived of the Liberty of speaking their Minds freely in Matters of
Religion, because they should thereby forfeit their Office and Revenues, if
they approved of the True Religion. That on the contrary, the Peace would be
much stronger between the Princes and States of the Empire, if Religion were
perfectly Free. That therefore the Electors, Princes and States, who had
embraced the Augustane Confession, desired now (as they had also formerly done
in the Diet of Ausburg) That this grievous Limitation and Restriction might be
abolished; and that it might be free for all Ecclesiastical Persons to embrace
the Augustane Confession, and suffer their Subjects to embrace it. That they of
the Augustane Confession did not by this, desire that the Revenues of the
Church should be dissipated, or turned to Profane Uses, or annexed to certain
Families; but they would take great Care to prevent these Inconveniences, and
do their utmost in it. And that by this means the true Intention of the
Founders should be observed, though the Profession of the True Religion should be
permitted, for it was, without doubt, their Design, to have the Pious and
Sincere Service and Worship of God Promoted and Settled, though they erred in
their Choice. That the Electors, Princes and States, aforesaid, would suffer
the Public and Civil Business of the Empire to be dispatched in this Diet at
Ratisbonne; but then they had commanded them, their Deputies, not to give any
consent to any thing, till the said Limitation were taken away: But then, if it
was once Abolished and Repealed, they were ready and willing to assist and
promote the Public Affairs in this Diet, to the utmost of their Abilities.

This Protestation or Remonstrance was very often renewed afterward in several
of their Dyets; but being always opposed by the Princes of the opposite
Religion, and by the Emperors, it could never be obtained; because they ever
thought, That the granting this Liberty, would end in the Rnine of the Roman
Catholic Religion. On the other side, those of that Religion wrote sharply
against the Peace of Religion, as it was then established by the Treaty of
Passaw, and the Diet of Ausburg, calling it a Lawless Confusion; and in
private, saying, That as it was obtained by a War, so it must by a War be
revoked.

In the Year 1556, the Thirty first of July, Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of
the Order of Jesuits, died, in the Sixty fifth year of his Age. He was born in
Spain, and at first served as a Soldier; which Employment he deserted in the
Year 1521, upon a Wound received at Pampelune. In the Year 1528 he began to
gather Companions. In the Year 1534 or 35 this Order was first framed by him;
and in the Year 1609 he was Canonized by Pope Paul IV. And (as Petavius says)
it was confirmed by Paul III, in 1540, the Twenty seventh of September. James
Lainez, a Spaniard, was this Year his Successor, and the second General of that
Order; which had then obtained One hundred Colleges in several Parts of
Christendom, as one of that Society assures us.

In the beginning of this year, Albert the Son of Casimir Marquis of
Brandenburg, having lately by the Interposition of some of the Princes obtained
leave from the Diet to return into Germany, to defend his Case; and sojourning
then with Charles Marquis of Baden, Albert Marquis of Brandenburg dies.
at Pforzheim, in Schwartzwalt, being extremely worn out with the Troubles of
his Affairs, and a Disease which sprung from the Intemperance of his former
Life, died the Eighth Day of January. This Prince was an Illustrious Example of
the Instability of Human Greatness, and of the Divine Justice: For He that was
once surrounded with so many Thousands of Fighting Men, that his Name was
terrible to all Men, and almost the whole German Empire lay exposed to his
Ravage, at last, by a change of his Fortunes, was deserted by all Men, and now
ended his Life in great Misery and Poverty; being despised by his very Enemies,
as the great Thuanus represents it.

The Eleventh of March the Diet, began at Ratisbonne the last year, was ended.
In it there was a Decree of Recess made, That a Friendly Conference should be
held the Fourteenth of August at Worms, for putting an End to the Differences
of Religion: That a double Supply of Eight Months should be granted to King
Ferdinaud, to enable him to carry on the War against the Turks: That the Peace
of Religion, and that of the State, should be preserved with great and exact
care; and for the Renewing the Imperial Chamber of Spire, which is the Supreme
Court of the Empire.

In April died John Count Palatin of Simeren, President of the said Imperial
Chamber, and the Father of Frederick, who about two years after succeeded Otho
Henry in the Palatinate of the Rhine. He was a Prince of great Learning, and
managed this Trust with the highest Commendations both for his Prudence and
Justice.

Soon after the great Controversy between the Families of Nassaw and Hesse,
The County of Catzenellobogen settled by Agreement.
which had been depending Fifty Years, and is often mentioned by Sleidan
concerning the County of Catzenellobogen was friendly ended at Frankfort upon
the Main, by the Interposition and Mediation of Otho Henry and Augustus
Electors, William Duke of Cleves, and others, who were made Judges in this
Affair for both Parties, the Landgrave of Hesse by their award retaining that
County, upon paying to William Prince of Orange 1600 Crowns, and resigning up
to him the Earldom of Diez for 1050 Crowns.

When the time of the Conference appointed by the Diet drew near, the Divines
who were of the Augustane Confession, had a Meeting at Frankford on the Main,
the First of August, to adjust their own private Differences before they entered
into a Conference with the Roman Catholics; The Conference at Worms.
so that this latter was not begun till the beginning of September. At the
opening of it, Julius Pflug, Bishop of Naumburg, who was President in this
Conference, desired those of the Augustane Confession, that they would in the
first place show openly their Disagreement with, and Detestation of the
Zuinglians, Osiandrians, Synergists, and Adiaphorists: Because the Peace of
Religion was only granted to those of the Augustane Confession by the Diet, and
this Conference was appointed with none but them, and the Emperor besides knew
that most of them had Orders to do this: That therefore some benefit at least
might result from this Conference, they would once for all, by a common
consent, condemn these Erros, and there would be much less danger and
difficulty in the rest. The younger Ministers and Deputies of Saxony easily
assented, and producing their Instructions, were very forward to separate the
Augustane Confession from these Errors. But Philip Melancthon (an old wise Man,
who saw the drift of this cunning Gamester) said the Examination and
Explication of their several Doctrins ought to go before the Determination and
Condemnation of them; and that till this was done, they ought not to be
condemned. The Roman Catholics, who were weary of the Conference, thereupon
would go no further in it, till they had given an Account of this to the
Emperor. Ferdinand commanded them to go on, and said it was enough if in the
Progress of the Conference, when they had explained the several Articles, they
did at last remark what was disallowed, by the common consent, in each of them.
But the Bishop of Naumburg refusing to go on, except he were first certain of
the Faith of those he was to dispute with, the Conference broke up without
effect, when there had only been some Papers exchanged between them concerning
the Rule of Judging Controversies and Original Sin. And all the blame was by
the Roman Catholics thrown upon the Divisions which were among them. Thus far
Thuanus.

Now the design of the Condemnation was a Division of the Protestant Interest;
that whereas they were too many for the Romau Catholics while they were
united, they might h^ave the Consent of those of the Augustane Confession to
ruin the Zuinglians, and then they should, with the less difficulty, extirpate
by the Sword the Lutherans too; and in the mean time they knew very well they
were never able to convince them by a Disputation, when it was utterly
impossible they should ever agree about the Rule that was to end these
Differences; the Roman Catholics Assigning the perpetual Consent of the
Church: And the Lutherans, the Old and New Testaments, and the Ancient Creeds;
and allowing no other Writings but as far as they agreed with these, some Ages
being purer than others. Certainly no wise Man of either Side ever did think
that any of these Conferences could put an end to these Controversies; though
they have made use of them to promote by Ends. And that Side that was
uppermost, has ever yet reaped the Advantage; and so it will be, till God
himself put an End to this Controversy.

But to return now to the War between France and Spain. The War between France
and Spain.
The Truce being broken by the Attempt upon Doway, which I have mentioned
already; the War went heavily on, because the Flower of the Nobility and Gentry
were gone with the Duke of Guise into Italy, which had much dispirited and
weakened France. And the Duke de Montmorancy, who from the beginning had a great
Aversion for this War, which he foresaw would end in the Ruin of France, was
more intent in levying Soldiers to defend the Borders of the Netherlands, than
in prosecuting the War against King Philip, and Invading his Dominions. In the
mean time, Queen Mary of England, Queen Mary joins with Spain.
being over-persuaded by King Philip her Husband, and disposed to it by the
Arts of Dr. Wotton, who was then her Ambassador in France, and by his Nephew,
who found the French were well disposed to a Rupture with England, if Calice
might be the Price of it, she I say entered into the War too, and sent an Herald
to the French Court with a Declaration to that purpose, who delivered it the
Seventh of June. The French King took no less care to raise a War between
England and Scotland, by way of Diversion, Mary the Queen of Scotland being
before this sent into France to be married to the Dauphin, his Eldest Son. So
that he thought he had now a Right to Command that Nation to espouse his
Quarrel; but the Scotch Nobility thought otherwise, and would not Engage in a
War against England, when they had no interest of their own to do it.

The Spaniards were all this while intent in providing Men and Arms, and the
Twenty fifth of July attacked the Fort of Rocroy, in the Borders of Champagne
and Hainalt, four Leagues from Maribourg to the South; but finding there a
greater Resistance than they expected, they marched away toward Picardy with
an Army of Thirty five thousand Foot, and Twelve thousand Horse. The Body of
the French Army being but Eighteen thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse, and
for the most part, both Sides Germans; so that the French thought it their
Interest to coast along by the Enemy, and defend their Borders, and cover their
Towns, which was all they could safely do in this inequality of Forces. There
was then a very small Garrison in St. Quintin, The Siege of St. Quintin.
under the Command of Charles de Teligny, Captain of the Troop of Guards
belonging to the Dauphin; but the Army coming suddenly before it, the Sieur de
Coligny the President of Picardy, put himself into the place with some few
Forces, and sent to Montmorancy to come up and succor him. This was
disapproved by those about him as Dangerous, and if things succeeded not,
Dishonorable. In the beginning of the Siege, Teligny was slain in a Sally, by
Engaging imprudently beyond his Orders, who was a Person of great Courage and
Strength, Industry and Fidelity, and an Experienced Commander. And Andelot, who
was sent by Coligny to bring Two thousand Foot into the Town, The Battle of St.
Quintin.
was, by a mistake of his Guides, misled, and falling into the Trenches of the
Besiegers, he was slain, and most of his Men cut off; and Monmorancy,
attempting to relieve the same place, was beaten also, and lost Two thousand
five hundren Men, and himself was taken Prisoner. This Battle had a fatal
effect upon France; for it made the Life of Henry II ever after Unfortunate,
and reducing France to the necessity of a dishonorable Peace, it became the
occasion of the Civil Wars which followed, to the great hazard of the Ruin of
that Potent Kingdom, and may serve as an Example to Princes, not to violate
their Faith, whoever dispense with it.

Montmorancy was from the beginning a verse to this War, Montmorancy ruined by
being taken Prisoner.
and foretold the ill Consequences of it; as he was an old, experienced, wise
Commander, and a great Lover of his Country, so till then he had lived in great
Power, and enjoyed the Favor of his Prince; but now when his good Fortune left
him, he lost the good Esteem and Regards of all Men; which from thence forward
were conferred upon the Duke of Guize, who employed them to the damage of
France, The News of this Victory filled France with Terror and Sorrow, and the
Netherlands with Joy and Courage. The Duke of Nevers, and some others of the
principal French Commanders however escaped.

If the Victorious Army had forthwith marched to Paris, they migh have taken
it; but King Philip was resolved to hazard nothing, but commanded his Army to
go on with the Siege of St. Quintin; and the King of France leaving Compeigne,
where he then was, and going to Paris, so quieted the Minds of the People by
his Presence and good Words, that things began to settle, and the fear in a
short time to abate.

Coligny kept the Townsmen of St. Quintin two days in Ignorance of this Loss,
and when they came to hear of it, though he saw the Town would at last be
taken, yet he persuaded them to hold it out to the last, that so the King might
have time to recollect his Forces, and be in a condition to oppose the
Victorious Enemy. Another of the Andelot's got into the Town, with about Five
hundred Chosen Men, and some few Volunteers of the Nobility; but when all was
done, King Philip coming in Person into the Camp, and Siege being carried on
with great diligence, the Town was taken by Storm the 27th of August, The Day
of the Battle.
and Coligny and Andelot became Prisoners too, and the latter was wounded. At
this Siege there was Eight thousand English employed, who did great Service;
but finding themselves ill used after the Town was taken, they returned to
Calis. St. Quintin taken by Storm.
There were above Four hundred French Soldiers slain in this Town, and Three
hundred taken Prisoners; and more had perished, if King Philip, who was
present, had not entered the City, and by Proclamation restrained the fury of
his own Soldiers, to whom he granted the Plunder of the Town, which was great,
and took particular care that those who had not been concerned in the danger of
the Storming the Town, might have no share in the Plunder of it.

Soon after this Victory, King Philip sent an Express to the late Emperor
Charles his Father, who was then in his private Retirement in Spain, desiring
him to send his Advice how to proceed; the wise and good Prince returned him an
Answer to this purpose, as the Great Thuanus relates it. A Letter of Charles V,
to his Son Philip.
Though this Retreat gives me the utmost security, yet I received the Account
of your Victory with a joyful and a pleased Mind; and I congratulate the happy
and fortunate Beginnings of my beloved Sons Reign; and I render to God Almighty
my humblest and devoutest Thanks and Praises, who has not suffered the Perfidy
of his Enemies to go long unpunished, but has thus suddenly chastised the
Truce Breakers both in Italy, and on the Borders of the Netherlands. For though
my mind foretold me it would come so to pass, and I comforted my self with that
hope, yet I was vexed that just at that time, when I had restored Christendom
to her Peace, and was going to compose my Soul in Peace, all things should of a
sudden be filled with an unexpected War and Tumult. But then as to the Advice
my Son desires from me, he is not to expect it either now or hereafter. He has
with him many grave and wise Men of an approved Fidelity, and bred up to
Business during my Reign, whose Counsel I would take if I were now at the Helm.
Let him consult with these Men, and well considering the weight of their
Reasons, after he has first implored the Divine Assistance and Grace, let him
determine what is best to be done. This Wise Prince would neither put himself
to the Trouble of considering what was best to be done, nor his Son to that of
approving what perhaps he would not have liked, or of rejecting the Counsels of
a Father, which would have been dishonorable to both. He had been so long a
Sovereign, that he knew the Thoughts and Tenderness of a Princes Heart, and
could distinguish between Civility nnd reality. And which was most of all, he
was really, and not pretendedly Dead to the World.

The Germans tumultuously demanded their Pay, after the Victory; the English
also desired leave to return, pretending they had been ill used, and the King
was forced to grant their Request, to prevent worse Consequences; So that in a
short time this victorious Army moulder'd to nothing, though his Captains did
what they could to persuade him to keep his Army up. And, which was yet worse,
many of the Germans passed over to the French, and helped to fill up their
Numbers; so that King Philip took only Castelet, Han, Chaulnes and Noyon, all
small Places, and this last by Surprise too. And then, in the latter end of
October, was forced to withdraw his Army into the Low Countries, having in the
mean time fortified S. Quintin, Han and Chaulnes to preserve them.

Whilst the Spanish Army was thus mouldering away and dispersing, the French
King was every Day increasing his. The French Army grows great.
He had sent for six thousand Switz, which were coming out of Piedmont, his
German Supplies were come, as far as Is Sur Tille, near Dijon; And the Duke of
Guise was every Day expected out of Italy, with the Forces under his Command,
who was sent for, presently after the Defeat of S. Quintin, and was now on the
Road with the Duke de Aumale his Brother. And the Duke of Nevers was
strengthening Compeigne with a Royal Fort, by the King's Order.

The Duke of Guise, upon his arrival at S. Germain, was honorably received,
and declared General of the Landforces, which had till then, from the taking
of Montmorencey been in the Hands of the Duke of Nevers. A Persecution in
France.


The Disorder of the War diverted Men from the Thoughts of Persecuting the
Protestants in France, so that now they grew and multiplied very much, even in
Paris. The fifth of November, in the Evening, there was a great number of these
met in a Place called Bertomier, in S. James-street, to perform the Offices of
Religion, and to receive the Lord's Supper after their way. This being
discovered by some, that lived near that place, they provided good quantities
of Stones, in the neighboring Houses, and their Arms ready in the Street; and
when in the dead of the Night the Meeting broke up, they that first went out
had Stones thrown at them; and a Tumult thereupon arising, a vast number of the
Rabble at that Signal, came running together, and attempted to break into the
House; they that were yet in the House, advised by their Danger, drew their
Swords, and issued out, and all of them, except one (who was slain in the
Crowd) made their escape though some were wounded. The Women, and others, who
were less able to shift, to the number of one hundred and twenty, rendered
themselves to Jean Martignon, the then Sheriff, who, when it was now Day,
carried them to Prison, the People being hardly kept from pulling them in
Pieces, by the Constables and their Guards. Thereupon there were diverse Rumors
spread abroad concerning this Meeting, as is usual in New and Odious
Occurrences: The misrepresentations of the Roman Catholics against the
Protestants.
That this Rabble met in a Chamber in the Night, to Eat and play the Whore, and
that after the Supper was over, they committed promiscuous Villainies, the
Mother lying with the Son, the Father with his Daughter, and the Sister with
her Brother; That the Tables and Provisions were found, and that the Carpets
and Tapesteries had still upon them the Marks of these Villainies: And because
this was not enough, they added, to enrage the Multitude yet more against them;
that they had Communicated in the Blood of a Child. This Account was given to
the King, but without any Author to justify it; but then no Man daring neither
to contradict it, for fear of being taken for an Heretic; those that were of
the Religion, wrote a small Piece, which they called an Apology, in which they
show, That the Crimes thus laid to their Charge were mere Slanders, and they
cited Passages out of the Fathers of the Church, to show that the same
Forgeries had been made use of by the Pagans against the Primitive Christians;
and that they might be sure it might come to the King's Hands, they got it
conveyed into his Bedchamber; which Book was afterward answered by Anthony de
Mouchy, a Divine, and the chief of the Inquisitors, and by Robert Cenali,
Bishop of Auranches.

Jean Munier, Recorder of Paris, was appointed to examine the Prisoners, who
reporting their Answers to the Parliament, Nich. Client, a Saintonian, who had
been a Schoolmaster many Years in Paris, and was now in the sixtieth Year of
his Age, Taurin Gravelle, an Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, and
Phillippina Lunia of rigort, the Relict of the Graveron, a Gentleman, who was
dead, were all condemned the fourteenth of September, and the two first were
burnt alive, but the latter was first strangled. And four Days after Nich. Le
Cene, a Physician of Normandy, and Peter Gambara of Poictou were burnt. Francis
Rebeziers, born at Stafort in Condomois, and Frederick Danville of Olerone in
Bearne, were led with an Iron Ball in their Mouths to the Place of Execution,
where they were hanged, and their Bodies burned to Ashes. When they were now
going to proceed against the rest, a Noble Matron, which was among the
Prisoners, offered a Petition to the Parliament, excepting therein against
several of the Judges, and offering many Reasons in her Petition, which ought
not to be neglected, to have them set by, and some others to be appointed in
their stead at the Trial: Whil the Parliament were considering what they ought
to do as to this Petition, there came Envoys from the Switz and Protestant
Princes in Germany, to desire the King not to proceed against a Company of
miserable People, who were of the same Religion with themselves. And thereupon
the Affairs of Philip being then in great Prosperity, and those of France in a
declining Condition; and the King needing the Assistance of the Switz and
Protestant Princes of Germany, for the Recovery of his Country, he suffered the
Parliament to act more mildly with them: So some of them were dismissed, others
turned over to the Ecclesiastical Courts, where by the Revocation of the
Sentence, they escaped Death. Rantigny and Champagne, two married Ladies, were
given to their Husbands, who were very averse to that Religion, and Ovarty,
another Lady, was given into the Hands of Queen Catherine.

The King of France published an-Edict the seventeenth of May, commanding all
Bishops and their Curates to reside upon their Benefices, and to preach to the
People, or to appoint others in their stead, who should do so, upon pain of
being deprived of the Profits of their Cures. There had been a Law published to
the same purpose by Lewis XI, the thirteenth of January 1476, which was now
revived, Men judging that Preaching was a likelier way to fix Men in their
Religion than Fire and Faggot. But, however, this Edict was not much regarded
by the Clergy of France, who were then as Unlearned and Ignorant, as they were
Cruel and Bloody.

The Army belonging to King Philip, The Siege of Calais.
being, as I have said, dissipated, or put into Winter Quarters, and that of
France growing daily greater, it was taken into Consideration, How they should
employ that chargable Body of Men, though the Winter was then in its greatest
Rigor. The first Debate was, Whether they should attempt the Recovery of S.
Quintin, and the other Places that were lost, or enter upon some new
Enterprise; and here they resolved upon the latter, and the Reduction of Calais
having been proposed by Senarpont, Governor of Boulogne, in the latter End of
the Summer, if the Misfortune of S. Quintin had not broke their Measures, they
presently resolved to reassume that interrupted Design. A part of their Forces
marched under the Duke of Nevers, pretending they intended to attack Luxemburg
and Arlon. Another Part under the Duke of Guise, (who was now General of all
the French Forces) pretended to block up S. Quintin, and the other Places that
were lost. Nevers having-passed through the Territory of Argone, came to
Stenay, a Town in the Dukedom of Lorain, and having staid there a short time,
suddenly sends his part of the Army to join the Duke of Guise, who lay then at
Amiens, who presently marched away for Boulogne, as if he had been solicitous
for the Preservation of it, 1558.
but suddenly wheeling about, the first of January, he came to Newnham-bridge,
a Fort seated a mile from the Town of Calais, which commanded the Avenues to
the Land-ward: There was another called Risbank, which lay near to the Town,
and commanded the Harbor on the North of the Town, and upon these two Forts
the greatest part of the Security of Calais depended.

The Lord Wentworth was then Governor of the Town, but the Garrison was not
above five hundred Men, and there were not above two hundred Townsmen, able to
bear Arms; so that the Duke of Guise sending three thousand Musketeers, and
the Soldiers of Newnham-fort, having made one improsperous Sally against them,
and not being relieved by the Governor, the Cannon was brought up against it,
which began to batter it the next Morning. The Duke of Guise knew very well the
whole stress of the Success lay in the celerity of his Actions, and
accordingly, the next Day, attacked the Fort of Risbank too, which were both
yielded the same Day, by the order of the Governor.

The Town of Calais is seated in a Plain, The Site of Calais.
and on three Sides of it is almost inaccessible, by reason of the River Hames,
part of which fills its Dikes, which are Great and Deep, and the rest falls,
with several other small Rivers into the Haven, on the west Side of the Town.
Its Form is Square, and at three of its Corners, it has Royal Bastions, and the
fourth, which is toward the South, has an Ancient but strong Castle for its
Defense; besides, it has a strong Bulwork of Earth, which is very high and
thick, but is of so sandy a nature (as the French found after this, to their
Damage) that the force of a Cannon scattered it like dust. The Rivers and
Marshes encompassing the Town on all Sides, there was no Passage to it but by a
Causey from the Fort of Newnham, nor was it possible for any Ship to enter the
Town, but what passed under the Fort of Risbank, so that these two Forts were
the great Securities of the Town, which were both now in the Hands of the
French; after which they lodged on the Causey and Banks twenty Foot Companies,
and one German Regiment, and one thousand one hundred Horse: The Marshal de
Terms secured the Way leading to Guines, with the rest of the Horse and the
Switz. The fifth of January they began to batter the River-gate with four whole
Cannon; and three hundred Culverins were employed against the other parts of
the Walls and Bulworks, but their main Battery was against the River-gate,
whilst the English drew almost all their Forces on this Side; the Gate and some
of the next Towers being much battered, the Duke of Guise ordered fifteen
Cannon suddenly to be planted against the Castle, the Walls of which were not
faced with Earth within; this Battery was played with that Fury, that the Noise
of the Cannon was heard as far as Antwerp, which is thirty three German Miles
to the North: A great Breach being made there, Andelot was commanded to pass
the River, and lodge himself upon the other Side with one thousand two hundred
Musketeers; after this they drew the Water out of the Town-Dike, which was
thought by the English the greatest defense they had, and by pitched Hurdles
they laid a Passage over the muddy Dikes and marshy Grounds for the Soldiers,
and secured the Foot from the Annoyance of the Small-shot by other Hurdles
about half a foot thick, which had Stakes fenced with Iron to strike into the
Ground, and Loop-holes to shoot through. The Night after (the Walls being now
battered down) the Duke of Guise ordered Grammont, with three hundred
Small-shot, to play all Night into the Breach, to hinder the English from
making any Works within the Castle, for their Defense. Strozzi was ordered at
the same time to lodge himself with the same number of Foot and one hundred
Pioneers, on the other Side, near the Gate, but was beaten off by the English
Small-shot, and forced to return to the Duke of Guise. The next Morning, the
Duke of Guise having ordered the Breach at the Castle to be carefully viewed,
Grammont was ordered with three hundred Muskets, to enter the place, who was to
be seconded by Strozzi, with the same number; these passed the Dike in Water up
to the Navel, and notwithstanding any resistance the English could make, lodged
themselves in the Castle, driving those of the English, that had not been
slain, into the Town. The Castle being thus gained, the Duke of Guise put a
strong Garrison into it. The English, so soon as the Tide returned again (which
filled the Dikes) stormed the Castle, in hopes to regain that important Post,
and being beaten off, they planted four Cannon against the Bridge, and forced
open the Castle-gate, and then stormed it the second time, but having lost two
hundred of their best Men to no good purpose, they then began to treat of a
Surrender; which at last was agreed; The Governor and fifty others being to
become Prisoners of War; The Soldiery and Townsmen to be at liberty, to pass
into England or Flanders, without any Injury, as to their Lives or Liberties:
And all the Ammunition, Cannon, Housholdstuff, Gold, Silver, Merchandise and
Horse, was to be left to the disposal of the Duke of Guise. On these Conditions
was Calais delivered up to the French, the fourteenth of January 1557, 58, when
it had been two hundred and ten Years in the hands of the English. The Place
was no sooner yielded up but great numbers of Ships came over, who
understanding what had passed, returned back. King Philip had smelt the Design
of the French upon this Place, and had wrote to Queen Mary, that he would put
Succors into the Town; but this was suspected, by the English, as a Design to
get Calais into his own Hands, and so his Prediction came to pass.

After Calais was taken they fell to consider, Guines taken.
Whether they should attack Guines, which was in the Hands of the English, and
lay two French Leagues from Calais, to the South, or Graveling, a Town of
Flanders three Leagues to the N. E. But they resolved to attempt Guines, which
was nearer, and more necessary for the securing the Possession of Calais, the
Lord Gray was Governor of it, who had a good Garrison, and had received some
Succors from King Philip; yet at the first Attack he left the Town, and fled
into the Castle; but whilst the French were plundering the Town, returned
again, and drove them out, and firing the Town returned into the Castle again,
which in a short time after he surrendered, when he had eight hundred English,
Spanish and Flemmings to have continued the Defense of it; but the Hearts of
the English were down, for Gray was reputed a good Soldier.

There was now nothing left to the English but a small Place called the Comte
de Oye, which had a Castle not strong, but almost unaccessible, as being
surrounded with unpassable Marshes, and which had no Passage but over a
Timber-Bridge: This Place lies almost two Leagues from Calais toward
Graveling, the Garrison of which never staid for a Summons, but hearing of the
loss of Guines fled, and left the Place open and unguarded, and Sipetra took
possession of it, without any further trouble, for the French. Burnet calls
this Castle Hammes, and Thuanus Oye; but the Castles of Hammes lay directly
between Guines and Calais. One Sir Edward Grimstone was then Comptroler of
Calais and a Privy Counselor, and he had often given Advertisement of the ill
condition of the Garrison; but the Treasury was low, the People discontented,
and the Thoughts of the Queen and her Council more set upon extirpating Heresy
(as they called it) than upon preserving this important Post, so it was lost,
and the Grief and Dishonor of this Misfortune sat so heavy upon the Spirits of
the Queen, that she never joyed after.

The next thing the French undertook was the taking of the Castle of Herbemont,
in the Forest of Ardenne, belonging to the Count of Beilisteine, which was very
troublesome to the Inhabitants of Ivoy; this enterprise succeeded well too, and
they took the Castle the sixteenth of February, and after it several other
small Places on the Frontiers, were deserted by their Garrisions.

This Year a Fleet of one hundred and twenty Turkish Galleys loosed from
Prevesa a Port of Epirus, A Turkish Fleet land in several Places of Italy, and
carry many into Slavery.
and passing by Brindisi, took and plundered Reggio, a City in the South of
Italy, after which, landing in the Bay di Surrento, they carried four thousand
persons into Slavery, among which was a great many Monks and Nuns. The Grief
and Shame of this was the greater, because it was done in sight of Naples. From
thence it sailed to the Coast of Provence, and having refreshed the Sailors, it
returned to Minorca, and took the Town of Citadella, with great difficulty, and
the loss of four hundred Men, after which it returned in August into Turkey.
The French Fleet, in the Mediterranean was able to do nothing for want of
Money, so the Fear was much greater than the Hurt.

The twenty fifth of May the Dauphine was married to Mary Queen of the Scots,
The Dauphine married to Mary Queen of Scotland.
yet the Scotch Ambassadors refused to promise under their Hands and Seals to
procure the Dauphine, in the next Convention of their States to be received and
owned as King of Scotland; and thereupon four of them dying soon after, it was
suspected that they had been poisoned: Yet in the next Convention the thing was
granted, and the Earl of Argile was appointed to bring the Marital Crown into
France: But in the mean time Mary Queen of England dyed, which occasioned a
great Change in England, France and Scotland. The greatest part of the Scots
were not pleased with this Marriage; and the French too, underhand, disliked
it, as tending to the exalting the House of Guise, and the depressing that of
Montmorency, and Gasper de Coligny Admiral of France, who were both at this
time Prisoners to King Philip.

A meeting in the mean time being appointed at Perone between Christierna the
Mother of the Cardinal of Lorraine and Perrenot Bishop of Arras for King
Philip, The first Proposals of a Peace between France and King Philip.
and the Duke and Cardinal of Loraine for the French: Perrenot deploring the
progress of the Turkish Arms during this unfortunate War, and above all things
the increase of Heresy in France and the Netherlands, cunningly offered the
House of Guise their Assistance for the ruining Montmorency, Coligny and
Andelot, as favourors of the Reformation, when a Peace were once settled between
these two Crowns: The House of Guise hereby only seeking to aggrandize it self
upon the Ruin of these three great Men, and the Spaniards to imbroil and
weaken France. The Cardinal, at his return, acquaints the King with what
concerned Andelot, intermixing a mention of a Peace with it. Henry II, was a
mild and most merciful Prince, but had an implacable aversion for the
Reformation, which had been instilled into him in his Infancy, by those who had
the Care of him; and he had before this heard something of And^lot's
Inclinations to favor that Party, and thereupon sent for him, who waited upon
the King at Monceaux, Andelot Marshal of France ruined by the Arts of the
Guises.
a Castle near Meaux. The King gave him great assurance of his kindness to him,
and of his Sense of his Merits and Services, and then told him, He was much
concerned to hear, from all Places, That he was not sound in the business of
Religion; and thereupon asked him what his Belief of the Sacrifice of the Mass
was. Aidelot, who was a Man of Spirit, answered otherwise than the King
desired, and according to Calvin's Doctrine: The King admonished him, That he
should consider himself, and not run into Mischief: He replied with more
confidence than he had shown before, That it was a great Satisfaction to him,
that the King, whom he and his Family had found a Bountiful Master, and to whom
he had in all things hitherto shown himself a most Loyal, Faithful and
Industrious Subject, had so far approved of him: But then he was not to play
the Hypocrite with God in the business of Religion; his Body, his Estate, and
his Honor were in the Hands of the King, and he might dispose of them as he
thought fit, but his Soul was subject to none but God, who gave it, and
therefore in this matter he must obey God only as his greatest Master. This
Answer so enraged the King, that taking his Lance in his hand, and intending
only to throw it on the ground, he wounded the Dauphin with it, who sat
beneath him; and the Tables being taken away, he ordered Andelot to be taken
into Custody, who was for some time detained in the House of the Bishop of
Meaux, and from thence he was sent to the Castle of Melun.

Andelot being thus laid aside, the Baron de Monluc, a Person of good Merit,
was made General of the French Foot in his stead, which was a Place of great
consideration in the Army. This Lord had been educated in the Court of the Duke
of Lorain, and was much addicted to the Interest of that Family: Yet, as he
says in his Memoirs, he refused this Employment at first, because he foresaw
it would expose him to a flagrant Envy, and the Resentments of the Family of
Montmorancy.

In the beginning of May, Thionville besieged and taken.
the French sat down before Thionville, with about Five thousand Horse, and
Fourteen thousand Foot. This Town is seated in the Dukedom of Luxemburg, in a
Plain Country, but Low and Marshy, and having the Moselle on the N. W. which
fills its deep Ditches, on which sides it has only two Bastions, which are
short, so that they cannot clear their Dikes, and at a great distance from each
other. The rest of the City is secured by great Towers, which extend themselves
beyond the Walls, and they again are within well filled with Earth. Quaderebbe,
a Brabentiner, was Governor of this Place, who had a Garrison under him of One
thousand nine hundred Foot, and Two hundred Horse. The chief Battery lay on
that side which is covered by the Moselle. This place, after a sharp defense,
was taken, upon good Articles the Twenty third of July: But then Strozzi, an
excellent Commander, and a Man of great Courage and Prudence, was lost before
it, who was accounted one of the best Captains of that Age. Four thousand
Townsmen, and Fifteen hundred Soldiers marched out of this place when it was
yielded up, most of the latter being wounded on the Head. The French lost Four
hundred, and had more wounded in this Siege. After this, they took Arlone,
another Town in the same Dukedom, three German Miles from Luxemburg to the
West, by Surprise, which being burnt by an unexpected Accident, was dismantled
and deserted. Their next Design was against Luxemburg, but here they spent
seventeen days to no purpose.

It had been ordered by the Council, The Defeat of Thermes, near Graveling.
That at the same time the Duke of Guise invaded the Dukedom of Luxemburg,
Thermes, who was Governor of Calais, should enter Flanders, and that the Duke
of Guise should second him with some German Forces, and that his Brother the
Duke of Aumale should join also with him at Fair en Vermandois: If their
Orders had been as well pursued, as they weye prudently contrived, the Affairs
of King Philip had been brought into great distress. Thermes went from Calais,
in the beginning of July, with Five thousand Gasconers and Germans, and Fifteen
hundred Horse, passing by Graveling, and coming suddenly before Dunkirk;
Dunkirk surprised,
and while he was treating with the Inhabitants, taking advantage of their
Negligence, he Surprised the place, and having Plundered the Town, he put a
Garrison into it; And Vinoxberg.
after which he took Vinoxberg, without resistance, though it was a Rich and a
Populous Town, which he treated in the same manner; but then being seized by
the Gout, his usual Disease, he committed his Forces to the Sieur Villebonne, a
Man too much addicted to Spoil and Rapine, who wasted all the Country with Fire
and Sword as far as Newport. King Philip in the Interim had sent the Duke of
Savoy to Liege, with Orders to assemble Forces near Maleburg, to oppose the
Duke of Guise; but when he saw Thionville and Arlonne lost, and the Duke of
Guise lie still, he took the opportunity to Surprise these Frenchmen before any
Succors were come up to them; to which end he sent Count Egmont, an Industrious
Captain, to whose diligence the Victory of St. Quintin was very much owing; he
coming to Graveling, which lies between Dunkirk and Calais, and from the
several Spanish Garrisons, got together Twelve thousand Foot, and Three
thousand Horse, and a great number of Peasants, who being enraged at the Spoil
of their Country, were desirous of an opportunity to Revenge their Losses. This
being known to Thermes, who expected the Duke of Guise every day according to
his order, he recollected his scattered Forces; and although he was not well,
took Horse, and posted to his Camp near Graveling, being very solicitous,
though too late, to secure his Retreat to Calais, Count Egmont being now at his
heels with his Forces: A Council of War was thereupon held in the Night, and it
was resolved that the French should take the advantage of the Ebb the next Day,
and march by the Seashore toward Calais. They passed the River Aa that
Morning, without any difficulty at the Low Water; which Egmont observing, he
passed it too, and met the French. Thermes, who saw now there was no security
but in their Valor, having the Sea to the North, the Dike of Boulaie on his
Back, and the Enemy on his Front and Side, thereupon drew up his Men in the
order of Battle; being secure on two Sides, to the South, which was his
left hand, he placed his Wagons, and planted his Fieldpieces in the Front,
which consisted in six Culverins and three Faulcons, and on his Wings he placed
his Horse, that they might cover the Gasconers who were in the Front, the other
French were in the Middle, and the Germans in the Rear. Count Egmont had for
haste left all his Cannon on the other side of the River, and would not stay
for it, fearing the French might in the mean time escape him; dividing his
Horse into five Parts, he commanded the Light Horse to begin the Fight; his
Foot were divided into three Parts, according to their Nations, Flemings,
Germans and Spaniards. He himself was one of the first that charged the
Gasconers, who at first stood their ground stoutly, and Count Egmont's Horse
was slain under him; but his Army being most in number, when they came to close
Fight, Horse to Horse, and Foot to Foot, the Flemings being much encouraged by
the hopes of Victory, and the French despairing of any other Escape, the Fight
was a long time doubtful; the Gasconers fought manfully, the Germans were only
Spectators, and the French Horse could do little for want of Ground; in the
very heat of the Battle, twelve English Ships coming up, put an end to the
Fight, by gauling the French on the Right Wing with their Canon on that side
they thought themselves most secure: Fifteen hundred were killed in the Fight,
and many more perished in the Flight, being knocked on the head by the
Peasants, who were enraged by their Rapins; others were drowned, and Thermes,
Villebone, Senarpont, the Count of Chaulness and Merviliers were taken
Prisoners; and the English Fleet took up Two hundred in the Sea, and carried
them into England to the Queen. This Victory cost the Flemings Five hundred
Men, and was gained the Thirteenth of July.

The Duke of Guise hearing of this Defeat, returned to Pierre-pont, in the
Borders of Picardy and Champagne, the Twenty eighth of July, that he might be
ready at hand to prevent any Attempt might be made on France. The Townsmen
meeting, as the Custom is, in a place called the Scholars Field, without the
Suburbs of St. German, near Paris, a few of them, who were addicted to the
Protestant Religion, began to sing David's Psalms in French Meter; thereupon
the People began, to leave their Sports, and joining with them, sung the same
Psalms: After this, a greater number, and among them Anthony King of Navarr,
and Jonae his Lady, who was already suspected to favor that Religion, fell
into the same Practice. The Clergy were much alarmed at this, affirming that
this new Invention was designed to bring the ancient Custom which they had
received from the Church of Rome their Mother, of singing the Public Service
in the Latin Tongue, into contempt, by introducing the use of one understood by
the meanest of the People. Whereupon they represented this as very Seditious to
the King, who ordered an Enquiry after the Authors of it to be made, and forbad
the Use of this Custom for the future, on pain of Death.

About the same time, The English Fleet unsuccessful.
News was brought of the arrival of an English Fleet of an Hundred and twenty
Ships upon the Coast of Normandy, under the Lord Clinton. Haure de Grace and
Diepe being feared, they sent the President of Boulogn to take care of those
Places; but the Fleet went on, and at Conquet, a Port of Britain, the Thirty
first of July, they landed, an Hundred and fifty Pesants at first opposing
them; but Seven thousand Men being landed, and the Ships with their Cannon
playing upon them, the Inhabitants left the place and fled. The English entered
the Town, and plundered it; but Kersimont the Governor of that Province, coming
up with Six thousand which he had hastily raised, he forced the English, with
the loss of Six hundred of their Men, to return on board their Ships; about an
Hundrd of them fell into the hands of the French, and among them one Hollander,
who told the Fnench that thirty Dutch Ships, under the Command of one
Wakenheim, had joined this Fleet at the Isle of Wight by the order of King
Philip; and that they were ordered to take Breast, which the French thereupon
fortified, and took great care of. Whereupon the Lord Clinton finding no Good
was to be done, returned, having made a very expensive and unprosperous Voyage.

The French by this time had got together a very great Army, which the King saw
drawn up near Pierre-pont; and King Philip's was not less, but then neither of
these Princes were disposed to try the Hazards of the War any further; and
Montmorency having agreed for his Ransom, at the rate of one hundred and sixty
five thousand Crowns, and being now grown old, and averse from the Thoughts of
War, he and Christierna, the Mother of the Duke of Loraine, went to and fro
between the two Princes, to promote a Treaty of Peace.

Vendosme Vidame of Chartres, who was made Governor of Calais, after Thermes
was taken Prisoner, had a Design upon S. Omers, but it was discovered and
prevented. In the middle of September, The Treaty of Cambray began.
Ambassadors from England, France and Spain met at Cambray, to treat of a
Peace in good earnest, and the first thing they agreeed upon, was the
withdrawing of the two Armies, because they seemed very dissonant from the End
of that Meeting. The greatest Difficulty they met with was about Calais, which
the French were resolved to keep, pretending it was an ancient Piece of their
Dominions, though lately recovered: And the English, on the other side, would
never consent to the Treaty, if it were not restored: But before this Contest
could be brought to a conclusion, Mary Queen of England dyed, which ended the
Controversy for the present, and thereupon this Congress was dissolved, and
another Meeting appointed in the same Place in January following.

The fifth of November the English Parliament met, The Parliament of England
meet, and Queen Mary dies.
but in a very ill Temper. On the seventeenth day of that Month, the Queen
dyed, in the forty third Year of her Age, when she had reigned five Years four
Months and eleven Days. Her Death was for some Hours concealed, and then it was
communicated to the House of Lords by the Lord Chancellor, who sent for the
House of Commons, and the Lord Chancellor signified to them also the Queen's
Death; and both Houses presently agreed to proclaim Elizabeth her Sister Queen,
wishing her a long and a happy reign.

The great Thuanus, contrary to his Custom, passes over Queen Mary without any
Character; he could say little that was good of he^, and would say nothing that
was ill. Those of her own Religion are now so sensible of the Errors of her
Government, that they are more put to it for Apologies than Panigyricks on her
Memory.

In Germany a Diet was appointed to meet at Frankford the twenty fourth of
February, The German Affairs.
to which the Ambassadors named by Charles V, before his Voyage into Spain,
came and delivered his Resignation of the Empire, by which he had transferred
his Authority to Ferdinand his Brother, then King of the Romans, to the
Electors, who after a short deliberation accepted the same, and in a solemn
manner elected and admitted Ferdinand to the Empire, and afterward crowned
him. After his return to Vienna, he sent Martin Gusman, his Lord High
Chamberlain, to Rome to acquaint the Pope with the Resignation of Charles V,
and his Advancement to the Empire, and to assure his Holiness of his good
Affections to that See. The morose Old Gentleman would not admit the
Ambassador, but left the business to be discussed by the Cardinals, who were
appointed for that purpose; who must needs make a great business of it, and
resolved, That what had been done at Frankford was of no Validity, because the
Holy See had not consented to it, and Christ's Vicar, who was entrusted with
the Keys of the That is the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government.
Celestial and Terrestial Government, without whose Consent, neither Charles
could be discharged from the Empire, nor Ferdinand be admitted. That no
Resignation or Deprivation could be made to or by any other than the Pope.
Besides what was done at Frankford, had been transacted by Men infected with
Heresy, who had lost all that Grace and Power, which belonged to them, whilst
they were Members of the Church of Rome: That therefore Ferdinand was to appear
within three Months before the Pope's Tribunal, to answer for his
Misdemeanors, and to show his Repentance; and then without doubt he would
obtain Pardon from this meek Father: With much more to the same purpose.

Ferdinand was of another Temper, and ordered his Ambassador to return, if he
were not admitted within three Days, leaving a Protestation behind him. This a
little quelled the Pope, who admitted him to a Private Audience the thirteenth
of July, when the Pope excused himself for not having granted his Request
sooner, for want of Leisure and Time to examine all the Difficulties which were
proposed in this Affair by the Cardinals; and seeing his Lordship could stay no
longer at Rome, he might return when he pleased, and he would send an
Ambassador to the Emperor (so he called Charles V, notwithstanding his
Resignation) as soon as was possible. And thus this thing stood till the Death
of Pope Paul III.

Charles V, The Death and Character of Charles the Fifth;
late Emperor of Germany, being at last overpowered by the many Diseases which
oppressed him, died the twenty first of September. In this Prince ( says
Thuanus) Fortune and Virtue strove to Crown his Deserts with the utmost degree
of Temporal Felicity. And for my part, I take him for the best Pattern which
can possibly be given of a virtuous Prince, in this or any former Age. His last
Words were these, Continue in me my dear Savior, that I may continue in thee.
He lived fifty eight Years, six Months and twenty five Days, and was Emperor
of Germany thirty six Years.

Thuanus says of him, That no part of his Life was destitute of some
commendable Action, yet he showed the greatness of his Soul most visibly in the
close of it: Before he was wont to conquer others, in this he overcame himself,
and reflecting on a better Life, renounced this present, which was liable to so
many Chances, before he dyed; and having so many Years lived to the good of
others, began now to live only to God and himself. In all that two Years which
went next before his Dissolution, he lived in the Society of some Monks of the
Order of S. Jerome; and by the Advice of one Constantin, his Confessor, applied
himself chiefly to the reading of S. Bernard, His Opinion concerning
Justification.
and fixing his Soul only on God, thus he argued: That he was unworthy, by his
own Merits, to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven; but his Lord God, who had a double
Right to it, that of Inheritance from his Father, and that of the Merits of his
Passion, was content with the first as to himself, and has left the second to
me, by whose Gift I may justly claim it, and trusting to this Faith, I shall
not be ashamed: For neither can the Oil of Mercy be put in any other Vessel
than that of Faith: That this is the only Confidence of that Man who forsakes
himself and relies upon his Lord: That to trust any otherwise to ones own
Merits was not of Faith but Perfidy: That Sins were forgiven by the Mercy of
God, and therefore we ought to believe that none but God can blot them out,
against whom only we have sinned, in whom is no sin, and by whom alone our sins
are forgiven, us. These Doctrins were afterward thought in Spain to approach
so near those of the Lutherans, that his Confessor was burnt for an Heretic
after he was dead; and some others that were about him had hard measure, after
his Death, on that account, and Lucas Osiander affirms, in express Terms, That
Charles V, dyed a Lutheran in the Point of Justification.

Queen Elizabeth, Queen Elizabeth succeeds.
presently after her settlement, dispatched Messengers to all the Princes of
Christendom, giving notice of her Sister's Death, and her Succession, and among
them, to the Pope also, by Sir Edward Karn, then Resident at Rome. His
Holiness, in his usual Style replied; That England was held in Fee of the
Apostolic See, That she could not succeed, being illegitimate, nor could he
contradict the Declarations made in that matter by his Predecessors Clement
VII, and Paul III: He said it was a great boldness in her to assume the Crown
without his Consent; for which, in Reason, she deserved no Favor at his Hands:
Yet if she would renounce her Pretentions, and refer herself wholly to him, he
would show a Fatherly Affection to her, and do every thing for her that could
consist with the Dignity of the Apostolic See. It was great pity this generous
Pope should fall into such Heretical Times; his great Soul would certainly have
wrought Wonders before the Days of Luther; but now alas! all this Papal
Meekness served only to render that sinking Ship more despicable and hated; for
Queen Elizabeth, when she heard of it, was nothing concerned at it, but
immediately she recalled Karn's Powers, and commanded him to come home: And
Popery from hence forward fared very ill in England; but then our Affairs have
been so exactly described by others, and are so well known to English Men, That
I shall here dismiss them, and apply my self wholly to the Foreign Affairs.

Thuanus observes, The Scotch Affairs.
That this Year there was rather no War than a Peace in Scotland, for that the
whole Kingdom was imbroiled with Rapines and the burning of Towns, two of the
principal Nobility of Scotland being carried away captive by the English,
William Keth Son of the Earl Marshal, and Patrick Gray: An English Fleet also,
under the Command of Sir John Clare, infested the Scotch Shoars, and burnt a
Place, by my Author called Cracoviaca, Kirk-wall, Main-Land, the principal of
the Isles of Orkney, which he says was the Seat of the Bishop, and the
principal, or rather only Town in those Islands, which he supposes was
severely chastized by Heaven, by a Tempest, which soon after dispersed the
Fleet, leaving a part of the English on the Island, who were all slain by the
Islanders and Natives.

This Year also the Reformation of Religion was much agitated, tho not effected
in Scotland; Scotland begins to entertain the Reformation.
Alexander Somervill Archbishop of S. Andrews, with the assistance of the rest
of the Churchmen, condemned one Walter Mills, an old Priest, to be burnt for
Heresy, and banished one Paul Mefan, hoping thereby to restore their lost
Authority, and curb the People; but it had a quite contrary effect, the patient
and cheerful Martyrdom of Mills incensing the People to that height, that they
spoke very freely, or as my Author has it, Licentiously and Seditiously of the
Churchmen, and a Solemn Procession being made on the first day of September,
in memory of S. Eugenius, or S. Gile's at Edinburgh, of which he was Patron,
whose Image was then carried about with great Pomp, the People tore it out of
the Hands of those that bore it, and threw it into the common Drought, having
first broke off the Head, Hands and Feet of this Wooden Saint, the Monks and
the rest of his Friends fleeing, and leaving him to shift for himself. The
Clergy seeing their Authority thus sinking, assembled in a Synod, the ninth of
November, to try if the seting a good Face, and pretending great Confidence
would retrieve their sinking Cause: But they of the Reformed Party, on the
contrary, of all Degrees exhorted one another to persevere in the Truth, and
not to suffer themselves to be oppressed by a small and weak number of Men: For
if (say they) these Men proceed by Legal Courses, we shall be too hard for
them, if they make use of Force, we are a Match for them. They drew up an
Address also to the Queen Regent, which they sent unto her by one James
Sandelands, an Honorable Baron, and of great account, in it desiring, That the
Public Prayers and Administration of the Sacraments might be in the Vulgar
Tongue, and that the Ministers might be elected by the People. The Regent, though
a zealous Catholic, yet fearing a Tumult, commanded the Priests to say the
Prayers in the Scotch Language. The same Demands were made by the Nobility of
the Synod, then assembled at Edinburgh: Who replied, That they must abide by
the Orders of the Canon Law, and the Decrees of the Council of Trent. The
Nobility perceiving them thus averse to a Reformation, sent one John Aresken of
Dundee a learned Man to appease them; who with great respect besought them, At
least to grant the People the use of the public Prayers in their Mother
Tongue. The Clergy would nevertheless abate nothing of their former Severity;
and the Queen regent, by their Persuasion soon recalled what had been extorted
from her. But the Death of Queen Mary of England, and the Succession of Queen
Elizabeth, which happened this Month, soon turned the Scales, and gave her
Cause to repent her too great obstinacy.

The Learned Spotiswood observes, That this Mills was the last Martyr that dyed
in Scotland for Religion; That Patrick Lermoth Bailiff of the Regality,
absolutely refused to pass Sentence of Death, as a Judge upon him, after the
Bishop had delivered him up to the Secular Power; that in the whole City of S.
Andrews a Cord was not to be had for Money, so that they were forced to take
one of the Cords of the Archbishop's Pavilion, to tie him to the Stake. It had
been good Prudence to have desisted, when they saw the whole Body of the People
thus bent against them, but they were hurried on to their Ruin, by a blind
Rage.

The People of Scotland were no less incensed on the other Side, and resolved
openly to profess the Reformed Religion, binding themselves by Promise and
Subscription to an Oath, That if any should be called in question for matters
of Religion, at any time hereafter, they would take Arms, and join in defense
of their Religion and Brethren, against the Tyranny and Persecution of the
Bishops. The principal Men, who joined in this Bond were Archibald Earl of
Argile, Alexander Earl of Glencarne, James Earl of Morton, Archibald Lord of
Lorne, Sir James Sandelands of Calder, John Erskin of Dun, and William Maitland
of Lethington. To this Bond vast numbers throughout the Kingdom subscribed, so
that they found their numbers were at least equal to those that opposed them.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.
BOOK II.
The CONTENTS.
The Deaths and Characters of Frederick I, and Christian II, Kings of Denmark.
Frederick II conquereth Dietmarsh. The Affairs of Italy. New Bishoprics
erected in the Low Countries. King Philip desirous of a Peace with France, that
he might be at leisure to extirpate Heresy. That Design discovered to the
Prince of Orange. The Diet of Germany. Conditions proposed in it by the
Protestants for a Council. The Emperor confirms the Peace of Passaw. The French
Ambassadors come to the Diet. The Life and Death of David George, a famous
Impostor. The Treaty of Cambray produces a Peace at last. The Peace occasioneth
a Persecution in France. The King goes to the Parliament of Paris, to awe it
into a Compliance: Yet some retain their Freedom at the Price of their Lives.
The King's Answer. A French Synod held by the Protestant Ministers. The
Protestant Princes of Germany write to the King of France in the behalf of the
Persecuted. A Commission issued to Try the suspected Members of Parliament. Du
Bourg first Tried. The sad condition of France during the Persecution. Henry II
slain. The various Characters of that Prince. Francis II succeeds him, a Lad of
Sixteen Years of age. The Persecution goes on. Slanders against the
Protestants. Du Bourg Condemned. Minart, a Persecutor, Assassinated. Du Bourg
Executed. His Character. The rest of the Members of Parliament restored. King
Philip prepares for Spain. He takes Ship at Flushing. Arrives in Spain. Raises
a great Persecution there. The Death of Pope Paul IV. The Deaths of several
other Princes. Pius IV Elected. Scotch Affairs. The English Affairs relating to
Scotland and France. The Scotch Complaints against the French. The War against
the French in Scotland. The Death and Character of Mary Queen Regent of
Scotland. The French Expelled thence. A Conspiracy in France. The King of
Navar, Conde, Coligni suspected to be in it. An Assembly of the Princes of
France. A Decree passed for an Assembly of the three Estates. The Protestants
of France increase. Francis II dies. A General Council desired, and obtained by
the Duke of Florence. Gustavus King of Sweden dies. The Estates of France
opened. The Persecution of Piedmont, which occasioneth a War.

THE First day of January, Frederick I, King of Denmark, who was Elected by the
Dy^^ of that Kingdom, in the Year 1523, instead of Christian II, deposed by his
Subjects for his Cruelty, 1559.
died at Koldingen, a Town in the Dukedom of Sleswick, The Death of Frederick
I, King of Denmark.
when he had lived Fifty six Years, Three Months and Twenty Days, and reigned
Thirty four Years. He was a Prince of great Moderation and Justice; he
overthrew the united Army of Christopher Duke of Oldenburg, and of the City of
Lubeck, who had invaded his Inheritance, near Alsens, a City of Fionia, with a
great slaughter of their Forces. Having by this Victory obtained a Peace, he
caused the holy Scriptures to be translated into the Danish Tongue, and opened
an University and a Library at Coppenhagen. Not long before his Death he
visited his deposed Uncle, who was then in Prison, and having discoursed very
friendly with him a great while, they mutually forgave each other. By his Queen
Dorothy, Daughter of Magnus Duke of Saxony, he had five Children, Frederick II,
who succeeded him in his Kingdom, Magnus Bishop of Vpsal in Livonia, Joane, Ann
married to Augustus Elector of Saxon^, and Dorothy married to Henry Duke of
Lunenburg. Christian II, King of Denmark dies.
The Twenty third of the same Month, Christian his Predecessor in that Kingdom,
followed him, being in the Seventy seventh year of his Age; he had lived in
Prison ever since the Year 1532, having given (says my Author Tuanus) this
Lesson to all Princes, That if they will Reign well and happily, they must
govern their Affections, and not out of a violent lust of insulting over their
Subjects, give up themselves to the conduct of their Passions; and that they
ought to assure themselves, that God is a severe Revenger, always ready, and
delighting to pluck off their Thrones the most Proud and Insolent who shall
abuse that Power he has entrusted them with. Frederick I, being dead, who was a
Prince utterly averse from war, and neither moved by Ambition nor Covetousness
to invade what was another; Frederick II conquereth Die^marsh.
his Son Frederick began a War upon the Inhabitant of Dietmarsh, who had
heretofore been subject to the Dukes of Holstein, the Bishop of Breme, and the
Kings of Denmark successively, and had often regained their Liberty with great
Loss and Dishonor to those Princes that had attempted to reduce this small
Province; but now their time was come, and Adolph Duke of Holstein, this year
made a final Conquest of them, for Frederick King of Denmark, in the space of
one Month.

In the beginning of this Year was a great change of Affairs at Rome. The
Affairs of Italy.
The Kindred of the Pope had already made themselves hated by all Christendom,
and now the Pope himself too fell out with them. They had engaged the Pope in
the War with Spain, which had brought so much Loss and Shame upon that See, and
its Dominions. In the time of those Confusions they had acted many things with
great Rapacity, Intemperance and Insolence without the Pope's knowledge, who
finding his Treasure exhausted, had by their Advice raised great and
extraordinary Taxes upon his People; and besides all this, had sold the Places
of the Criminal and Civil Judges, suppressed the monthly Payments of his
Officers, and seized many of the Lands belonging to the Religious Orders, and
had levied two Tenths upon all the Benefices. The War with King Philip being
ended, and the Pope having with a calm and dispassionate mind heard the
Complaints made against his Relations by one Jermiah, a Friar of the Theatin
Order, and especially against the Cardinal of Caraffa, began more nearly to
inspect his own Affairs, and the Lives of his Relations. About the same time,
Cosmus Duke of Florence made great Complaint also of the Caraffa's, because not
content with the extorting what they pleased from the Hospitals, Monasteries
and Clergy within the Pope's Dominions (which they looked upon as their own)
they had also by their private Authority done the same Wrongs in the Dukedom of
Florence, and indeed all over Italy. He thereupon ordered Bongianni
Gianfigliacci, his Resident at Rome, to complain of this to the Pope; but then
the Caraffa's had prevented him from having any Audience; whereupon Cosmus
wrote a Letter to the Pope, which was by the means of Cardinal Vitelli, an
Hater of their Insolence, delivered to the Pope. He having read it, sent
presently for his old Monitor Jermiah, and by him ordered Vitelli to give him a
more exact account of their Misdemeanors. There was nothing more incensed the
Pope against them (who was Imperious and Jealous of his Papal Power to the
utmost degree) than that the Cardinal had agreed, without his knowledge or
consent, with the Duke de Alva; that his Brother should accept of a
Compensation from King Philip instead of Paliani, which Place the Pope had
designed to unite to his See. Whereupon he presently commanded the Cardinal to
leave the Vatican, and not to come any more into his Presence. The Twenty
seventh of January the Pope summoned great Consistory, and in it discharged him
of the Prime Ministry of Affairs, and of the Government of Bononia. He took
also from the Duke of Paliani, his Brother, the Command of the Forces of the
Ecclesiastic State, and of the Galleys, and deprived the Marquess di Monte
Belli of the Custody of the Vatican Palace, declaring against them with that
fury, that some of the Cardinals attempted to appease him, and among them
Ranutio Cardinal of Farnese To whom he replied, That your Grandfather had done
much better, if like me he had sacrificed his private Affections to his
Pastoral Office, and having severely chastised your Father's abominable Lusts
and Villainies, had thereby prevented the scandal the Impunity of them has
given to the whole World. So that nothing that could be said or done, could
reduce the old Man from his Resolves against them, but tended rather to the
increasing of his Fury. And hereupon he forthwith abolished some Imposts,
pretending they were exacted without his knowledge: By all which he hoped to
obtain the repute of a Just and Upright Prince, and to cast the Odium of the
ill things which had been done in his Popedom, upon his Relations. After this,
he betook himself wholly to the promoting the Inquisition, which he called the
most Holy Tribunal, and here he showed a very great severity, bringing not only
Men suspected of Heresy, but of some other Crimes within their Jurisdiction.
Then commanding all Monks and Nuns to their several Houses, he Imprisoned some,
and sent others to the Galleys, for not presently obeying him. His Rigor was
so great in this last, that many left his State, and went and settled in the
State of Venice. He spent Fifty thousand Crowns in Corn, to relieve the Poor in
a time of Scarcity, and settled Bishops at Malacha and Cochin, two Cities
belonging to the Portuguese in the East Indies, and made the Bishop of Goa an
Archbishop, exempting him from the Jurisdiction of the Bishopric of Lisbon. He
also erected many new Sees in the Low Countries, at the request of Philip King
of Spain, to the Diminution of the Jurisdiction and Diocesses of many French
and German Bishops. These Sees were settled at Mechlen, New Bishoprics erected
in the Low Countries.
Antwerp, Harlem, Daventrie, Leewarden, Groningen, Midleburg, Bosleduc, Namur,
St. Omers, Ipress, Gant and Bruges, and were put under the Archbishops of
Cambray, Mechlin and Vtrecht. This change gave great offense to the
Low Countries, who esteemed itrather an Inslaving than an Honoring of their
Country, to have so many New Sees settled among them; and the more, because
among other Reasons assigned by the Pope, one was, That these Countries were on
all sides encompassed with Nations which had cast off the Sea of Rome; so that
the Salvation of the Souls of this People was much endangered by Schism, which
rendered this Settlement hateful to all those who favored the Reformation; so
that this was one of the principal Causes of the War which followed, which in
the end proved fatal to many of these New Bishoprics.

In the interim, King Philip desirous of a Peace with France, that he might be
at leisure to extirpate Heresy.
this Consideration had that effect upon the Spirit of King Philip, that it
greatly disposed him above all others to enter into a Treaty of Peace with
France. He saw that not only the License which attended a War, but the vast
number of Germans which he was forced to employ, by their conversing with his
Subjects in the Netherlands, begat in them a good Opinion of Luther and the
Reformation. Henry II of France imprudently communicated to William of Nassaw,
Prince of Orange, when he was Ambassador for Philip in France, when they were
one day Hunting together, That Design discovered to the Prince of Orange.
That King Philip and he had agreed first to extirpate all the Sects which were
then rising in the Netherlands, and after that they would join their Arms, and
do the like in all other places; which being discovered by that Prince to the
Netherlanders, they entered into Consultation for the preserving themselves from
the Pride of the Spanish Government, and made those insolent Demands of King
Philp, when he was going into Spain. This Counsel was then generally attributed
to the Cardinal of Lorain, and Perrenot Bishop of Arras, and all concluded,
That under the pretense of suppressing Heresy, King Philip and Henry of France
had laid a Design of Ruining the Civil Liberties of France and the Netherlands.
When the Commissioners met, for the concluding the Treaty of Peace between
these Princes, they found themselves delivered from one difficulty, the
Restitution of Calais, by the Death of Queen Mary of England; but then
Thionville, Verdun and Toul, three Imperial Cities, had been taken in this War
by the French, and King Philip thought he was bound in Honor, and by his
Interest too, to see them restored to the Empire, and yet he saw the French
were as well resolved to keep them. Nor was indeed his Interest in the
Restitution so great as that of the French was to keep them, he having very
effectually provided for his own Security and Benefit, by the gaining other
Places.

Hereupon these Princes, The Diet of Germany.
by mutual consent, sent Ambassadors to the Diet of Germany, began this Year
the Twenty fifth of February, at Ausburg. The first thing that was done in
them, was the celebrating the Funeral of Charles V, with great Solemnity. His
Encomium was pronounced by Lewis Madruse, then Bishop of Trent, the afterward
a Cardinal. After this Ceremony, an Account was given of the Conference at
Worms, for the Reconciling the Differences of Religion; and there appearing no
hope of an Accommdation, Ferdinand the Emperor promised he would take care to
have the General Council renewed, and that all should obey its Decrees and
Determinations. But the Deputies of the Duke of Saxony, and of several other
Princes of the Empire opposed this, affriming that there being no hopes of
restoring the Peace of the Church by a Popish Council, Conditions proposed by
the Protestants for a Council.
the Edicts of Passaw and Ansburg were religiously to be observed: But the
Emperor persisting in his former Opinion, they said they were not against a
Free and General Council in Germany, so be it were legally assembled by the
Emperor, and not by the Pope, and in which the Pope should appear as a Party
subject to the Council, and not as President and Judge of all others; and
provided the Bishops and Clergy might be freed from the Oath they had taken to
the Pope, that they might freely speak their Thoughts: That the sacred
Scriptures might be the only Rule by which they should judge and determine these
Controversies, rejecting all humane Traditions and Customs that were contrary
to the Word of God: If the Divines who had embraced the Augustane Confession,
might not only be heard, but admitted to give their votes in the Decision of
these Controversies, and have good Security given them for their going thither;
and that they should enjoy the Liberty granted them by the Decree of Ausburg,
without any fraud or violence: That the Points in Dispute should not be
determined, as is usual in Civil Affairs, by the plurality of Votes, but by the
Rule and Prescription of the Word of God: That in the first place, the Decrees
of the Council of Trent already made, should be cancelled as vicious, and not
legally assembled; and that these things should be debated a new. And lastly,
That if these things could not be obtained of the Pope, the Emperor should
maintain the Peace of Religion, and the Edict of Passaw. These were the
Conditions the Protestants proposed for the holding of a Council.

The Emperor, The Emperor Confirms the Peace of Passaw.
who despaired of reconciling the differences of Religion on these Terms, and
having no other way left him for preserving the Peace of Germany, Confirmed the
Peace of Passaw. After this, they took into Consideration the Reduction of the
Moneys of Germany to their ancient value and purity, and heard the Complaints
of William of Furstemberg, Great Master of the Knights of Livonia, who obtained
a Grant of an Hundred thousand Crowns for the Levying of an Army for their
Protection against the Russ: But this Sum seeming less than the necessity of
their Affaris and of the Times required, the Livonians neglected it, and betook
themselves to the Protection of Sigismund Augustus, King of Poland, to whom
they assigned Nine of their strongest Places, upon condition that they might at
any time redeem them by the payment of Six thousand Crowns, which was confirmed
by a Treaty Signed and Sworn between them and the King of Poland. After which,
Furstemberg resigned his Dignity to Gotard Ketler. There was also a Complaint
made by the Livonians against the Inhabitants of Lubeck, Riga and Revel, for
furnishing the Russ, who were the Enemies of Germany, not only with all sorts
of Mechandize imported by them to Narva, a Town of Russia, but also with Arms
and Ammunition, which for the future, was, by a Law made in this Diet,
forbidden, which was afterward repealed.

The Twenty eighth of March, The French Ambassadors come to the Diet.
the French Ambassadors were introduced into the Diet, and after they had in an
Elegant Speech declared the great Affections their Master had for the Emperor
and the States of Germany; they desired the ancient League might be renewed
between the Empire and that Kingdom; and that for the future there might be a
firmer and closer Union and Friendship. Upon this the Emperor returned Thanks
to the Ambassadors, saying, That the King might be assured of the Friendship of
the Empire, the Princes and States, and of his too, if his Actions did agree
with his Words, and those Cities which had lately been taken from the Empire,
were restored to it: That this being done, he did not see what could hinder
their entering into a sincere Friendship. At this the Ambassadors replied, That
they had no Instruction concerning what he had proposed about the Cities, but
they would give an Account of it to the King their Master, and in the mean time
they desired the States would meet the King's Proposals of Friendship with
equal Candor. Upon this the Assembly broke up, and the Ambassadors were
re-conducted back with great Civility and Respect; to whom it was hinted, that
the Emperor could not but mention the Restitution of the Cities, but then that
neither he, the Princes, nor the States would break with the King of France,
though those Cities were not restored. They decreed also a Noble Embassy to the
King of France, in which the Cardinal of Ausburg and Christopher Duke of
Wirtemburg were employed.

One David George, a Native of Delft in Holland, born of mean Parents, his
Father being a Fencer, and his Mother a mean Woman, and himself unacquainted
with any other than his Mother Tongue; was a Person of great seeming
Moderation, so that all took him for a very Honest and well-meaning Man, though
he was of a stubborn and incorrigable disposition. The Life and Death of David
George, a famous Impostor.
He was a Person of a comely Countenance and good meine, and all the Motions of
his Body were Grave and becoming, so that he seemed made up of Honesty. This
Man spread amongst his Countrymen the Pestilent Sect of Anabaptists, to which
they were very much disposed, and this being done to his great advantage (for
he had got a good Estate by it) and fearing he might not be safe, if he
continued any longer in his Native Country, where he was accounted the Head of
that Sect, he went with some of his Followers to Basil, in the Year 1544, under
the Name of John Bruck, and the first of April made a Speech in the Senate of
that City; desiring, He might be protected by them, as one forced to flee for
his Religion; and that they would receive his Wife, Children, Family and
Fortunes, as in a safe Harbor. The Cause, the Person, and the Speech, agreeed
so exactly, and his Temper was so wholely unknown to them, as well as his
former Life, and his Country being very remote, what he said appeared so like
Truth, and had happened to so many others, That August 25, having given the
usual Oath, he was taken into the Protection of that City; where he lived with
that Respect to the Magistrate, that Humanity toward the Citizens, and the
Civility toward all, observing carefully their Religious Rites, and in all
things behaved himself so well, that he gave not the least occasion to any to
suspect him of any erroneous Doctrine, and he was as well thought of by the
most, as he desired to be, or was esteemed by his own Party. Thus he lived very
quietly in his Family, observing very strictly three things: 1. Concealing the
Name of David George, by which he was well known in Holland and Friesland. 2.
Of what State and Condition he was at Home; so that some took him for a Person
of good Birth, others for a Nobleman or Rich Merchant. 3. Lastly, he took Care
not to admit any into his Sect of the City of Basil, or of the neighboring
Country: But, in the mean time, he took care by Letters, Books and Messengers,
to enlarge his Sect in Holland, and in other such distant Places: But as to
Switzerland he meddled not, for fear he might be discovered. Having thus spent
six Years, with great Pleasure, there happened a thing which gave him some
Disturbance, one of his Followers falling off, upon better Information, and
appearing with great Zeal against the Doctrins of his quondam Master: His House
being also burnt with Lightning, was a sad Presage, That his good Fortune and
his Life were near their End. But that which most afflicted him, was, That an
able Person was come from Holland, who had given an exact account of him and
his Family, to the Citizens of Basil; this brought a great Despondence of Mind
upon him, and that a Sickness, which seized his Wife also, who dyed first, and
David George followed her himself August 25, 1556; and he was buried with great
Pomp, in the Church of S. Leonard. Thus died that famous Impostor and Deceiver,
who had pretended, That he was greater, and more Divine than Christ, and
Immortal; that the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
was imperfect, and did not lead to a true and perfect Felicity; but his was
such as would certainly make him, who rightly understood it, happy: That he was
the true Christ and Messiah, the most beloved Son of the Father, who was
begotten not of Flesh but by the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of Christ; which
having reduced his Flesh to nothing, and kept it in a certain place, unknown to
the Saints, had at last delivered it to David George; with much more such
Blasphemous Non sense. After his Death, the Fraud broke out, and this Year
March 12, his Sons, and all that belonged to him, to the number of eleven, were
brought before the Senate, and examined concerning his Name, Country and
Doctrine: And they answering as he had taught, were committed to different
Prisons, and all his Papers and Writings were delivered to the Divines. April
26, the Divines and University having considered them, condemned his Doctrine as
false, contrary to the sacred Scriptures, pernicious and injurious to Jesus
Christ, and to be exterminated out of the Christian World. After this, his Sons
were dismissed out of Prison, upon condition they should buy no Lands without
the Walls of the City, without the Permission of the Senate: That they should
entertain no Travelers, though of their near Relations, but should send them
to the public Inns: That they should deliver in all the Books written or
printed by David George, and not keep any by them in the Dutch Tongue; and that
they should send their Children to the School of Basil to be instructed: That
they should pay a Pecuniary Mulct, if required; and that they, their Wives and
Children should appear in the Church, and make Profession of the True Faith,
and-Renounce that of David George. Two days after, his Body was sentenced to be
taken up and burnt, together with his Books and Effigies, by the Hands of the
Common Hangman, in the place where they usally executed Malefactors; and all
his Goods they sez'd to the Public Treasure; adding, That if any Person
presumed to blame this their Decree, he should be liable to the same
Punishment. His Body was found very perfect, so that it might be known by his
yellow B^ard from another Man's, though he had been buried two Years and six
Months, and was accordingly burnt in a vast concourse of Men.

In the beginning of February the Ambassadors met again, The Treaty of Cambray
produces a Peace at last.
at the Castle of Cambray, to conclude the Treaty, which was broke up upon the
Death of Mary, Queen of England. Queen Elizabeth, who succeeded her Sister
Mary, a Princes of a Masculine Soul, and of a Prudence above her Sex, fearing
if she relied upon the Spaniard, she might either be deserted or dishonored by
his Protection, had in the mean time, made a separate Peace with France. After
which she changed the Religion of England, in her first Parliament, abolishing
all the Laws made by her Sister Mary, and reviving those made by her Brother,
Edward VI, and rejecting all Obedience to the Pope of Rome. This Peace with
France did much facilitate the Treaty of Cambray: In which, among other things
these Princes promised to do their utmost, that a General Council should be
held as soon as was possible, to the Glory of God and the pacifying Men's
Consciences. This last Clause, by the perverse Counsels of these Princes, in a
short time raised a War in the Low Countries and France, which was more lasting
and more fatal than any former Wars. This Treaty was signed at Cambray, April 3.

These two Kings having thus regained their Peace, The Peace occasions a
Persecution in France.
and disburthened themselves of the Cares which the War brought upon them, they
betook themselves solely to the Care of Religion, which in France had been
under consideration the two foregoing Years, and was then omitted on account of
the War and Treaty, but was now reassumed in the heat of a Marriage Feast.
There was one Diana Duchess of Valentinois, a Court-Lady, and one of the
King's Mistresses, who used to beg the Estates of all such as suffered for any
Crime; And the Duke of Guise, who were the Promoters of this Persecution, the
latter aiming at nothing but Popular Applause: These two insinuated this Belief
into the King; That the Venom of Heresy was much spread in France, and that
in truth he was not King of those Provinces in which that prevailed: That the
Impudence of those who embraced it, was so great, that they did not whisper it,
as heretofore, in the Ear, but preached it openly and boldly throughout the
Kingdom, by which the name of God was blasphemed, and his Majesty's Royal
Authority was endangered; for when the Law of God was once confounded, who can
Question, ( say they) but that all Human Laws will soon be subverted? And that
they might the more easily prevail, they employed Giles Maistre, president of
the Parliament, Jean de S. Andre, Anthony Minart, and Giles Bourdin the King's
Attorney, and principally the first of these, who was a Man of a fierce
Disposition and Temper, to incense the King's Mind against the Sectaries, he
being no way inclined to such Severities. To this end they tell him, That there
would little be gained by the Peace, of a more cruel War was fomented and
carried on at Home: For that the Disease had already got such Strength, that if
his Majesty dissembled a little longer, the Sword of the Magistrate and the
Laws of the Land would not be able to suppress it, but he must levy Armies, and
himself take the Field against them, as had been done in the case of the
Albingenses. That what had hitherto been done, had not had its desired effect,
because all the severity had been spent upon the populace and the mean people,
the hatred and detestation of which had affected all Men, but very few had
taken example by it. That now it was fit to begin with the Judges, many of
which had embraced their Doctrine secretly, or favored them on other accounts,
and by their connivance nourished the Distemper, suffering this Offense either
to go unpunished, or very lightly corrected. This, they said, was the very Root
of the Evil, and that all labor was in vain t^ll it were pulled up.

Not long after this, The King goes to the Parliament of Paris to aw it into a
Compliance.
the King was prevailed upon to come into the Parliament in Person, whilst the
Members were debating about the Punishment of the Sectaries, June 14. He seemed
rather to labor to conceal his Anger, than to have come with a calm Mind:
Among other things he told the Parliament; That having made a Peace he hoped it
would turn to the general Good; but he was much concerned that the business of
Religion, which was one of the principal Cares of a good Prince, had been,
during the War, tumultuously and seditiously treated by some: That therefore he
desired for the future, more care might be taken of the Christian Religion: And
because he heard that affair was this Day to be debated by them, he was come
thither; and he admonished them to proceed in it with Freedom, saying, It was
God's Cause, who knew all our Hearts and Thoughts.

Though the Members of the Parliament knew the King was brought thither to
deprive them of their Liberty; yet there were some who resolved to retain their
ancient Freedom at the price of their Lives; Yet some retained their Freedom at
the Price of their Lives.
and having declaimed against the Manners of the Court of Rome and its ill
Customs, which had degenerated into most pernicious Errors, and given occasion
to the rise of many Sects; they thence inferred, That the Penalties of Heresy
were to be mitigated, and the Severities of the Law abated, till the
differences of Religion were composed by the Authority of a General Council,
and the Discipline of the Church reformed. And this was the Opinion of all the
good Men in the Parliament. Arnold du Ferrier, President of the Criminal Court,
an honest and a wise Person, and the best Lawyer in France, was the first who
proposed this Method, and was followed by many others, among which was Lewis du
Faur, a Man of great Sense, and of a generous Temper, who added, That all were
agreed that the Differences in Religion had occasioned great Disturbances, but
then (said he) we ought carefully to enquire, Who caused these Disorders, lest
as Elijah answered Ahab, when he reproached him, as the Troubler of Israel, it
might be said to us; It is thou that have troubled Israel. Then Anna du Bourg
beginning with a Discourse of the Eternal Providence of God, to which all
things are subject; when he came to the Question proposed, said, There were
many Sins and Crimes committed by Men, which the Laws had already forbidden,
and yet the Gallows and Tortures which were employed, had not been able to
prevent the frequent Perjuries, Adulteries, profuse Lusts, and Profane Oaths,
which were not only connived at, but cherished. On the contrary, every Day new
punishments are invented against a sort of Men, who could never yet be
convicted of any wicked Attempt; for how can they injure the Prince, who never
name him but in their Prayers for him? Are they accused of breaking our Laws,
perverting the Allegiance of our Cities or Provinces? No, the greatest Tortures
could never extort a Confession that they so much as thought of any such thing.
Are they not accused of Sedition only, because they have by the Candle of
Scripture discovered the shameful and increasing Villainies and corruptions of
the Roman Power, which they desire may be reformed? Christopher Harlay and
Peter Seguier the two Presidents said with great Modesty, that the Court had
hitherto justly and rightly discharged its Duty in this Particular, and that it
would still do the same without changing, to the Glory of God, and therefore
neither the King nor People of France would have cause to repent the trusting
to it. Christopher de Thou, with great freedom reflected on the King's Attorney
and Advocates, for presuming to defame the Proceedings of that Court, and
indangering its Authority. Renatus Baillet desired the Judgments which were
blamed, might be re-examined, and more maturely considered. Minart having made
a short Preface, to soften the Envy which had been raised against them, only
added, That he thought the King's Edicts were to be observed. After these
Maistre the President made a sharp Harangue against the Sectaries, instancing
in the Severities which Philip the August is said to have employed against the
Albingenses, 600 of which he burnt in one day; and in the Waldenses, which were
massacred with Fire and Smoke, partly in their Houses, and partly in the Dens
and Caves they had fled to.

The King having obliquely reproached the Court for entering upon this Debate,
The King's Answer.
without his Order, added, He now clearly saw, what he had heard before, That
there were some among them, who despised both his Authority and the Popes. That
this was the fault of but a few, but it was dishonorable to the whole body of
them; but only they that were guilty should suffer the Punishment. And
therefore he exhorted the rest to go on in their Duty. The Reflections of la
Faur and du Bourg, who mentioned the Story of Ahab, and the frequent
Adulteries, exaseperated the King more than the rest, and therefore he
commanded Montmorancy to apprehend them, who again ordered Gabriel de
Montgomery, a Captain of the Guard, to take them and carry them to the Bastile.
Afterward Paul de Foix, Anthony Fumee, Eustace de la Port, were also taken
into Custody, but la Ferriere, du Val and Viole were concealed by their
Friends, and escaped this Storm. Men censured these Proceedings, as they stood
affected; but the Wiser were much disgusted, That the King should be so far
imposed on by others, as to come personally into his Court to subvert those
Laws he ought to have protected: That he should make use of Threats and
Imprisonments; saying, That this was a clear Instance that he was subject to
the Passions of others, and who could think but these things were the
foreunners of great Changes?

The Ministers of the Reformed Religion, A French Synod held by the Protestant
Ministers.
notwithstanding, held a Synod at S. German, June 28, one Morelle being
President, in which they settled the order of their Synods, the Authority of the
Presidents, the taking away the Supremacy in the Church, the election of
Ministers, and their Office and Duty, Deacons and Presbyters, Censures, the
Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, of contracting and dissolving Marriages,
which yet were only temporary Decrees, to be varied as future Synods should
think fit; but to oblige particular Persons till so altered.

About the same time came Ambassadors from the Protestant Princes of Germany,
The Protestant Princes of Germany write to the King of France.
with Letters to the King, subscribed by Frederick Cout Palatine of the Rhine,
Augustus Duke of Saxony, Joachim Elector of Brandenburg, Christopher Duke of
Wirtimberg, and Wolfang Count of Weldentz. In which they represent to the King,
How much they were afflicted to see so many Pious, Quiet and Holy Men, who
professed the same Religion, Imprisoned, Spoiled, Banished, and put to Death,
as Seditious Persons in France. That they thought themselves bound by Christian
Charity, and the Alliance which was between them and France, to beseech him
well to consider this Affair, which concerned the Name of God, and the
Salvation of so many Souls; that he ought to free himself from Prejudice, and
employ great Judgment and Reason in it. They assured him they were no less
solicitous for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of their Subjects than he,
and upon the Differences of Religion, had maturely considered how they might be
composed: That they had found by degrees, and insensibly, through Avarice and
Ambition many Corruptions had crept into the Church, which were dishonorable
to the Majesty of God, and Scandalous to Men, and that they ought to be
reformed by the Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures, the Decrees of the
Primitive Church, and the Writings of the most Ancient Fathers: That the
Corruptions and Disorders of the Court and Church of Rome, had long since been
complained of in France, by W. Parisiensis, John Gerson, Nicholas Clemangius
and Wisellius of Groeningen, the Restorer of the University of Paris, under
Lewis XI, and other Divines: That King Francis, his Father, of Blessed Memory,
was convinced of this, and had wisely endeavored to put an end to the
Differences of Religion, and to reform the Discipline of the Church: That now
France was not involved in War abroad, they besought him the Difference of
Religion might by his Authority and Conduct be quietly ended: That this might
easily be effected, if the King would but appoint Learned and Peaceable Men,
who should examine their Confession of Faith, without Partiality or Prejudice,
by the Holy Scripture, and the Ancient Fathers: That in the interim he should
suspend all Legal Severities, discharge the Imprisoned, recall the Banished,
restore their Estates to those that had been ruined: This they said would be
acceptable and pleasing to God, Honorable to the King, Profitable to France,
and very Grateful to them. The King entertained the Ambassadors kindly, and
having read the Letter, said he would suddenly send them a satisfactory Answer;
but by that time they were arrived at the Borders of France, the Fire, their
coming seemed to have abated, raged more horribly than ever.

June 19. A Commission issued to try the suspected Members of Parliament. Du
Bourg first tried.
a Commission was issued to Jean de Saint Andre, the President and Promoter of
these Troubles, Jo. James de Memme, Master of the Requests, Lewis Gayaut,
Robert Boet, Eustace Bellay, lately a Member of the Court of Parliament, but
then Bishop of Paris, and Anthony de Nouchy, to try the Members of Parliament,
which had been imprisoned. Du Bou^g being interrogated by Saint Andre, refused
to answer, None of the Members of that Court being to be Tried, but by the
whole Court. Whereupon Bourdin obtained a new Commission from the King,
commanding Du Bourg to plead before these Delegated Judges; and if he refused,
that they should take him for Convicted, and Guilty of Treason. He being thus
deprived of his Privilege, lest he might seem to despise the King's Authority,
and making a Protestation to save the Privilege of others, the third Day after
answered in such manner, to all the Questions proposed, that he seemed to
differ very little from the Lutherans and Calvinists; so without any other
Witnesses produced, he was by the Bishop of Paris declared an Heretic, judged
unworthy of the Sacerdotal Character, and delivered up to the Secular Power:
From which Sentence he Appealed to the Archbishop of Sens.

Whilst these miserable Men were thus persecuted for their Religion; The sad
Condition of France during the Persecution.
and their Favorers, Friends, and such as had presumed to speak freely, were
by Informers also brought in Question; there was a sad Face of Affairs in
France, and a sullen silence. The Court, in the interim was never more Jolly,
the Preparations for a great Marriage filling it with Mirth and Bravery, which
in a short time too, had as lamentable a Conclusion. Among other things there
was a Tilt prepared, and a Yard made for that purpose, not far from the
Bastile, in which the Members of the Parliament were then imprisoned. Some Days
being spent in this Divertisement, June 29. the King would needs run against
the Count of Mongomery, and they breaking their Lances, the Sight of the King's
Helmet by accident flying up, he received a Wound in the Eye, Henry II, of
France slain.
and falling from his Horse was latched by some of his Servants, and carried
into a Tower belonging to the Bastile. It is said, whilst they carried him
thither, he looked up, and remembering the Members of Parliament which he had
committed there, said; He feared he had done wrong to those Innocent Men. The
Cardinal of Lorrain, who was present, angry at it, replied; That Thought was
put into his Mind by the Devil, the Enemy of Mankind: That he ought to be
careful of his Motions, and continue constant in his Faith. Whether this were
so or no, I will not affirm, (says Thuanus, my Author) because I am resolved
to write nothing without good Authority: The Physicians saying too, That in
these kinds of Wounds the Speech is lost. At the Report of this Accident Andrew
Vesale, a Famous Physician was presently sent from Brussels by King Philip,
that he might however show his Good Will to this Prince: But he came too late,
the King dying July 2. when he had lived forty Years, three Months and eleven
Days, and reigned twelve Years and three Months. The Marriage between Margaret
his Sister and Philbert Duke of Savoy, was hereupon hasted, that it might be
finished before his Death, and Celebrated it was without any Pomp or
Magnificence.

There was great variety of Opinions, The various Characters of Henry II, of
France.
some extolling his Life beyond Reason, as Martial and Brave, and his
Conquests, by which he had enlarged his Kingdom, adding to it a great part of
Italy, Scotland and Corsica: That having obtained a Victory against Charles V,
at Renty, he had reduced that Great Prince to the Thoughts of a Retreat to a
Private Life. That out of his rare Respect to the Church of Rome, (not
regarding his Oath) he had renewed the War and succored Paul IV. That
recalling his Army out of Italy, he had been able to defend France against the
united Forces of King Philip, and Mary of England, and at last had ended the
War, at least by an useful Treaty; and by the Marriages of his Daughter and
Sister, had secured the Public Peace. Others said he had violated the Glory of
his Just Arms by breaking the Truce, and involved himself (by the Fault of
others) in an unjust and unprosperous War, spent vast Treasures, and lost the
Flower of his Kingdom: That the Peace was Desirable, but very Dishonorable;
and the Marriage only a Covering for the infamy of the Concessions: And that as
he delighted too much in War, so he perished dishonourably like a common
Soldier: His Misses, who reigned rather than he, his Prodigality and Luxury
were not forgotten: And the abundance of Poets then in France, was taken for an
Instance of the Corruptions of the Times.

To speak freely without Love or Hatred, he was a Warlike Prince, and too
little affected to the Arts of Peace; but then he was soft and easy, and
governed too much by others. Wise Men then thought there would follow a War,
his Children being very young, his Wife Ambitious, and the Court divided by
Faction: And this accordingly came to pass, and brought forty Years of great
Calamity upon France. But I shall for the future be very short in the French
Affairs, referring the Reader to Davila, and other Writers, of the Civil Wars
of France. The Reader may be pleased to know, That I have in all this followed
Thuanus, abridging him in some Places, and in others transcribing him at large.

The King being crowned, Francis II, a Lad of sixteen Years of Age, succeeds
him. And the Persecution goes on.
and the Dominion of the Queen Dowager as Guardian, and of the Guises, as Prime
Ministers, established to the great Dissatisfaction of the Princes and Nobility
of France, the next Care was to carry on the Persecution against the
Protestants: Oliver the Chancellor was employed against the Members of the
Parliament, which were imprisoned at the time of the King's Death, and S.
Andre, and Anthony de Mouchy against the rest of the People; who, that they
might spread the terror of their Names over the whole Nation, thought fit to
begin with Paris. Their principal Bloodhounds were Russanges, and Claude
David, two Mechanics, and one George Renard, a Tailor, who had all three
professed the Reformed Religion; and were now employed, as best acquainted with
these Men. They drew in two Apprentices shortly after, who had deserted their
Masters: And these, Slanders against the Protestants.
to gain the greater Applause, confessed not only that they had Nocturnal
Meeting, but (which says Thuanus, was a notorious Lie) that they at them used
promiscuous Conjunctions after the Candles were put out. And this Impudent
Story created a great Detestation of the Protestants, in the Minds of the
deluded Catholics, whose Ears were open to these kinds of Misrepresentations.
This lie was carried on with great Industry, and these two Wretches were led
first to the Cardinal of Lorrain, and then to the Queen, to communicate this
rare Secret, no Man daring to contradict it. The Queen, who was never a Friend
to the Protestants, from henceforth was more than ever enraged against them:
But Oliver, the Chancellor, suspecting the Story, examined these Lads
separately, and by their Varying and Contradicting each other, found it to be a
mere Lie. But when it was discovered so to be, they went unpunished, the Hatred
against the Sectaries drowning the Voice of Public Justice.

However, the Places of Meeting being thus discovered, great Numbers of Men and
Women were taken and imprisoned, and others left the Kingdom, whose Goods were
seized and confiscated. Many Children were left by their Parents, which filled
the Streets with their Cries and Lamentations, to the great Affliction of
almost all Men. This Example was soon after followed at Poictiers, Tolose, Aix,
and generally in the Province of Narbonne, George d' Armagnac, the Archbishop
of that See, a Cardinal, employing all his Interest and Industry, that the
suspected might be taken up. They were by this time become so numerous, that
their very Number gave them Boldness, which being thus exasperated, vented it
self in severe Reflections on the King, Queen and Guises; in which there seemed
to be more than a private Anger and Liberty.

The King of France had been a long time afflicted with a tedious Quartane
Agne, Other Slanders spread against the poor persecuted Protestants.
but overgrowing that Disease, he shot up in height, and grew apace, but was
very Pale, and of a sickly Constitution; being removed to Blois, which was his
Native Air, his Face of a sudden was overspread with Redness, Spots and
Carbuncles, whereupon a Report was raised, That he had the Leprosy, and that a
great number of Children, of less than six Years of Age, had been torn out of
the Arms of their Mothers about the Loire, to make a Bath of their Blood for
the Cure of the King. It was uncertain whether the Guises or their Enemies had
invented this Story, for different Ends; but the Blame of it was certainly cast
upon the Protestants, and the King by that means was exasperated against them
by the Guises. The Protestants, on the other side, put out a Book, to show that
this Story was invented and fathered on them by the Cardinal of Lorrain. And
after this one of the Spreaders of this Report being executed for it, averred
with his last Breath, That he had Orders from the Cardinal so to do.

In the mean time the Process was carried warmly on, Du Bourg condemned to
Death.
against Anna du Bourg, and the rest of the Members of the Parliament, who were
Prisoners in the Bastile; who were sent thither by the Orders of Henry II. Du
Bourg had appealed first to the Parliament of Paris, and after to the
Archbishop of Sens; but his Plea was overruled by both, and the Sentence of the
Bishop of Paris was also confirmed by the Archbishop of Lions. He declared
himself willing, after this to be degraded, That the Sign of the Beast in the
Revelation being blotted out, he might have nothing of Antichrist left in him:
However, this variety of Appeals prolonged their Process some Months. After
this he sent them a plain Confession of his Faith, which agreed in all things
with that of Geneva. Frederick Elector, and Count Palatine of the Rhine, also
so far espoused his Cause, as to write a Letter to the King in his behalf;
desiring his Life might be spared, and that he might be sent to him. December
18. Anthony Minart the President was shot dead, Minart a Persecutor slain.
in the Night, as he returned Home, which was charged upon du Bourg, as done by
his Procurement; because he had foretold, That he would be forced from giving
Sentence against him, if he did not willingly forbear it, upon his challenging
him as his suspected Enemy. However, it hastened the Sentence of Death against
du Bourg, who heard it with great constancy of Mind, he saying, He pardoned his
Judges, who had pronounced it according to their Consciences, tho contrary to
the Word of God, and sound Knowledge. At last he advised them to extinguish
these their Fires and repent of their Sins, and taking his Leave of them said,
Du Bourg led to Execution.
He went willingly to the Stake. From thence he was carried in a Cart to the
Place of Execution, and having spoken a few Words to the People, was first
hanged and afterward burnt. He only said, My God forsake me not, that I may
not forsake thee. He was 38 Years old, and was born at Riom in Auvergne, of a
Rich and Noble Family, Anthony du Bourg, a Branch of which had been Chancellor
of France under Francis I. His Character.
He took his Degrees at Orleance; and was esteemed a good Lawyer, and an
upright Judge, and many of the most zealous Catholics interceeded for him,
during his Imprisonment, and his Death was deplored by many very heartily. The
rest of the Members of Parliament were restored.
His Constancy partly confirmed and partly exasperated the Minds of the
Protestants; so that from his Ashes there sprung up a Crop of Rebellions and
Conspiracies, which for a long time kept this once most flourishing Kingdom in
a low condition. The rest of the Members were restored, by the Court at last;
de Thou, one of the Members of that Court opposing, and at length mastering the
more bloody Guisians. The meaner People, who being then in Prison, were
dispatched with less Difficulty, some being condemned to Death, others to
Renuntiation, and others to Banishment. Images erected in the Streets to be
Worshipped.


About the same time there was another Project set on foot in France, they
erected Images of the Saints and Virgin Mary in the Streets and Market Places,
and burnt Candles before them in the daytime, singing Songs to their Honor,
and seting Chests, and if any passed by without giving Money and worshipping the
Images, he was presently set upon by the Rabble as an Heretic, and he escaped
well if he was only beaten and trodden into the Channel, and lost not his Life:
Which only served to irritate and unite the Protestants the more.

King Philip having made a Peace with France, King Philip prepares for Spain.
resolved this Year to return into Spain; in order to this he came to Gaunt,
and there summoned a Chapter of the Knights of the Golden Fleece; from thence
he went to Zealand, committing the Government of the Netherlands to Margaret
Duchess of Parma, the Wife of Octavio, his Sister, with a guard of 3500
Spaniards, which were all distributed on the Borders of France, in the Fronteer
Towns. After the Peace he had principally employed Granvel Bishop of Arras, who
had advised him to leave this Guard, for fear of the Lutherans, which were very
numerous in these Provinces, by reason of their Neighborhood to Germany. The
principal Care of these Countries was committed to William Prince of Orange,
and the Count of Egmont, who were Men of great Birth, and had particularly
deserved well of Philip, in his last War with France; these remonstrated
against the leaving of the Spaniards, and freely said; They had not much mended
their Condition, if when they had preserved their Country with their Swords,
they must now be exposed in Peace, to the servile Yoke of Foreign Forces and an
Insolent Soldiery. King Philip was inwardly displeased with this Liberty, yet
suppressed his Resentment; and that he might not seem to go thence offended
with these Great Men; he promised to withdraw those Forces within four Months.
After this he took Shipping at Flushing, August 26. being attended by a Fleet
of 90 Ships. He met with so great a Tempest on the Shoars of Gallicia, He takes
Ship at Flushing.
that the Ship in which he went, perished, the King being hardly got out of her
into a small Bark, that waited upon him. Thuanus says, He ascribed his
Delivery to Heaven, and said, He was preserved by the singular Providence of
God to extirpate Lutheranism: And Meteren, That this Tempest was an Omen of the
great Calamities that attended him and his States, a great part of the Fleet
being Shipwrecked.

He soon fell to the Work he believed God had called him, He raises a great
Persecution in Spain.
and began with the extirpation of Heresy; some few had been put to Death
before his arrival, here and there; but the greatest part were kept, that he
might have the joy of seeing them burnt at Vallidolid and Seville. September
24. this pompous Show was begun in the Person of John Ponce, a Son of the Count
de Baylen, who was brought forth with great State, and burnt as an Obstinate
Lutheran; and with him John Gonsalo, a Preacher: After these Isabella Venia,
Maria Viroesia, Cornelia and Bohorquia, which was a Spectacle of great
Compassion and Envy, the last of these being not above 21 Years old, yet
suffering with great Constancy. After these followed Ferdinad de St. Jean, and
Julian Ferdinando, John de Leone and Frances Chavesia a Nun, Christopher
Losada, a Physician. and Christopher de Arles a Monk, and Garsia de Arras. This
last was the Man, who had brought that Spark into Spain, and by his constant
and learned Preaching, improved it so far, that he had brought over to his
Opinion the greatest Part of the Monks of S. Isiodore, and of the Inhabitants
of Seville: yet afterward he had deserted his Companions, and disputed against
them too before the Inquisitors; but being at last convinced of the Wickedness
of it, he repented; and being brought before the Inquisitors, reproached them
as fitter for Mule-Drivers than Judges of the true Faith, of which they were
brutishly Ignorant, tho they impudently assumed that Title and Office. Giles
and Constantio were reserved to bring up the Reere, Constantio, the Confessor
of Charles V, burnt after he was dead.
but they both died, yet their Bodies were burnt. This last was Confessor to
Charles V, in the last two Years of his Life and Retirement: Soon after his
Death he was imprisoned, and died in durance. His Body was carried about in a
preaching Posture, and the dreadful ghastly look it had brought Tears from
some, whilst others laughed at the theatrical Hypocrisy and Bloody Folly of
the Monks.

From hence this Cruel Scene was removed to Vallidolid in October following,
Twenty eight Nobles burnt at Vallidolid.
where in the presence of Philip, 28 of the Principal Nobility of that Country
were bound to Stakes, and most Catholickly and Charitably burnt. Whether
Thuanus were weary of the former Cruelties, or wanted exact Informations of the
Particulars of this last, I cannot say, but the last is most probable; but
however he gives none of their Names or Qualities, and says there was some
Variation in the Time. Thus Spain was preserved from Heresy (as they call it)
not by the Learning or Piety of the Clergy, but the Bloody Zeal of King Philip.

Pope Paul IV, The Death of Pope Paul IV.
being worn out with Years, and very much afflicted with a Dropsy, July 29
sent for the Cardinals, and told them, He was going the way of all Flesh; and
having advised them to chose a good Successor, recommended to them The most
Holy Office of the Inquisition (as he called it) which was the only thing that
could preserve that most Holy See. He, after this, pointed in another Discourse
to King Philip, whom he said God had raised up as the great Defender of the
Catholic Faith; and he added, That he did not doubt but the Christian Religion
would by his Counsels, however now afflicted, be restored to its Ancient State.
He dyed August 18. aged 83 Years, having sat Pope four Years, two Months and
twenty three Days. Whilst he was yet dying, The People of Rome express their
Hatred of him and the Inquisition.
the People broke open all the Prisons, especially those of the Inquisition,
which they also set on Fire, and they were hardly restrained from burning the
Palace of Minerva, where that Court Sits; with the same Fury they beat down the
Image of the Pope, and broke off its Head and Right Hand, and three Days it lay
exposed in the Streets, to the Contempt and Scorn of all Men, after which it
was thrown into the Tiber. After this the Arms of the Caraffa's were demolished
all over the Town. His Body was buried with little Pomp, and a Guard of
Soldiers drawn up to secure it from the Rage of the Populace.

It is observed, That this Year was fatal to the Princes of Europe, August 17,
Lawrence Prioly Duke of Venice died, The Deaths of several Princes.
and was succeeded by Jerome, his own Brother, his rare Virtues dispensing with
the Venetian Laws, of not suffering Honors to continue in the same Family,
lest they might seem Hereditary. September 1, died Hercules di Este Duke of
Ferrara, he married Renata, a Daughter of Lewis XII, King of France; and was
happy in all his Government, except his taking part with Henry II, in that
unjust War against King Philip; as Thuanus calls it: But he was happy in this,
That by his Prudence he extricated himself, and came off with little or no
Damage, in his Treaty of Peace, with that Potent and provoked Prince.

February 12. died Otho Henry Duke of Bavaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and
was succeeded by Frederick III. April 29 died Francis Otho, Duke of Lunenburg.
January 24, died William Prince of Henneberg; so that within the space of one
Year died Charles V, two Kings of Denmark, a King of France, a Duke of Venice,
a Pope, the Elector Palatine, the Duke of Ferrara, and three Queens, Helionora
of France, Mary of Hungary, and Bona Sfortia Queen of Poland.

The Conclave was very much divided in the Election of a new Pope, between the
French and Spanish Factions, Pius IV, elected.
each Side laboring to have a Pope of their own Interest; So that this Contest
lasted three Months; till at last the Ambassadors of the other Princes began to
remonstrate, That this long Delay tended only to the improving the Differences
in Religion, and the increasing the Enemies of that See. At last, after a
Vacancy of four Months and seven Days, John Angelo Medici was elected, December
26. by the Suffrage of forty four Cardinals. He was born at Milan, of obscure
Parents, and took the Name of Pius IV: He began his Reign with a Pardon of the
Insolences the People of Rome had committed upon the Arms and Statue of Pope
Paul IV, He changes his Manners to the Worse.
his Predecessor: But he soon changed, for he that till then had seemed the
most Courteous, Patient, Good, Grateful and Liberal of Men, presently became
quite another Man, and took up other Manners: He rescinded all the Acts of his
Predecessor, and presently acknowledged the Imperial Dignity to be lawfully
invested in Ferdinand, the Brother of Charles V, and received his Ambassadors
with great Civility and Respect.

To return near Home, Scot^h Affairs.
the Protestant Religion was already received in all Parts of Scotland,
especially in the Towns and Families of the Nobility and Gentry, though in
secret; but Queen Elizabeth having entertained the Reformed Religion, and
settled it in England, they thence presumed she would be a sure Friend to those
of that Persuasion in Scotland: And a Parliament being called to open May 10.
1559. at Sterling, Alexander Cunigham Earl of Glencarn, and Sir Hugh Cambel, an
eminent Knight, and Sheriff of Air, appeared there in the behalf of the
Ministers of the Reformed Religion, who had been summoned to appear there by
the Regent; who was now resolved to dissemble no longer, but to excert her
Authority, and show her Zeal in their Ruin; accordingly she threatened them
severely, and said; She would banish all their Preachers, who under pretense of
Religion promoted a Rebellion. The Deputies amazed with her great Words,
opposed Supplications, remembering her of her Promises; to which she samrtly
replied, That the Promises of Princes were not to be expected to be fulfilled
further than agreed with their Convenience. A Mystery which she ought not to
have revealed however, if her Anger had not broken open the Recesses of her
Heart. At this the two Deputies replied, by Glencarne, That if she would keep
no Promise, they would acknowledge her no more, but renounce their Obedience to
her, the Mischief of which she ought seriously to consider. The Boldness and
Briskness of this Answer abated the Regents Anger and Courage, and she seemed
much calmed, and replied; I will consider of it. The news of this being carried
that Night to S. John's-Town, the Inhabitants of it met that Night openly in
their Churches, and had Sermons. The Queen Regent thereupon ordered all the
Ministers, who were come as far as that City, but attended by vast Numbers of
the Nobility, Gentry and Commons, in order to their appearing in the
Parliament, to return Home, saying; She would not proceed in the Citation; yet
afterward she declared them Rebels for not appearing. This made many leave her
and go over to the Protestants. Whereupon she commanded one James Halyburton,
Mayor of Dundee, to apprehend one Mefan a Preacher, who thought to have lien
hid in that Place; and ordered the People to celebrate Easter-Sunday, after the
ancient manner. When in this no body would obey her, one Areskin of Dundee went
over to them, and assured them, The Regent was so exasperated, that there was
nothing but Ruin to be hoped for at her Hands; and that she had no regard to
her Promise: Thereupon they all resolved to dissembled no longer with her, but
to use Force against Force. One John Knox, a bold and violent Preacher, further
inflamed their overheated Minds by a Seditious Sermon. The Nobility going to
Dinner from the Sermon, a Quarrel arose in the Church, and the Priest that
interposed being severely treated, the Rabble fell upon the Statues and Altars,
and destroyed them in a moment; after this, they fell upon the Franciscan and
Dominican Abbeys, where they also destroyed the Images and Altars. The next
that suffered was the Carthusian Abbey, which they demolished so entirely in
two days (though very great) that the Footsteps of its Foundations were not
easily to be discovered.

The Regent was by this time as much incensed as they; and swore, She would
revenge this Villainy with the Blood of the Inhabitants, and the Ruin of the
Town. But in the interim the Example spread, and the same things were reacted
at Cupre in Fife. The Regent having assembled some Forces under Hamilton Earl
of Argile, and the Earl of Athole, marched easily toward St. John's-Town, that
the Can non might overtake them. But the Inhabitants of that Place writing to
their Friends what was doing, he Earl of Glencarne came presently to their
Assistance, with Two thousand five hundred Horse and Foot. And shortly after
they had Seven thousand Men in Arms against her; so that she now saw that Force
would not do; upon which she sent the Lord James Steward Prior of St. Andrews,
and one Cambell (who though Protestants, continued in their Obedience to her) to
treat with the Earl of Glencarne and Areskin, who agreed, May 29, That all
Forces being discharged, the Town should be set open to the Regent, that she
might refresh her self a few days in it: That no French should yet enter into
it, nor come near it by three Miles: That all other Controversies should be
determined in the next Parliament. Whereupon she entered the Town, and was
honorably received. But one of the Inhabitants being slain by an insolent
Soldier, and the Regent expressing not any Concern for it; They from thence
concluded the Treaty would not be long observed, and accordingly about three
days after she ordered the Town to be sacked, changed the Magistrates, and
restoring the mercenary Scots, sworn to and paid by the French. Being hereupon
urged with her Promise, she answered, That Promise was not to be kept with
Heretics, and if she could make an honest Excuse after the Fact committed, she
would take upon her Conscience to kill and undo all that Sect; concluding, That
Princes ought not to have their Promises so strictly urged upon them; and then
went back to Sterling. The Convenience and Strength of the Place, made her
think it worth the breach of her Faith to them; but the Lord James Steward the
Prior of St. Andrew, and the Earl of Argile, were so offended with this
Procedure, that they left her, and went over to the Protestants, and gave them
notice that she intended to Garrison Cupre and St. Andrews, in Fife, with
Frenchmen. Whereupon they destroyed the Franciscan and Dominican Abbeys of the
last City under the Archbishop's Eyes, yet he durst not show the least
discontent at it, but fled into Faulkland. The Regent assembled all the French
she had in the Kingdom, which were two thousand, and one thousand Scots, and
marchd for Cupre the Thirteenth of June. The Earl of Argile, on the other side,
brought in one thousand Protestants to the Relief of St. Andrews, and Patrick
Lermoth Bailiff of the Regality, their Chief Officer, levied five hundred more
of the Inhabitants of St. Andrews, and before Ten of the Clock the next Morning
there were above three thousand Horse and Foot, which being drawn up to the
best Advantage upon the Banks of a small River by Mr. James Halleburton,
Provost of Dundee, a Man of good Experience and Valor, and therefore made
General that day, made so formidable an Appearance, that the Regent durst not
hazard a Battle against them. By this time she saw, to her Cost, how necessary
it was for Princes not to break their Faith. For when she would have gladly
come to Peace, there could no reliance be made upon her Promise, and she had
nothing else to engage. And when they demanded the French might be sent away,
she said that she could not do it without order from the King of France. So she
was desired to withdraw the Garrison out of St. John's Town; which when she
refused, the Protestants marched thither the Twenty fourth of June, and in a
few days took it. From thence they marched to the Abbey of Scone, and took and
sacked it; and being informed the Regent designed to put a French Garrison into
Sterling, they went in the night from St John's-Town thither, and surprised it,
and ruined all the Monasteries, Images and Altars. They also changed the
Religion at Lithgo, Linlithgow.
in the way to Sterling, and wheresoever they prevailed. The Regent and the
French in the mean time retired from Edinburg to Dunbar, expecting till this
Storm should blow over, and here they heard of the Death of Henry II of France:
The Protestants rejoiced at it, as a thing that tended to their Safety, but had
like to have made it the occasion of their Ruin, by withdrawing from the Army.
The Regent thereupon marched with her Forces to Edinburg, and in the way had a
fair opportunity to have fought and overthrown the remainder of their Army,
which was prevented by the Duke of Hamilton, and James Earl of Dowglass. The
Twenty fourth of July a Truce was made to last till the Tenth of January; which
the Regent observed so much the more exactly, because she found by Experience
that the former breach of Promise had involved her in greater Difficulties and
Distresses. Yet even here she could not totally lay aside her old wont, but
broke Faith as far as she durst.

It is necessary here to Transcribe some of our English Affairs which relate to
Scotland, that we may see how far, The English Affairs relating to Scotland.
and upon what Provocations Queen Elizabeth was concerned. Henry II, of France
had no sooner ended his War with King Philip, but he began to cast an Eye upon
England, as very convenient for the Dauphin King his Son, and Mary Queen of the
Scots, and on that Account refused to recall the French Forces out of Scotland,
as by the last Treaty he had promised; but instead of that, he sent more
thither by stealth, and was very earnest with the Pope to declare Queen
Elizabeth an Heretic and Illegitimate, and Mary the Lawful Heir of England;
which yet was diligently but underhand opposed by the Imperial and Spanish
Agents at Rome. However the Guises never left exciting the credulous and
ambitious Hopes of that Prince, of Uniting the Crown of England to that of
France, by the means of Queen Mary their Heir, till at last they prevailed on
him to assert openly the Pretenses of his Son and Daughter-in-Law, and to
consent they might use this Title, Francis and Mary, by the Grace of God, King
and Queen of Scotland England and Ireland, and to quarter the Arms of England
with those of Scotland, upon their Plate, and on the Walls of their Palaces,
and the Coats of their Heralds. The English Ambassador complained of this, but
to no purpose, as tending to the great Injury of his Mistress, with whom they
had lately made a Peace, they having never done it in the Life of Queen Mary,
though there was a War between the Nations: That there were great numbers of
Soldiers Listed in France and Germany to be Transported into Scotland upon the
same Continent with England. So that Queen Elizabeth had just reason to suspect
the Intentions of the French, who now breathed nothing but Blood and Death
against the Protestants; but that Prince's Designs, whatever they were,
perished with him, to the great Advantage of Queen Elizabeth, who had otherwise
been attacked by all the Forces of France and Scotland, both as Illigitimate
and an Heretic. Yet she ordered his Exequies to be celebrated at St. Paul's
with great Solemnity, and by Charles Son to the Lord Howard of Effingham her
Envoy, condol'd his Death, congratulated the Succession of Francis his Son, and
promised to observe the Peace between them religiously.

Yet Francis the new King, Fradcis II, of France, claims England in the Right
of Mary his Wife.
and Mary his Wife, the Queen of the Scots, (by the Advice of the Guises, who
now had got the Government of France, in a manner, into their Hands) still
continued the Claim of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the use of the
Arms thereof more openly. And when Throgmorton, the English Ambassador in
ordinany, a Wise and Stout Man, severely expostulated the Business. They
replied, Queen Mary might assume the Arms of England with some small
Distinction, to show her near Relation to that Royal Blood. But he denied this
could be done by the Laws of Heraldry, if the Person using the Arms of another
Family was not derived from a certain Heir. After this they pretended, They
only used these Arms, to force the Queen to lay aside the use of the Arms of
France. To which he answered, That twelve Kings of England (as Dr. Woton showed
in the Treaty of Cambray) had worn the Arms of France, with so undoubted a
Right, that no opposition had been made to it in any Treaty between France and
England. At last, by the Interposition of Montmorancy, who was no Friend to the
Guises, he prevailed, and the Title of England and Ireland, and the use of the
Arms of those Kingdoms was laid aside, because that great Man thought, It was
not for the Honor of France to have any other Title or Arms assumed or
engraven on their Seal than that of the King of France. That this one Title was
as good as many: And he also showed, That the former Kings used no other, though
they claimed the Duchy of Milan, and the Kingdom of Naples. But however, from
this Use of the Title and Arms of England imposed on this young Queen, by the
Arts of the Guises, and the Ambition of Henry II, as from a Fountain, sprung
all those Calamities, which afterward ruined her: For from this Time Queen
Elizabeth was a declared Enemy to the Guises, and a concealed one to the Queen
of Scots; which last enmity, was by the Malice of cunning Men, a growing
Emulation, and new Occasions, which every day sprung up, so improved, that at
last it ended in her Death. For Princes will endure no Rival, and Majesty is
very sensible of Affronts.

The French by the Treaty were to give four Hostages for the Restitution of
Calais within eight Years; The French Provocations against the English.
but when it was to be done, they would give but three. The English Merchants
were ill used in France: A Servant of Throcmorton's, the Ambassador, was sent
by Francis, Grand Prior of France, the Brother of Guise, publicly to the
Galleys: A Pistol was discharged against the Ambassador, in his own Lodgings:
And he had no Plate allowed him, for his Table, but what had the Arms of
England engraven on it, in contempt: Du Brossay was also sent with Supplies of
French into Scotland: And the Galleys of France were brought from Marseille in
the Mediterranean into the British Seas.

This was the State of Affairs between France and England, The Scotch
Complaints against the French.
when the Troubles of Scotland broke out, and the Lords of the Articles sent
William Maitland their Secretary; who made a deplorable Representation of the
State of that Kingdom to Queen Elizabeth, setting forth; That since the
Marriage of their Queen to the Dauphine of France, the Government of Scotland
had been cha^^ed, the French Soldiers laid all waste; The principal Employments
were given to Frenchmen, their Forts and Castles put into their Hands, and
their Money adulterated to their Advantage. That the Design was apparently to
possess themselves of Scotland, if the Queen should happen to die without
Issue. Cecil (who was the Queens Prime Minister) employed Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, to find out what the Lords of the Articles designed; and what
Means they had to attain their Ends; and upon what Terms they expected Succors
from England. They said, They desired nothing but the Glory of Jesus Christ,
the sincere Preaching of the Word of God, the extirpation of Superstition and
Idolatry, the Restraint of the Fury of Persecution, and the Preservation of
their ancient Liberties. That they knew not for the present how to effect this;
but they hoped the Divine Goodness, which had begun the Work, would bring it to
its desired End, with the Confusion of their Enemies: That they earnestly
desired to enter into a Friendship with the Queen of England to the
Preservation of which they would Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes.

The Consideration of these things was not warmly entertained in England, Queen
Elizabeth holds off at first; but,
be cause the Scots had little Money, and were not over-well cemented among
themselves; so they were only advised, Not to enter rashly into a War. But as
soon as the English knew that the Marquess of Elboeuf, the Queen of Scots
Uncle, was listing Men in Germany by the Rhinegrave, for a War in Scotland,
That Cannons were sent to the Ports, and Preparations amde to conquer that
Kingdom, and that in greater Quantities than seemed necessary to reduce a few
unarmed Scots: That the French, to draw the Danes into this War, had proffered,
That the Duke of Lorrain should renounce his Right to Denmark: And that they
were renewing their Solicitations with the Pope, To give a declaratory Sentence
for the Queen of Scot; against the Queen of England: Thereupon Sir Ralph
Sadler, a wise Man, was sent to the Earl of Northumberland, and Governor of
the middle Marches, on the Borders of Scotland, at last is forced to unite with
the Protestants of Scotland.
to assist him, and Sir James Croft, Governor of Berwick. The English Council
could not see whither all this tended, unless the French designed to invade the
Kingdom of England, as well as assume the Title and Arms of it.

Upon this the Council of England began to consider in good earnest, and with
great Application of the Scotch Affairs, Reasons assigned for the driving the
French out of Scotland.
it was thought a thing of very ill and dangerous Example, that one Prince
should undertake the Protection of the Subjects of another Prince, who were in
Rebellion: But then it was thought impious not to assist those of the same
Religion, when persecuted for it. And it was certainly a great Folly, to suffer
the French, the sworn Enemies of England, when they challenged the Kingdom of
England too, and were at Peace with all the rest of the World, to continue
armed in Scotland, which lay so near and convenient for the Invasion of
England, on that side which had the greatest number of Roman Catholics, both
of the Nobility and Commons. This was thought a betraying the Safety and Quiet
of the whole Nation, in a very cowardly manner: And therefore it was concluded,
It was no Time now for lazy Counsels; but that it was best to take up their
Arms, and as the English Custom was, To prevent their Enemies, and not stay
till they should begin with us. It was always as lawful to Prevent an Enemy as
to repel him, and to defend our selves the same way that others Attack us. That
England could never be Safe, but when it was Armed and Potent; and that nothing
could contribute more to this End than the securing it against Scotland. That
in order to this the Protestants of Scotland were to be protected, and the
French Forces driven out of it; and this was not to be done by Consultations,
but by Arms. That the neglect of these Methods had not long since lost Calais,
to our great Hindrance and Shame: That a little before, whilst the French
pretended to preserve the Peace with great Fidelity, they had surprised the
Fort of Ambleteul, and some other Places near Bologne, and by that means forced
the English to surrender that important Place. That we must expect the same
Fate would attend Berwick, and the other Fronteer Garrisons, if they did not
forthwith take Arms, and not rely any longer on the French Pretenses of
maintaining the Peace, which were never to be believed, their Counsels being
secret, their Ambition boundless, and their Revenues immense; so that it was
then a Proverb in England, France can neither be Poor nor Quiet three Years
together: And Queen Elizabeth was used to say that Expression of Valentinean
the Emperor was good, The War resolved.
Francum amicum habe, at non vicinum: Let a Frank be thy Friend, but not thy
Neighbor. So that upon the whole it was concluded, That it was Just, Honest,
Necessary, and our Interest, to drive the French, as soon as was possible out
of Scotland.

Hereupon William Winter Master-Gunner in the Fleet, The War begun.
was sent with a Fleet to Edinburgh Frith, who to the great terror of the
French fell upon their Ships of War on that Coast, and their Garrison in the
Isle of Inchkeith. The Duke of Norfolk, then Lieutenant of the North, was also
sent toward Scotland, William Lord Gray, (who had well defended Guines against
the French, though unsuccessfully) was made Governor of the Eastern and Middle
Marches; and Thomas Earl of Sussex, who had been Lieutenant of Ireland in the
Reign of Queen Mary, was sent thither again with the same Character; and
commanded to have a particular care the French did not excite the barbarous and
superstitious Irish to a Rebellion, under the Pretense of Religion.

The French in the interim were not idle, but the Regent reproached the Lords
of the Congregation (so the Protestants were called) in a Proclamation, that
they had brought Englishmen frequently into their Houses, that came with
Messages unto them, and returned Answers back to England; though they made no
Answer to them, because they did not think it convenient either to deny it, or
openly to Avow it for the present; and the King of France and Queen Mary wrote
each a distinct Letter to the Lord James Stewart, threatening him with
Punishment as his wickedness deserved, and by Word of Mouth let him know, That
he would rather lose the Crown of France, than not be revenged on the Seditious
Tumults raised in Scotland. And one Octavian, a French Captain, landed soon
after with a French Regiment, great Sums of Money and Ammunition of War, and was
forthwith sent back by the Regent for one hundred Horse, and four Ships of War;
and in the mean time she fell to Fortify Isith or Leith, expelling all the
former Inhabitants, and making it a Colony of French only, it being a
Sea-Port-Town, fit to receive Supplies, and a Place that might serve the French
Companies for a Refuge, if they should happen to be reduced to any great
straight. This was done about September, as appears by a Letter of the Nobility
about it in that Month. The Regent's Reputation was by this time at so low an
Ebb, that nothing she said was believed, and all she offered suspected.

About this time, Four Divines and two thousand Men, sent from France to
Convert the Scots.
M. Pelleuce Bishop of Amiens (afterward Bishop of Sens) arrived at Leith,
attended by three Doctors of the Sorbon, Furmer, Brochet and Feretier; he
pretended he came to dispute with the Preachers of the Congregation, and he
sent to some of the Nobility residing then at Edinburg, desiring a Hearing: But
for fear their Arguments might not prove so effectual as was expected, Le
Broche, a French Knight, came over at the same time with two thousand Foot to
reinforce their Sylogisms. The Congregation-Nobility reject however their armed
Logic, and would have nothing to do with them.

The Eighteenth of October, The Lords of Scotland Arm against them, and depose
the Regent.
the Lords assembled their Forces at Edinburg, and the Regent, with the Bishop
of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Dunkeld, and the Lord Seaton, the same day entered
Leith. And some Messages having passed betwixt them, they proceeded so far at
last as to suspend the Queen-Regent's Commission, discharging her of all
Authority till the next Parliament, prohibiting the Officers to serve under
her, or by color of her Authority to exercise their Offices from thenceforth.
This Decree bears Date the Twenty third of October.

The Twenty fifth they summoned the Town of Leith, She prevails over them.
commanding all Scots and Frenchmen to depart within twelve hours. But failing
in this Attempt, the Regent took Edinburg, and restored the Mass there, and all
those of the contrary Religion were forced to flee into England, or where they
could find shelter. Hereupon the Queen sent for more Forces, and the Marquis d'
Elboeuf was sent from Diep with eighteen Ensigns of Horse, which were dispersed
at Sea by Tempest, so that he arrived not at Leith before the Spring of the
next year.

The Lords retired first to Sterling, and then to Glasgow, where they reformed
all things after their usual manner; and in the mean time they sent William
Maitland and Robert Melvil to Queen Elizabeth, where at last they obtained what
they designed in the manner I have expressed.

The French hearing this, resolved to suppress the Lords before the English
should come up to their Assistance, and thereupon began to waste and spoil the
Country to Sterling; but though they met with little Resistance, yet they could
not attain their End.

In February an Agreement was made between the English and the Scotch
Commissioners, 1560.
sent by the Lords for the Preservation of the Scotch Liberties and Freedoms
from a French Conquest, The Scotch Lords go on with their Reformation.
and for the Expulsion of the French Forces out of Scotland, the Articles of
which were Signed the Twenty seventh of that Month. About this time the English
Fleet, under Captain Winter, came up, and took all the French Ships in the
Fyrth of Edinburg, which much amazed the French who were then marching for St.
Andrews, by the Seaside; whereupon they returned to Leith. About the same
time, the Lords of the Congregation reformed Aberdene, but the Earl of Huntley
coming up in good time, saved the Bishop's Palace, which had else been reformed
to the Ground.

The English Landforces, to the number of two thousand Horse, The English
Forces enter Scotland, and besiege Leith.
and six thousand Foot, entered Scotland, under the Command of the Lord Gray, in
the beginning of April. The English at first beat the French into Leith, and
battered the Town very diligently; but remitting in their Care and Industry,
the French made a Sally out of Leith, and cut off a great number of the
English, which made them more vigilant. The last of April, a Fire happened in
the Town, which burnt the greatest part of it, with much of the Soldiers
Provisions. The Seventh of May the Town was Stormed, but the Ladders proving
too short, an hundred and sixty of the English were slain, and nothing was
gained. Soon after there came up two thousand English more.

In the mean time the French King sent to Queen Elizabeth, The French proffer
to restore Calais to the English.
that if she would withdraw her Army out of Scotland, he would restore Calais
to her: To which she replied, She did not value that Fisher-Town so much, as to
hazard for it the State of Britain. Thereupon the French perceving no Peace
could be had without the French were recalled out of Scotland, and disdaining
to treat with the Scots who were their Subjects, they began a Treaty with the
Queen of England.

In the mean time, Mary of Lorain, Queen Regent of Scotland, died in the Castle
of Edinburg, the Tenth of June, partly of Sickness, and partly of Displeasure:
Before her Death, The Death and Character of Mary Queen-Regent of Scotland.
she sent for the Duke of Wastellerand, the Earl of Argile, Glencarne,
Marshall, and the Lord James, and bewailing the Calamities of Scotland, prayed
them to continue in Obedience to the Queen their Soverign, and to send both the
French and English out of the Kingdom; so asking their Pardon, and granting
them hers, she took her leave with many Tears, kissing the Nobility one by one,
and giving the rest her Hand to kiss.

She was a Wife, Good, Religious Princess, full of Clemency and Charity, and
would doubtless have prevented the Calamities of Scotland, which befell there in
the end of her days, if she had been left to her own Measures; but being
governed by the Orders of France, she was forced to do and say what she did, to
her great dishonor and disquiet, which too at last ended in the Ruin of those
she most desired to Promote, as it always happens in Breach of Faith. She would
often say, That if her own Counsel might take Place, she doubted not but to
compose all the Dissension within that Kingdom, and to settle the same in a
perfect Peace upon good Conditions.

Soon after her Death (or as Thuanus says, The French forced to leave Scotland.
a little before it) Ambassadors from France and England came to Edinburg, who
sending for the Scoth Nobility, began to treat about the sending the French out
of Scotland; which was at last agreed, and the Sixteenth of July the French
embarked on the English Fleet for France; and the English Army the same day
began their march by Land for Berwick, and the Fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar were dismantled; but sixty Frenchmen were left to keep the Castle of
Dunbar; and the same number the Isle of Inchkeeth, until the States should find
means to maintain the said Forts upon their own Charges from all Peril of
Foreign Invasion.

In August the Parliament met, A Parliament in Scotland.
which established a Confession of Faith contrary to the Roman Religion, and
passed three other Acts, one for Abolishing the Pope's of Jurisdiction and
Authority, another for Repealing the Laws formerly made in favor of Idolatry,
and a third for the Punishing the Hearers and Sayers of Mass; and with these
Acts Sir James Sandelands was sent into France for the Royal Assent of the King
and Queen, which was refused, and he severely treated for undertaking that
Embassy by the Guises.

The Oppression of the Princes of the Blood in France by the House of Guise, A
Conspiracy in France.
and of the Protestants by the Roman Catholics, caused a dreadful Conspiracy,
which drew in all the desperate People of that once most Fourishing Kingdom, to
the great hazard of its Ruin. The concealed Head of this Conspiracy was Lewis
Prince of Conde, the apparent Godfrey de la Bar, Sieur de Renaudie, a Young
Gentleman of an Ancient and Noble Family of Perigort, who falling into a long
and ruinous Suit for a Living, which his Uncle had intercepted and detained
from him in Angoumois, had not only been overthrown by his Opposite, but had
also, for some fraud in the management, been severely Fined and Banished for
some time; he at Lausanne and Geneva had contracted a Friendship with some
others of his Country, who had fled thither on the account of Religion, by whom
he had been brought over to that Persuasion; and after returning into France in
disguise, he had wandered over a great part of the Kingdom, and made many
Friends of that Religion, and being a Stout, Subtle Man, and exasperated by the
things he had suffered, he undertook this dangerous Employment, willingly as a
means to revenge the Wrongs he had undergon.

The Conspirators met the First of February, The Conspiracy of Blois formed at
Nantes.
at Nantes, in great numbers, on diverse Preteces, and there formed the fatal
Design of Blois, for the Surprising the King and the Court the Fifteenth of
March, and the bringing the Guises to a Trial for all their Encroachments on
the French Privileges, and Abuses of the Royal Authority. The whole Design is
so well expressed in Davila his History of the Civil Wars of France, that I
shall rather refer the Reader thither for his Satisfaction in it, than attempt
to reduce it into a Dark, and scarce perhaps Intelligible Compendium.

It was very extraordinary, Thuanus his Reflection on this Conspiracy.
that before ever this Kingdom had in the least been shaken by any Commotion,
the Majesty of the King, the Authority of the Governors and Magistrates being
all in their former vigor, that such great numbers of Men, in all Parts of the
Kingdom, should enter into so unheard, so dangerous a Design. But such was the
Hatred they bore to the House of Guise, and the Detestation that all Men began
to entertain of the bloody Practices against the Protestants, that though so
every many were engaged in it, yet they all kept Faith each to other, and
concealed the Secret; so that the Guises had notice of it from Italy, Spain and
Germany, before any of their Spies in the Kingdom scented or suspected it.

At last one Pierre Avanelles, an Advocate of the Parliament of Paris, The
discovery of the Conspiracy.
and a Protestant, out of pure Conscience, for the preventing so great a
Scandal and Mischief, discovered this Conspiracy to Stephen L' Allemont Sieur
de Vouzay, Secretary to the Cardinal of Lorain, he having got knowledge of it
from La Renaudie, the Chief Agent in it, who lodged in his House. The King was
then gone from Blois to Ambois, which was a small and strong Town, which had
also a great and a very strong Castle, and easily to be defended. Here de
Vouzay acquainted the King and the Council with it, and was immediately
Imprisoned, to be produced as a Witness against the Conspirators, if it proved
to be true; and to be treated as an Impostor, if it happened otherwise. Andelot
and Coligny come to Court on an Invitation.
The Guises were very desirous that Andelot, and Coligni the Admiral, should be
invited to Court, fearing or hoping rather that they too were in the Plot. And
they accordingly came presently to the Queen-Regent, and Coligni, in a
Discourse before Oliver the Chancellor, inveighed sharply against the violent
Proceedings in Matters of Religion, which had exasperated a great part of the
People against the Government, and concluded, That he believed the granting
Liberty of Conscience, and suspending the Severity of the Laws, till the
Controversies of Religion were composed by a Lawful and Free Council, would
very much appease and quiet them. Oliver, Oliver the Chancellor of France,
hated the Persecution, and desired a Reformation.
who desired a Reformation, and hated the bloody Methods then in use, was glad
of this Proposition, and recommended to the Guises the granting of a general
Pardon, and Liberty of Conscience, till a Free Counsel could be had, as an
excellent Remedy of these Evils: Which was presently granted, excluding
notwithstanding those who under pretense of Religion had conspired against the
King, his Mother, Brothers, or Ministers: Which was published the Twelfth of
March in the Parliament of Paris; which yet never shocked the Conspirators, who
were well resolved. The same day Renuadie came to Carreliere in Vendosmois, not
far from Ambois, and appointed the rest to meet him the Seventeenth of the same
Month (the King having changed his Abode, they were forced to change the Day.)
That day, Deligneris another of the Conspirators, and a Captain, repenting the
Undertaking, discovered it to Queen Catherine. The Guises had by this time got
a good Body of the Nobility about the King, and a Party of the Conspirators
being met in Arms near Tours, the Inhabitants of that City would not endeavor
to take them, but suffered them to escape to Saumur; the Seventeenth of March
was the day now appointed for this great Design, and Renaudie, who knew nothing
of the Discovery, marched boldly up to Ambois, and though great part of his
Foot were cut in pieces in the Woods, as they came up in small Parties, or
taken Prisoners by the Horse who were sent out for that purpose, many of which
were presently hanged on the Battlements of the Castle, in their Boots and
Spurs, yet Renaudie their Chief Commander escaped, and was not taken then.

The Duke of Guise obtained a Commission to constitute himself the King's
Lieutenant General in France the Eighteenth of March; and Oliver the Chancellor
obtained, before he would pass it, a Pardon for all who should lay down their
Arms within twenty four hours, and return home with only two or three
Companions, giving them liberty to present what Petitions they pleased in a
peaceable way to the King. The Nineteenth of March, Renaudie met Pardaillan,
who was sent with a Party of Horse to take up such as he found in Arms.
Pardaillan would have fired a Pistol against Renaudie, but it missing, Renaudie
run him through, but was slain in the same moment by Pardaillan's Servant
himself. Renaudie slain.
His Body was brought to Ambois, and hanged on a Gibbet, with this Inscription,
The Leader of the Rebels. Two of his Servants were taken at the same time, and
some Papers in a private Character, which proved to be a Petition on the besalf
of the Protestants, designed to be presented to the King in an Assembly of the
States, Begging a Remission of the Severity of the Laws against them, and
Protesting the utmost Duty and Obedience to him. Many of those who were taken,
were examined against the King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde. The King of
Navar, Conde, Coligni and Andelot suspected.
Who said, They knew nothing of Navar, but heard that Conde should have been
their Captain. Whence the Duke of Guise concluded, That Coligni and Andelot
were cetainly in it, though Queen Catherine was of a contrary Opinion; but
however Conde, who was then in the Castle with the King, was commanded not to
depart without leave, which he wisely dissembled. Some few were Tried for this
Conspiracy, but many more were Hanged up by Night, and many Merchants were
Slain as they traveled about their business for their Money, but under Pretense
they were in the Conspiracy, so that there was nothing but Slaughter and
Murders to be seen.

About the same time, Oliver the Chancellor dies.
Oliver the Chancellor of France died, not so much of Oldage or Sickness, as
Discontent at the Cruelcy and Iniquity of the Times; his Death was foretold by
some of the Conspirators, who reproached him for his unworthy Complyances. And
when the Cardinal of Lorain visited him in his last Sickness, he expressed his
Resentments against him, and died weeping and sighin for what he had done.
Michel de l' Hospital, a great and a good Man, succeeded him, by the
procurement of Queen Catherine.

Though this Conspiracy was principally designed against the Guises, yet they
desired the World should believe these Men had first made a Defection from God
by Heresy, and then had conspird against the King, Queen Catherine, and the
King's Brothers: The Thirty first of March the King wrote to all the Governors
of the several Provinces, to take great care that the Relics of this
Conspiracy did not imbroil their Provinces; after which there was the like
Account sent to the Elector Palatine, and the rest of the Protestant Princes of
Germany. The Princes of Germany thereupon, among other things, desired the King
to consider whether he had not yielded more than was fit to some about him
(meaning the Guises) who out of an inbred Malice and Cruelty exercised great
Cruelties on Men that were never convicted of any Crime. There they beseech his
Majesty, that he would put a stop to the Sufferings of these Innocents, and
seeing they embrace the same Religion with us, we cannot but desire an end may
be put to those cruel and hasty Executions. This Germany has found (say they)
to be the only Remedy, and France has no other left to restore its Peace, than
by granting a Peace to the Minds and Consciences of Men.

Coligni the Admiral leaving the Court, Coligni sent into Normandy by the Queen.
Queen Catherine ordered him to go into Normandy, and to enquire diligently
into the Causes of the late Conspiracy: He laid the blame of it on the
boundless Ambition of the Guises, and advised the Queen to observe inviolably
the late Edict for Liberty of Conscience, and to put a stop to the Persecution
of the Innocent, as she valued the safety of the King, and the quiet of the
Kingdom. Some of the Captives who had escaped out of the Prisons at Blois,
wrote Letters to the Cardinal of Lorain, telling him, they knew the Escape of
the Conspirators was very afflictive to his Eminence: That therefore they were
gone to seek them, and hoped in a short time to return better attended. This
rallery was a great Mortification to that fearful Minister, who feared new
Commotions, and persuaded the King to put out a General Pardon for all Roman
Catholics. The Clergy labor to bring the Inquisition into France.
In May the King put out another Edict, which was called the Edict of
Romoraulin, by which he took the Cognizance of Heresy from the Civil
Magistrates, and gave it solely to the Bishops, which about five years before
had been so vigorously opposed by the Parliament of Paris. De l' Hospital the
Chancellor is said to have consented to it, only to prevent the violent Guises
from introducing the Spanish Inquisition, which they had recommended to Henry
II, and were now promoting with all their might in France. From henceforward
the Cardinal of Lorain became more placable to those of the Religion, and to
stop the Mouths of those who desired an Assembly of the three Estates,
persuaded Queen Catherine to call an Assembly of the Princes at Fountain-bleau,
to consult of the Public Affairs.

About this time Conde left the Court, Conde leaves the Court.
and by a Letter gave his Brother the King of Navar an Account of the Ill Will
the Guises bore toward him, and that a Debate had been held in the King's
Cabinet-Council, for the taking him into Custody: That therefore he had been
forced to betake himself to him into Bearne. This Letter was soon after
discovered to the Guises who had entertained Spies in the Family of Conde, who
presently wrote a Letter to Conde full of sugared Expressions of Kindness and
Affection; which Conde presently sent to his Brother, who very much approved
his Resolution, but advised him to return to Court and clear his Innocence;
which Conde did not think safe. Perrenot the Brother of Cardinal Granvell, in
an Audience he had of Queen Catherine, told her, there was no way to restore
the Peace of France, but by Banishing the Guises some time from Court, and
Recalling the Princes of the Blood and Montmorancy to their former Stations.

The Twenty first of August, An Assembly of the Princes of France.
the Assembly of the Princes and Notable Men of France was Opened at
Founain-bleau. The Chancellor in his Speech, among other things, complained,
That the Hearts of the People of France were incensed against the King and his
Principal Ministers, but the Cause of it was not known, and therefore it was so
difficult to find out and apply a fitted Remedy. For That, the greatest part of
the Men of this Kingdom being weary of what is present, fearful of what is to
come, divided by different Religions, and desirous of Change, are willing to
imbroil the Kingdom. And therefore their principal Business was to find out the
cause of this Disease, and apply a fitting Remedy to this Sickly Body.

Coligni the Admiral, Coligni delivers a Petition from the Protestants to the
King.
who was present the next day, presented a Petition to the King, which had been
given him whilst he was in Normandy, by a vast number of his Subjects; desiring
that the Severity of the Laws against them, might be mitigated, till their
Cause had been duly considered and determined: That they might have Public
Places assigned them for the Exercise of their Religion, lest their Private
Meetings should be suspected by the Government: And they invoked God to bear
Witness, That they had never entertained any disloyal Thought against his
Majesty, nor would do so: But on the contrary they offered up to God, most
devout Prayers for the Preservation and Peace of his Kingdom.

The Bishop of Valence, The Bishop of Valence seconds it.
a Learned, Grave and Experienced Person, confirmed this Opinion, showing the
great Corruptions in the Church had given Birth and promoted these Divisions in
the Minds of Men, which were rather exasperated than extirpated by harsh means
and bloody Persecutions. Then he showed the great Use of General Councils, And
advises the King to call a National Council.
for the composing the Differences in the Church: And therefore he said, He
wondered how the Pope could quiet his Conscience one Hour, whilst he saw so many
thousand Souls perish, which God, without doubt, would require at his Hands.
But if (said he) a General Council cannot be had, the King ought to follow the
Examples of Charles the Great, and S. Lewis his Ancestors, and call a National
Council of France; commanding the Teachers of the Sectaries to be present in
it, and to enter into Conference with the Divines, concerning the Points in
Controversy, etc. That the Sectaries were worthy of Blame for their Rebellion,
and the Roman Catholics for having been too Bloody and Cruel in the
Prosecution of them; which had only served to irritate the Minds of Men, and
make them enquire more greedily into the Opinions of those they saw suffer so
patiently. That the ancient Fathers employed no other Arms against the Arians,
Macedonians and Nestorians, but the Word of God, and the Princes then did only
banish Heretics.

The Archbishop of Vienne represented the great Difficulties that hindered the
obtaining a General Council; For ( said he) there is none of us who does not
know what great pains Charles V, took to procure a General Council, and what
Arts and Stratagems the Poples employed to defeat that commendable hope this
pious Prince had entertained. The Disease is of too acute a Nature to attend
long Delays, which are very uncertain; and therefore the best way was to call a
National Council; which the King had already promised, and the urgent
Necessities of the Church would not suffer him to delay any longer. Having
shown how this had been constantly practiced from the Times of Clovis to
Charles the Great, and so downward to the times of Charles VIII. He concluded,
That the Necessity being Great, they ought to delay no longer, nor to regard
the Oppositions the Pope would make against this Method. For the appeasing the
Civil Dissentions of France, he advised the calling an Assembly of the three
Estates.

The third day Coligni discoursed of the Petition he had presented; and being
asked, why it was not subscribed? He said, There was above fifty thousand Men,
in the Nation, ready to subscribe it: Concluding, That there was nothing more
calamitous, than for a Prince to fear his Subjects: And they to be at the same
time afraid of him. That the House of God ( the Church) was to be forthwith
reformed, the Army to be dishanded, and an Assembly of the three Estates called
as soon as might be.

The Cardinal of Lorrain, was so enraged with Coligni's Speech, that he made a
sudden reply to it. The Cardinal of Lorrain replies to Coligni.
That the whole scope of ill Men was to deprive the King of his military
Guards, that they might the more easily oppress him. That the late Conspiracy
was against the King, and not against his Ministers, as was pretended: That as
to what concerned Religion, he would submit to Learned Men: But then he
protested, That no Councils should be of that Authority with him, as to depart
in any thing from the Customs of his Ancestors; and especially in the most
sacred Mystery of the Lord's Supper: And as to an Assembly of the States, he
submitted that entirely to the King. He concluded, The Sectaries were a
Seditious, Proud sort of Men, and that the Gospel and Faith of Christ was made
an occasion of Tumults and Seditions by them, and therefore they were to be
severely prosecuted. Yet he was for mitigating the Severity of the Laws toward
such, as met peaceably without Arms, who were to be reduced to their Duty by
more gentle Methods, more than by Force. To which purpose he would freely spend
his Life. That the Bishops and Curates should by their presence redeem the Time
they had lost, and the Governors of the Provinces be forced to do their
Duties. But then, since there was nothing under Debate, but want of Discipline,
and Corruption of Manners, it seemed very unnecessary, that either a General or
a National Council should be called. The free Confession of this Cardinal, is
the Opinion of the whole Party; and though the name of a General Council makes
a great noise, yet we very well know how they have treated the ancientest and
best Councils, when they have in any thing crossed their Humors or Interests,
and from thence may conclude, They will never submit to any that shall not be
conformable to their Wills.

The twenty sixth of August, A Decree passed for an Assembly of the three
Estates, and the suspension of the Laws against Heretics. A design upon Lions.
a Decree was past that an Assembly of the three Estates should meet before the
tenth of December, in the City of Meaux. And that if a General Council could
not be had, a National Council should be assembled. And in the mean time all
Severities in matters of Religion should be omitted. Thus (says Thuanus, my
Author) the Protestant Religion, which before was so much hated, began by
degrees to grow up and get Strength with the tacit Consent of its greatest
Enemies. Thus ended the Assembly of the Princes, and Notable Men of France.

About this time Ferrieres Maligni, one of the Conspirators of Amboise,
escaping out of Prison, had a Design to surprise Lions, and had formed so great
a Party in the Town, as might have done it, but remitting the execution of his
Project to a more convenient time, by order of the King of Navarr, the thing
was discovered, and many of his Partisans taken; but yet such was the constancy
of the Party, that though many were tortured, yet nothing could be found out to
prove the King of Navarr or Prince of Conde concerned in this Attempt. Yet were
they invited to Court by the King, to purge themselves of the Suspicion, upon a
Promise they should receive no Injury: But this they wisely refused as not
Reasonable.

This and several other such alarms procured an Edict, That no Prince or other
person, of what condition soever, should provide Money, Soldiers, Arms or
Horses; and if any Person did otherwise, it should be taken for High Treason.
The Cardinal of Bourbon, was also employed to bring the Princes of his Family
to Court, by passing his Faith to them, That nothing should be done against
them. The three Estates, in the interim, meeting at Meaux, were from thence
adjourned to Orleans, and the Marshal, de Thermes was sent to Poictiers, with
two hundred Horse, to watch the Motions of the King of Navar, if he came to the
Assembly.

The Protestants in France having obtained a little respite from the Pressures
of the Persecution by the late Edicts, The Protestants of France increase
wonderfully, during the Peace. In some places they grow insolent.
increased, and there were great Assemblies of them in all Parts of the
Kingdom, especially in Dauphine. At Valence, which was an University much
celebrated for the Study of the Law, the fear of the Laws being now removed,
there succeeded in its stead a lawless Boldness and Petulance; so that some of
the Young Students forcibly seized the Franciscan's Church, for the holding
their Assemblies. At Montelimard, they had also their Public Sermons, and at
Romans: And which was yet more insufferable, they met armed, and were very
injurious and rude to the Roman Catholic: Which as to Valence was soon after
revenged with equal Cruelty and perfidy, by one Maugiron, who was sent for that
purpose by the Duke of Guise. At Romans about sixty were taken and committed to
Prison. And at Montelimard, the King's Faith was by Maugiron pawned and
forfeited again; and the Town taken and plundered. The number of the
Protestants increased very greatly also in Bretagne and Normandy, and they had
their Public Sermons in many Cities, in those Provinces, which were managed
with greater Modesty than those in Dauphine.

Though the Guises had given many Testimonies of their small regard to their
Faith; The King of Navarr, and Prince of Conde promise to come to the Assembly
of the States. The Archbishop of Vienne dies.
yet the King of Navarr, and Prince of Conde, had now passed their Promise to
the Cardinal of Bourbon, That they would present themselves in the next
Convention of the States; and that Cardinal had given the King Assurance of it,
being then at Paris; and the King of Navarr was already on the Road. The
Archbishop of Vienne falling sick about this time, by a Letter signified to the
Duchess of Moupensier, his great Confident, That he certainly knew, That if
the King of Navarr and the Prince of Conde came to Court, they would be
committed to Prison; and that Bourbon would not be able to make good his
Promise to them, who was only employed to deceive his Brothers. That
Montmorancy was laid at too, and one la Sague, a Villain, had been examined
against him, and had confessed a Treaty with the Queen of England; That so soon
as the War in Scotland was ended, the Soldiers would be employed in France.
Soon after, this venerable Prelate died of Grief and Vexation. He was a learned
and an honest Man, not infected with the Leprosy of Flattery; and therefore
not very grateful to the Court: And being extremely desirous of a Reformation,
was suspected to be a Lutheran.

The eighteenth of October, The States meet at Orleans.
the King entered Orleans, attended by a terrible Guard of Soldiers; which made
that City more like a Garrison than the seat of an Assembly of the States.
Navarr arrived the thirtieth of the same Month, with a small Retinue and
unarmed; and quickly found how little the Guises did regard their Faith or
Promise, by the little Respect was shown to him and his Brother, at his Entry,
Navarr and Conde secured
and in their first appearance before the King: And Conde was presently
committed to Prison, declaiming against the breach of Faith, made by the King
and the Guises, and the Credulity of his Brother, the Cardinal of Bourbon,
which had betrayed the whole Family into their Enemies Hands. The King of
Navarr seemed to have more Liberty, but was under the restraint of a Guard;
deprived of the Attendance of his own Servants, and watched by Men, who had
order to observe his Looks and Motions; and his Secretary and all his Letters
were seized. The thirteenth of November the Prince of Conde was examined by the
Chancellor and others, in Prison: Who told them, It belonged not to them to try
or examine the Princes of the Blood, but to the Parliament of Paris and the
Peers of France, and the whole Body of the States. Bourdin the Attorney
General, at last told him, That if he declined the Judgment of these Delegates,
he should be taken for convict, and Sentence accordingly pronounced against
him, as guilty of High Treason, and the Witness should be examined elsewhere.
Perceiving by this the head-longhast of the Guises, his Lady delivered a
Petition to the King, for learned Council, which was granted him: But his
Servants were taken from him, and he was denied a Conference with his Brother
of Navarr and the Cardinal, though he desired some of the Kings Ministers might
be present. These Hardships created him much Compassion in the Minds of Men,
and they thought he was hardly used, which made his Enemies yet more hated.
They on the other hand despised the Thoughts of Men, and bent all their
Thoughts how they might destroy the King of Navarr, for they thought they were
secure of Conde. Among other ways, they intended to have assassinated him in
the King's Chamber; of which an account was given him by some of Guise his
Creatures. Upon which he resolved to draw his Sword and dye fighting, if he
were thus attacked; and desired an old Friend to take care to preserve his
Bloody Clothes, and show them to his Son. When he had thus done, he went unsent
for into the King's Chamber, and taking the King by the Hand, so by his Looks
prevailed upon him, that his Heart failed him, and he either repented, or durst
not proceed in this Design. Queen Catharine was already weary of the Insolence
of the Guises, and desirous to save the House of Bourbon as a Curb upon them;
to this purpose she gave erder to the Chancellor, to put what Rubs he could in
their way. The Guises, in the mean time, hastened the Trial of Conde, as much as
was possible, esteeming all Delays dangerous to them.

The sixteenth of November, Francis II dies.
the King being abroad to hunt, was taken extreme ill, which caused Montmorency
to make the more haste to Court. The twenty sixth of that Month the Kings
Disease grew very great and hopeless: This turned the Rage and Fury of the
Guises into Fear and Consternation, when they considered what they should lose
in the Death of that Prince. Thereupon they began to work upon Queen Catharine,
by other Methods, to flatter and crouch to her, and to represent the King of
Navarr and Prince of Conde, as exasperated to that height by their late
Sufferings, that without doubt they would seek her Ruin; but they for their
Parts would stand by her, and serve her with great Fidelity. They desired
therefore Navarr might be committed as well as his Brother had been, before the
King dyed. The Chancellor prevented this by showing, in a grave Oration, That
it would certainly involve France in a Civil War. The fifth of December the
King dyed, having lived seventeen years and ten Months, and reigned one Year,
five Months and twenty Days. His Youth, and the shortness of his Reign, makes
it uncertain whether he ought to be ranged with the Good or Bad Princes; and
the more, because not he but the Guises governed.

This Accident changed the state of things, Charles IX succeeds.
and saved the Life of Conde, or rather the House of Bourbon: Charles IX, his
Brother, succeeded him; and Navarr of a Prisoner, became the second Person in
that Kingdom, Queen Catharine having adjusted all things with him before the
late King died. She sent Letter also to Montmorency, who was not yet arrived at
Orleans, to hasten his coming to the new King, because she was desirous to use
his Counsel and Advice. When he came to Orleans, he asked the Sentinels, By
whose Orders they were placed there, and for what End, and commanded them to be
gone, or he would hang them? The Guards presently disappeared, and then it was
visible that the Guises and not the King needed them.

Though Conde was freed the same moment the King died, The Prince of Conde
fre'd.
yet he would not go out of his Prison till he knew his Accusers and
Prosecutors; to which the Guises replied; It was by the late King's Order, and
would explain the Mystery no further. About twelve Days after, he went to the
Castle of Hane, in Picardy, and there attended the Orders of the new King.
Francis the Second was buried with small State and less Expense, to the great
hatred of the Guises; who in the mean time were very busy to revive the
Differences between Queen Catharine and the King of Navarr, who wisely
prevented their Design, by offering the first Place to the Queen, and reserving
the second to himself, as President of the Kingdom. This passed into a Decree
the twenty first of December.

The Protestant Religion, The Protestant Religion breaks out in the Netherlands.
which had got such footing in France, that it seemed not possible to root it
out, without the Ruin of that Kingdom, began this Year to show it self more
openly in Flanders and the Netherlands, the Nobility espousing it in great
numbers together, with the rest of the States. Nor could Margaret their
Governess, under King Philip, obtain the continuance of the Taxes for the
maintenance of the Spanish Forces: Nor would they of Zealand acquiesce, tho the
Pay was sent from other Places, till these Troops were sent into Spain: Nor
would they grant any Supplies to be disposed of by the Governess, but reserved
that to themselves, that the Soldiers in the Frontier Towns might be certainly
and regularly paid. This was vigorously opposed by the new Bishops, instituted
by Paul IV, as tending to the remitting the Reins of the Ecclesiastical
Government, as well as the Civil.

Bartholomeo Caranza, The Archbishop of Toledo suspected to be a Lutheran.
Archbishop of Toledo in Spain, was also suspected to incline to the Protestant
Religion, and on that account was imprisoned by the Inquisition, and his
Revenues were brought into the King's Treasure. By an Appeal to Rome he saved
his Life; but was never able to recover his See again, but died many Years
after at Rome, in a Private State. Thuanus says, He knew him; and that his
Learning, Integrity, and the Holiness of his Conversation was such as made him
worthy of that Dignity.

The great Progress of the Protestant Religion in all Places, A General Council
desired by many, and opposed by the Pope.
made all Good Men (says Thuanus) desire that the General Council, which had
been intermitted, might be reassumed and carried on; but Pope Pius IV had the
same Fears of it his Predecessors had; lest his own Power should be abated. And
therefore though he judged this the only means to root out Heresies, and very
necessary; yet he delayed it, and unless he were compelled by Force, or some
present Danger, it was apparent he would never admit it. But having resolved,
on the other side, right or wrong, by Force or Fraud to accomplish his own
Desires; and hoping to reap great Advantages from the Ruin of the Caraffa's,
though he had been much assisted by them in the obtaining of the Papacy; he
applied himself to this with great Application and Industry, But prosecutes the
Caraffa's to ruin.
and under the Mask of Friendship. And having laid his Plot, he committed
Charles Caraffa the Cardinal, and his Kinsman, the Cardinal of Naples, to the
Castle of S. Angelo. But Anthony Marquess de Monte Bello, being then not at
Rome, though cited also, escaped the Danger and fled for his Life. Though daily
Accounts came to Rome of the Tumults and Disorders of France, the Pope took no
notice of them. Though the Duke of Florence, who was great with him (for he
pretended to be descended of that Family) did very much urge his Holiness to
consider the State of Affairs in France and Scotland: And told him, It was
Uncharitable to see so many thousands of Souls Lost; and Impolitick, to
necessitate Princes, by the despair of a General Council, to betake themselves
to National Synods. This was much enforced by the Noise, the Speech of the
Chancellor of France had made in the late Assembly, which was then very hot in
Italy. He had, among other things, assured the French Clergy, That if the Pope
would not hold a General, there should very speedily be a National Council
assembled in France; and had exhorted all the Bishops to prepare themselves for
it. To this the Pope answered with great anxiety, seeking Pretenses of Delay,
and pretending he was going to Ancona, and that by the way he would speak with
the Duke of Florence, who was a wise Prince, and his Kinsman, and regulate that
Affair by his Advice.

Cos^^us Duke of Florence, The Duke of Florence come to Rome.
perceiving that this Journey of the Pope to Ancona was a Sham, and being
invited by the Pope to Rome, resolved to go thither, to promote this and some
other Private Business he had with the Pope. Before this, King Philip having
heard of the National Council, designed in France, had sent Anthony de Toledo
to advise the King and Council in this, and lay before them the inevitable
Danger of a Schism, which would follow upon it. On the other side, Ferdinand
the Emperor insisted, That seeing the Council was begun on the account of the
Germans, it should be renewed in Germany, and all that was already determined,
should be re-debated anew. Others thought it reasonable, That seeing the French
were now equally concerned with the Germans, the Council should be assembled in
some City in the Confines of France and the Empire, as at Constance; or if the
Germans would agree to it, at Besanzon. The Pope was rather inclined to have it
at Trent, or rather to bring it deeper into Italy, and had some Thoughts of
Vercelli, a City in the Borders of France; though he could not yet resolve
certainly to hold it any where; for he (good Man) was more desirous that
Geneva, which had much infected France and Germany, should be reduced by a War,
than that the Controversies of Religion should be committed to the peaceable
Determination of a Council. And to that end he had persuaded the Duke of Savoy
to make a War upon the Vaudois his Subjects. Whilst the Pope was in this
incertainty, in October the Duke of Florence came to Rome; and persuaded the
Pope by his Arguments to resolve on the calling of a Council the next Year,
that he might provide a General Remedy for a General Disease: He showed him,
That there was no Danger such a Council would pass any severe Sentence on the
Manners and Abuses of the Court of Rome: And that it was fit he should desire
the Discipline and Corrupt Manners of the Church of Rome should be reformed:
His Arguments for a General Council,
That he ought sincerely to promote it, and cause select Divines to be
assembled out of all Christian Kingdoms, and to hear them favorably; that so
the Peace of Christendom might be restored, which was now torn in Pieces by
Diversity of Opinions. About the same time the Death of Francis II, the
Advancement of the King of Navarr, and the great Kindness Queen Catharine, on
his account showed to the Protestants, very much terrified the Pope; and
compelled him to entertain the Thoughts of a Council, in good earnest, which
till then had been talked of with no great sincerity.

The Pope thereupon sent Lawrence Lenzi, With other concurrent Accidents, at
last prevailed.
Bishop of Firmo, to King Philip; John Manriquez to the Duke of Florence, and
Angelo Guiccjardin to the Queen of France; who was to condole the Death of her
Son, to comfort her, and to entreat her to undertake the Protection of the
Religion she was brought up in; and that she would not open a Door to the
growing Schism, nor seek any Remedy for the Disorders of France from any but
the Church of Rome: The Pope's Ambassadors to thee Christian Princes.
And to assure her, That in a short time all their Desires should be gratified
by the Calling of a General Council; and therefore they prayed her to take
Care, That the flourishing Kingdom of France might not make a Defection from
the Ancient Religion, during her Government, nor any Prejudices be raised
against the Remedies which might justly be expected from it.

The Pope at the same time appointed Hercules Gonzaga, Hierome Seripand, and
Stanislaws Hosio, three of his Cardinals, to be his Legates in the Council; and
sent Zachary Delfino Bishop of Zant, and Francis Commendone, into Germany, to
invite the Protestant Princes to it. Canobbio was sent into Poland on the same
Errant; and had Orders to go on into Russia, to exhort that Prince, who was of
the Greek Communion, to send his Bishops and Divines to the Council; but there
being a War between the Russ and Poles at this time, this Journey was prevented.

The Twenty ninth of September this Year, Gustavus King of Sweden dies.
died Gustavus King of Sweden, which was the Founder of the Line which now
reigns in that Kingdom; he was succeed by Eriek his eldest Son. This Prince
reigned Thirty eight Years with great Prudence and Commendation, being only
noted for a little too great Severity in his Taxes, which was necessary in a
Prince that was to Found a Family; but he was otherwise a Prince of great
Virtues, and the Reformer of the Church of Sweden. The same Year died Philip
Duke of the hither Pomerania, and Albert Count of Mansfeild, a great Favourer
of the Reformation; he died the Fifth of March, in the Seventieth year of his
Age, and Sixtieth of his Government. The same Year died the Cardinal du Bellay,
the Great Patron of John Sleidan, a Person of great Merit, and employed by
Francis I, in many Embassies: He was a great and hearty Desirer of the
Reformation of the Church, and without all doubt showed our Author the right
way to it, though he missed it himself. The Nineteenth of April died also
Philip Melancthon at Wittemberg: He was born at Brett, a Town in the Palatinate
of the Rhine, and was the great Companion and Friend of Martin Luther, but was
more moderate, and a great hater of Contentions and Disputes, and a lover of
Peace: By which Virtues he won the Love and Respects of both Parties in those
troublesome days; on which account he was sent for into France by Francis I.

The Celebration of the States of France was inter ^^^tted by the sudden Death
of Fracis II. But there being great Discontents at the numerous Assemblies of
the Protestants in many Places, which were now openly held; the finding out a
Remedy for this, hastened the opening that Convention. The Thirteenth of
December was appointed for that Purpose, and the Chancellor began the Affair
with an Elegant and Pious Discourse. In which having shown the Use of these
Assemblies, and exhorted all degrees to Peace and Concord, and shown 'em the
common Causes of Sedition and Rebellion, he tells them, That in their times, a
new Cause, that of Religion, had been added to all the former; As if (says he)
Religion could or ought to be the cause of a Civil War, which is the greatest
Mifchief that can befall a Kingdom, and contains all others in it. But then God
is not the Author of Dissension, but of Peace; and other Religions, because
false, may be founded and preserved by Force and Fraud; but the Christian
Religion, which is the only true, is only to be established by Patience,
Justice, Prayers and Tears: The ancient Christians accordingly chose rather to
be Killed than to Kill, and Signed the Truth of their Religion with their
Bloods: And yet it cannot be denied but that a false Religion is a very
powerful Exciter of the Minds of Men, and surmounts all other Passions, and
unites Men more strongly than any other thing; so that we must confess that
Kingdoms are divided in effect more by their Religions, than by their Bounds;
and therefore it daily happens, that those that are possessed by an Opinion of
Religion, have little regard to their Prince, their Country, Wives and
Children; and from hence springs Rebellions, Dissentions and Revolts. And in
the same House, if they are divided in Religion, the Husband cannot agree with
the Wife and Children, nor one Brother with another. That therefore a Remedy
might be had for so great a Calamity, it had been decreed at Fountain-bleau,
That there was need of a Council, and the Pope having since declared there
should suddenly be one, that Men ought not in the mean time to hammer out for
themselves new Religions, Rites and Ceremonies, according to their own Fancies.
For this would not only endanger the public Peace, but the Salvation of their
Souls too. That if the Pope and the Council failed, the King would take the
same Care his Ancestors had, and provide for the Peace and Welfare of his
Kingdom: That it was to be hoped the Bishops would for the future exercise
their Functions with greater Care and Diligence: That the Cure might come from
that Fountain which had caused the Distemper: That they ought to arm themselves
with Virtues, Good Manners, and the Word of God, which are the Arms of
Supplicants, and then go out to War against our Enemies, and not imitate
unskilful Captains, who disfurnish their Walls to make an Irruption. The
Discourse of one that lives well, is very persuasive, but the Sword has no
other power over the Soal than to destroy it with the Body. Our Ancestors
overcame their Sectaries with their Piety, and we ought to imitate them if we
would not be thought rather to hate the Men than their Vices. Let us therefore,
said he, pray daily for them, that they may be reduced from their Errors, and
discharging the hateful Names of Lutherans, Huguenots, and Papists, which were
introduced by the Enemy of Mankind, and are too like the ancient Factions of
Guelfs and Gibellins, let us only retain the Ancient Appellation of Christians.
But then, because there are many who only pretend Religion, but are in Truth
led by Ambition, Avarice and Novelty, it is fit to suppress these Men in the
very beginning: These are the Men that ought to be kept under by the Force of
Arms.

When the States came to debate, A Difficulty proposed.
the Clergy and the Commons were of Opinion, That their Powers were determined
by the Death of the late King; and that they ought to return Home: Which was
overruled by the King of Navar and the Council; And they were ordered to
proceed; because by the Law of France the King never dies; but the Lawful
Succession is transmitted without any interruption. The Cardinal of Lorraine
had designed in the former Reign to make a Speech in the Name of the three
Estates; which was then not opposed, but now the Commons would not suffer it,
because contrary to the Ancient Usage: And for that they had some things to
object against the Cardinal himself.

Jean l' Ange, The Deputy of the Commons speaks against the Clergy.
an Advocate of the Parliament of Bourdeaux, spoke for the Commons, and
remarked three great Faults in the Clergy, Ignorance, Covetousness and
Excessive Luxury, which had given Being to the new Errors, and Scandal to the
People. That the Preaching of the Word of God, which was the chief cause of the
instituting Bishops, was totally neglected; and they thought it a shameful
thing, and beneath their Dignity: And by their Example, the Curates had learned
to neglect their Duty too, and had ordered the Mass to be sung by Illiterate
and Unworthy Stipendaries. That the excessive Pomp and Avarice of the Clergy
(who pretended by it to promote the Glory of God) had raised an Envy and an
hatred of them in the Minds of the People. And therefore he desired that a
Council might be assembled, by the order of the King, to remedy these Mischiefs.

After him James de Silty Comte de Roquefort, And is seconded by the Deputy of
the Nobility.
made a Bold and an Elegant Oration in the Name of the Nobility, and taxed the
Clergy for invading the Rights, and oppressing the People, under Pretense of
the Jurisdictions granted them by the Ancient Kings of France. That therefore
the King ought, in the first place to take care to reform the Clergy, and
assign good Pensions to those that Preached the Word of God, as had been done
by many of his Ancestors, which he named.

Jean Quintin le Bourguinon, made a long tedious Speech in the behalf of the
Clergy, to show; The Clergy apologize for themselves.
I. That the Assembly of the three Estates were instituted for the providing
for the Sacred Discipline. II. That the King might understand the Complaints of
his People, and provide for the Necessities of his Kingdom, by their Advice,
and not for the Reformation of the Church, Which could not Err, and which
neither has, nor ever shall have the least Spot or Wrinkle, but shall ever be
Beautiful: But then he ingenuously confessed, That the Sacred Discipline was very
much declined from its Ancient Simplicity. That therefore the Revivers of the
the Ancient Heresies were not to be heard; and all that had Meetings separate
from the Catholics, were to be esteemed Favorers of Sectaries, and to be
punished. Therefore he desired the King to compel all his Subjects, within his
Dominions, to Live and Believe according to the Form prescribed by the Church.
That the Insolence of the Sectaries was no longer to be endured, who despising
the Authority of the Ancients, and the Doctrine received by the Church, would
be thought alone to understand and embrace the Gospel. That this was the next
step to a Rebellion, and that they would shortly shake off the Yoke of the
Civil Magistrate, and with the same Boldness fight against their Prince, that
they now employed against the Church, if Care were not speedily taken. He
desired that all Commerce between them and the Catholics might be forbidden,
and that they might be treated like Enemies, and that those who were gone out
of the Kingdom on the account of Religion, might be banished. That it was the
King's Duty to draw the Civil Sword, and put all those to Death, who were
infected with Heresy; to defend the Clergy, and restore the Elections of
Bishops to the Chapters, the want of which had caused great Damages to the
Church. That it had been observed, That the very Year the Pope granted the King
the Nomination of Bishops, this Schism began, and has ever since spread it
self; for in the 1517, Luther, Zuinglius and Oecolampadius set up, and Calvin
followed them. This Speech incensed the whole Assembly against him, and
especially the Protestants, who published so many Libels and Satyrs against
him, that he soon after died of Shame and Grief. He was no ill Man, but was a
better Decretalist than a Divine; and had never well thought whether a
Reformation were needful or no, But then it ought also to have been considered
that he did not speak his own Single judgment, but had his matter prescribed
him by the Clergy for whom he spoke.

After some days, the King Signified to the Bishops, that they should prepare
themselves for the Council, which was now recalled at Trent; and the Judges and
Prefects were commanded to discharge all that were Imprisoned for Religion
only, and leave all that were suspected, the free enjoyment of their Estates
and Goods; And it was made Capital to reproach, or injure one the other, on the
Account of Religion. After which the Assemly was Prorogued to the Month of May,
of the next Year.

There was in Piedmont, a Valley called by the Name of Perosia, and St. Martin;
Inhabited by about 15000 Souls, whose Ancestors about 400 Years since had upon
the Preaching of Waldus, The Persecution in Piedmont, which Occasioneth a War.
Speronus and Arnaldus, made a defection from the Church of Rome, and had at
times been severely treated for it, by the French, under whom they had been;
but by the last Treaty were assigned to the Duke of Savoy. This People about
the Year 1555, had embraced the Reformation, and had suffered it to be
publicly preached, tho it was forbidden by the Council at Turin, which the
Year following sent one of its own Members, to inquire after the Offenders and
to punish them; to whom the Inhabitants of this Valley delivered the Confesson
of their Faith; Declaring that they professed the Doctrine contained in the Old
and New Testament, and comprehended in the Apostles Creed; and admitted the
Sacraments Instituted by Christ; the IV first Councils, viz. those of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon; and the Ten Commandments etc. That they
believed the Supreme civil Magistrates were Instituted by God, and they were to
be obeyed, and that whosoever resisted them, fought against God. They said
they had received this Doctrine from their Ancestors, and that if they were in
any error they were ready to receive instruction from the Word of God, and
would presently renounce any heretical or erroneous Doctrine which should be so
shown to them.

Thereupon a Solemn Dispute was in show, appointed concerning the Sacrifice of
the Mass, Auricular Confession, Tradition, Prayers and Oblations for the Dead,
and the Ceremonies of the Church and her Censures; all which were rejected by
them, they alleging that they were humane Inventions, and contrary to the Word
of God. This Confession was sent by the Duke of Savoy to the King of France,
who about a year after returned Answer, That he had caused it to be Examined by
his learned Divines; who had all condemned it as Erroneous and contrary to true
Religion; and therefore the King commanded them to reject this Confession and
to Submit to the Holy Church of Rome; and if they did not do so, their Persons
and Estates should be Confiscated. But they on the contrary were resolved to
stand by their former Confession. They were thereupon commanded not to admit
any Teacher who was not sent by the Archbishop of Turin, or the Council there;
and that if any Teachers came among them from Geneva they should discover or
apprehend them, upon pain of Death, and loss of all they had. For three years
after this, the people of this Persuasion were let alone and no way molested;
but this Year the Duke of Savoy, much against his will and Inclinatiion, was
drawn by the Pope to make a War upon them. In the beginning of March, Jean de
Carquignau, and one Mathurim and his Wife were taken and burnt; and several of
the Neighbor Valleys were Plundered, several of the Inhabitants were put to
death; and about Sixty sent to the Galleys, and some recanted and professed the
Roman Catholic Religion. After this one Thomas Jacomel a Dominican, was sent
with one Turbis for his Assistant, who was a bloody man, to inquire diligently
and severely into all that were suspected; but the Nobility interposing, there
was no great Severity shown. The Monks of the Abbey of Pignoral, which was
seated in the Entry of the Valley, on the other side, kept a parcel of
Soldiers in Pay; and trapping as many of these poor People as they could, as
they passed to and fro, they used them very cruelly; and some others of the
Nobility did the same thing; and a Sedition following upon it, they fined the
poor Inhabitants One Thousand six Hundred Crowns. Upon this a sharp war insued,
which ended in the Ruin of the Aggressors of the Church of Rome.

The Pastor also of Perosia, was taken and burnt with a slow, Fire with many of
his Flock, and the Inhabitants were spoiled of all they had, and forced to Flee
to the Mountains. Being thus enraged with hard Usages, in the Month of July,
Fifty of them set upon One Hundred and Twenty Soldiers belonging to the Abbey
of Pignoral, put them to flight, and slew the greatest part of them; and about
Four Hundred more of their party coming up, they took the Abbey of Pignoral,
and delivered all their people which were imprisoned there. In October
following News being brought that the Duke of Suvoy was sending an Army to
destroy them; They resolved that it was not lawful to take Arms against their
Prince, but that they would take what they could carry away and betake
themselves to the Mountains, and there attend the good pleasure of God, who
never forsakes his own, and can turn the Hearts of Princes which way he
pleases. There was not one Man amongst them who repined against this Decree.
In after times they had Pastors who taught them otherwise, and told them it was
not their Prince, but the Pope that they resisted, and that they fought not for
their Religion, but for their Wives and Children. The second of November the
Forces of the Duke of Savoy entered their Borders, and the Soldiers attempting
to get above them, they betook themselves to their Slings, and maintained a
Fight against them (though they were but few in number) the space of a whole
day, with no great loss. At last the General finding they were not to be
forced, gave them leave to Petition the Duke of Savoy, That they might live in
Peace, assuring him that nothing but utter ruin could have forced them to take
Arms against him: for which they humbly implored his Highness's Pardon, and
begging the Liberty of their Consciences, and that they might not be forced to
submit to the Tradtions of the Church of Rome; but might, with his good leave,
enjoy the Religion they had learned from their Ancestors.

This Petition was seconded by the Duchess of Savoy, who was a merciful
Princess, ^and had great Power over the Affections of the Duke. It being ever
her judgment that this People were not to be so severely used, who had not
changed their Religion a few days agon, but had been in Possession of it from
their Ancestors so many Ages. Upon this they were to be received to mercy; but
the Soldiery fell upon them, when they suspected nothing, and Plundered them
three days together. The General seemed to be much concerned at this breach of
Faith: yet after this they were fined eight thousand Crowns, which they were
forced to borrow on great Usury, and they were also commanded to bring all
their Arms into the Castles the Duke had Garrisoned in their Country. And at
last they were commanded to eject all their Pastors (which was granted with the
tears of their People) that they might avoid the fury of the Soldiers. The
General pretended not to be satisfied that their Pastors were in good truth
gone, and when they suffered them to search their Houses, the Soldiers
Plundered them again, and then burnt their Town. There was one Town called
Angrogne, in a Valley of the same name, the General pretended to show them more
favor, and agreed that they should have one Pastor left them: but they forced
him also to flee into the Mountains afterward, and Plundered his House, and
all his Neighbors, and then enjoined the Sindicks (who are their chief
Magistrates) to find up, and bring in the Pastor; threatening that otherwise
they would burn and destroy the whole Territory; and when they had so done then
they withdrew.

In the mean time their Messengers were gone with the Petition, mentioned
above, to the Duke to Vercelli, where they attended forty days before they
could get Audience, and then they were forced to promise they would admit the
Mass, and when the Prince had upon these terms forgiven their taking Arms
against him, they were commanded to ask Pardon too of the Popes Nuncio, which
at last they did. During their absence, the Inhabitants of Angrogne had
suffered no Sermons but in private, that they might not exasperate the Prince,
or make the Affairs of their Deputies more difficult. But they resolved when
these were returned they would exercise their Religion openly, and not give any
thing to the maintaining of the Soldiers, whether their Request were granted or
denied.

In the beginning of January the Deputies returned, and when their Principals
understood what had been done, 1561.
they wrote of the rest of the Valleys to give them an account of it; and
defired a public Consultation or Diet. At which it was resolved that they
should all join in a League to defend their Religion, which they believed was
agreeable to the Word of God, professing in the mean time to obey their Prince
according to the Commandments of God, and that they would for the future make
no Agreement, or Peace, but by a common Consent, in which the freedom of their
Religion should be saved. Upon this they grew more Confident, refused the
Conditions offered by the Duke of Savoy, and the promises made by their
Deputies. And the next day they entered into the Church of Bobbi, in Arms, and
broke down all the Images and Altars, and after a Sermon, marching to Villar,
where they intended to do the like, they met the Soldiers (who had heard what
was done) going to Plunder Bobbi, stopped them, and with their Slings so pelted
them, that they were glad to shift for their lives, and left these Reformers to
do the same thing at Villar. The Captain of Turin attempting to stop this Rage
was beaten, and the Dukes Officers were glad to seek to their Pastors for a
Pasport. After this they beat the Captain of Turin in a second Fight. By this
time the whole Army drew into the Field, and the Inhabitants of these Valleys
not being able to resist them, they burnt all their Towns and Houses, and
destroyed all the People they took. In these Broils Monteil, one of the Duke of
Savoy's Chief Officers, was slain by a Lad of eighteen years of age; and
Truchet, another of them, by a Dwarf. The Duke of Savoy had sent seven thousand
Soldiers to destroy this handful of Men; and yet such was their Rage and
Desperation, and the Advantage of their Country, that they beat his Soldiers
wheresoever they met them. And in all these Fights their Enemies observed that
they had slain only fourteen of the Inhabitants, and thence concluded that God
fought for them. So the Savoyards began to treat of a Peace, which at last was
concluded to the Advantage of these poor despicable People. The Duke remitting
the eight thousand Crowns they were to pay by the former Treaty, and suffering
them to enjoy the Liberty of their Religion: So that he got nothing by this War
but loss and shame, the ruin of his People on both sides, and the desolating of
his Country.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION.
BOOK III.
The CONTENTS.
A Persecution in the Low Countries. The French Affairs. Queen Catharine
favors the Protestants, but orders Montmorency to oppose them. She
suspects the designs of the Nobility. The differences of Religion occasion
Tumults in France. Various Edicts made. The Cardinal of Lorrain procures the
Conference of Poissi. Mary Queen of the Scots leaves France. The three Estates
of France Assemble at Pont-Oyse. The Conference of Poissi. The Rudeness of
Laines, General of the Jesuits. This Conference disliked abroad. The Council of
Trent recalled. Opposed by Vergerius. The Popes Legates sent to Princes to
invite them to the Council. A Diet of the Protestant Princes at Naumburg. The
Queen of England rejects the Council. The Ruin of the Caraffa's. The King of
Navarre drawn over to the Romish Party, by the Arts of the King of Spain.
Scotch Affairs. The Protestant Religion settled there by a Parliament. Queen
Mary Arrives there. Her beginning favorable to the Protestants. Great kindness
at first, in show, between her and Queen Elizabeth. The French Affairs. The
Edict of January, 1562. Injunctions published by the Queen concerning Images.
The King of Navarre pretends to promote the Reformation. The Edict of January
opposed by the Guises. The Massacre of Vassi. The Duke of Guise enters Paris.
All things in France tend to Civil War. The Queen joins with the Roman
Catholic Party out of fear. Orleans surprised by the Prince of Conde. The
Massacre of Senlis. Roan taken by the Protestants. Several Treaties for a
Peace. The Siege of Roan. The King of Navarre shot. His Death and Character.
The Prince of Conde leaves Orleans. Besieges Corbeil. The two Armies come in
view. He marches toward Normandy. The Battle of Dreux, in which Montmorency is
taken. St. Andre slain, and the Prince of Conde taken. Coligni and the Duke of
Guise become Generals. The Pope fondly rejoices at this Battle. The Siege of
Orleans. The Duke of Guise Assassinated. His Death and Character. The Queen
desires, and at last makes a Peace, which is disliked by Coligni.

THIS Year there began a sharp Persecution against all that were suspected to
favor the Reformation in the Netherlands, and for the greater terror they
burnt the Houses of all those they Convicted for holding private Meetings. A
Persecution in the Low Countries.
Perrenot Bishop of Arras, and Cardinal Granvel, hoping by this means to
prevent the spreading of a Religion in that Country, which had made such
progresses in Germany and France. They that embraced this Religion, were no
less scandalized by the multiplying the Bishoprics, and thereupon drew up a
Confession of their Faith, to be exhibited to King Philip, beseeching him, in
the end of it, that he would put a stop to the bloody Executions, which
destroyed so many of his innocent People. This Confession was the same in
substance with that published by the French Protestants; and amongst other
things, they took particular care to insert That the Civil Magistrate was the
Ordinance of God, and therefore was to be obeyed. Their Tributes to he duly
paid, and all manner of Respect and Reverence to be showed to them; and that
Prayers were to be made to God for their preservation.

In the month of February, The French Affair.
the new King of France left Orleans, and went to Fontainbleau, where the
Prince of Conde waited upon him, and being introduced into the Privy Council,
asked the Chancellor if there were any Accusation depending against him, and
was told by him and the whole Council, they were entirely satisfied of his
innocence, and leave was given him to demand an Acquital in the Parliament of
Paris. And a Decree was made to that purpose, and Published by the Order of the
Council March 13. after which he went to Paris to prosecute his Discharge
before that Court.

In the mean time Queen, Queen Catharine favors the Protestants.
Catharine, the Regent of France, seemed very much ^o favor the Protestant
Party, and by her Arts and Dissimulation, so far prevailed upon the spirit of
the King of Navarre, who was their Head, that he told the Danish Ambassador, he
did not doubt but he should see the Reformed Religion settled in France within
one year. The Queen, on the other side, told Montmorency, That she connived at
them for the present, that she might the more easily elude the designs of the
King of Navarre, by seeming to comply with him. But then (she said) he and the
other great Men of that Kingdom ought to oppose them, and to complain that the
Religion of their Ancestors was every where violated and despised. She designed
by this, First, To divide the great Men in the Point of Religion. Secondly, To
weaken the Interest of the King of Navarre. And thirdly, To preserve the Romish
Religion in France. But Montmorency, who was her Instrument, designed only the
last, yet he was very active in it. The Queen in the interim carried her
dissimulation so far, that she ordered Jean de Monluc, Bishop of Valence, who
was a great favourer of the Reformation, and no Enemy to the Protestants
Doctrine, to Preach frequently at Court, and She and the King were sometimes
present at his Sermons. He would sometimes speak very freely against the
Corruptions that were in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, and
obliquely tax the Papal Authority. The favor the Queen showed to this Bishop,
made Montmorency suspect that in her Heart she had a kindness for the
Protestant Party, and that underhand she and Navarre had one and the same
design. And thereupon he deserted her, and joined with the Guises, his (till
then) Mortal Enemies, the Duchess de Valentois procuring the Reconciliation.
Magdalen of Savoy, Wife to Montmorency, was also an implacable enemy to the
Reformation, and hated Coligni the Admiral, for that and other causes, and
therefore she perpetually stimulated him against the Protestants.

Francis Montmorency, The younger Montmorency's Advice to his Father.
Son of the Constable, was a person of great Prudence, and he wisely advised
his Father not to lose the least of his friends in so necessary a time (for he
foresaw a Tempest would arise in France) of what Religion soever they were:
that it did not become a wise Man to endeavor to gain new friends with the
loss of his old ones, and to prefer the uncertain friendship of reconciled
enemies before the tried affections of his old Acquaintances. That if he
rejected Conde, Coligni, and Rochefoucault, on the Account of Religion, he
would deprive his Family of the assistance of three great Men, and perhaps the
Queen would think never the better of him: therefore his advice to his Father
was to sit still, and let Coligni, and the Guises fight it out, without taking
part on either side, and in all probability Guise would be worsted; and he
would become the Arbitrator of the two contending Religions. And in the mean
time, it was most certain, there were many great Errors, by length of time
crept into the Church, which he ought not to defend, because they were
injurious to the Majesty of God. The good old Gentleman was much moved at this
Advice from his Son, but made no other answer to it, than That he certainly
knew that if the Religion were changed, the Civil Government would be changed
too. That he cared not what became of him, if his little Masters did well, and
the Actions of Henry II. might not be called in question; who was a wise
Prince, and his good Master. So he perished in his first resolves, believing he
was obliged to defend the Cause of Religion against his best, and most ancient,
and tried friends.

The Pope seeing his Jurisdiction and Authority decline so fast in Germany,
England, and France, greedily embraced a pretended Overture made by one
Abraham, The pretended Submission of the Cophthites.
a Syrian Impostor, who pretended he was sent by the Cophthites, an Eastern
Sect of Christians, to make a submission to the Holy See; whereupon he sent
Christopher Roderick, and John Baptista Elianus, two Jesuits, to them; who
gained nothing by this Mission, but an exact Account of the Opinions of these
Cophthites, and a certainty of the Frauds of this pretended Ambassador Abraham,
who had feigned this Mission to the Pope for his own Ends.

This Mortification was soon after attended by another, Livonia falls off from
the Sea of Rome.
not less afflictive to his Holiness, for Gothard Ketler, Master of the
Teutonick Order in Libonia, entirely submitted to Sigismond King of Poland,
which put an end to that Order; when it had flourished there 357 years. He was
thereupon made Duke of Gurland and Semigallen, and Governor of Livonia, and
Marrying a Wise, withdrew himself and his Subjects from the Sea of Rome. The
Archbishopric of Riga was also about the same time changed into a Dukedom,
John Kothewick, the last Archbishop of that See, embracing the Augustane
Confession, put himself under the Protection of the Crown of Poland, and was by
Sigismond made Duke of Lithuania. This Archbishopric was founded in the year
1215, by the procurement of the Knights of the Teutonick Order, the City being
then and a long time after, the Seat of the Master of it, who divided the
Sovereignty and Administration of Justice with the Archbishop. After this short
Digression, which the Reader is desired to Pardon, I shall now return to the
prosecution of the French Affairs.

The new Friendship between Montmorency and the Guises was a very frightful
thing to the Queen Regent, The Queen suspects the designs of the Nobility.
who sought all the way she could possible to divide their Affections, for the
preserving her own Authority, and therefore she was very Anxio^sly inquisitive
to find, whether this new Kindness between two such Ancient Enemies tended. The
Prince of Conde in the mean time was declared Innocent by the Parliament of
Paris the Thirteenth of June, and his Discharge Recorded. The Differences of
Religion occasion Tumults.
The Differences in Religion not only disquieted the Court, but the Provinces
also, the two Parties reproaching each other with the Names Papist and
Huguenot. There were frequent Tumults raised also by the Roman Cabolicks, to
show that Coligni was out, when he said, The Protestant Religion might be
divulged throughout all the Provinces without any Disturbance. And at Amiens
and Pont-Oise things came to a Sedition, the Catholic Artificers beginning the
Quarrel, and falling upon some of the Houses of some of the Protestants, and
they slew one Hadrian Fourre a Priest, because he was reported to savor the
Reformation, and afterward burnt his Body publicly, for which only two were
hanged. An Edict to restrain them.
This necessitated the Council to forbid all Reviling Expressions, and all
Tumults on the Accounts of Religion; And by it, all that had been banished for
Religion in the Reign of Francis II. were invited to return, and promised, they
should enjoy their Goods and Estates, if they would live like good Catholics
for the future, or otherwise might sell them, and retire elsewhere; which was
after opposed by the Parliament at Paris, but yet many returned on that
account, and many that were in Prison were discharged, so that the Protestant
Party appeared numerous. The Cardinal of Lorrain was Alarmed at this, and
represented to the King and Queen: That the whole Kingdom was filled with
Conventicles; That the meaner sort ran to the Sermons out of curiosity, and
were easily corrupted; That the Ancient Ceremonies were little frequented or
regarded, and that they were already derided and scorned by many; That great
numbers every day forsook the Church, The Edict of July.
and went over to the Protestants. So he would needs have had a new Edict
forthwith published, to prevent these Inconveniences. This being Debated in the
Council in the Month of July, there was another Edict published. That all
should live peaceably, and without any furry each to other, or reproaching one
the other; That there be no Listing or Inrolling Men on either side; That the
Preachers should use no Seditious or Turbulent Expressions upon pain of Death,
and the Presidents of the Prov^ces should determine: of these Affairs, and
execute the Edi^t; That no Sermons should be frequented by Men Armed or
Unarmed, in public or in private, nor any Sacraments Administered, but
according to the Rites of the Church of Rome; And, That if any Man was
Convicted of Heresy, and delivered to the Secular Power, he should only be
Banished; and this was to stand till a General or a National Council should
determine otherwise. This was called the Edict of July.

The Cardinal of Lorrain had so good an opinion of his own Abilities, The
Cardinal of Lorrain procures the Conference of P^issy.
that he was fondly persuaded, he could confute all the Doctrines of the
Protestants out of the Fathers, and thereby acquire a great Reputation to
himself, if he could procure a Conference with their Pastors. It was therefore
resolved, that there should be a Meeting for that purpose at Poissy near St.
Germain the Tenth of August, and that Pasports should be granted to their
Ministers which were to come thither on that account. All of both sides being
invited thither at the same time. The Queen Regent was very much for this
Disputation, but the greatest part of the Roman Catholics were against it, as
thinking it a dangerous thing to suffer the Doctrine, which had hitherto been
received, to be brought under debate, and the Religion of their Ancestors to be
disputed.

In the Interim Mary Queen of the Scots left France, Mary Queen of Scotland
leaves France.
and returned into Scotland, the Cardinal of Lorrain attending her as far as
Calais. There was also a Theatrical Reconciliation between the Prince of Conde
and the Duke of Guise, by the Order of the King; the later protesting, That he
had no hand in the Imprisonment of the Prince, and the Prince telling Guise,
That the Adviser and Procurer of his Commitment was a Wicked Man and a Villain;
To which Guise Answered, That he believed so too, but was not concerned in it.
After which, by the King's Command, they embraced each other as Kinsmen and
Friends, and promised a firm and sincere Friendship each to other, and there
was great Rejoicing in the Court. The Assembly of the States was Prorogued last
year till May of this, and then was, on the account of the great Affairs,
prorogued to August, and Appointed to be opened at Pont-Oyse.

In this Assembly, The Three Estates of France Assembled at Pont-Oyse.
the Agreement between the Queen Regent and the King of Navar was Confirmed by
the three Estates, which was very difficultly obtained by the later. This
Assembly was opened at St. Germain, where James Bre^agne d Autum, who spoke for
the Commons, declaiming sharply against the Ignorance of the Priests, and the
Corrupt Manners and Depraved Discipline of the Clergy, so that they were unfit
to Lead or Instruct the People but rather disgusted and displeased them, doing
all things for Hire, and nothing as their Duty, enslaving themselves to
Pleasures, and wallowing in Luxury and Idleness. To this he assigned the
Calamities which at present oppressed France. He therefore moved the King to
take away all their Jurisdiction, that he should employ their overgreat Riches
to Pious Uses, and call a National Council, which was the only present and
certain Cure of those Evils; That free Pasports should be given to all that
would come to it, and, that the King or some of the Princes of the Blood should
preside in it, whilst Business of Religion was debated; That the late Decree
against Conventicles should be no prejudice to those of the Reformed Religion,
who rejected the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, nor any Presription as to
length of time, which could not make what in it self was false, true; and the
Business of Religion was to be quietly and friendly debated according to the
Word of God, and not with the Sword and Reproaches. He that spoke for the
Nobility, excused the Clergy, and desired the King to preserve their
Privileges and Dignities. But then he moved, to have the greatest part of the
Church Lands sold to pay the Debts of the Crown, pretending, that a third part
of the Purchase Money put out to Use, would be as good to them as the whole
Land. That the Edict of July might be recalled, and only multiplicity of Sects,
and ill Language, under the pretense of Liberty, prohibited. That a National
Council might be called, in which the King should preside. That all
Jurisdictions should be taken from the Church, and annexed to the Crown. There
were also many other things demanded in this Assembly, which tended to the
Ruin of the Clergy, the Papal Authority growing into Contempt, and the
greatest part, either out of a desire to promote Piety, The Clergy of France
give the King Taxes to save their Revenues and Jurisdictions.
or of Love to Novelty, favoring the Protestant Party, and daily increasing
their numbers by joining with them.

The Clergy to prevent this Storm wisely gave the King four Tenths for six
years, which very much appeased the King and the Principal Courtiers toward
them The Queen, by the Advice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, wrote about this
time a long Letter to the Pope, dated the 5th of August, In which, stating the
dangers which attended the differences in Religion, she exhorted him to provide
speedy Remedies, because they were become so numerous, that they could no
longer be suppressed by the Sword; that many of the Principal Nobility and
Magistrates embraced that way, and had drawn over such Numbers, and so united
them, that they were become sormidable to the State; yet by the Rare Blessing
of Heaven, they had no Anabaptists, Libertines, etc. none that denied the
Apostles Creed, or the Interpretation of it received in the Seven General
Councils; That therefore most were of opinion, that notwithstanding these
differences, they ought to be received into the Communion of the Church, which
would end in the Peace of the Church; That the use of Images, which was
forbidden by God, and, as to Adoration, disproved by St. Gregory, ought to be
taken away; That Exorcisms and some of the Prayers used in Baptism, might be
omitted; The Lords Supper Administered to all the Laity in both Kinds, and the
Decree of the Council of Constance ought not to be preferred before the Command
of God; That the Prayers might be used in the Vulgar Tongue, and all that would
Communicate might do so the first Sunday of every Month; That the Psalms might
be sung in the French Tongue; A Public Confession of Sins, Prayers for the
Prince, the Magistrates, Clergy, Good Weather, Fruitful Seasons, and all
Affliction might be in the same Tongue; That the late invented Feast of the
Holy Sacrament might be abolished, it being unnecessary, and the cause of great
Scandal and Offense; and that this Mystery was Instituted for a Spiritual
Worship, and not for Show and Pomp; That the use of the Latin Tongue, which
was foreign and unknown, was a great fault, the Prayers of the Church belonging
not only to the Clergy, but to all; but as now it stands, Who can say Amen to a
Prayer in a Language he knows not? That if yet the Latin must be used, it were
fit an Interpretation should be made of the Prayers in the Vulgar Tongue; That
the Receiving of the Priest in the Sacrifice of the Mass, the People only
looking Idely on, is contrary to the Institution; That the Psalms ought to be
in the Vulgar Tongue, and also the Private Prayers of the People; That these
things might be granted without derogating from the Papal Authority. The Pope
was infinitely offended with this Letter, and the more, because of the same of
a National Council shortly to be holden in France; but then he dissembled his
Resentment, and became the more sincere in the Assembling a General Council,
which he had rather promised than desigued before.

The Conference was to be begun the First of August at Poissy, The Conference
o^ Poissy:
and the Bishops and Divines were already arrived there, and had entered into a
Debate, what Points were to be Disputed; where they spent the time to no great
purpose, disputing amongst themselves concering the Office of a Bishop, the
Dignity of Cathedral Churches, of Colleges and their Exemptions, of the
Ordination of Curates and Priests; concerning allowing them Competent Pensions,
abating their number, reforming the Discipline of the Monasteries, of
Commendam's and Benesices, of cutting off the Pleasures and Luxuries of the
Clergy, and of Censures. And they thought the Answering such like Queries was
of great use to the Church in these confused times. The Protestant Ministers.
There appeared for the Protestants Augustine Marlorat, Francis de S. Pol, Jean
Remond Merlin, J. Malo, Francis de Mureaux, N. Tobie, Theodore Beza, Claud
Brisson, J. Bouquin, J. Viret, J. de la Tour, Nich. de Crallas, and John De
l'Espine, Their demands.
who abjuring the Dominican Order did then first openly prosess the Protestant
Religion. Soon after Peter Martyr came to Zurich: These Asked four things; 1st.
That the Bishops should be Parties and not Judge; 2d. That the King and Council
should Preside; 3d. That all things might be determined only by the Word of
God; 4th. That whatever was agreed, should be set down by Notaries. The Queen
yielded all these, but would have one of the Secretaries of State be the only
Notary, and she would not consent that the King should Preside in the
Conference. The Cardinal of Lorraine had before objected against Beza, That he
should say, that Christ was no more present in the Sacrament, than in a Muddy
Ditch. This Expression is said to have been urged by Melanchthon, against
Oecolampadius as the Consequence of his. Doctrine, and was by a mistake of the
Cardinal wrongfully charged on Beza, who denied and detested it as Blasphemous.
The First of September the Conference began, The Conference began.
the King, the Queen, his Younger Brother, and Sister, and about Eleven Bishops
being present, and the Cardinals of Bourbon, Tournon, Chastillon, Lorrain,
Armagnac, and Guise. The King opened it with a short Speech, which was seconded
by the Chancellor with a longer. In which he preferred a National Council
before a General, and showed that the Errors of many General Councils had been
corrected by National Synods, The Chancellor's Speech.
particularly the Arrian General Council of Ariminium was condemned by a
Private Council held by St. Hillary Bishop of Poictiers, and banished out of
France. He said, they neithe needed much Learning nor many Books, the Bible
alone being sufficient by which Religion was to be Tried and Examined. That the
Protestants were their Brethren, and to be treated as such; if out of Ambition
or Avarice they did otherwise, God would judge and condemn them, and their
Decrees would be rejected. That they ought to Amend and give God Thanks for any
Error that was discovered, and if they did not, God would Punish them.

After him, the Cardinal of Tournon spoke, and Thanked the King, Queen and
Princes for being present, and approved highly of what the Chancellor had said,
but desired a Copy of it, which the Chancellor refused, though it was seconded
by the Cardinal of Lorrain, because he perceived they craftily designed to
mischief him by it. Beza speaks.
Theodore Beza, being next commanded to speak, fell upon his Knees, and after a
Prayer, and reciting his Faith, complained to God, that they had been
injuriously treated as Enemies of the Public Peace. Then he showed, wherein
they agreed with the Church of Rome, and wherein they differed, and discoursed
of the way of attaining Salvation, of Faith, Good Works, the Word of God, the
Authority of the Councils and Fathers, of the Sacraments, and of their use and
true Interpretation; of Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation, and lastly,
of the Ecclesiastical Order and Discipline, and obedience to Princes; he was so
long and so sharp in some of these things, that they had scarce patience to
hear him out, and the Cardinal of Tournon presently replied with a Voice
trembling for Rage; Tournon replies with rage.
That he and the other Prelates had done violence to their Consciences by
condescending to this Conference in compliance with his Majesty's Commands, by
hearing these new Evangelists. That he foresaw, if they were heard, many things
would be spoken by them injurious to the Majesty of God, which would offend the
Ears of the King, and of all good Men. And therefore he beseeched his Majesty
not to believe what was said, That if he could have prevented it the King
should not have been present, but, however, he desired he would not suffer his
Mind to be pre-ingaged in their false Opinions, but to suspend till the Bishops
had Answered it, and the King and the rest there present should know the
difference between Falsehood and Truth. He Asked a Day to Answer in, and prayed
the King that he would persevere in the Religion of his Ancestors. Lastly, he
added, that, but for the respect they bore to the King, the Bishops would have
arisen and put a stop to those horrible and abominable Words. The Queens Answer.
The Queen calmly said, she had done the thing without the Advice of the
Parliament of Paris, the Princes, and Privy Council; That no change was
designed, but that the Disturbances of France might be appeased, and Men
friendly brought from their Errors into the Old Way, which belonged to them to
effect.

The first Dispute was, The Points debated.
about the Lords Supper; The second, which was the 17th of August, was about
the Church, which, the Cardinal of Lorrain said, could not Err, That if any
particular Church did, Recourse was to be had to the Head, the Church of Rome,
and the Decrees of a General Council, and the Concurrent Opinions of the
Ancient Fathers; and before all, to the Sacred Scriptures explained by the
Right Sense and Interpretation of the Church. As to the Lord's Supper, in
effect, he said, That if the Protestants would not embrace their Opinions,
there was no hope of an Agreement. The Cardinal of Tournon thereupon applauded
his Harangue, and said, he was ready to lay down his Life for this Faith,
entreating the King to continue steadfast in it, and was contented (Good Man!)
that if the Protestants would subscribe these two Points, they should be
admitted to dispute all the rest; but if they refused this, all hearing was to
be denied them, and they were to be expelled out of his Dominions. Beza desired
to Answer him Extempore, but the King delayed the Answer to the next day.

Upon a Petition, the Ministers were heard at last again the 24th of September
before the Queen only; when Beza discoursed of the Church and its Notes, which,
he said, were the Preaching of the Word, and a Pure Administration of the
Sacraments. As for the Succession of Persons and Doctrines, it had been often
interrupted; He discoursed of the Ordinary and Extraordinary Vocation, of the
Universal Church and her Authority, of Councils, which he affirmed had, and
might err, of the Dignity of Scripture, and whether the Scriptures were to be
preferred before the Church, or did borrow their Authority from the Church.
Claud d' Espence, a learned Man, Claud d' Espence opposes Beza.
who desired very much the Church might regain her former Peace, being
Commanded by the Cardinal of Lorrain, to answer Beza, began with a Declaration,
that he had a long time wished, that there might have been Conferences, and
said, he had ever abhorred those Bloody Proceedings which had been used against
those miserable Men. The Ordination of the Protestant Ministers Questioned.
Then he said, he wondered by what Authority the Protestants took upon them the
Office of the Ministry, and by whom they were Ordained and Instituted; and
that seeing the had received Imposition of hands from no body, how could they
be accounted lawful Ministers; for it was manifest, they had no Ordinary call:
And they must prove an Extraordinary Vocation by Miracles, which they had not.
And thence he concluded, they never came into the Church, either by an Ordinary
or an Extraordinary call. As to Traditions, if any Controversy arose about the
Sense of Scriptures, which could not be otherwise adjusted, they must of
necessity have recourse to the Fathers, who had their Authority from their
lawful and ordinary Call or Succession, because upon them the Gifts of the
Spirit were bestowed: As it was written of the Levites, whose Answers were not
to be questioned. That many things were settled by Traditions, which were not
written in the Scriptures. As, that the Father was not begotten; That the Son
was of the same Substance with the Father; That Infants were to be Baptized;
That the Blessed Virgin continued a Virgin after she brought forth; That the
Decrees of General Councils should be valid, and that they cannot err in
Matters of Faith; and that it cannot be shown, that any of the later Councils
have corrected the former.

Beza replied, Beza Replie^.
that the Imposition of hands was no necessary note of a lawful Call, The two
principal were, a due Inquiry into the Doctrine and Manners of the Person, and
an Election of them to the Ministry. That they were not to expect Imposition
of hands from the Bishops who opposed the Truth, and persecuted those that
Preached it. And that Miracles were not always necessary to an extraordinary
Call, which he endeavored to prove by Isaiah, Daniel, Amos, Zachariah, and St.
Paul. In the next congress, Beza spoke much about the Calling of the Protestant
Ministers, but in such a manner as tended more to the exasperating of the
Prelates, than the appeasing them; so that these two days were spent in mere
squabble, without order, and to no purpose.

There was then in France John Laines, Laines General of the Jesuits his
Rudeness in the Conference.
a Spaniard, General of the Jesuits, who came thither with Hippolito d' Este
Cardinal of Ferrara, sent by Pope Pius IV. as Legate to the King. This Laines,
being present this day at the Conference, called the Protestant Ministers
Monkeys, Foxes, and Monsters; and said, they were to be turned over to the
Council called by the Pope: Then he fell upon the Queen, for meddling in things
that did not belong to her, but to the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops; and he
said, it was not lawful, whilst a General Council was in being, for the Queen
to appoint by her private Authority a Conference here. The Queen was much
enraged at the Insolence of this Man, but, out of Reverence to the Legate,
suppressed her resentment; after this Day there were no more Public
Conferences, but they Drew out three of a Side, and endeavored to form such an
Exposition of the Lord's Supper as both Parties might agree in, which in the
End proved impossible to be done, and so the Conference of Poissi ended, which
was the first Liberty that was granted to dispute the Established Religion in
France; and was blamed by some as a thing of ill Example, and approved by
others as the only means left to prevent the Storm which hung over their heads.
But it had not that effect, so the Ministers, and especially Beza, (who was
invited by the Queen) were honorably dismissed.

The Fame of this Conference being diffused through Italy and Spain, Philip the
Second was strangely surprised at it; so the Queen sent Jacques de Monbron, In
the History of the Council of Trent, called Jaques de Montbrun.
a Person of good Birth and Repute to excuse it, That Prince would hardly be
induced to hear the reason of it, and turning him over to the Duke de Alva, he
blamed their fearfulness, and advised them to return to the same Severities
which had been used in the Reigns of Henry II. and Francis II. promising his
Masters Assistance for the Extirpation of the Protestants. Adding, That the
King had been solicited to it by the Catholic Nobility and People of France,
and that he could not neglect their Petition, but he must be wanting to
himself; That he did not fear such vain reproaches, as that with foreign Forces
he invaded what was another; because in this Cause the Spanish Forces were no
foreigners, when the Religion of their Ancestors was at the stake. By this it
appeared to the Court of France, That there was a Correspondence between their
Catholics and the Spaniards, and one Arthur Desire, a Priest, was taken much
about this time near Orleans, going into Spain with a Letter from some great
Men to King Philip, to persuade him to undertake the Protection of their Infant
King, and of the Catholic Religion, which was in great danger to be ruined;
for which he was ordered to be Penance by the Parliament of Paris, and
committed to the Carthusian Monks to be kept a Prisoner for ever; but
afterward he made his Escape. This Sentence was pronounced against him the
14th of July.

In the End of this Year, A Popish Position gives great Offense in France.
one Jean Tanquerel, a young Divine, proposed as his Thesis in a Disputation,
That the Pope as Christ's only Vicar and the Monarch of the Church, can by his
Spiritual and Secular Power, command all faithful Princes as his Subjects; and
if they disobey his Precepts, deprive them of their Dignities and Kingdoms;
which being complained off to the King, the Chancellor sent a Commission to
inquire into it, and Tanquerel being fled, it was ordered, that the Parritor of
the Theological Faculty should make a Recantation of it in his Name in the
School of the Sorbonne, before the Dean, and all the Fellows and Students of
that Faculty, in the Presence of the President of the Parliament of Paris, the
King's Counsel and Solicitor, and for the future, the Parliament forbad all
such questions to be given. And ordered the Sorbonne to send two of their
Fellows to beg the King's Pardon. This Decree passed the 2d of December, and
was put in Execution ten days after.

The Pope had till now dreaded a General Council, as tending to the abatement
of his Power, The Council of Trent recalled.
and on that score had delayed it till Cosmus Duke of Florence, and the fear of
a National Council in France, prevailed upon him to reassume that which was
began by Paul III. continued by Julius III. and was at last interrupted by the
Commotions of Germany: The Pope's Bull.
In order to this, the 19th of November 1559. he Published a Bull for the
recalling this Council to Trent at the Feast of Easter of this Year, vehemently
Exhorting all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops and Abbats, and all others who
had the Right or Privilege to Sit and Vote in a General Council by common
right, or any Privilege or Ancient Custom; that at that Day they would be
present in the said Council: He also Admonished the Emperor Elect, and all
other Christian Kings and Princes, that if they could not be personally
present, they should send their Ambassadors thither; affirming beforehand, that
he designed nothing by this Council but the Glory of God, the Reduction and
Salvation of the scattered Sheep, and the lasting Peace of Christendom. There
was soon after a sharp Invective Printed at Ausburg by Paulus Vergerius Bishop
of Cabo di Istria in Friule, Vergerius opposes the Council.
who was a Cardinal, and had been employed by several of the preceding Popes in
great Ambassies, and had lately left that Church, and betaken himself to the
Protestans of Germany. In it he set forth the Pride, Pomp, Luxury, Ambition,
Bribery, and corrupt Manners of the Court of Rome. which he vowed he well knew,
and from his heart detested. That the Council was not called by the Pope, to
establish the Doctrine of Christ, but those Human Inventions which they had
brought in contrary to the Commandments of God, not to Purge God's fold, but to
disseminate their inveterate Errors, not to restore Christian Liberty, but to
introduce a misrable Servitude and Oppression on the Souls of Men; none but the
Bishops and Abbats, who should take an Oath prescribed by the Roman Ceremonial,
Lib. 1. c. III.. XIV. being permitted to sit there: That all the inferior
Clergy, and secular Princes had only a right to come, be instructed, but not to
deliberate or vote, by which it must needs come to pass that not only all those
who had separated from that Church on the account of her gross Errors would not
be heard; which was promised at first by Paul III. but that also many of the
most Skilful and most Learned Doctors of that Church would be excluded from
giving any Vote; and all Liberty, in which only there was any hope of restoring
the Peace of the Church, would be taken away, and a Door opened to let in a
Schism which would never have an end.

The Pope, Ambassadors sent to the Protestant Princes to invite them to the
Council.
perceiving that this Complaint would irritate the Minds of the German Princes,
for whose sake the Council was first Indicated, sent Ambassadors to them;
Zachariah Delfino Bishop of Faro, and John Francis Comendon Bishop of Zant,
being by his order directed to all the Princes with Letters of Credence. They
went, first to Ferdinand the Emperor, who was then at Vienna; from thence, they
went by his Advice, to meet all the Princes of the Augustane Confession, who
were then Assembled at Naumberg upon the River Saole in Saxony: whom they were
to treat very gently and modestly, studying to avoid whatever might give
occasion of Exasperation or Offense, by the Counsel of this great and excellent
Prince; he telling them, this was the easiest way to do their Business, and to
get a Positive Answer. He also reminded them of the Conditions upon which the
Protestant Princes had in the last Diet declared, they would consent to the
Council of Trent. That if they happened to be mentioned, the Ambassadors might
not be destitute of an Answer. He also sent Three Ambassadors of his own with
them, 1. Otho Count of Eberstin. 2. Felix Bogislaus, Baron of Hassenstein; And
3. Christopher Meela, Vice-Chamberlain of Bohemia. These being admitted the day
after their Arrival at Naumburg, into the Assembly of the Princes, exhorted
them to be present in the Council to be shortly holden at Trent, that an end
might so be put to the lamentable Differences of Religion, and the Calamities
of Germany. When they had deliberated on the Proposal, Their Answer to the
Emperor.
they returned this Answer, That they were very Thankful to the Emperor for
his Care of, and Love to the Empire. As to the Council, they did not refuse a
Free, General, and truly Christian Council, in which, not the Pope, but the
Word of God should sit as Judge, the Oath of the Bishops being discharged, and
a Liberty allowed to those of the Augustane Confession to Vote: But on the
contrary, they perceived the Pope pretended to continue the Council of Trent,
and only to allow those Bishops to Vote, who were Sworn to him, against which
they had already Protested in many Dyets of the Empire: They concluded with a
Promise of a more partiticular Answer when they had consulted the Princes
assembled at Newburg, they having as yet no Instructions concerning this Point,
from them, or their Deputies. And in the mean time, they prayed the Emperor
that he would preserve inviolably the League of Passaw, and the Peace of
Religion.

After this, both the Pope's Legates were heard one after another, The Pope's
Legates Admitted.
who said very much in Commendation of Pius IV. his great Care of Religion, and
good Affection toward them: That to this end, he had recalled the Council to
Trent, for the Extirpation of Heresy and Sects; in which he promised all
things should be transacted with Christian Charity, and Brotherly Affection,
and all should be fully and sweetly heard, and Determinations made, and
Suffrages given, with the utmost freedom and liberty. Therefore they exhorted
them to send Ambassadors with Plenary Instructions, and lend their Assistance
to the bringing so commendable a Design to its desired end; which was, the
restoring Peace to Christendom. They delivered also the Pope's Letters to the
several and respective Protestant Princes, which being Superscribed with the
word Son, were all returned Sealed, to the Legates. The last day of the
Meeting, the Electors, and other Princes, in the Morning returned an Answer to
the Pope's Legates. Their Answer to the Legates.
That they did not acknowledge the Popels Jurisdiction; nor think themselves
bound to give him any account what they intended in the Business of the
Council, the Calling and holding of which belonged not to him; but they had
fully declared their Minds to Ferdinand, the Emperor, their gracious Lord.
That as for them, (the Legates,) they esteemed them for their Noble Birth, and
great Learning, and should have shown them greater respects, if they had not
come on the Pope's Errand. Being thus dismissed, they went to Lubeck, and sent
to Frederick King of Denmark for leave to come to him; but had for an Answer,
That neither he, nor his Father, had never had any Business with the Pope, nor
did he desire now to know their Errand. And Martinego, who was sent to Queen
Elizabeth of England, was forbidden to come over.

To give the Reader a certain and clear knowledge of this Meeting at Naumburg.
The occasions of the meeting at Naumburg.
The 13th of January, Fredcrick the Elector Palatine, Augustus Duke of Saxony
and Elector, Jo. Frederick of Saxony, Wolfang, of the Palatine Family, Ernest
and Philip Dukes of Brunswick, Ulrick Duke of Meckleburg, Christopher Duke of
Wirtemburg, Charles Marquis of Baden, Ernest Prince of Henneberg; and the
Ambassadors of Joachim Duke and Elector of Brandenburg, and of John and George
Fredirick of that Family, of Philip Landtgrave of Hesse, and of Barnim and Jo.
Frederick Dukes of Pomerania, upon the report of a Council suddenly to be
assembled, met at Naumburg, to which Place the King of Denmark, and the Princes
of Lunenburg, sent only Letters of Friendship, to assure those that met, that
they would stand by them. The design of it was, to put an end to those
Controversies which had arisen amongst the Protestants themselves, to renew
their Subscriptions to the Augustane Confession, to consider, and by mutual
Consent to resolve, whether they should go to the Council or refuse it. They
had great Controversies amongst themselves about the various Editions of the
Augustane Confession, which had been explained, enlarged, and as to the
Expressions very often changed, and the Elector of Saxony was for the retaining
the first Edition, and putting the Smalcaldick Articles, by way of Preface to
it; but the rest not consenting to it, he left Naumburg, and returned. When
they came to consider the Council of Trent, they were no less divided in that
too: Some were for an absolute rejection of it, others were for the fending
Ambassadors from the several States, who should propose the giving an Account
of their Faith in a free and truly Christian Synod; and enter a great Complaint
against the Pope and Court of Rome, make their Exceptions to the Council on the
account of the Suspicion of the Judges, the perverse Method or Order of
Proceedings, and the Inconvenience of the Place, this they conceived would
^itigate the Envy had been raised against them, and show, that their Enemies,
and not they, were the obstructers of Concord and Union. After this they sent
Deputies to the Duke of Saxony, deploring his departure before the End of the
Conference, and giving him an Account of the Form of Confession they had Agreed
to Subscribe, and desiring him that he would also subscribe it, or at least
restrain his Divines from traducing and defaming it, as they had before done by
some things agreed at Frankford. Soon after Augustus Duke of Saxony Married
Anne Daughter of Morice of the Family of Nassaw, and Brother to William Prince
of Orange.

Jerolamus Martinego, The English reject the Council.
who was sent to Treat with Queen Elizabeth for the same end as I have said
already, came into Flanders, and from thence, according to the ancient Custom,
sent for Leave to come into England, but was denied it, the Council of England
not thinking it fit to admit a Nuncio from the Pope, when there Religion, would
be apt upon such an Encouragement, to Imbroil our Affairs upon began to Treat
with Throcomorton our Ambassador in that Court; That Queen Elizabeth would be
pleased to send her Ambassadors to the Council, in which he was seconded by
Letters from the Kings of France, Spain, and Portugal, and the Cardinal of
Portugal, and the Duke de Alva. To which she replied, That from her Heart she
desired a General Council, but she would have nothing to do with a Papal. That
she would have nothing to do with the Pope neither, whose Authority was
banished out of England by the consent of the Three Estates. That it belonged
not to him, but to the Emperor to call a Council; and, that she acknowledged
no greater Authority in him than in any other Bishop.

The Twenty fifth of July Erirk King of Sweden was Crowned with great Pomp at
Stockholme upon the Baltic Sea. Erick King of Sweden Crowned. The Cardinal of
Caraffa Hanged.
Charles Cardinal of Caraffa and Nephew of the last Pope, was strangled the
Sixth of March in the Castle of St. Angelo, upon pretense, That he had
Exasperated Paul IV. his Uncle with his false Stories, and put him upon a War;
That he had caused the Truce between France and Spain to be broken, had entered
underhand Treaties with the Protestant Princes of Germany, and also with the
Turk, the Enemies of Christianity; but in reality, because the Pope was much
offended with the sharp Answers the Cardinal made after he was imprisoned; The
Pope being thereupon made sensible, that the Cardinal was a Person of great
Spirit and Interest, and if ever he were dismissed, he would at one time or
other Revenge the Quarrel upon the Popes Relations, so that his Holiness
contrary to his first Intentions, found it was needful to cut him off, though
against Law, as his own Canonists generally said. The Count de Paliani, Brother
of the Cardinal of Caraffa, had the same fate, but on other pretenses.

In France all that desired the Peace of the Church and the Reformation of
Religion, A National Council desired in France.
concluded, the Pope would not hold a Council whatever he pretended, and
therefore urged the having of a National Council; which was opposed by the
Guises and their Faction, for fear the Protestant Party should prevail in it
against the Catholic. They did whatever they could to persuade the King and
Council from it, and procured the Pope to persuade Philip King of Spain to
interest himself in it, who sent Anthony Bishop of Toledo to persuade the Queen
to send the French Clergy to the Council of Trent; and that in the mean time,
to prevent a Schism, the thoughts of a National Council should be laid aside.
He had Orders also, as occasion offered, to threaten those who favored the
Protestants, and to give assurances of his Masters readiness to support the
young King; which was ill taken in France, as a kind of usurping a Right to
interpose their Spanish Pride in the French Affairs. Toledo died in France, and
Maurice his Successor became very importunate with the Queen to begin a
Persecution against the Protestants, which was as stiffly opposed by the King
of Navar; who demanded his Kingdom, The King of Navar drawn over to the Popish
Party by the King of Spain's Arts.
and interrupted all the Spanish Proceedings by his frequent Complaints to the
young King. King Philip finding, to his Cost, that this Princes Power was
greater in France than he imagined, began a Design upon him to make him more
pliant to his Desires. This was to reject his Wife, and Marry Mary Queen of the
Scots, and then declaring himself Head of the Catholics in France, the King of
Spain was to give him Sardinia for Navar, and to help him to Conquer England;
and so two Heretical Queens were for Heresy to be laid aside, and the Pope was
to Consecrate and Bless the Business. The King of Navar detesting the Project
of Repudiating his Queen, the Exchange of Sardinia was driven on with more
eagerness, pretending it was the greatest Island in the Mediterranean Sea, next
Sicily, and the most fruitful, rich, and populous, and situate very
conveniently for a Conquest of Barbary. This Project being also seconded by the
Popes Nuncio, the Cardinal of Ferrara, prevented the calling of a National
Council, which Wise Men thought was the only thing that could have prevented
the Civil War, which after broke out to the almost total Ruin of France.

Though the Edict of July had forbidden all Meetings of the Protestants, A new
invented Convention for the Regu^lating matters of Religion in France.
yet their Number daily increasing, and with it their Confidence; not only
Sermons were openly made, but the Priests were in many places forcibly
expelled, and the Churches seized for the use of the Ministers, which gave
being to the Edict of the 3d of November, for the Restitution of those Churches
upon pain of Death; which by the Persuasion of the Ministers themselves, was
obeyed throughout the Kingdom. But when notwithstanding Men seemed rather
enraged than appeased by the Edict of July, and the Conference of Poissy was
broken up without any effect, there being every day news brought of new
Commotions, they began to think of some more effectual Remedy, which that it
might meet with the greater approbation, and by consequence be the more
universally executed, the Presidents and some chosen Members of all the
Parliaments of France were summoned before the King to St. Germain, by whose
Advice it was to be drawn and Moddel'd. Upon which the Cardinal of Lorrain and
the Duke of Guise left the Court, conceiving the thing would do it self, now
Montmorancy and the King of Navar had espoused that Interest.

About the same time there was a dreadful Tumult at Dijon; A Tumult a^ Dijon.
whilst the Protestants were assembled at their Sermon, the Rabble thought fit
to make themselves the Executioners of the Edict of July, and having procured a
Drum to beat before them, they marched against the Huguenots, but the Meeters
made use of their Weapons, and repelled Force with Force; The Rabble thereupon
turned their fury against the Private Families, and plundered several Houses.
There were also some Tumults at Paris on the same score, and toward the end of
the year all things tended to a general Revolution.

Having thus represented the State of Religion in all the rest of Christendom,
Scotch Affairs.
as shortly, and as well as I can, I return now to Scotland. The Messengers
they had sent into France to procure the Royal Consent to the Acts they had
made in their last Parliament, were no sooner returned with a positive denial,
and a dreadful Reprimand, which frighted and exasperated the Nation both at
once; but they had the Joyful News of the Death of King Francis II. to their
great satisfaction, and the no less affliction of the French Faction in that
Kingdom. On the other side, the Nobility, who had lent their Assistance to the
Expulsion of the French, immediately met at Edinburg, and after a Consultation,
sent the Lord James to their Queen to persuade her to return into Scotland;
Lesley however prevented them, and got to her some days before the Lord James.
She was then at Vitrie in Campaigne, Queen Mary resolves to return into
Scotland.
whither she was retired to lament her Loss: His business was, to bespeak her
favor to the Catholic Party, and return into Scotland; The first she readily
promised, and as for the other she ordered him to Attend till she had resolved
what to do. It was soon after resolved, that she should leave France, so that
the Lord James found her fixed to return when he came into France, yet his
Assuring her of the great desires the Nobility of Scotland had to see her there
again, much confirmed her. So she sent him back with Orders, to see that
nothing should be attempted contrary to the Treaty of Leith in her absence.

In March following, M. Giles Noailles, a Senator of Bourdeaux, arrived at
Leith, with three Demands from the new King of France: 1. That the old League
between France and Scotland should be renewed. 2. That the late Confederacy
with England should be diss^lved. 3. That the Churchmen should be restored to
all they had been deprived of. But the Council replied, That it did not befit
them, to treat of things of that Consequence, before the Assembly of the
States, which was to be held the 21st of May, when the Lord James made answer,
That the French, and not the Scots, had broke the old League, by endeavoring
to enslave them. 2. That they could not violate the Treaty made with England;
and, as to the third, That they did not acknowledge those he interceded for, to
be Church men, and that Scotland, having renounced the Pope, would no longer
maintain his Priests and Vassals. About the same time, the Earls of Morton and
Glencarn returned from England, whither they had been sent, with Assurances,
That the Queen would assist them in the Defense of the Liberties of the
Kingdom, if, at any time, they stood in need of her Help; which was heard with
much Joy.

As the Lord James returned into Scotland, he waited upon Queen Elizabeth, and
advised her to stop Queen Mary, if she came by England, (as he expected she
would) 'till he had secured the State of Religion in Scotland; The Protestant
Religion settled in Scotland.
for though she had promised, She would continue all things in the State she
found them, ye he would not entirely rely upon her Promise, having so often
heard the old Maxim from the late Regent. To make sure work therefore, he
procured an Act to be passed in this Convention, for the Demolishing all the
Cloisters, and Abbey Churches, which were yet left standing in that Kingdom; the
Execution whereof, as to the Western Parts, was committed to the Earls of
Arran, Argile, and Glencarn; as to the North, to the Lord James; and as to the
Inland Counties, to some Barons that were thought the most Zealous: Whereupon
ensued a most deplorable Devastation of Churches, and Church-buildings, says
Spotiswood* throughout all the Kingdom; for every one made bold to put to their
Hands, the meaner sort imitating the Example of the greater, and those who were
in Authority. No difference was made, but all the Churches were either defaced,
or pulled down to the ground. The Church Place, and what ever Men could make
Money of, as Timber, Lead, and Bells, were put to sale, and the Monuments of
the Dead, the Registers of the Churches and Libraries were burned or destroyed,
and what escaped the Fury of the first Tumults now perished in a common
Shipwreck, and that under the color of public Authority. John Knox is said to
have very much promoted this Calamity, by a Maxim he published, That the sure
way t^ drive away the Rooks, was to pull down their Nests, which, in
probability, he meant only of the Monks; but now their Hands were in, was
extended to all the Church Buildings: Noailles was then in Scotland, and
carried the News of this dreadful Reformation to the Queen into France.

She was much enraged at it, The Queen angry with the Proceedings.
and said to some of her Confidents, that she would imitate Mary Queen of
England; but however, she had wit enough to dissemble her Resentment for the
present.

In order to her return, Queen Mary goes into Scotland.
she left Vitri, and went to Paris; and having waited upon the King, and
Queen-Regent, to take her leave of them, she took her Journey toward Calais,
Queen Elizabeth had sent the Earl of Bedford, to condole the Death of Francis,
her late Husband, and to desire her Ratification of the Treaty of Leith; but
this, she said, she could not do, 'till she had consulted with the Nobility of
Scotland; and when the Ambassador replied, They could not but approve of what
they had made, she replied, They did, but not all; and when I come amongst
them, it will appear what mind they are of. The Duke of Guise, and the rest of
the great Men of that Family, attended her to Calais, and the Marquess of
Elboeuf, and Francis, Grand Prior of France, went with her. She took Ship the
14th of August, and arrived at Leith in Scotland the 20th. She was much
concerned, for fear Queen Elizabeth might intercept her in her way home, and
therefore, sent again for the English Ambassador; but when he still insisted,
to have the Treaty of Leith ratisied, she delayed it. Her Uncle, the Cardinal
of Lorrain, advised her, to leave her Jewels and Treasures in France, 'till she
were safe in Scotland; but she said, It was folly, to be more concerned for her
Jewels, than for her Person, which she must hazard. The truth is, her Fear was
well grounded, for Queen Elizabeth sent a Fleet to way-lay her; but the two
Navies passed by one another, in a dark foggy day, unperceived, and she safely
arrived at Leith the 21th of August.

The beginning of her Government was very gracious, and she condescended to
grant, That no Change or Alteration should be made in the present State of
Religion; only, Her beginning very gracious to the Protestants.
she said, she would use her own Religion apart, and have a Mass in private,
which was, and by many was thought, very reasonable, she having been Educated
in the Roman Church, and being a Sovereign Princess: Yet the Preachers, in
their Sermons, publicly condemned that Toleration of their Queen, The
Preachers would not Tolerate the Queen.
as unlawful; and the Earl of Arran, being exasperated by his Imprisonment, on
the account of Religion, in France, by the Order of the Guises, from whence he
made his Escape, replied, That he did neither agree to Public nor Private
Mass; which highly displeased the Queen. See Spotiswood, page 182.
And Archimbald Douglas, Provost of Edinburg, put out an Order, commanding all
Papists to be gone; for which, the Queen committed him to the Castle of
Edinburg: And one of the common sort of Men broke the Tapers in the Court,
which were prepared for her Chapel, and a Tumult had ensued to the Ruin of the
other Preparatives for her Chapel, if some wiser Men had not interposed;
amongst whom, the Lord James was one of the greatest and forwardest, to
suppress this insolent Disorder: On the other side, the Marquess of Elboeuf was
much offended, to see the Protestant Religion exercised openly in Scotland, and
the Earl of Huntley, a vain Man, proffered the Queen his Service, to reduce all
the North Parts of Scotland to the Popish Religion, which was wisely rejected.

In the middle of September, Great kindness in show, between Queen Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth.
the Duke of Aumarl, and the rest of the French, which had come home with the
Queen, went back to France, but the Marquess of Elboeuf, who stayed with her
all the Winter. She sent William Lord Maitland to Queen Elizabeth, with Letters
full of kind and friendly Expressions, and desiring the like Returns from her:
And, amongst other things, that she would declare her the lawful Heir to the
Crown of England, in case she (Queen Elizabeth) should dye without Issue; which
Queen Elizabeth denied, but said, She would never wrong her, nor her Cause, if
it be just in the least point; and that she knew not any, whom she would prefer
before her, or who (if the Title should fall to be controverted) might exclude
her.

The Queen of Scots, Queen Mary begins to favor the Romish Party.
caused a new Provost of Edinburg to be Elected, changed the Common Council,
and put out a Proclamation, That all her good and faithful Subjects should
repair to, and remain within, the Birgh, at their pleasure, for doing their
lawful Business; which was in opposition to the Provost's Order. She kept her
Masses too, more publicly, and with greater pomp; of all which, the Ministers
complained in vain in their Sermons. The Nobility had divided the Church Lands
amongst them, and had now another Game to pursue, and were striving who should
be most in the Queen's Favor.

The Queen's Expenses being soon found too great, Yet she augments her Revenues
out of the Church Lands.
for the poor Revenues of the Crown of Scotland to maintain. The Remainder of
the Church Lands was divided into three parts, one was assigned to the Queen,
one to the Ministers, and the third was left to the Bishops and Parsons of the
Romish Communion, which they were forced to yield to, to prevent the loss of
all, they now subsisting merely by the Queen's Favor. The Earl of Huntley, to
be made Lord Chancellor, turned Roman Catholic again, which encouraged one
Winyet, a Priest, to write a Book against the Reformation, for which, he was
censured and forced to leave Scotland. Not long after which, she created the
Lord James, her Brother, first, Earl of Mar, and then of Murray, the Lord
Ereskin claiming, and at last obtaining, the Earldom of Mar, which much
offended Huntley, which had enjoyed both these Titles ever since the death of
James the Fifth. This made Huntley enter into many base and unworthy Designs to
murder Murray, which were all, by one means or other, discovered, and, at last,
ended in the Death of Huntley, and the Executiou of John Gordon, his eldest
Son, a hopeful young Gentleman, in the Year following. 1562.


The beginning of the Year 1562, was very unquiet in France. The French Affairs.
The King had called an Assembly of the Delegates of all the Parliaments of
France, in the end of the last year, which was to meet at St. Germain the 17th
of January of this year, to consider of the means of appeasing these Broils,
and preserving the Peace of France. The King opened this Assembly with a short
Speech, which was seconded by a larger, made by the Chancellor; who having
given a short account of the several Edicts, that had been made before in the
business of Religion; and shown how they had all, by one means or other, been
defeated. He added, That Laws were of no use, if they were not Religiously
observed. But then, ( said he) if the Question is put, Why are not the Laws
executed? Must not you, that are the Judges, bear the blame? For if they excuse
themselves, and say, That it was not in their power to execute them, I will
accept the Answer, upon condition they will ingenuously confess, That neither
was it in the King's power: And that this Affair of Religion, by a secret
Judgment of God, for the Castisement of our Luxury, Indevotion, and Neglect of
his Glory, is so disposed, that we may, by the severity of the Punishment, be
brought to Repentance. In the year 1518, when these Commotions first began,
there is no Man but knows, how corrupt the Manners, and how loose, or rather
profligate, the Discipline of the Church was throughout the World: For, to omit
the Court of Rome, in which, there was nothing right and sound, we had here in
France a young King, brought up in Pleasures, though he afterward was much
improved, but he was then very dissolute; nor was Henry of England any better:
And after all the Judgments God has sent from Heaven upon us, we have not
repented or amended; and therefore, there is no wonder, that this sad
difference of Religion cannot be composed, and the Peace of the Church
restored. No, on the contrary it is now apparent, that our Enemies are become
so numerous, that they are almost able to oppress us. As to those who pretend,
that we have increased them by our Connivance, I can answer, That during the
minority of the King, they are bolder, and I would have them consider too,
that, for our Sins, God has set a Child over us. There are some, who would have
the King arm one part of his Subjects against the other, which, I think, is
neither Christian, nor Human. After very much to the same purpose, he told
them, the Thing proposed by the King to their Consideration, was, Whether it
was the best way for the King to Suppress the Meetings, or to Tolerate them?

Thereupon followed a very great Debate between these Deputies of the several
Parliaments of France, A Debate concerning Toleration.
but, at last, they came to a Resolution, to remit something of the Severity of
the Edict of July, and to allow the Protestants the liberty of Public Sermons;
The Edict of January, which granted Liberty of Conscience to the Protestants.
and accordingly a new Edict was made, which was called, The Edict of January,
the principal Heads of which, were these: That the Protestants should restore
the Ecclesiastics to their Churches, Houses, Lands, Tithes, and other goods
whatsoever which they had taken from them forthwith, and suffer them peaceably
to enjoy their Images, Crosses, and Statues, without any molestation, or
endeavoring to destroy them; or doing any other thing that may disturb the
public Peace, upon pain of Death, without any hope of Mercy. That the
Protestants should have no public Meetings, Sermons, and Prayers; or
administer any Sacraments, publicly or privately, by Night or by Day, within
any City, in any manner whatsoever: Yet, in the mean time, till the
Controversies of Religon shall be composed by a General Council, or the King
shall otherwise order it, Those, who shall go to, or frequent, their Sermons
shall not be molested, provided they be had without the Cities. And the
Magistrates were accordingly commanded, not to disquiet, but to protect and
preserve them from all Injury. That all Seditious Persons, of what Religion
soever they were, should be severely punished, and all should be bound to
discover and deliver them up to Justice, a thousand Crowns being imposed upon
any person who should receive, abet, or conceal, such Riotous Offender, and the
Offender to be whipped, if not able to pay the Penalty. That the said Meetings
should be without Arms, and that no person should Reproach another on the
account of Religion, or use any Factious Names. That the Protestants Ministers
should admit none into their Number, till they had diligently examined their
Lives, Conversations, and Doctrines. That the Magistrates might freely go to
their Meetings, to see what was done, or to apprehend any Criminal, who should
be treated according to their Dignity, and obeyed. That the Protestants should
hold no Synods, Conferences, or Consistories, but in the presence of a
Magistrate. That they should create no new Magistrates, or make any Laws or
Statutes: And if they desire any thing by way of Discipline, it should be
referred to their Authority, or, if need be, be confirmed by them. There shall
be no Levies of Men or Moneys made by them, nor any Leagues entered into for
their private Defense. And as to Alms, they shall only take them of such as are
willing to give. The Civil Laws, especially those concerning Holy Days, and the
Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity in Marriages, shall be observed. That
their Pastors shall give Security to the Magistrates, for the Observing this
Edict, and promise, That they will not preach any Doctrine contrary to the
Nicence or Apostles Creeds, or the Books of the Old or New Testament, nor use
any Reproaches against the Catholics in their Sermons: And the same is
enjoined the Catholics, in relation to the Protestants. No man shall publish
any Libels to desame another, or sell, or cause them to be sold. Lastly, the
Magistrates are hereby commanded to be very diligent, in case any Sedition
happens, to search out the Offenders, and punish them, without any Appeal to be
allowed to such Offenders.

A Debate being made concerning the Worship of Images, Injunctions published by
the Queen's Order, concerning Images.
these Propositions were published by the Queen, by the Advice of the Bishops
of Valence and Seez, and Monsieur Bouthillier, d' Espence, and Picherel. That
seeing Errors are, according to St. Augustine, rather to be rooted out of the
Mind of Men, than out of Churches, and other places, the Bishops should take
order with the Curates, to have the People well Instructed, and diligently
Admonished, concerning the right use of them, that all Offense or Scandal might
be prevented, both by the Royal Authority, and that of the Church; and that if
any opposed this, he should be treated as a Violater of the Royal Edicts,
Images of the Trinity forbidden.
and of the public Peace. That all Figures of the Holy Trinity should be
immediately removed out of all Churches, and all other public and private
Places, as being forbidden by the Holy Scriptures, the Councils and Testimonies
of the Fathers, and only Dissembled or Tolerated by the Sloth of the Bishops
and Pastors. That the Picutres of all profane Persons, and others, who were
not to be found in the Authentic Martyrologies of the Church, all lascivious
and dishonest Pictures, and those of Brutes, shall be abolished. That no
Crowns, Garlands, or Vestments, shall be put upon any Images, nor Incense, nor
Candles, burnt before them; nor shall they be carried in Processions, nor any
Prayers or Oblations be made to them, nor shall they be worshipped with bended
Knees, because all these things are parts of Worship. That all Images, but that
of the Venerable Holy Cross, shall be taken from the Altars, and either placed
on the Valves, or Walls, of the Churches; so that from henceforth, they may
neither be saluted, kissed, prayed to, or presented with Gifts. That all
Images, which were wont to be carried on the Shoulders of Men in the Churches
and Streets, should, according to the late Canon of Sens, be for ever
abolished. Beza opposed the retention of the Cross, as brought into use by
Constantine the Great, and one N. Mallard, Dean of the Sorbonne in Paris, though
he confessed, some ill things had crept into the Church; yet he was of opinion,
that all this Worship of Images ought stoutly to be defended and retained, and
put out a Book to that purpose; so the Thing fell. This Order was made the 14th
of February.

The same Month, The King of Navar pretends still to promote the Reformation.
but some few days before it, the King of Navar wrote a Letter to the Elector
Palatine, in which, he testified his great desire to promote a Reformation, and
that he hoped to have found a way to reconcile Differences, by the Conference
of Poissi. But that this Affair had not succeeded according to his wish; and
that, even in the Dispute about Images, which seemed to have less of
Difficulty, they had yet not been able to agree. But that, whatever Men
pretended, he would, by the help of God, endeavor, that the Confession of
Faith, which could not be destroyed, without the Ruin of the Peace of the
Nation, should insensibly be established as far as the Infancy of the King, and
the present State of Things would permit. He wrote also, to the same purpose,
to the Duke of Wirtemberg, and to Philip Landtgrave of Hesse. The Elector
Palatine wrote an Answer, dated the 20th of April, from Heidelburg, wherein he
said, he was sorry to see the Affections of the Protestants cool in this
Affair; and therefore, he exhorted him to go on in this commendable Design of
Reforming Religion.

When the Edict of January came to be published, The Edict of January opposed
by the Guises and others.
the Guises and Montmorancy, who were now reconciled, and were absent at the
time of making it, employed all their Industry, to prevent its having its
effect; alleging, it was not made as it ought, and would prove destructive to
the Kingdom of France; and having brought over Navar to their Party, though they
foresaw they should meet with great, and almost insuperable, Difficulties; yet,
they thought, they should at last gain their Ends. The Duke of Guise went
therefore to his Country House, and his Brother Charles, the Cardinal, soon
after followed him thither: So they both went to Zaberen, a Town belonging to
the Bishop of Strasburg, where Christopher, Duke of Wirtemberg, met him, on
pretense he came to visit a Lady that was his Kinswoman, bringing with him John
Brent, and James Andrea, two eager defenders of the Augustane Confession
against the Zuinglians, (whose Doctrine was generally followed by the
Protestants in France;) here they conferred together three days. The Cardinal
of Lorrain pretended to have a great affection for the Duke of Wirtemberg, and
the rest of the German Princes; he said also, That since the Conference of
Poissi, he had a good opinion of the Augustane Confession, and that he had
often persuaded the Protestants to subscribe it, and they had ever refused it,
because they did not so much desire the Reformation of Religion, and of the
Church Discipline, as the spreading lewd and monstrous Opinions, which tended
to the filling France and Germany with new Tumults. That the King of Denmark
wisely foresaw this, who congratulating, by his Ambassador, the attempt, to
reform the Church, expressed at the same times his fear, that they should
embrace the Zuinglian and Geneva Confession, instead of the Augustane; and
thereupon carefully advised the King of Navar, to consider this. That the Duke
of Wirtemberg, and the other Princes of Germany, ought to fear the same thing,
if they desired the Peace of Germany, or that of the Church: For that as
Germany and France were near each other, so their Interests were so interwoven,
that the Good or Evil would be common to them. That as they were derived from
one of the Illustrious Families of Germany, and enjoyed one of the principal
Stations in France; so they had left that Kingdom to confer with him (the Duke
of Wirtemburg), and to settle, by mutual Consent, what might be useful and
salutary to both these States, and that they might conjointly oppose the
Endeavors of the Zuinglians, and their Doctrine. They pretended, they did not
do this, with intention to hinder the Reformation of Religion, and the Worship
of God, For that they desired above all things; but that they sought to prevent
that Tempest, which these Sectaries were raising, both in France and Germany:
And therefore, they desired the Duke, to interpose his Authority with the
Princes of Germany, and to induce them to have a good Opinion of their Designs.

The Duke of Wirtemburg (having consulted with Brent and Andrea, his two
Divines, who were very desirous, the Helvetian Confession should not be
entertained in France) commended the Cardinals affections toward himself and
the Empire; and said, he approved of his Counsel, for the hindering the
Reception of that Confession in France, which, without doubt, would cause great
Commotions. But then, he said, this was upon condition, that the Reformation
should be carried on in France in the mean time; and that no Severities or
Proscriptions should be employed against those, who had made defection from the Sea of Rome. The Cardinal was thought to have said this, to the intent, to
dispose the German Protestant Princes to send Supplies against the French
Protestants, when it should come to a War; or, at least, to make them less apt
to succor the Prince of Conde, and the Protestants. Thus that Conference ended

The Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal, returned to Joinville in Champaigne,
where, The Duke of Guise called to Court by the King of Navar.
soon after, he received a Letter from the King of Navar, that he should come
to Court as fast as was possible, whither he forthwith went. In the Borders of
Champaigne, there is a Town, called Vassy, which has high Walls, and is the
Capital of a Presecture: The Protestants had a Meeting Place in this Town, able
to contain twelve Hundred persons, The Massacre of Vassy happened accidentally
in that ^ourny.
in which, at times, they preached, and administered Sacraments after their way,
because they had, as yet, no settled Minister, but procured one from Troyes;
(The Bishop of which place was a favourer of them.) But now there was one
Leonard Morel come from Geneva, to settle there, which was ill taken by Claude
de Saints, the Governor of the Town, and by the Prior, Curate, and
Neighbors, who had frequently complained of it to Jerome de Burgos, Bishop of
Chaalon sur Marne in Champaigne, under whom, the place was. The year before,
the Bishop came thither, and had a disorderly Dispute with the Minister, about
imposition of Hands, managed by one of his Divines, which he brought with him
before the People, Governor and Bishop, which had no good effect. Antonia de
Bourbon, the Mother of the Guises, a zealous Roman Catholic, was also much
offended with the nearness of this place, and desired very much to be rid of
it; and she reproached her Son, for his overgreat patience in a thing, wherein
the Glory of God, her own Honor, and the Religion of his Ancestors, was
concerned. Hereupon, the first of March, he went to Vassy, with Lewis the
Cardinal his Brother, Du Brossay, and his Son, and a great Retinue, designing
rather to suppress and dissipate this Conventicle by his Presence, than to
offer Violence to any private person. As he went, he heard a Bell ring at an
unusual time, and asking the reason of it, was told, It was to call the
Protestants to their Meeting. Hereupon, his Footmen began to make a Noise, as
if there had been a Military Enterprise; but the Duke went on, and entered
Vassy, where there were 60 Horse ready to receive him, and he was to dine that
day at Sclaron. The Curate and Prior were very earnest with him, to go by the
Conventicle; but whilst he delayed them, and seemed unwilling to do it, the
meaner part of his Attendants ran thither, and began to call the Protestants,
who were there assembled, Dogs, and Rebels to God and the King. The Protestants
also returned their reproaches upon them: and so at last they fell from words
to flinging stones, after which those that were on Horseback lighted and broke
into the place where the Meeting was, which was a Granary, and was for some
time defended, by those within, but they at last prevailing, drew their Swords,
and began to stab and wound the Protestants. A great Cry arising, Guise was
forced to go thither, to put a stop to the Massacre, but he by Accident
receiving a small Wound, this so enraged his Retinue, that he could not
restrain them; in this Tumult about 60 persons were killed, and 200 wounded,
amongst which last was Morell, who was sent Prisoner to Dis^er.

Though this Tumult happened against his will, and contrary to his expectation,
yet the Duke of Guise, The Duke of Guise uses ill Arts to secure his Servants
who began the Tumult.
to excuse himself and his Servants, sent for the chief of the Protestants who
were taken, and severely chid them, for having by this unlawful Meeting given
occasion to this Tumult, and blamed the Queen of Scots Bailiff, (for to her the
Place belonged) for suffering such Conventicles to be held there. And caused
several Depositions to be made, that the Tumult was begun by the Protestants,
though it was in truth begun by his own Servants. Fame increased the Fact, and
made it appear worse in all the Circumstances than in truth it was, and every
one judged of it as he stood affected; the Protestants blaming it, and the
Catholics defending it, as necessary to put a stop to the Insolence of a few
ill Men to prevent worse: But Wise men saw, it would not stop here, but that
Seditious Men would take the same Methods throughout the Kingdom. The Duke of
Guise went to Reims, The Prince of Conde complains of it to the King.
and from thence to Nantueil, the King being then at Monceaux, in the Diocese
of Meax, whither Conde came and made a great Complaint of the Massacre of
Vassy, aggravating it above the Truth; adding, That it was a thing of ill
Example, and ought to be severely Punished. The Queen on the other side was
very much troubled, and wrote to the King of Navar to take care of this Affair,
who was then at Paris; and advised the Duke of Guise not to go to Paris, till
he had been with the King; to which he made no other Answer, than, That he was
so taken up with entertaining his Friends, that he was not at leisure to wait
upon the King. And his next care was to excuse it to the Duke of Wirtemburg, to
whom he sent a Letter to that purpose, laying the fault on the Insolence of the
Rabble, which trusting in their number, had begun to fling Stones at his
Servants. The King of Navar went to Monceaux in the mean time, where he met
with severe Complaints against this Tumult, and stisly averred, that the
Protestants had been the beginners of the fray, excusing the Duke of Guise, and
entertaining those that complained of it, with very great roughness. Beza, who
was there, replied, That if it were so, the Duke of Guise ought to have
complained to the King, and not to have permitted his Servants to have become
their own Judges; and turning to the King of Navar, he said, He was sent by the
Church to complain of this wrong, which has ever been readier to suffer, than
to act Injuries; and that yet he ought to rememeber, that Anvil had broke many
Hammers; in the mean time, The Duke of Guise enters Paris.
the Duke of Guise went to Paris, without taking any notice of the King, where
he was entertained with greater Ceremony and Respect, and had a greater
Attendance than became a Subject; the Queen began to fear the King of Navar,
Guise, and Montmorancy, would, under the Pretense of Religion, set up a
Triumvirate, which would bring her and the King under their Power; so that she
had no other remedy, but to put her self and her Son under the Protection of
the Prince of Conde, The Queen upon this, puts her self and the King into the
Protection of the Prince of Conde.
and by her Letter, to desire him to stand by them. But then she did this very
privately, and by her Emissaries, that she might not alienate the hearts of the
People, and of a great part of the Nobility, from her, by seeming to promote
the new Religion, and by the Envy of that, be excluded from having any share in
the Government. In the mean time, that she might consult her own safety, she
went with the King of Navar to Melun, whither M. de Marle, and Claude Martel,
one of the Aedilit.
Officers of Paris, who was in great esteem amongst the People, came to her,
and represented the great Danger Paris was exposed to by the Forces of the
Prince of Conde, and said, it was necessary She and the King should come
thither forthwith, and he having many armed Men about him, he desired the
Citizens might have their Arms restored to them, which had been taken away by
Montmorancy: which last, she rather delayed, than denied, because she saw they
would have them whether she would, or no. From thence she went to
Fontain-bleau, to gain time to consider what was to be done, and was in
suspense whether she should go for Orleans, whither Conde was going, or trust
to the Regal Authority, and go to Paris. Navar went in the mean time from M^l^n
to Paris, and Lodged with Mommorancy, where, there was a Council held every
day, without the Prince of Conde: And the Government of the City was taken from
young Montmorancy, by the Advice of his Father, and given to the Cardinal of
Bourbon.

Every thing now tended to an open rupture, All things in France tend to a
Civil War.
and rumors were spread abroad, that the Catholics, in all Parts of the
Nation, were ill used by the Protestants, which Reports were (true, or false)
set on foot by the Cardinal of Lorrain. The Populace was exasperated, and
having regained their Arms, were the more enraged for the having had them taken
away; and therefore could no longer be kept in order. The Prince of Conde
seeing his Danger, that he might not seem to expose his own Party to the sury
of their Enemies, proposed to the Cardinal, that he would leave the City, if
Guise and the other Confederates would do so too at the same time, that it
might not be endangered by an intestine Sedition; which was accepted, and the
Duke of Guise went to Fontainbleau, with a great Retinue, to the King and
Queen, and the Prince of Conde, went to Meaux, and la Ferte Aucoulph upon the
Marne. As soon as they were thus gone, M. de Marle took into the City MD men
for its Security, which Montmorancy the younger had refused to do whilst the
City was under his Care: The Duke of Guise, when he went to Fontain-bleau,
carried with him many Armed men, that he might fright the Queen from her Cabals
with the Prince of Conde, and so draw her, by a secret Fear, to join with him;
The Queen out of Fear joins with the Catholic Lords commonly called the
Triumvirate.
and the Stratagem took. She had before carefully enquired into the Numbers and
Riches of the Protestants, that she might know, what she and the King might
expect from them, but she could not be assured of any thing, only that there
were 2150 Assemblies in the Nation, the Delegates of which proffered her and
the King their Services in case of Necessity; but when she desired a more
particular and exact account, they suspected, she had some ill design against
them, and declined giving her an exact account of their Secrets, reflecting on
her inconstancy which they much suspected.

In the mean time, Conde comes up toward Fontain-bleau.
Conde was coming to Court as the Queen had ordered him, and was at Pont Saint
Clou, within two Miles of Fontain-bleau; which when the Queen heard, all things
were put into Confusion, as if a Siege had been expected, the Populace running
into disorder, and the Magistrates conniving at it. Nor was the disorder less
in the Court. The Queen fearing, not without cause, that some mischief would
ensue if Conde came up; the Confederates being in possession of the King, and
resolving to carry him and the Queen to Paris. The Queen would gladly have
stood Neuter, but the Confederates told her plainly, they knew Conde was come
to get the King into his Power, The Triumvirate seize the King.
and they were resolved to carry him to Paris, and if she pleased, she might
follow him; and so they carried him to Melun, not giving her any time to
consider of it. The Queen followed, and took such Lodgings as they assigned her
in the Castle. Here she would have made her Escape with the King, if the
Jealousy of the Confederates had not prevented it; They knowing this would
give a great Reputation to the Party that could gain it, and make the opposite
Party look like Rebels. Next Morning the Queen fell to flatter the Confederates
to get them to go back to Fontainbleau, and that she might speak with Conde.
But the Duke of Guise disappointed all her Projects, and carried the King and
his Brother to the Castle de Vincennes, within two Miles of Paris, the King
weeping, as if he had been carried into Captivity by force.

The next Morning, Montmorancy entered Paris, pulled up the Seats and Pulpit of
the Protestant Meeting House near Port St. Jean in the Suburbs, and burnt them
publicly, the people rejoicing greatly at it. And in the Afternoon did the
same thing without Port de St. Antoine, to another such House, but here the
Fire took the next Houses, which abated the Joy, though there was at last too
much bestowed on so ridiculous an Enterprise. Upon this, many good Men were
injured by the Rabble in the Streets, as being suspected in the Point of
Religion, yet it came not to Blood.

The next day after, Montmorancy appears very zealous against the Protestants
at Paris.
the King and the Queen were brought up to the Louvre, the Confederates
pretending they were not safe elsewhere. And here they began to talk of
Declaring a War against the Prince of Conde, which was opposed by the
Chancellor, whose Judgment was slighted by Montmorancy, because he was a
Gown-man. But he replied, That tho he was no Soldier, yet he knew very well,
when War was fit, and when not; but the violence of the Confederates at last
excluded him from that Consulation.

The Prince of Conde was coming toward the Court, but hearing that the Queen
out of levity or fear was joined with the Triumvirate, and was gone to Paris,
he seeing the Enemy in possession of the King's Person, The Prince of Conde
betrayed by the Queen into a disadvantageous War.
concluded they had got a great Advantage over him, and yet that the Die being
cast, it was too late to go back, so he went to Orleans to meet d' Andelott,
and sent to Coligni the Admiral to come thither to him. Innocent Tripier de
Monterud was then Governor of Orleans for Charles de Bourbon Prince de la
Roche-sur-Yon, he, in the beginning had been very favorable to the Protestants
and had equally employed them with the Catholics in the Guard of the City; but
seeing the Queen was now joined with the Confederate Catholic Lords, he
changed his Mind and took in more Forces by stealth, that he might thereby
overpower the Protestants. But Andelott entering the place with a small
Attendance quickly got together 300 of the Protestants, Orleans surprised by
the Prince of Conde.
and seized St. John's Gate, and immediately sent to the Prince of Conde to
come up, so that though Mon. de Monterud endeavored to recover this Post, yet
it was in vain, and the Town fell into the Hands of the Prince of Conde, and
Monterud was forced to obtain the Prince's Leave to be gone.

The Seventh of April the Prince of Conde sent a Letter to all the Protestant
Churches and Nobility in France, Conde Justifies the War.
to bring to him all the Forces and Moneys they were able to raise, for the
Rescuing of the King out of Captivity, and the delivering him out of the Hands
of some great Men, who had first violated the Laws or Edicts of France, and
then, seizing the Person of the King by force, Abused his Authority, to the
breaking the Peace of that Kingdom. The next day he put out a Manifesto,
wherein he largely unfolded the Truth, that the bottom of their Design was, to
deprive the Protestants of France of that Liberty which had been granted them
by the King's Edict, The Catholics, begin the War to deprive the Protestants
of the Liberty granted them by the Edict of January.
which he proved amongst other things by the Massacre of Vassy, which he said
was designed for a Signal to the whole Nation to do the like. He called God to
Witness his only Intentions were, to restore the King and his Brothers, and the
Queen and the Council, to their Liberty; to preserve the Veneration due to the
Royal Edicts, and especially that solemn Edict of January last, and to prevent
the Moneys given by the States in the last Assembly, for the payment of the
Debts of the Crown, from being misspent, or turned to other uses; for as for him
and his, they would manage this War at their own Charges. He desired, that
whilst the King was in their Power, no Credit should be given to any Edict,
Warrant, or Commission, though under the great Seal, or Signed by the King. As
for his Brother the King of Navar, he should pay him always the Respect that
was due to his Character and Place, but he desired, the Duke of Guise and his
Brothers, and Montmorancy should lay down their Arms, restore the King and his
Council to their liberty, and suffer the Edict of January to continue in force
till the King were of Age, and then he would lay down his Arms, and he and his
would return to their own homes. If they refused these just and equal
Conditions, and attempted any thing with force against him, he said, he would
not bear it, but would rescue the King and his People from their violence; and
they should answer for all the Calamities and Miseries which should follow. The
Prince of Conde and the Ministers write to the Princes of Germany.
He wrote two days after this to the Princes of Germany, and ordered the
Ministers to do so too, that the greater Credit might be given to his, to the
same purpose. And in the Conclusion, desired they would not be wanting to the
King, Queen and Kingdom at a time of so much need, nor suffer themselves to be
prejudiced by the false pretenses of his Enemies, but rather would support and
strengthen him in the War which he had engaged in, for the Glory of God, and
the Safety of the King and Kingdom. The 11th of April he caused the League
which the Protestants had entered into, to be printed also, which was to last
only till the King should be of full Age to undertake the Government of his
Kingdom in his own Name; and at the same time, he caused that entered into by
the Triumvirate to be printed, which they pretended was Confirmed by the
Authority of the Council of Trent, which was about that time opened.

The same Seventh day of April, The King and Queen affirm they were at Liberty
in their Declaration.
the King and Queen put out a Declaration at Paris, wherein they affirmed, that
the report of their Captivity was false, and scandalously feigned by the Prince
of Conde, for a color to his Seditious Practices: And that they came
willingly, and not by force, to Paris, that they might consult of the means of
settling this Commotion. The Third day after, another Paper was Published by
the Queen, Navar, Bourbon, the Cardinal and Duke of Guise, and Montmorancy, by
the Advice of Aumale, the Chancellor, St. Andre, Brisac and Montmorancy the
Younger, for the Confirming the Edict of January, the Pardon of all past
offenses, and forbidding the troubling or endangering any Man on the account of
Religion. And giving liberty to the Protestants to meet and Preach any where,
except in Paris, and the Suburbs thereof. At the same time an Envoy was
dispatched to the Elector Palatine, and the rest of the Princes of Germany, to
consult them about the Council of Trent.

About the same time there was a Barbarous Massacre made of the Protestants at
Sens, by the Procurement of Hemar, President of Sens, and, as it was believed,
not without the knowledge of the Cardinal of Guise, The Massacre of Sens.
who was Archbishop of that See, who was thereupon said to have had a hand also
in that of Vassy. There was a report spread in the City, that the Protestants
had a design to surprise the City and deface the Images, whereupon the Rabble
rose and drowned in the River, and Slew, in all, 100 People of all Ages and
Sexes, Plundered and pulled down their Houses, and rooted up their Vines; of
which Conde made a grievous Complaint to the Queen, in a Letter of the 19th of
April. But there being many Complaints of the like nature, brought from other
parts of the Nation against the Protestants, the thing was neglected. And
Davila takes no notice of it. About the same time many Cities, throughout the
Kingdom of France, were surprised by the Protestants, which was in many places
not possible to be done without Slaughter and the Profanation of the Churches,
though their Captains at first carried themselves as moderately as they could.

The Prince of Conde understanding by a Letter he received from the Elector
Palatin, The Princes of Germany much divided about the true cause of this
French War.
That the Princes of Germany were much divided about the Causes of this War,
and Especially the Catholics: He wrote a Letter to Ferdinand the Emperor the
20th of April, to inform him of the Causes of these Tumults, asserting the King
and Queen were carried away against their wills, and that he had been forced to
betake himself to Arms, to restore them to their former Liberty; and therefore
he beseeched the Emperor to favor him, as an Asserter of the Royal Interest.

The 15th of April, Roan taken very easily by the Protestants.
Roan was taken by the Protestants almost without any Tumult or Resistance; And
when Henry Robert de la Mark Duke de Bouillon, Governor of Normandy, was sent
thither by the King of Navar, to Command them in the King's Name to lay down
their Arms, they slighted his Authority, and gave Reasons for what they had
done, alleging, amongst others, the Attempts upon the Protestants at Amiens
and Abbeville, which, they said, were sufficient to terrify the most Peceable
from laying down their Arms; but then they were willing to deliver the Keys of
the City to him, and to keep it for his use, and in his Name. He leaving the
City thereupon, they took St. Catherine's, a Monastery without the City, and
put a Garrison into it. A Tumult arising the next Night, some of the Catholics
were slain, and others put into Prison. So from the Third of May till the City
was re-taken, the Exercise of the Romish Religion was totally omitted. And
after that Pont del' Arche and Caudebec.
Soon after they took Pont de l' Arche, which, being taken by the Roman
Catholics, the Protestants took Caudebec beneath Roan, and when they might
have demolished it, they endeavored to keep it, but it was soon after re-taken
by the Roman Catholics, and so the City was restrained on both sides. Upon
this, 300 Horse and 1500 Foot were sent against them, which for some time had
the better of the Citizens. The Protestants took Diepe the 21th of April
without any Resistance, Diepe.
and pulled down the Images and Altars in the Churches. The 21th of June,
Aumale left Roan and Besieged Diepe. In the County of Calais the Protestants
were the stronger. Caen, and Bayeux.
were also taken and Reformed by the Protestants.

Man's was taken by the Protestants the Third of April without Resistance, Man's
taken by them.
and in the mean time Forces were raised by both Parties, the Queen in her
Heart being pleased to see the Prince of Conde Espouse her Cause, and desiring
to abate the Pride of the Guises, and therefore she was earnest to have a
Treaty, hoping by this means to have both the Parties at her Devotion. The
Prince of Conde, the first of May, had sent her a Letter with some Terms for an
Accommodation, which were, That the Edict of January, which had been violated
by the Conspirators, should be observed. 2. The Injuries committed upon the
Protestants, severely punished by the Magistrates. 3. Guise and his Brothers,
and Montmorancy, and who had raised this War, should leave the Court, and
return to their several Governments, till the King was of Age to undertake the
Government, and determine himself this Controversy. And then he would lay down
his Arms, and retire to his home. The Fourth of May it was Answered, That the
King would observe the Edict of January every where but at Paris. That all
Slaughters, Spoilings and Injuries committed, should be inquired into and
punished, but he would not send Guise, Montmorancy, and St. Andre from the
Court, because he was satisfied as to their Loyalty, needed their Counsel, and
ought not to set any Mark of Dishonor on them. But then they were willing for
the sake of the Public Peace to retire, if those that were in Arms in Ocleans
and all over the Nation would first go home, restore the Places taken by them
to their former Liberty, and yield that Obedience to the King they ought, and
that the King of Navar should still retain the Command of the Army. The Prince
of Conde perceiving by this Answer that the Triumvirate were resolved not to
leave the Court, and that they only pretended the Danger of laying down their
Arms before him, without taking any Notice of the Hostages he had offered for
their Security in that case, suspected there was fraud in the bottom, and would
not comply neither, alleging, That the King's Presence was their security,
whereas he had nothing but the Equity of his Cause to Plead.

After this the Triumvirate put in a Petition to the King, The Triumvirate
desire no liberty should be granted to the Protestants.
Desiring that an Edict might be made, 1. That no Religion but the Roman
Catholic should be Admitted in the Kingdom. 2. That all the King's Domestics,
Captains, Governors and Magistrates should be of that Religion, and whoever
did not publicly profess it, should be deprived of all Honor and Public
Employments, saving to them their Estates. 3. That all Bishops and Clergymen
should profess the same, or be deprived of their Revenues, which should be
brought into the Exchequer. 4. That all the Churches which were destroyed,
spoiled, or defaced, should be restored, and those that were guilty of these
Sacriledges punished. 5. That all should lay down their Arms, upon what
pretense soever they had been Listed, or by whom soever. And they that had no
Commission from the King, should be treated as Traitors. That the King of Navar
only should have the Right of Levying Men, till these Troubles were ended by a
Treaty or a Victory, and they to be paid out of the Treasury. And on these
Terms they were willing not only to leave the Court, but the Nation, and to go
into Exile: And till this was done, they could not leave the Court. This was
Answered at large by another Paper Printed the 20th of May with great sharpness.

The 26th and 27th of May the King of Navar commanded all the Protestants to
depart from Paris, The Triumvirate draw out of Paris.
ordering that no injury should be done to them or their Goods in their retreat
or absence on pain of Death: And perceiving that nothing could be effected by
Treatise, the Triumvirate drew their Forces out of Paris, consisting in Four
thousand Foot and Three thousand Armed Horse, about which time the Queen
invited the Prince of Conde to a Conference, and they met in the beginning of
June at Thoury a Village in la Beausse, with all the Cautions usual in such
Cases. But that Treaty proving ineffectual, the Prince of Conde drew his Army
out too, which was then Four thousand Foot and Two thousand Horse. The Prince
of Conde had more of the Nobility of France in his Army than the other fide,
either out of Love to the Religion, or hatred to the Guises, or by the secret
Orders of the Queen. The Prince of Conde maintain great Order in his Army at
first.
Besides his Army had a severe Discipline, and Public Prayers were said
Morning and Evening at the head of each Company: There were no Oaths, no
Quarrels heard of, but the Psalms were devoutly Sung in the Camp, there was no
Dice, no Tables, no Rapines, all was Modesty, and the least Faults were
severely punished, so that the Country Man or Merchant might live or travel by
the Army in perfect security; and their great desire was, that they might be
led against Paris. The 21th of May the Army marched from Orleans, and there was
another Treaty for a Peace, and another Conference with the Queen, A second
Treaty between the Queen and Conde.
who thanked him and all the Great Men that cam^ with him for the good Service
they had done her and the King, in a time of such great need; saying they were
worthy of the highest Rewards and Honors, and praying them to persevere in it,
and to Consult the good of the Kingdom. She excused what she had done in the
mean time for the other Party, by saying, They were more in number who embraced
the Roman Catholic Religion, and therefore it was necessary there should be no
other Religion suffered in France than that. At this Conde replied he could not
submit to so hard a Condition. For if the Peace of Religion were taken away, a
War would follow, which would be very difficult and lasting. This proving
ineffectual too, the Prince of Conde marched to La Ferte Alez, and took and
sacked Boigency, Boigency sacked. B^ois.
a Town upon the Loire. The Triumvirats Army marched right to Blois which the
Protestants had taken not long before, and Garrisoned, but the Place being weak,
they retreated to Orleans, and left it to the Catholics, who Exercised unheard
of Cruelties, and put most of the Protestants to the Sword, or drowned them in
the River, though they recovered the Town without one blow striking. From
thence they marched to Tours, Tours.
which had but a little before been surprised and reformed by the Protestants,
contrary to the will of the Wiser People, who foresaw the ill consequence of
it. The Country in the mean time was exposed to Rapine, under pretense of
Extirpating Heretics, the great Men conniving at it, or being well pleased:
And a War was Proclaimed against the Protestants, and all Men were commanded to
treat them as the Enemies of Mankind, on the account of the Sacriledges
committed in the Churches, because the Church Plate was taken to be Minted for
Money to pay the Army, and the Images and Altars were generally beaten down
where the Protestants prevailed. Whereupon the Peasants left their Work, and
fell to Rob and Plunder their Neighbors, and to exercise unheard of Cruelties
and Barbarities, they thinking the Protestants were to be treated like Mad
Dogs. This forced the Gentry in a short time to Arm against them, and they
treated the Monks and Priests in their own Kind, and Hanged up those Catholic
Peasants.

The Protestants took Angers the 5th of April, Angers taken by the Protestants.
almost without any opposition, and both Parties lived peaceably to the 21th,
when they pulled down the Images in the Churches; which so incensed the Roman
Catholics, that, the 5th of May, they let in Succors in the Night; whereupon
followed a Fight, in which, the Protestants were worsted, and the Roman
Catholics, prevailed. The other Party were plundered, whereupon some Women
were ravished, and others slain, to the Number of about eleven. Tours retaken
by the Roman Catholics.
Tours being retaken, all the Protestants were, by one means or another, made
away, the President of the City not escaping their Cruelty, because he was
suspected to be a Protestant, though he had never declared himself such; so that
the Governors were forced to erect Gallows, to put a stop to the bloody
Barbarity, which they themselves had raised in the People. The Protestants of
Man's were much affrighted, Man's deserted by the Protestants.
when they heard of the Massacre of those of Tours, because they also had
broken down the Images, and pulled up and defaced some of their Tombs.
Whereupon, the 12th of July, they left the City in the Evening, to the number
of 800, and went to Alenzon. The Bishop, upon this, put in 500 Roman Catholics
for a Garrison, who reacted all the Cruelties upon the Protestants, and suborned
Men to swear against such, as, they supposed, had defaced the Images, or
profaned the Churches, whereupon they were severely punished for others
Faults: The Bishop had a great hand in this, and was turned a Soldier, and
treated all such as he suspected, of the Clergy, very hardly; nor did he spare
the Churches Treasures more than the Protestants had done, but took them to pay
his Soldiers, raising, besides, great Contributions on the People for that
purpose. There were, in the Cathedral Church, the Images of the twelve
Apostles, of Silver, of great Weight, and adorned with many Jewels, and the
Bishop had carried them to his Castle de Trouvoy in Maine, for their greater
Security; but that being taken afterward, they were lost, and the Bishop was
suspected of having converted them to his own use: and going, after this, to
the Council of Trent, it was said, He must needs have the Holy Ghost, because
he carried the twelve Apostles with him:

The 13th of May, Amiens.
the Protestants were forbidden their Meetings at Amiens, their Books sought
out and burnt, and, amongst them, all the Bibles they found in French, and the
Pulpit with them, and some few of them were flain in the Tumult. At Abbeville,
there was a greater Tumult raised by the Roman Catholics, and many of the
Soldiers in the Castle, and of the Inhabitants of the Town, were murdered, upon
a pretense they favored the Prince of Conde's Interest, and the Governor of
the Town was assassinated in his House, and his naked Body was dragged about
the Town; and another Gentleman most barbarously murdered. At Senlis, Senlis.
many of the Protestants were assassinated, and some were put to death by the
Decree of the Parliament of Paris on other pretenses. I have transcribed only a
very few of the horrid and insufferable Villainies, committed by the Roman
Catholics of France, in this War, from Thuanus: For so madly did they dote
upon their Images and Altars, that when ever they got any of the Protestants
into their hands, they treated them with unheard of Cruelty and Rage; whereas,
all their Fury spent it self on the Statues, Pictures, Altars, and Relics, of
their Churches, or in some places on their Tombs; and if some few Slaughters
happened, in was in the Surprise, or taking of Places, before they were masters
of them; but the Roman Catholics raged most, where the Protestants were least
able to resist them.

The Prince of Conde hearing, that his Party was worsted in Normandy, sent
Lewis de Lanoy with three hundred Horse, who, with some difficulty, arrived at
Roan the 11th of June, Normandy.
and recitified the Disorders he found in that place; the Protestants would
have expelled the Roman Catholics out of the City, but he persuaded them only
to disarm them, and swear them to live peaceably. Roan, in a short time after
this, was besieged, from the 29th of June, to the 11th of July, by the Roman
Catholics, but then they were forced to withdraw, and the City remained in the
Protestants hands. In the interim, a Treaty was carried on by the Vidame de
Chartres, with Queen Elizabeth, for Succors, which displeased many, though the
Roman Catholics, in the mean time, had called in German and Swiss Auxiliary
Forces, to support their Quarrel. The Roman Catholic Army, in the mean time,
The Roman Catholics retake Poictiers and Bourges.
took Poictiers, after a sharp Siege, which yet might have holden out longer,
where they plundered the Protestants, and put many of them to the Sword: And
after that, Bourges, being besieged by the Duke of Guise, was, at last,
surrendered by the Cowardice or Treachery of Mr. de Yvoy, the chief Commander,
when the Roman Catholics had almost spent all their Ammunition, and the
Admiral had taken that which was sent to supply them from Paris. The taking
this place, so far discouraged the Protestants, that a great many places
yielded upon the first Summons.

The Duke of Guise, and his Party, The Siege of Roan resolved on.
after they had taken Bourges, were divided in their Opinion, some advising,
the Army should march to the Siege of Orleans, as the Capital of the adverse
Party; and others, that they ought first to take in Roan, as more easy to be
reduced, and of no less advantage, because preventing the English from powering
great numbers of Men into France: So at last this Party prevailed, and that
Siege was undertaken.

Montgomery, who by misfortune slew Henry the Second, was, by the Prince of
Conde, appointed to command here in Chief, who entered the place the 18th of
September, with 300 Horse; and having added some new Works to St. Catherins, he
built a new Fort at St. Michaels, The Terms of the Protestants League with
England.
which he called by his own Name. About the same time, a League was concluded
between the English and the Protestants, at Hampton Court; by which, the Queen
was to send 6000 men into France, 3000 of which, were to keep Haure de Grace in
the King's Name, for a place of Safety for those of the Religion, and the rest
were to be employed in the Defense of Diep and Roan, and she was to supply
140000 Crowns for the Charge of the War; the Forces were immediately sent from
Portsmouth, and landed at Haure de Grace, under the Command of the Earl of
Warwick. The 28th of September, the Forces of the Triumvirate came before Roan,
being then 16000 Foot, and 2000 Horse. Montgomery had, besides the English and
the Townsmen, 800 Veterane Soldiers, for the Defense of the City. The Besiegers
would have stopped the passage of the River, by sinking Ships in it; but the
violence of the Tide cleared the Chanel, so that the Frigates came from Haure
de Grace, with Canon, Ammunition, and Victual, notwithstanding. The 6th of
October, St. Catherins Fort was taken by Storm and Surprise, and 300 Townsmen
beaten back, who came to relieve it. The 9th of October, 500 English, under the
Lord Gray, entered the Town. The 13th of October, the Besiegers stormed the
City, from 10 'till 6 at Night, the English and Scotch sustaining the brunt,
and at last repelling them, the next day they stormed it 6 hours more, The King
of Navar shot at the Siege of Roan.
to the loss of 600 men. The 15th of October, the King of Navar was shot in the
left Shoulder with a Musket Bullet in the Trenches. The 25th of October, there
was a sharp Fight at St. Hillary's Gate, three Mines being sprung to small
purpose. The next day, the City was taken by Storm, the greatest part of the
brave Men having been slain, or wearied out, in the continual labors of the
Siege. Montgomery, and the greatest part of the English and Scotch, shipped
themselves in a Galley, and breaking the Chain, which the Besiegers had drawn
cross the River, they escaped to Haure de Grace. There were slain in this
Siege, about 4000 Men on both sides. He dies.
The 17th of November, the King of Navar died of his Wounds, having received
the Sacrament according to the Custom of the Church of Rome; but blaming his
own wavering and unconstant temper in the matters of Religion, and saying, If
he recovered, he would embrace the Augustane Confession, and live and dye in
it. He was a person of great Beauty, of a generous and liberal Disposition, a
good Soldier, just, and fit for business, but too much addicted to Pleasures,
which at last fatal to him, and drew him into this War.

The Queen had entered a Treaty with the Inhabitants of Diep, for the recovery
of that place, before Roan was taken, and they were amazed with the Dangers
that City was in, (...) surrendered to the King.
and the depredations the German and French Horse made upon them; that so soon
as they heard Roan was taken, they sent a Petition to the King, who granted
them all that they desired, but the public Exercise of their Religion:
Whereupon, part of them went away with the English, and the rest retired to
Antwerp, and other places in the Low Countries; So the Town was delivered up to
the young Montmorancy the second of November, who obtained leave from the
Queen, for them to meet privately for the Exercise of their Religion. The same
Conditions were granted to them of Caen. And also Caen.
The next Care, was to clear Haure de Grace of the English whither the Earl of
Warwick came, two days after the surrender of Roan. Diep retaken by the
Protestants.
The 20th of December, the Protestants surprised Diep again, without any
considerable opposition, the Inhabitants no way consenting to it, and excusing
it to the Queen, as done without their aid, knowledge, or consent, and
thereupon great numbers of them went into the Low Countries, fearing they
should be treated with the same Curelty, as they of Roan had been, when that
City was taken, for which, they were ill used by Montgomery, who was the
procurer of this Surprise.

The News of the loss of Roan, The Protestants beaten in Guienne.
was brought to the Prince of Conde, when he was in great pain for Andelott,
sent by him into Germany, to bring him some Protestant Forces: This ill News
came attended with the defeat of Monsieur de Bury, in which, 2000 were slain
in the Field, and many more lost in the Retreat the 9th of October. The same
day this Victory was won at La Ver in Guienne; Monsieur de Bazourdan attempted
to surprise Montauban in the night, which proved ineffectual, and he lost 200
of his Men in this design. From thence, they marched to Thelose, which was then
also in the hands of the Protestants, and reduced to great Extremities; but the
Inhabitants being supported by the frequent Sermons of their Pastors, were
encouraged to hold out, and, on the contrary, the Sieur de Terride thought it a
great disparagement to be baffled here too, and grew stubborn in his Resolves
to carry this place, because his Forces had miscarried at Montauban, and so the
Siege was continued, till the Pacification in April following. In this Siege,
Sazourdan was slain, the 22th of October, by a Shot from the Town.

The Sieur d'Andelott, Andelot hardly obtains Succors in Germany.
who was sent into Germany to obtain Succors, met with great Difficulties, the
Court of France having sent one Envoy after another to break his Measures, and
render the Protestant Princes averse to War: And when the Emperor had called a
Diet to meet in November, for the choosing Maximilian, his Son, King of the
Romans, the Prince of Conde sent one Jaques Spifame, heretofore Bishop of
Nevers, an eloquent and brisk Man, who gave in the Confession of Faith,
published by the French Protestants in the Assembly of the States, for the
vindicating them from the aspersions of those monstrous Opinions, which their
Enemies had raised from them. He also made three elegant Speeches, one to the
Emperor, one to Maximilian in his Bedchamber, and one to the three Estates,
to purge the by the Order of the Queen, and for the delivery of the King out of
Restraint. The Landtgrave of Hess in the mean time, the 10th of October, had
assembled at Bucarat 3000 Horse, and 4000 Foot; to which, the Prince de Porcean
brought in 100 of the French Nobility on Horseback, as far as Strasburg. D'
Andelott was then afflicted with a Tertian Ague, yet he traveled with that
Industry, that he arrived at Orleans the 6th of November, bringing up with him
besides 300 Horse, and 1500 Foot, which had escaped from the Rout at Ver. And
very welcome they were, the taking of Roan, and the defeat of Ver, having
reduced their Reputation, Forces, The Prince of Conde takes the Field.
and Hopes, to a very low ebb: The Prince of Conde hereupon marching out of
Orleans the first of November, with the whole Army, and a Train of Artillery,
consisting of 8 Pieces, the 11th of November, he took Pluviers, in the Forest
of Orleans, Pluviers taken by the Prince of Conde.
a populous Town, by Surrender; and because they had presumed to defend it with
4 Foot Companies; he hanged two of the Captains, and all the Priests he found
in it, and disarmed the Common Soldiers, and made them take an Oath, that they
should not hereafter bear Arms against him. In this place, he found great
quantities of Provisions, part of which, he sent to Orleans, and reserved the
rest for the use of his Army. The Terror of this prevailed so far upon the
Garrison of Baugy, that they durst not stay for a Summons, but retired to
Chasteaudun. Montmorancy, and the Duke of Guise, were, by this time, returned
form Roan to Paris; and the Marshall de St. Andre having in vain endeavored
to stop the passage of Monsieur d' Andelott, was come back to Sens, a City he
suspected, from whence he went to Estampes; but hearing the Prince of Conde was
near, he left two Companies to defend that place, (who soon surrendered it) and
retired toward Paris. Here also the Prince found great quantities of
Provisions, which were of great use to his Army. Here the Prince of Conde
entered into a Consultation, whether they should march away for Paris, and take
and rifle the Suburbs of that great City: But the King, Queen, and a numerous
Army, being there, they concluded the City could not be taken; and
consequently, that this Ravage would turn to their damage and disgrace, and
make a Peace difficult, if not impossible, when so many innocent People had
been ruined and undone. To all this, Francis Lanoy added, that there was an
apparent danger, whilst the Soldiers were dispersed, and eager upon the Prey;
that the Army might make a Sally out of Paris, and cut them in pieces, with
little or no resistance. Having therefore taken La Ferte Aucoulph upon the
Mark, Dourdan, and Mont-Leberi, Corbeil besieged by the Prince of Conde.
he sat down before Corbeil, which was under the Government of Monsieur Pavan,
with the Regiment of Picardy, and some Companies of that of Champagne; The
taking of which place, and cutting off the Provisions, would have very much
incommoded the City of Paris.

The 17th of November, the Prince of Conde summoned the place, the being denied
it, a small Skirmish ensued, and the next day S. Andre entered it with Succors
from Paris. About the same time, the News of the death of the King of Navar was
brought into the Protestant Camp; and the Queen's Emissaries began to give out
Speeches, that the Prince of Conde should succeed in his Post: And the Queen
her self sent to invite him to a Conference, which was rejected. The 22th,
there was another Conference desired, which served for a pretense to withdraw
the Army from Corbeil, which, by this time, was too well manned for the Prince
to deal with; The two Armies come in view of each other.
whereupon he marched toward Paris, the Catholic Army being then come up, and
in sight, so that the two Armies pelted each other with their Cannon: Two days
after, the Prince came to Juvicy, and the next to Saussaye; there the motion
for a Conference was again renewed, and the Queen was to come as far as Port
Angel for that purpose: But the Prince either not being well, or fearing some
Treachery, excused himself, and sent Coligni to treat with Montmorancy, his
Uncle. Montmorancy, on the other side, to dissipate the Prince's Jealousy,
crossed the Seyne, and came to him. From thence, the Prince marched on toward
Paris, and, three days after, Coligni, who led the Vangard, attacked the
Suburbs of St. Victor, which caused a grievous Consternation in Paris; so that
if there had been then no Garrison in the City, the Inhabitants would have
opened their Gates, and fled for their Lives; and Jacques Gillis, President of
the Parliament at Paris, a violent Persecutor of the Protestants, died, for
fear they were come to take Revenge on him for the Blood he had shed, and he
was succeeded by Christopher de Thou, a person of great moderation and
integrity, and a lover of his Country, but addicted to none of the Factions
that embroiled France; who was promoted by the Queen. The Prince's Army
consisted then in 8000 Foot, 5000 Horse, and 7 Cannons. The 2d of December, the
Queen, attended by the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Prince of Roche sur Yon,
Montmorancy and his Son, and the Seigneur de Gonnor, met the Prince, A Treaty
with the Queen, and the Terms proposed by the Prince of Conde.
Coligni, Genly, Gramont, and Esternay, at a Conference. The Prince demanded,
that the Protestants might freely meet, wherever they desired it, and not
elsewhere. That then the English, and other Strangers, should depart the
Nation, and the Cities should be restored into their former State. That no
person should be called to account for any thing done during the War. That
there should be a free General Council held (if it might be had) within six
Months; and if not, then a National Council of France. The Queen, as to the
first, excepted Paris, Lions, the Cities on the Fronteers, all those that had
Parliaments, and all that had no Meetings since the Edict of January; the
Churches to be restored, and no Exercises in them, but what was according to
the ancient form, and Conde desired, they might meet in the Suburbs of the
Fronter Cities. The Conference was continued four days, and then ended without
any Agreement, the Protestants, by that time, being resolved to try the Fortune
of a Battle.

The 10th of December, The Prince marches toward Normandy, to meet the
English Succors.
the Prince withdrew the Army from Paris, and retreated to Paloyseau; the next
day, he marched to Limoux; and the third, to Valenza, a place of Pleasure; the
fourth, to St. Arnoul, the Inhabitants of which, out of fear, shut their Gates,
whereupon it was taken and plundered, and the Priest severely treated, and here
the Army stayed two days. The King's Army (for so now it was called) marched to
Estamps, and finding it Garrisoned by the Princes Forces, they left it, and
marched to Chartres, which was a stronger place, and had a greater Garrison. The
Prince of Conde was enraged, to be thus deluded by a Sham-Treaty, and had some
Thoughts to have returned to Paris, which was wisely prevented by Coligni, who
advised him to march toward Normandy, and join with the English at Havre de
Grace, who had a good Body of Foot, which they wanted most of all, and where
they expected Money from England; which, though it was very difficult, yet the
Germans beginning to be mutinous for their Pay, it was resolved upon. The 15th
of December he marched to Ablium.
Ably, and the next day to Gallardon, which, refusing him entrance, was taken,
and the Inhabitants ill used; from hence, he went to Mintenon, where he crolled
the S^yne, and went to Aulnay. Here the King's Army overtook them, and passed
the (...) before him unperceived; The King's Army overtake the Prince.
there was in it 16000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, which lay encamped between the
Villages of L'Espine and Blainville, and the Horse, being fewer than those with
the Prince, was divided into four Squadrons, and placed between the Foot, which
were covered by these two Villages on both sides, and on the right hand with
Wagons too; but the Duke of Guise was with a Party of Horse on the left Wing.
The Battle of Dreux.
Andelot had that day a fit of his Tertian Ague, yet he took his Horse, and
went to view the King's Army, and finding it very dangerous to attack them in
that Post, advised they should turn toward Treon; but Montmorancy ordered the
Cannon to play just as they were going to march that way, which caused some
disorder in the first Troops of Conde's Army: Whereupon he fell in upon the
Swiss, whereas he ought to have charged the opposite Horse, and by this means,
besides, he exposed his own Foot naked to the Vanguard of the Enemy, which
passed by untouched; however, the Swiss were broken into and dispersed, and the
German Horse made a great Slaughter of them. Danville, eldest Son to
Montmorancy, came thereupon with three Troops to their Relief, in which Action,
Gabriel Montmorancy, his Brother was slain; Rochefoucault fell upon the next
Squadron of Swiss, but was repulsed by their Pikes, with loss. At the same
time, Coligni fell upon Montmorancy, who was in the Rere, Montmorancy taken
Prisoner.
and broke it all in pieces. Montemorancy had his Horse slain under him, and as
he mounted another, was wounded in the Face, and taken by one R. Sewart;
Beauvuis was also taken, but died soon after of his Wounds: And Anglure de
Givry, and the Duke de Aumale, were beaten down, and trod to Death by the
Horse. The Regiment of Bretagne was also dispersed, so that there was only one
Squadron of Swiss entire, which repelled the Germans, and there were some
French Horse which make a Front; but at length they were charged in the Rere by
de Mouy, but then he also was charged by Biron, with three Troops in the Flank,
and soon after taken, his Horse being slain.

The Vanguard, in which the Duke of Guise stood, was all this while entire; he
was in the Army as a private Gentleman, and had no Command, because he would
not sight under Montmorancy: At his Advice, St. Andre fell then upon the Prince
of Conde, when all his Forces were weary and dispersed, and first broke the
Prince's Foot, which were very much slaughtered by the Spaniards that followed
the Gascongners and Germans, who first broke in upon them. After this, Guise,
Damville, St. Andre, by the advice of the Duke of (...) turn the Fortune of the
day, and gains the Victory on the King's ^^de.
and St. Andre, all united with the rest of the King's Horse, fell upon the
Prince's Horse, which, being disordered by three Fieldpieces fired upon them,
was soon broken, Andelot doing all that was possible to rally the Germans, but
it proving impossible, he rode to Teron, and at last escaped. Conde and Coligni
got together 200 Horse, but could not persuade the Germans to return to the
Charge, they pretending, their Pistols were lost: They also disordered and
discouraged the French Horse, so that the Prince of Conde was forced to flee;
he had received a wound in the Hand, and his Horse was shot in the Thigh, and
fell; and Danville coming up, as he was remounting, The Prince of Conde taken
(...) slain (...) Coligni.
he was taken Prisoner: Soon after this, Montmorancy was in vain endeavored to
be recovered. In the interim, Coligni rallying 300 Armed Horse, and 1000
Germans, charged St. Andre, and the Duke of Guise, with greater Fury than they
had showed in the first: In this Rencounter, St. Andre was slain by one
Baubigny, whom he had injured, after he was taken and carried off. He was a
Person of great Natural Parts, but very lewd and wicked, though a Man of Courage;
under Henry the Second he had been in good Esteem, and was now employed on the
account of his Abilities 'till the Divine Vengeance overtook him for his
Crimes, and cut him off, by the Hand of one he least feared of all the World;
which may give great Men a good hint, not to do Injuries, on presumption of
their Power, but to revere Fortune. The Duke of (...) force (...) to (...).
The King's Army was again declining, when the Duke of Guise came up with a
Party of Foot, and charging Coligni in the Flank, he retreated, because not
supported with equal Numbers, but with a soft pace, and carrying off two Pieces
of Cannon. The Duke of Guise followed him a while, but Night coming on, he was
forced to give over the Pursuit. Coligni went to Neufville, and Guise returned
to the Camp. The fight lasted four hours. It was observed, there was no Forlorn
Hope, though the Armies faced each other an hour before the Fight began. That
both the Generals were taken, and the Victory changed several times between
them, and was at last doubtful, Coligni would have ^ought, the next day.
to whom it belonged. Coligni would have persuaded the Germans to fight the
next day, which had certainly ruined the King's Army, if they would have done
it, but they would not. The Duke of Nevers was mortally wounded by a Servant of
his own, by accident. There was about 8000 slain, of which, 3000 were
Protestants. 1500 Germans were taken by the Duke of Guise, and sent home
without Arms. Montmorancy was hurried to Orleans, and Conde was kindly treated
by the Duke of Guise, who was now become General in the King's Army: That
Night, they two lay together in one Bed, as well as supped at one Table, to
both their great Commendations. The next day, the Duke of Guise sent an account
of what had happened to the Queen to Paris, who, by this time, was sufficiently
afraid of his prevailing Fortune, though she had no great Good Will for the
Prince of Conde; but then she rarely dissembled her Thoughts, and ordered
public Thanks to be given to God for the Victory, and sent the Duke of Guise a
Commission, to be General of the King's Forces.

The day after the Fight, Coligni General of the Protestants.
Coligni drew up the remainder of the Protestant Army in Battle array, and
marching toward the Enemy, that he might obscure the Fame of the overthrow,
and recollect such as had escaped: he lodged that Night at Gailard, and the
next at Aunea, a Castle in Beause, where he was by common Consent made General,
during the absence of the Prince of Conde. From thence, he marched to Puiset,
and so to Patey, where he stayed two days, and then designed to surprise some
Forces he heard were sent to Blois; he followed them as far as Freteval in
Vendosme, and arrived at Baugy, with a design to repair the Bridge, and
disperse his Forces into Winter Quarters in Sologne and Berry, whither he heard
the Duke of Guise intended to send his, that they might be the nearer to
besiege Orleans in the beginning of the Year.

Though there are some Particulars relating to the Year 1562, which I shall
hereafter return to; yet I think it the best way, to carry on the Thread of the
French Affairs to the end of the War here, and then return back to the other.

The Duke of Guise, 1563.
in the beginning of January, thought fit to solicit Frederick Rolshouse, a
Subject of the Landtgrave of Hesse, who said, He was sent by his Master, an old
Friend and Allie of the Crown of France, to deliver the King from the Restraint
he was put under by the Enemies of his Government, and to assist the faithful
Defenders of the French Interest: Thereupon, the 22th of January, the Queen
went to Bloise, where she published a Declaration in the King's Name and her
own, to assure the Landtgrave, That all those Reports, which had been spread
abroad of the Restraint of her and her Son, were false, and set on foot by the
Protestants, only, as a color of their Sedition, that they might arm and raise
Forces in Germany; and therefore she hoped, that when he, and the rest of the
German Princes, should understand the truth of this, they would not aid or abet
the Rebels of France against their lawful Prince, contrary to the Oaths given
by their Ancestors. This Declaration was signed, for the greater confirmation,
by Alexander, the King's youngest Brother; Henry, Prince of Navar; Charle^,
Cardinal of Bourbon; Lewis de Bourbon, Duke de Monpensier; and Charles de
Bourbon, Prince de Roche-sur-Yon. Soon after the Fight also at Dreux, there was
a General Pardon published, to all that should return to their Allegiance to
the King. The Pope fondly overjoyed with the Victory at Dreux.
When the Pope heard of this Victory, he was strangely joyed at it, conceiving,
this one Battle would put an end to the Power of the Protestants in France, he
expecting that effect from Force and Violence, which the French hoped for only
from a Council. But however, he thought himself now delivered from a great part
of his Cares, and made it his business to precipitate the Council, though he
knew, the Germans would protest against it, whom he did not at all regard; and
as for the King of France, he thought, the Joy of the Victory would give him
satisfaction enough. The Conncil was as much joyed as any body, but especially
the Cardinal of Lorraine, for his Brother's good Fortune in this Battle, to
whom all was ascribed in a Speech made there the 10th of January.

Coligni entering Berry, led his Army to Ceel, the second of January, a place,
which the Priests of that Province had chosen, to secure the Church Treasures
in, which now, to their great damage, they persuaded the Townsmen to defend, it
being soon taken, and all that Plate melted down, and the Inhabitants very
severely used for their Resistance, and several of them hanged, the Priests
escaping in the Tumult. In Beausse, the Duke of Guise took Estampes, after
which, he besieged Pluviers with 800 Horse, who took the Suburbs; the Garrison
of which, sallying out, retired to Orleans, leaving their Carriages behind
them. Whilst the Duke of Guise was busy in preparing Necessaries for the Siege
of this great City, Andelot, who had undertaken the Defense of it, was as
intent in fortifying and storing the City with all things that were necessary.
There were in it 14 Companies of Germans, and 4 of Townsmen, and many of the
Nobility, all well Armed.

The Queen, The Prince of Conde carried to Blois.
when she had stayed a while at Chartres, went with the King to Blois, (as is
said) carrying with them the Prince of Conde under a strong Guard; from whence,
she sent him to the Castle of Onzain, a strong place in Angoumoise. Coligni
was, in the mean time, wholly intent on the appeasing of the Germans, fearing
they would mutiny for their Pay, which, he said, would be sent in a short time
from England; so that, at last, he obliged them to promise, they would not
desert him. The Duke of Guise, having quitted Beausse, was by this time come to
Baugy, where there were some Skirmishes of no great consequence between him and
the Protestants. Some mention was made also of a Peace, the Princess of Conde
proposing, That her Husband, and Montmorancy, should be set at liberty to that
end, but there was nothing done in it. The Sieur Boucart, a Commander under
Coligni, was coming before, Trimoville, a Town upon the Loire, which was under
one Potin, commanded it to surrender; which being refused, he took it by force,
and put the Inhabitants to the Sword; amongst whom, were 36 Priests: From
whence, he went to Gien, which was preserved out of his hands by three
Companies of Spaniards, who were sent thither for the approaching Siege of
Orleans. Coligni, in the mean time, left Gergeau, and went to Orleans, to
consult with the other Commanders what was best to be done, and there it was
resolved, the Germans should be sent into Normandy, to be ready to receive
their Pay out of England, which their Commanders readily accepted; Coligni went
with them, and Gramont undertook the defense of Orleans, Andelot being sick.
Coligni was all the way plied with Messages from the Queen, for a Peace, to
hinder his Journey: The first of February, he arrived with 4000 Horse at Treon,
and took a view of the place, in which the late Battle was fought, from thence
he went to Eureux: He took soon after St. Pere de Melun, a rich Monastery, and
finding great Riches in its Church, which had been given by the Seamen, he
took its Wealth, and, which was worse resented, destroyed those Images which
were most addressed to in Distresses. Soon after, eight English Ships came to
Havre de Grace, in which, were five English Companies, eight Cannon great
quantities of Ammunition and Money; whereupon he resolved to take the Castle of
Caen, before he went back to Orleans, and, the first of March, raised a Battery
of four Cannon against it, and took it in a few days, though the Duke of Elboeuf
was Commander of it, who must have been taken too, but that Coligni was in have
to relieve Orleans.

The Duke of Guise began the Siege of Orleans the 7th of February, The Siege of
Orleans.
and attacked the Suburb de Olivet, which Andelot had ordered to be deserted;
but, by the negligence of the Germans, had like the next day to have proved the
loss of the City, Guise his Forces getting into it, before the Germans and
French could withdraw, and fire the Houses; many of them perished in the Crowd,
at the passage of the Bridge which led to the City, and was then imbarassed
with the Goods the Germans had heaped up there: But Andelot making a sharp
Sally at the Head of a Troop of Gentlemen, opened the way, the kept off the
Enemy; it is said however, 800 of the Besieged perished in this Tumult; others
say, not half the number: But yet, however, it was a great loss, and much
incommoded the City. Two days after, the other Suburbs were taken. The 18th of
February, the Duke of Guise wrote to the Queen, That the Siege was very
forward, and that, in a few days, he should send her the joyful News it was
taken; but the same day, toward night, as he was riding with some Officers,
The Duke of Guise wounded by one Poltrot.
he was shot in the Side by one John Poltrot, near his Armpit. This person was
a Gentleman of Engoulesme, and brought up as Page in the Family of Francis
Boucart Baron d' Aubeterre, and having in his Childhood lived in Spain, could
imitate that Nation to a wonder, and was commonly called, The Little Spaniard,
he had long since resolved to be the death of this great Man, and had foretold
it publicly, and was so much the less suspected, because he was thought a
close dissembling Fellow. Being sent by his Master to learn an Account of the
Battle of Dreux, he found Coligni at the siege of Ceel, who gave him Money to
buy a fleet Horse; after which he never returned to his Lord, and this made
Coligni suspected, as conscious of the Design. From thence he went to the Duke
of Guise his Quarters, and contracted an Acquaintance with his Servants, and
this day after a Prayer to God to direct him, lying in wait, Shot him as he was
returning home in the Evening. Poltrot fled into the next Wood, and they who
pursued him could not find him; and when he had rode all night, and quite tired
his Horse, next morning he came to Pont Olivet by Orleans; which being unknown
to him, and therefore thought by him to be very distant from the place he fled
from, he laid him down to sleep, and was taken upon suspicion by the Searchers,
and being known, was brought to the Queen to St. Ilario, and Examined
concerning the Fact, and by whose Procurement he did it. He said, he had been
twice solicited to it by Coligni, and had at last consented to it upon the
persuasion of Beza and another Minister, but he said, the Prince of Conde,
Andelot, and the Sieur de Soubieze knew nothing of it. He advised the Queen to
have a care of her self too, because the Protestants were ill affected to her
since the Battle of Dreux, and that Monpensier and Sansac were also designed to
be cut off: An Account of which Confession being sent to Cologni by a German
Prisoner, the 12th of March he published a Paper in his own defense, in which
he called God and Man to Witness, that he never saw nor knew Poltrot before the
last January, and he had given him Money and employed him as a Spy in the Duke
of Guise his Camp, That when he went into Normandy, he had given him 100 Crowns
to acquaint Andelot with what passed there; and that all he had said besides
were lies and falsehood; That though he was not much concerned for the death of
the Duke of Guise, who was an Enemy to the King, and to the Reformation, and
all that Embraced it, yet he ever detested these ways of Proceeding, and had
never by himself or any other asked any such thing of Poltrot, though Conde,
Andelot, and himself, before the Queen and Montomarncy, to whom he had produced
good Assurances of it. Beza also in the same Paper, said, he never saw Poltrot
in all his Life; and Rochefocault said the same. Coligni sent the same day a
Letter to the Queen to entreat her to keep Poltrot, that the truth of his
innocence might be made out from him, before he were Executed. The Death and
Character of the Duke of Guise.
The Duke of Guise in the mean time dead the 24th of February, having purged
himself of the Massacre of Vassay, and Advised the Queen to make a Peace as
soon as was possible. He was a Great Man in the Opinion of his Enemies, a good
Soldier, and both fortunate and prudent in his Actions, but falling into a
divided Factious State, he was by his Brother Charles, a violent Man, misled,
though he often detested his Advises. Though he had no Command in the Battle of
Dreux, yet he alone procured the Victory, this made him the sole General, and
being terrible to the Protestants, it hastened his Ruin, but then it had ill
Consequences (though at first it occasioned a speedy Peace) in after times. The
Children of the Duke growing up in the Civil Wars which followed, inherited the
popularity of their Father, and under the Pretenses of Religion, and the Sloth
of the Kings of France, endeavored first to Revenge their Fathers Death on the
Protestants, and at last turned their Arms against the Royal Family, to the
great hazard of its Ruin and their own too.

Soon after the Duke of Guise was wounded, The Queen earnestly desires a Peace.
the Queen sent Henry de Cloet, and the Bishop of Limoges, to the Princess of
Conde and Andelot, to treat of a Peace several times. And when he was dead, she
yet more earnestly desired, it, fearing Conde and Montmorancy, the Heads of the
two Parties. Or, as Davila says, being desirous to drive out the Foreign
Forces before they could settle themselves, and above all, the English out of
Havre de Grace. Besides she wanted a General to Head the Kings Forces,
Montmorency being then a Prisoner, and none of the rest being equal to the
Prince of Conde, Coligni, or Andelot; besides, the Royal Revenues were by the
War reduced to so low an Ebb, that they were forced to borrow of their
Neighbors to support the War. In the mean time Francis de Briqueville Baron de
Columbiers was employed by Coligni to take Bayeux, before which he came the
12th of February, and though at first repulsed, yet upon the bringing four
Cannon from Caen, he took the City the Fourth of March, the Garrison helping him
to plunder it, and many of the Inhabitants, especially of the Clergy, were
slain, because they were thought to have occasioned the resistance which was
made. Soon after St. Lo was deserted, and fell into the hands of the
Protestants, and after it Auranches. Vire had expelled the Protestants, and
pretended to defend it self, but was taken by Storm toward Night, which
increased the Calamities of the Inhabitants. Honfleur was taken by De Mouy, the
Fourteenth of March. About this time Coligni having made Montgomery Governor of
Normandy, went from Caen with a gallant Army toward Lisieux, where he was
excluded by the Garrison, and from thence to Bernay, which presuming to do so
too, he took the Town and made a great slaughter of the Inhabitants, destroying
all their Images and Altars, and handling their Priests very severely. The 7th
of March the Prince of Conde and Montmoraney were brought to the Island Boaria
near Orleans under strong Guards, The Treaty of Peace between the Prince of
Conde and Montmorancy.
and a Treaty of Peace was opened: And Montmorancy declaring he would never
consent to the Edict of January, other Conditions were proposed, to the great
dissatisfaction of the Protestants. Conde, upon his promise, had leave given
him to enter Orleans, where he treated with the Protestant Ministers, but
finding them resolved to stand to the Edict of January, the 12th of March he
came to an Agreement with the Queen, which was subscribed by the King the 19th
of the same Month. The Terms of which were, The Articles agreed on.
That, 1. All the Nobility should permit what Religion they pleased, who had
Sovereign Authority, in their Jurisdictions. That all Noblemen should have the
free Exercise of Religion in their Families, if they did not live in Corporate
Towns. That in every Generalite or Prefecture one City should be assigned for
those of the Religion. And, that wherever they had at this day a Liberty, they
should still enjoy it. All Offenses were remitted, and the Royal Moneys spent
in the War; and Conde was acknowledged the Kings faithful and Loyal Kinsman;
and the Nobility, Captains, and all others who had assisted him, were
pronounced to have done all things for the Kings Service, and with a good
Intention.

Coligni was kept in Normandy by the Flattering Prosperity of his Arms, Coligni
not pleased with the Peace.
and though he was, by many Letters from the Prince of Conde, pressed to hasten
his Journey to Orleans, yet he did not arrive there before the 23 of March. The
next day he could not dissemble his discontent at the Terms of the Treaty of
Peace, telling the Prince publicly, That he wondered, how they could be
prevailed upon to clap up a Peace upon such disadvantageous Conditions, when
the Affairs of the Protestants were in so flourishing a state. That they ought
to have remembered, that in the beginning of the War, the Triumvirate had
consented, that the Edict of January should be restored, and that now two of
them ( the King of Navar and the Duke of Guise) were slain, and Montmorancy was
their Prisoner, and consequently a Security for the Prince of Conde; Why should
not they have had the same Terms? That the restraint of the Profession of the
Protestant Religion to one place in a Province, was to give up that by a dash
of the Pen, which their Sword could never have obtained. That what was granted
to the Nobility could not be denied; and they would soon see it was safer to
serve God in the Suburbs of great Cities, than in their Private Families; and
that it was uncertain whether their Children would be at all like them. But
however nothing could rescind an Agreement made by common consent. Thus ended
the first Civil War of France.

I have transcribed this whole Account of the first Civil War of France from
the great Thuanus, abridging it as much as was possible, and pursuing the
Actions only of the great Armies; because if I had taken in all he relates of
the various Actions between the two Parties in the several great Cities and
Provinces, it would have swelled infinitely beyond the design of this Work, or
otherwise have been so dark as not to be easily intelligible. And if the Reader
compare this short Account with that given by Davila, he will soon see, how
little the sincerity of that Historian is to be relied on, and how small the
Reason is, for him to treat the Huguenots as Rebels in all the Course of this
War.

When the War first began, the Protestants acted purely on the defensive, but
after several local Massacres, they began to pull down Images and Altars in
Revenge, for the bloodshed of the other Party, and finding, to their cost,
this did but enrage the Roman Catholics against them, and made them the more
cruel, they fell next upon the Priests and Monks, as the Authors of their
Calamities, this more incensing the Roman Catholics; And they again using the
most horrid barbarities that were ever practiced by Men, the Protestants rose
likewise in their Executions on them so that if this War had continued a few
years, France must have been depopulated. Now though in all this the Roman
Catholics were the first Agressors, and forced the Protestants to this
severity in their own defense, yet their Writers cunningly omitting the
Provocation, or softing the Actions of their own Party, set forth at large the
Cruelties of the Heretics, (as they call them) and many times aggravate them
above what is true; but Thuanus, though a Roman Catholic, was too great a Man
to be guilty of so false a representation, and who ever pleases to consult
him, will and, I have been very favorable to the Roman Catholics in this
Abstract, and have not sought occasions to make them odious without cause.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE Reformation of the Church.
BOOK IV.
The CONTENTS.
The Cardinal of Ferrara leaves France. The Causes of the Delay of the Council.
The Pope's Legates sent to Trent. The Prohibition of Books taken into
Consideration. The French Ambassadors arrive at Trent. The French King's
Reflections on the Proceedings of the Council. The French Clergy arrive there.
The Pope's Fear of them. Maximilian Son of Ferdinand the Emperor chosen King of
the Romans. The Emperor dislikes the Proceedings of the Council. The Spanish
Ambassadors received in the Council. The Fathers of Trent much Displeased with
the Peace made in France. The Queen of Navarr cited to Rome, and many of the
Bishops by the Inquisition. The French King's Declaration against these
Proceedings. The Queen Mother of France complains of the Council. The Pope
Gains the Cardinal of Lorrain to his Side. That Councils have no Authority over
Princes. The Ambassadors of France Protest against the Council, and retire to
Venice. The Council ended. The Censure of the Council. The State of Religion in
Piedmont. A Tumult in Bavaria for the Cup. The Romish Reasons against granting
Marriage to the Clergy and the Cup to the Laity. The Siege and Surrender of
Havre de Grace. Charles the IX. declared out of his Minority. The Scotch
Affairs.

HAVING thus dispatched what concerns the first French War, I now return to the
Affairs of the Rest of Christendom in the Year 1562. And here I will first
begin with the History of the Council of Trent. Whilst the recalling this
Council was agitated with great heat, The Cardinal of Ferrara leaves France.
the Cardinal of Ferrara, the Pope's Legate in France after the Revocation of
the Edict of January, seeing all things there in the state he desired, he took
his leave of the King and returned into Italy. Before he went, however, he took
care to furnish the King with Money to carry on the Siege of Orleans, which he
took up of the Bankers of Paris. He had raised a vast Expectation of this
Council in the minds of all those who had yet any Kindness left in their Hearts
for the Sea of Rome; and the more, because they thought the Edict of January
which had caused the War, would then fall of Course, it being made only by way
of Provision till a Council should determine otherwise. As the Cardinal was in
his Journey Fifty Horsemen came out of Orleans under the Command of one
Monsieur Dampier, and surprised all his Mules, Horses, and Treasures, and when
he sent a Trumpeter to demand them again, the Prince of Conde made Answer, That
this magnificent and warlike Equipage did not befit Pastors and the Successors
of St. Peter, but rather Commanders and Generals of War who were in Arms for
Religion. Yet if he pleased to recall the 200000. Crowns which he had furnished
the Triumvirate with to carry on the War against him, and the Italian Forces
out of France, he would then restore all he had taken to his Eminence.

The Council which was appointed to meet at Easter of the former Year, was
delayed to the beginning of this; The Causes of the Delay of the Council.
the Pope putting it off, because he was as much afraid of the Spanish Bishops
as of the French National Council. He had been necessitated to grant great
Contributions to King Philip to be levied upon his Clergy, and he thought the
Bishops would on that score come with exasperated Minds to the Council; and all
his Thoughts were bent on the keeping the Papal Power undiminished, rather than
on satisfying the just Compaints of the Nations. At last being forced by an
unresistable necessity he sent Hercules Gonzaga, Jerome Seripand, and Stanislaus
Hosio out of his Bosom, The Pope's Legates sent to Trent.
to be his Legates at Trent. And not long after he added to them James
Simoneta, and Mark Sitico Bishop of Altemberg in Transylvania, who had orders
to open the Council again the Eighteenth of January 1562. That those things
might be therein treated of which the Proponentibus Legatis.
Legates should propose, and in the same Order, for the taking away the
Calamities of these Times, the appeasing the Controversies of Religion, the
Restraining deceitful Tongues, the Correcting the Abuses of depraved Manners,
and the obtaining a True and Christian Peace, by such means as the Holy Council
should approve of. The French Clergy insisted, That mention should be made of a
Free and General Council to be called for the Quieting of their Differences,
because their Protestants would never submit to the Determinations of the
former Sessions. On the contrary, the Spaniards professed they would only
continue the former Council; and therefore they used a middle way, and decreed,
A Council should be Celebrated. The Spanish Bishops were as much dissatisfied
because all the Power of proposing was given to the Legates, and taken from the
other Bishops, and complained of it to King Philip; who Ordered his Ambassador
to treat the Pope about it, that the Council might be free. The Pope Answered
the Ambassador, That he was not at leisure to dispute about Ablative Cases
Positive, and the Genders of Words, and that he had something else to do. And
in private he spoke of the Calamities and Dangers of France with the same
unconcernedness. For when one of the French Cardinals deplored the Danger the Sea of Rome was in of losing that Kingdom, he replied, What then? if as long as
I am Bishop of this City I shall not be forced to abate any thing of the
Greatness of my Table, and the Magnificence of my Buildings. And when they
insisted to have the Manners of Men and the Discipline of the Church thoroughly
Reformed, he said, In that Particular he would satisfy France to the full, and
take such Care in it, that they should all of them Repent that they had
mentioned a Reformation. Adding, That he foresaw that the Kingdom would be
divided on the account of Religion, but he did not value the loss of it a
Farthing. All which Expressions says Thuanus, Are in the Letters of the French
Ambassador that was then at Rome, out of which I have faitfully Transcribed
them; and the Letters are now in my Hands. The History of this Council is so
well described by Petro Soave Polano, a Venetian, which is in English, that I
need the less insist upon it; but I shall however remark some few things from
Thuanus and others, for the Enlarging or Confirming the Credit of that History,
which is much cried down by the Roman Catholics; as certainly they have good
Reason to be offended with that Author, who with so much Truth and Impartiality
has discovered the Artifices of that Assembly, for the keeping up the Grandeur
of the Court of Rome, and the Suppression and Baffling that Reformation, which
the most Learned of the Church of Rome then so much desired and panted after.

The Second Session was held the Twenty sixth of February, The Prohibition of
Books taken into consideration.
in which a Decree passed against Reading Books suspected of Heresy, and a
safe Conduct and an Invitation was given to all that would come to the Council.
Seventeen Bishops were by Name appointed to bring in a Catalogue of such Books
as were intended or thought fit to be Prohibited. Polano observes, that they
carried this so high as to deprive Men of that Knowledge which was necessary to
defend them from the Usurpations of the Court of Rome, by which means its
Authority was maintained and made Great. For the Books were Prohibited and
Condemned, in which the Authority of Princes and Temporal Magistrates is
defended from the Usurpations of the Clergy; and of Councils and Bishops from
the Usurpations of the Court of Rome, in which their Hypocrisies or Tyrannies
are manifested, by which the People, under pretense of Religion are deceived.
In sum, a better Mystery was never found out than to use Religion to make Men
insensible. However this may help to keep those in their Church which they now
have; it does certainly by Experience render them very Contemptible to all
others, and unable to defend their Religion; which is especially true of their
Laity.

The Fourth of March the business of the Safe Conduct was dispatched in a
Congregation; A debate whether Episcopacy and Residence are of Divine Right.
and a Debate was raised and pursued with great Heat by the Spanish Bishops,
That Episcopacy was instituted by God without any Medium; and that Residence
and their Pastoral Deligence, in feeding their Flock, was of Divine Right,
which they desired might be Confirmed by the Decree of the Council. But because
this tended to the Establishing the Authority of the Bishops, and the Abating
that of the Pope, his Holiness was much concerned at it, and having consulted
the Cardinals about it, they by common consent Delayed, and by ambiguous
Answers deluded the Fathers at Trent, and at last totally baffled them in this
Point. The Second Session was appointed to be the Twelfth of April, which was
then prorogued to the Fourth of June, and from thence to the Fifteenth of the
same Month. In the mean time the King of France sent Lewis de Sanct Gelais
Sieur de Lanssac, The French Ambassadors Arrival.
Arnold de Ferrier, Presiders of Paris, and Guy du Faur Sieur de Pibrac, his
Ambassadors to the Council, who arrived at Trent the Nineteenth of May. Lanssac
soon after wrote a Letter to give an Account of their being come to the French
Resident at Rome, in which he said he thought they ought in the first Place to
take care that an Event contrary to their Expectation might not attend the
Council; that the Pope should Order his Legates to show great patience to those
who spoke, proceed slowly in all things, attend the Arrival of those Bishops
who were coming, and a^ow a Liberty without condition to all that were to Vote
or Speak, and not fall under the old Reproach of having the Holy Ghost sent
them from Rome in a Portmanteau; and lastly, that they should take care that
what was Decreed at Trent to the Glory of God, should not be malignantly
Interpreted and Traduced; or, it may be, Corrupted at Rome by a Company of Idle
Men: He desired therefore he would endeavor to obtain these things of the
Pope, as he did; but the Pope took this Liberty very ill, and desired, That no
Prejudice might be done to his Authority by the French Bishops. Adding, That he
reserved the Reformation of the Eccl^siastical Discipline, and of the Court of
Rome to himself; and that he might with greater Convenience attend this and the
Transactions at Trent, he intended to go to Rononia. The pretense of this
Journey was the Crowning of the Emperor in that City, who was said to be coming
thither for that purpose: But the reality was, the Pope was afraid the World
should think him more solicitous for the preservation of the Papal Power, The
Demands of the French Ambassadors in the Council.
than for his Pastoral Cure. The Twentieth of May the French Ambassadors were
admitted in a Congregation, where they made an unacceptable Oration, an
abstract of which is in Polano: Thuanus says, The Speech was made the Fourth
of June, and that amongst other things they desired, That the Missals and
Breviaries might be Reformed, and the Lectures which were not taken out of the
Holy Scriptures might be cut off; That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper might
be allowed in both Kinds according to the desire of many Nations; And also the
Liberty of eating Flesh, and that the Severity of their Fasts might be abated;
That Marriage should be allowed to the Clergy of some Countries; That the
multitude of Humane Constitutions should be retrenched, and Prayers in the
Vulgar Tongue faithfully Translated, mixed with the Latin Hymns. Before this
the Ambassador of the Duke of Bavaria had also demanded the giving of the Cup
in the Lords Supper to the Laity as absolutely necessary for the Preserving
those who had not yet separated themselves from the Communion of the Church of
Rome, but were much offended with this denial, and for the Recovery of those
who had lef^ it. And accordingly there were about Fifty of the most Learned of
the Fathers of the Council who were for granting it, and amongst them Gonzaga
President of the Council, though all his Colleagues dislented. But the Span^sh
Bishops opposed it, and others thought it was fit first to send Legates into
Germany who should see and report it to the Council whether it were necessary,
and how it might be done. This was debated in a Congregation the Twenty eighth
of August; but in the Twenty second Session held the Seventeenth of September
it was rejected, and all were Anathematized, That did not allow the Church to
have taken away the Cup from the Laity, etc. upon just Grounds. When the
Germans still insisted that it might be granted again to some People; the
Council to free themselves from their importunity, turned them over to the
Pope, who according to his Prudence was to do what he thought Useful and
Salutary. Before this the Pope being pressed to Grant the Cup by the French
Ambassador about a Year since, had referred it to the Conclave of Cardinals,
and they and he had referred it to the Council; and now the Council sends it
back to the Pope. Oh the stupid Patience of these Men!

When Lanssac gave the King of France an Account of what had been done, he said
in his Answer, That he liked what had been done as yet at Trent; but could not
but observe that they went very slowly about the Reforming of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, The French Kings Reflections on the Proceedings of
the Council.
and the Manners of the Clergy; and in the mean time were in great haste to
Establish the Points of Doctrine; That therefore it was suspected when this was
with Levity enough performed, there would be an end put to the Council, and no
care be taken for the former, that so this procedure would afford no Benefit to
the Church in this distracted State of Christendom, and especially to France.
That about Thirty Years since, when Fire and Sword had so unsuccessfully been
employed to Cure the Disease, all Men looked upon a General Council as the
Sheet-Anchor: That he wished nothing had been done in the beginning of this
Council for the Alienating the Minds of the Churches Enemies, but rather that
they had by all means been allured, and invited to it; and if any had been
prevailed upon to come, that they should have been treated by the Fathers of
the Council with Kindness and Humanity as Children. For to what end were all
these careful and diligent Disquisitions and Disputations concerning the
Doctrine, seeing there was no debate but between the Catholic and Protestant
in these Points? And as to the Protestants their Definitions signified nothing,
but only gave them Occasion to say their Opinions were condemned by the Council
without hearing what they had to say for them: That therefore it seemed more
advisable to have endeavored to have brought them into the Council; for fear
they should in time withdraw all those who adhere to the Church: For it was a
vain surmise that the Protestants would ever submit to those Decrees which were
made when they were absent. That therefore he was of Opinion, That the
Reforming the Manners of the Churchmen, and the Discipline ought to be their
first and greatest Care, and the other to be for a time suspended; for this
would be acceptable to all Men. And lastly, Lanssac was ordered to get the next
Session Prorogued to the latter end of October, 1563. that the French Clergy
might be present at it; or at least that the publishing of the Canons might be
deferred till then. When Lanssac had represented all this to the Council, he
desired in the King's Name, That seeing in the former Sessions some things had
been decreed to the prejudice of the Liberties of the Gallicane Church, it
being an ancient Priilege belonging to them to represent by their Kings, or
their Ambassadors, what they thought useful or necessary for them, that this
Liberty should for the future be preserved; and that if any thing were Acted to
the contrary of it, it might be recalled. In the mean time, the Thirteenth of
November, The Cardinal of Lorrain and the French Clergy arrive at Trent.
the Cardinal of Lorrain, and about Forty of the French Bishops came to Trent
with some Divines, who were met without that City by the Pope's Legates, and
some of the other Bishops, and of the Ambassadors. In this Journey the Cardinal
of Lorrain went to Inspruck to meet the Emperor before he went to the Diet at
Francfort where he had some Conferences in private with that Prince about the
Affairs of Religion.

The Pope and the Cardinals at Rome were alarmed at this coming of the French
Clergy, The Pope alarmed at it, as if so many Enemies had invaded him.
as if so many Enemies had invaded them, and all things were in an Hurry to
make Preparations against them. There were new Legates, and a new Squadron of
Italian Bishops, who might out number the French, presenly to be sent to Trent.
And the Pope wrote to King Philip to Order the Bishops of his Dominions to
unite their Counsels and Votes with the Italian Bishops, that neither the
Reasons nor the Votes of the Vltramontane Bishops might prevail against them.
And in his private Audience with L' Isle the French Resident at Rome, he
ridiculed the Cardinal of Lorrain, by calling him, The other Pope who had Three
hundred thousand Pounds the Year Revene, out of several Ecclesiastical
Benefices, when he (good Man) was content with the single Bishopric of Rome;
and it is an easy thing (says he) for the Cardinal with his belly full to
praise Fasting, and admonish others to be content with one Benefice. The French
King had sent Francis de Bolliers, Sieur de Manes, to dissipate and remove this
Jealousy of the Pope's, at the approach of the French Bishops, and to acquaint
his Holiness with his Intentions. For that it was commonly said, That the
Cardinal was sent to get the Transactions in the Conference of Poisey last Year
confirmed by the Synod, That the Cup might be granted to the Laity, That the
Clergy might be allowed Matrimony, That the Liturgy might be in the Vulgar
Torigue, That the Bishops might have but one Diocese, and that none should be
Elected to that Dignity who could not Preach to the People. As to the first
Manes excused the Conference of Poisey, and said, It was appointed by the Queen
and the Cardinal for the gaining time, and the retarding or keeping back those
intestine Commotions they foresaw, and for the stopping the Mouths of the
Sectaries, who complained every where that their Reasons had never been heard;
That they designed in the Interim to levy Forces so that if they could not
convince the Sectaries by Reason, they might by force reduce them to their
Duty. That nothing was done in that Conference. And as to the other Points the
Cardinal and France, Clergy had no other Instructions then what had been sent
to the Ambassadors of France and that they brought no prejudged Opinions with
them to the Council. The Pope was much concerned upon the Account of a Report
that the Bishops of France had moved their King to stop the Payment of First
Fruits by the Clergy of France to the Sea of Rome. And he said this was
contrary to their Pacts and Agreements with him; which was, That this Affair
should be transacted with the Pope only in a friendly way. But then after all,
nothing so much startled the holy Man as a Report, that a Peace was treating
secretly with the Protestants, and that they would have Liberty given them to
Preach and he foresaw, that if France were once quieted, the Council could not
be hurried to a Conclusion, but things would be well considered, and perhaps
the Protestants must be heard in it, and amongst them Queen Elizabeth of
England, which he feared beyond Expression. For he thought the Cardinals of
Lorrain and Ferrara were so Useful and Necessary to the King of France, that he
could never have spared them to attend the Council, where there was no need of
them if he had not had some such pestilent Designs to promote. Whereupon he
mustered up all the Prelates he could possibly, The Popes fears of the French
Bishops never to be stopped.
not admitting any Excuse, and sent many also who had resigned their Benefices
to the Council, together with the Coadjutors of other Bishops, that so he might
have the more Votes, believing he was now in the utmost degree of Danger; and
as if he had not had enough of his own he borrowed some Prelates of his Friends
too: And amongst them he got leave of the Duke of Savoy that Anthony Bobba
Bishop of Cassale, who was then that Princes Ambassador in the Court of Rome;
and Lewis Vanini de Teodolis Bishop de Bertinoro, a Person of great Learning
and Eloquence, who had excused his Attendance in the Council upon his want of
Health, should now forthwith be dispatched to Trent. When this last was going
thither, he is said to have consolated and strengthened the good Pope in his
Anxiety and Fears of the Event, with an Assurance, That he would certainly get
the Victory over the Council, which was a very Acceptable Saying to the Pope;
and that he for that good News, Kissed the Bishop of Bertinoro, when he took
his Leave to go to Trent, bidding him be careful to get the Victory he had
promised him. And when after this some flying Reports came to Rome, that some
Questions were moved in the Council to the prejudice of the Papal Authority by
the Bishops, he was so moved at it, that in the Consistory before all the
Cardinals, he cried out, he and the Romans were betrayed, whilst he maintained
an Army of Enemies at Trent with great expense. By which expression he aimed at
the Italian Bishops, who were his Pensioners, and kept there by him in great
numbers. And Jo. Baptista Adriani writes, He was just upon the Point of
inhibiting the Council, and had done it if Cosmus Duke of Florence had not
averted him from that dangerous and shameful project.

The 8th. Maximilian Son of Ferdinand chosen King of the Romans. Polano in his
History of the Council of Trent, says the Election was made the 24 th. of
November. So that the first date seems to be the day of the opening of the Diet.
day of September Maximilian the Eldest Son of Ferdinand the Emperor was chosen
King of the Romans at Francfort upon the Maine, in a Diet there assembled for
that purpose. Stroschen a Polander by birth, who was then Ambassador for
Solomon the Emperor of the Turks, was present at Francfort, and saw this
Ceremony, being sent to settle a Truce for eight years between those Princes,
which had been a long time sought by Busbequius at Constantinople. The Emperor
was by this League to pay Thirty Miliions of Hungarian Ducats for a Tribute by
the year. In this Diet the Princes of the Augustane Confession, and their
Allies gave in their opinion concerning the Council in Writing, as they
promised they would in the Convention at Naumburg. They said they could not
come to this Impious Council which was Indicted by Pope Pius the Fourth,
because not so assembled as was prescribed in their Appeals to a pious, free
and lawful Council, given in heretofore in several Diets of Germany. This Diet
ended about the end of December, and the Emperor went by Worms, Spire,
Weissemburg, Strasburg, Schlestat, and Basil, to Friburg in Brisgow, being in
all places received with great Honor; and in the last of these places he held
a Diet for Alsatia, and then by Constance he went in February to Inspruck,
where he staid some time on the account of the Council of Trent, which he hoped
might be ended in the less time if he were near it.

The French Ambassadors when they came to the Council of Trent were furnished
with certain Instructions what they were to ask, but had Orders to suppress
them till they had conferred with the Emperors Ambassadors, which happened to
have much what the same demands. But by this time the Court of France seeing
there was no care taken to satisfy the Emperor, and that things were carried
with great slowness, ordered their Ambassador to open their Grievances, which
were contained in Thirty four Articles, and were accordingly unfolded to the
Council the 4th. of January; as they may be seen at large in Polano his
History, Page 609. I shall not here trouble the Reader with them. The 10th. of
January the King of France ordered his Ambassador to assure the Pope that the
Annals which were taken away in the Assembly of the States of France, lately
held at Orleans, should for the future be paid to the Pope; he hoping by this
means to have him more ready to grant his desires, tending to the peace of the
Church, which the Pope's Ambassador largely promised. On the 14th. of February
a Decree was made concerning the Residence of Bishops and Pastors with great
difficulty and opposition, which all tended to the obtaining the Judgment of
the Council, That the Pope has full power to feed, and govern the Universal
Church. The French who hold that a Council is above the Pope, were contented to
conceal their opinion in this point, for fear the Pope should take that
opportunity to dissolve the Council, without any good done by it. But then they
were resolved to defend their said opinion if it were opposed whatever
happened, and upon no terms to lose or yield it. King Philip also labored very
hard that the power of the Bishops should be raised, and that of the Pope and
the Conclave brought lower; which they of the Pope's party interpreted as a
design to diminish the Spanish Liberties, because the Bishops and Chapters of
Spain would be more subjected to the will of the King than the Court of Rome
would. By which means they at last prevailed so far upon that jealous Nation,
that the power of the Bishops in the end was very much abated, and that of the
Pope was enlarged and exalted; and the Bishops were contented to act as the
Popes Delegates, and by his Authority, and in his Name to exercise their
Functions. About this time it was that the Cardinal of Lorrain went again to
the Emperor to Inspruck, which caused a great fear in the Pope's party in the
Council, for that they suspected he went to adjust with that Prince the ways to
bring the Papal power under.

In the beginning of March the Emperor wrote a Letter to the Pope (after he had
consulted the Bishops of Quinque Ecclesiae, The Emperor dislikes the
Proceedings of the Council.
who went to Inspruck to him) wherein he signified to his Holiness, That after
his Son in the last Diet was Elected King of the Romans, and Crowned, and that
he had visited his Cities upon the Rhine, he was come to Inspruck to promote
the Affairs of the Church in the Council as became the Supreme Advocate and
procurator of the Church; but that to his great grief he understood that things
were so far from going as was to be desired, and as the public State of
Affairs required, that it was to be feared, if speedy remedies were not
applied, the Council would be ended in such manner, as it would give offense to
all Christendom, and become ridiculous to all those who had made a defection
from the Church of Rome, and fix them more obstinately in those opinions they
had embraced, though very differing from the Orthodox Faith. That there had not
been any Session celebrated for a long time, and that it was commonly given
out, the Fathers and Doctors in the Council, had contentions and differences
amongst themselves, which were unworthy of that moderation which they ought to
have, and tended very much to the detriment of that concord which was hoped for
from them; and yet these contests frequently broke out to the great
satisfaction of their Adversaries: That there was a report, That the Pope
intended to dissolve or suspend the Council; and he advised him not to do it,
because nothing could be more shameful or damageable; and which, besides, would
certainly cause a great defection from the Church, and bring a great hatred on
the Papacy, and from thence cause an equal contempt of all the Clergy; That
this dissolution or suspension would certainly procure the Assembling of
National Councils, which the Popes have ever opposed as contrary to the Unity
of the Church, and which those Princes which were well affected to the Sea of
Rome, had hitherto hindered in their Dominions; but after this they could find
no pretense to deny or delay them any longer. Therefore he desired the Pope to
lay aside that thought, and to apply himself seriously to the celebration of
the Council, allowing the Ancient Liberty to all in its full extent, that all
things might be dispatched rightly, lawfully, and in order, and thereby the
mouths of their Adversaries, who sought an opportuntity to calumniate, might be
stopped. That it would become his Holiness to attend the Council in person if
his health would permit it; and he earnestly desired he would, That he (the
Emperor) if the Pope thought fit, would also come thither, that they both by
their presence might promote the Public business. That the Pope might compose
and decide many difficulties which had arisen from his absence. The Emperor
sent a Copy of this Letter to the Cardinal of Lorrain also, and desired he
would promote those things which tended to the Glory of God, and the good of
Christendom.

The 21th. The Ambassador of Spain received in the Council.
of May the Count de Luna, Ambassador for the King of Spain, was received in a
Congregation; and there was a Speech made in the behalf of that Prince in the
Assembly, by one Pedro Fontidonio de Segovia a Divine, who extolled above
measure the care of his Master in the Affairs of Religion, and especially his
severity shown toward Sectaries; he said this Prince Married Mary of England,
only to the end he might restore the Catholic Religion in that flourishing
Kingdom. He Reproached the French and German Nations, for thinking that much
was to be indulged to the Heretics, that being won by these Concessions they
might be reduced into the bosom of the Church. At last he said, That they ought
so to consult the Salvation of Heretics, and the Majesty of the Church, that
all things might be done for the promoting the latter, rather than for
gratifying the former. And he exhorted all Princes to imitate the severity of
his Master in bridling Heretics, that the Church might be delivered from so
many Miseries, and the Fathers of Trent from the care of celebrating Councils.

A little before this time the news of the Peace made with the Protestants of
France, The Fathers at Trent much dissatisfied with the Peace made in France.
came first in Generals, and soon after the particular Articles. This was
blamed by the greater part of the Fathers in that Council, who said it was to
prefer the things of the world before the things of God; yea to ruin both the
one and the other. For the Foundation of a State, which is Religion, being
removed, it is necessary that the Temporal should come to desolation; whereof
the Edict made before was an example, which did not cause Peace and
Tranquillity, as was hoped, but a greater War than before. The truth is, these
men would have all the world fight out their quarrel to the last man, and then
if their Catholics perish, they are as unconcerned as for the Heretics; and
accordingly ever since that time they have made it their business first to
hinder all Treaties of Peace, wherein any liberty was granted to the
Protestants; and when they could not gain that point, to make them be broken as
soon as was possible; tho this too has for the most part turned in the end to
their great loss and shame. The French Court show their Reasons for it.
The French Court perceiving how the Fathers of Trent took the Peace, Ordered
the Cardinal of Lorrain to show the great Dangers which from the Civil War
threatened that Kingdom; and to assure the Council that it was the intention of
the King to dissipate the Factions of France by a Peace, that he might be at
leisure to attend seriously the restitution of the Peace of the Church. But
when this would not be allowed neither, the Queen sent Renate de Birague,
President of Dauphine, to assure the Fathers, That their Intentions were not to
settle a New Religion in France, nor to suffer it to grow up and increase, but
that having disarmed their Subjects, and quieted the Tumults, they might with
the less trouble return to the Methods used by their Ancestors, for the
reducing their people into the way, and the Unity of the same Catholic
Religion. That this could never be done but by the Authority of a lawful and
free, either General or National Council: that a General Council seemed the
safer way, but then it was necessary that a liberty and security should be
given to all that would to come. That though this had been done by the Pope and
the Fathers; yet the place was such; and so situate, that being rather in Italy
than Germany, the Protestants could not think themselves sufficiently secure.
For they desired a Council in Germany, and thought they were not safe if it
were any where else: That not only they of Germany, but the English, Scotch,
Danes and Swedes, were of the same mind, and it was very unjust to condemn so
many Nations unheard, and besides it was unprofitable too, for whereas all good
men hoped that this Council would procure an Unity, on the contrary it would
cause a greater opposition and enmity, when these Nations saw themselves
neglected; and by the inconvenience of the place, as it were excluded out of
the Council. For it was fit for none but weak and credulous men to think they
would ever submit to the Decrees of a Council in which they had never been
admitted, nor heard; but it was to be feared on the other side that their minds
being exasperated, their patience would turn to fury, and they would traduce to
Posterity the Decrees of the Council; and in the present age treat them with a
virulent sharpness in their Writings. Therefore Birague was Ordered to desire
the Council might by the consent of the Fathers and Pope be transferred into
Germany, to Worms, Spire, Basil or Constance. This Discourse would not edify
at Trent, and he was sent on the same Errand to Inspruck to the Emperor, and to
Vienna to his Son Maximilian. There were two others sent at the same time, one
into Spain, and another to Rome; but this latter found the Pope enraged to the
utmost with the Peace, so that he was resolved to treat France without any
favor.

In order to this, The Pope's Bull to the Inquisitors.
the Pope puts out a Bull dated the 7th. of April, by which he grants power to
the Cardinals, appointed Inquisitors General for all Christendom, to proceed
smartly and extrajudicially, as shall seem convenient to them against all and
singular the Heretics, and their Abettors and Receivers, and those who are
suspected to be such abiding in the Provinces and places in which the filth of
the Lutheran Heresy has prevailed; and to which it is notorious, there is not
a safe and free entrance; though the said persons are adorned with the Episcopal,
Archiepiscopal, Patriarchal Dignity, or Cardinalate, without any other proof to
be made of the safety or freedom of the Access. But so that Information be
first made, and that they be cited by an Edict by them to be affixed to the
Doors of the Palace of the Holy Inquisition, etc. admonishing and requiring
them to appear personally, and not by their Proctors, before the said
Inquisition, within a certain and limited time, as the said Inquisition shall
think fit, upon pain of Excommunication denounced, Suspension, and other lawful
pains. And if they shall not so appear, they shall be proceeded against in the
secret Consistory, and a sentence decreed against them (though absent) as
convict, and confirmed with a clause of Derogation. Though this Bull was contrary
to all Laws, Several French Cardinals and Bishops cited to Rome;
yet the Inquisitors presumed upon it to cite some Bishops of France, and with
them Odet de Coligni Cardinal de Chustillon, who had embraced the Opinions of
the Protestants, and was now called Count de Beauvais, he having been formerly
Bishop of that City; St. Roman Archbishop d'Aix, John Monluck Bishop of
Valence, Jean Anthony Caracciolo Son of the Prince de Melphe; Jean. Brabanson
Bishop of Pamiez, And the Queen of Navarr also.
Charles Guillart Bishop of Chartres. And as if this had been intended but for
a step to her; the Princess Joan Labrett Queen of Navarr, Relict of Anthony
late King of Navarr. All which I say, by a Bull dated the 28th. of September,
and affixed at Rome, were cited to appear before the Inquisition, within six
Months, and the Queen was told, That if she did not, she should be deprived of
her Royal Dignity, Kingdom or Principality, and Dominions, as one convicted:
and the same should be pronounced to belong to whosoever should invade it. The
King and Queen of France, and all the Nobility were extremely exasperated with
these proceedings of the Pope; and the Bull being read in the Council of State,
D'Oisel the then Ordinary Ambassador in the Court of Rome, The French King
declares against these Proceedings against the Queen of Navarr.
was ordered to acquaint the Pope, That the King could scarce give any credit
to the first reports which were spread in several Pamphlets in France, till the
Citation which was fixed up in several places in Rome, was read to him; at
which he was much troubled, because the Queen of Navarr was in Majesty and
Dignity equal to any other Prince in Christendom; and had from them the Title
of Sister. 2. That the danger which threatened her was of ill example, and might
in time be extended to any of them, and therefore they were all bound to assist
and defend her in this common cause, and the more because she was a Widow. 3.
But the King of France above all other, because nearly related to her, and her
late Husband, who was one of the principal Princes of the Blood Royal, and had
lost his Life in his service in the last War against the Protestants; leaving
his Children Orphans, the Eldest of which was now in the King's Court, and
under his care: That the King could not neglect the cause of this sorrowful
Widow, and her Orphan and Children, who appealed to his fidelity, and the
Memory of his Ancestors; who had in all times of affliction succored the
Princes of Germany, Spain, and England. That Philip the Bold, the Son of St.
Lewis, had with a potent Army defended an Orphan-Queen of Navarr, and brought
her into France, where she was after Married to Philip the Fair, from whom Joan
the present Queen of Navarr was lineally descended. And that John Labrett the
Grandfather of this Queen being in like manner persecuted by one of the Popes,
and driven out of a part of his Kingdom; the rest had been defended and
preserved by Lewis the Twelfth, and his Successors. That the Popes themselves
have heretofore fled to the French for protection when they have been expelled
out of their Sees, who had often restored them, defended and enriched them with
the grant of many Territories: That this Queen was so near a Neighbor, and
such an Allie to the Crown of France, that no War could be made upon her
without the great damage of France: That all Princes were Interested in the
Friendship and Peace of their Neighbors, and obliged to keep all Wars at a
distance from them for the preservation of their own quiet and security. Since
therefore his Majesty saw by this Bull that there was a design to deprive his
Ancient Allies of their Dominions, and at pleasure to set up others in their
stead, he had just reason to fear that as the Spaniards had heretofore on such
pretenses possessed themselves of all the Countries to the Pyrenaean Hills, so
that in time they might pass them too, and descend into the Plains of France,
and so a dismal and destructive War might be rekindled between these powerful
Princes, to the great hazard and ruin of Christendom. Lastly, the Queen of
Navarr being a Feuditary of the Crown of France, and having great Possessions
in that Kingdom, was under the Protection of the Laws of it, and could not be
drawn out of it to Rome, either in Person, or by Proxy; no Subject of France
being bound to go to Rome; but if the Pope had any cause against them, he was
obliged to send Judges to determine upon the place even in those Cases that
came before him by Appeal. That therefore this Citation was against the
Majesty, Law, and Security of the Crown of France; and tended to the
diminishing of the esteem of that King and Kingdom. That if the Form of this
Proceeding were considered, what could be more contrary to the Civil Law than
to force a man out of his proper Court, and condemn him in another without any
hearing? For there are Laws, That no accused person shall be cited out of the
Limits of the Jurisdiction in which he lives, and that the Citation shall not
be obscure and perfunctory, but declared to the proper person, or to his
family. And the Constitution of Pope Boniface the Eighth, That Citations set up
in certain places of Rome should be of force, was recalled by Clement the
Fifth, and the Council of Venna, as hard and unjust, or at least mitigated; and
it was decreed that they should not be used, but when there was no safe coming
to the person accused: But in France, where the Queen of Navarr resides, it
cannot be pretended that there is no safe coming to her. And what can be more
contrary to Natural Equity than to condemn unheard? It is forbidden by the
Canons and Decrees of Councils, and there is a noble example of this in
Ammianus Marcellinus, where Pope Liberius, being urged by Constantius to
condemn Athanasius, chose rather to be banished, than to sentence him without
hearing. And in the Judgment against Sixtus the Third, who was accused of
Incest, Valentinian the Emperor observed the same method, and made him appear
and answer in a Synod before Fifty Bishops. For the same reason the Sentence of
Nicholas the First, against Lotharius the Son of St. Lewis, for having two
Wives, was thought void and null. Nor was this Sentence against the Queen of
Navarr of better force, because she was absent and unheard. That the Popes have
always shown that respect to Crowned heads, as to admonish them by their
Legates, before they decreed ought against them. So Alexander the Third sent
two Cardinals to Henry the Second into England, when he was accused of the
Death of Thomas a Becket A. B. of Canterbury, That he might purge himself
before them of this crime. So of late Clement the Seventh, did the like in the
case of Henry the Eighth, to whom he sent Cardinal Campeius. And if it were
granted that the Judgment were rightly passed, how could the Dominions of the
Queen be exposed for a prey, and given to the first Invader, they belonging to
the King as Lord of the Fee? Therefore the King believes that the Pope is
deceived by false reports, and instigated by the craft of his Ministers, who
not regarding the public peace, have drawn him from his natural goodness, to
Counsels which are dishonorable to his Holiness, and destructive to his
Authority, and to that of the Sea of Rome, tending to the alienating of the
hearts of his friends from him, and the disturbing of the Peace of Christendom.
And his Majesty is the more persuaded of the truth of this, because his
Holiness so earnestly espoused the Interest of Anthony the Husband of this
Queen in his lifetime; and endeavored to persuade King Philip to restore to
him the Kingdom of Navarr, or at least to give him the Island of Sardinia as an
Equivalent. But then there is nothing more offends the King than the
considering that whereas so many Kings, Princes, and Free States above Forty
years since have defected from the Sea of Rome, and committed the offense
charged upon the Queen, and so by the rule of Justice ought to be first
punished as first offending; yet the Pope has not proceeded in the same way, or
with equal severity against any of them; so that from hence it is clear that an
occasion is sought by her enemies to oppress and ruin her by surprise, whilst
she is a Widow, her Children Orphans, the King of France who ought to protect
her being a Minor, and disturbed by Civil Wars; and for this reason the King is
the more obliged to defend her from injury, and himself from contempt, seeing
without acquainting him with it, they have begun this Process against a Queen
so nearly related to him. That if this Accusation had been made on the account
of Religion, and for the Glory of God, the Pope ought in the first place to
have shown his care of her soul, and from the Word of God to have administered
fitting Remedies, and not to have proscribed her Kingdoms and Dominions, The
Deposing of Princes, and disposing of their Dominions, the cause of great
Calamities.
and given them for a prey to the first Invader. The Pope has a Supremacy given
him, That he may consult the Salvation of Souls, and the repose of Christendom,
and not that he may deprive Princes of their Kingdoms, and dispose of their
possessions at his pleasure; which the former Popes have never been able to do
in Germany and other places, without bringing great reproach and dishonor on
the Church, and disturbances upon the World. That therefore the King desired
with the greatest humility that he could or ought, that the Sentence against
the Q. of Navarr should be revoked, and all the Pope's Ministers should be
inhibited from proceeding in this cause by a public Act; and if this were not
done, the King should be forced against his will to make use of the same
remedies his Ancestors had employed in the like cases, according to the Laws
and Rights of his Kingdom. But before all things he protested he should do this
unwillingly, and therefore they only should bear the blame who by their
rashness had forced him to use the power God had given him, in so just a cause,
and to implore the assistance of his friends against them.

There was at the same time distinct Memorials, and larger Instructions sent to
the French Ambassador for the Defense of the Bishops, The Bishops defended by
the King also.
and D'Oysel who was an active Minister, prevailed upon the Pope to have the
Proceedings against the Bishops stopped, and the Sentence against the Queen of
Navarr revoked and abolished. So that at this day it is not to be found amongst
the Constitutions of Pope Pius the Fourth. The 18th. of May there having been
no consideration had of the XXXIII. Articles put into the Council the 4th. The
Queen complains of the Proceedings of the Council.
of January, the Queen wrote to Lanssac her Ambassador, complaining very
bitterly of the delays and shifts which had been made in this business, and
said that the hope good men had hitherto had of the success of this Council,
and the opinion of their sincerity who met in it, would both vanish without any
fruit, and their dissimulation and connivance would more and more inflame the
wrath of God against us, who had now made it manifest unto all men that the
affairs of the Church needed a Reformation, and a severe correction; and to
that purpose had invited and brought together from all parts of the Earth, so
many men famous for their Piety and Learning to this Council; and if after all
this he shall see us still stubbornly resist his will; he will be necessitated
to punish those men who have hindered so good a work, and so necessary to the
peace of the Church: That therefore the King had wrote to the Cardinal of
Lorrain to assemble a Congregation of the French Clergy, and after a mature
deliberation had amongst themselves to demand earnestly of the Fathers of the
Council that these things might be considered and determined as soon as was
possible. But the Cardinal was by this time won over to the Pope's side, The
Pope gained the Cardinal of Lorrain to his side,
and was willing to sacrifice the safety of France, and the King's Will, to the
Interest of the former. In order to this he delayed the Execution of his Orders
from day to day; and at last that he might totally disappoint them, asked leave
of the King to go to Rome, believing the Kings Ambassadors would do nothing in
his absence. And not long after Lanssac obtained leave to return into France.
Who went to Rome.
The Cardinal of Lorrain went from Trent toward Rome the 18th of September,
and with him five of the French Bishops: But the other French Ambassadors did
nevertheless insist stoutly to have the Articles considered by the Council;
who, that they might elude this pursuit, made some Decrees which had some
respect to those things the French had desired, but which aimed at the granting
a Liberty and Immunity to the Clergy against all the Laws, Privileges,
Liberties, and Jurisdictions, and Lawful Authorities of all Kingdoms, States
and Princes; which being seen by La Ferriere and Du Faur the King's Ambassadors
at Trent they by their Master's Order opposed the said Decrees. The 27th. of
September, the King by a Letter having commanded his Ambassadors to insist upon
their first Demands; and to assure the Council, that as none of the Christian
Princes should exceed him in the fervor of true Piety, and a desire to promote
the Affairs of the Council, so if they still went on to cure the desperate
wounds of the Church with a light hand, or rather to plaster them over, and
conceal, than cure them, whilst they omitted the proper and most necessary
remedies, and instead of considering the Reformation of the Church, turned the
edge of their Authority against the Power of Princes, and the Decrees of
Councils, he would not have the Presence of his Ambassadors add Authority to
such unjust Decrees to the great prejudice of his Royal Dignity, and to the
Damage of the Liberties of his Kingdom. He said also that he had been informed
that the Council had entertained a design to declare the Marriage of Anthony de
Bourbon King of Navarr, and Joan his Queen unlawful, and to declare Henry his
Son a Bastard; and he commanded them not to be present at any such Act. Lastly,
he commanded them to repeat their former demands; and if the Fathers of the
Council would not grant them, then to leave Trent, and go to Venice, and stay
there till they had further Orders from him. He told them also that his
principal desire was by a serious Reformation of Church Affairs and manners,
(the corruptions in which had caused so many to make defection from the Church
of Rome) by the Authority of a General Council, to unite the divided minds of
men in the matters of Religion. That his Ambassadors and Proctors had often
treated with the Pope, and the Fathers of the Council about this; and to that
end had exhibited the said XXXIV. Articles, to which no satisfactory return had
been made, but on the contrary, they having lightly touched the business of
Reformation, had exercised an Authority which belonged not to them, The Council
has no Authority over Princes.
against the Rights, Liberties and Power of Sovereign Princes. That they
neither could nor ought to inquire into the Civil Administration, which was not
subject to their Court, nor to derogate from those Constitutions and Customs
which had been long enjoyed by Princes; nor to Anathematize Kings; all which
things tended to Sedition, and the interruption of the public Peace: That he
would not suffer that Authority which he had received from his Ancestors to be
weakened by their unjust censures. Yea, he commanded them to tell the Fathers,
That if they presumed any more to undermine the Authority of Kings, and the
Prerogatives of their Betters, that they should then also protest against their
proceeding, and leave Trent: Advising the Bishops and Divines of France, who
were in the Council to promote the Reformation of Religion as much as was
possible for the good of his divided Kingdom, and to that end to stay still at
Trent. But then the King did trust to their wisdom and conscience, that they
would not approve of by their presence, or consent to any thing which was
prejudicial to the Royal Authority, Prerogative or Dignity of the King or
Kingdom of France. But however the Council still persisting in their former
Methods, La Ferriere came into the Council, and made a sharp Oration against
the Pope and the Council. Polano Page 721
in his History of the Council of Trent, has the sum of this Oration; and
Thuanus says it was pronounced the 22d. of September. But however, I will not
trouble the Reader with it here, because of its great length; this Oration
pleased none of the Fathers; the French themselves not excepted, because he set
Princes as the Ministers of God, above the Anathema's of the Clergy, and made
both their persons and revenues subject to the Laws and Authority of Kings;
telling them too plainly of their great prevarications, obstinacy and
unwillingness to reform, or be reformed.

But however, all the Fathers could do, was to bring the Faith of the
Ambassadors in question, which they soon discussed by producing their
Instructions. This failing, they cavell'd at the parts of the Oration, and end
eavoured to pervert the sense and meaning of it; so that Ferriere was forced to
publish an Apology for it. And soon after this they mended the matter by a
sharper Oration, in which amongst other things they told the Council plainly,
The Ambassadors of France put a severer Protestation into the Council.
That Hadrian the Sixth was in the right when he told the world, That what care
soever was taken of the lower members of the Church, that body could not be
restored to its health, if the Head also (the Pope) were not reformed. Toward
the end they said, They protested only against Pius the Fourth; They Venerated
the Apostolic See, the great Pontiff, the Holy Church of Rome, for the
increase of whose Dignity their Ancestors had so often shed their blood, and of
late had fought in France; but it was against the Sovereignty of Pius the
Fourth, that they protested; all whose Decrees and Sentences they refused and
despised; and seeing there was nothing done at Trent, but all was dispatched at
Rome; and what was here published, was rather the Dictates of Pius the Fourth,
than the Decrees of a General Council; they denounced and testified, That
whatever was decreed in that Convention, or should hereafter be decreed or
published, they being only the Decrees moved by Pius the Fourth, they should
not be approved by the Most Christian King, nor the French, nor be taken for
the Acts of a General Council. And then commanded all their Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots and Divines to return into France till God should restore to
the Catholic Church the ancient form and liberty belonging of right to General
Councils, and to the Most Christian King his just Rights. Thuanus says, he can
hardly believe this Oration was made, though he finds it Printed in the
Commentaries of Jacques de Bourdin Secretary of State. But however it shows the
sense great men had of the Council of Trent, at that time when it was best
understood.

A little before this time the Emperor being about leaving Inspruck, The
Emperor opposes the intended Proceedings of the Council against Queen
Elizabeth.
discovered that they consulted at Rome and Trent about proceeding against
Queen Elizabeth of England; and he wrote to the Pope and the Legates, that if
the Council would not yield that fruit which was desired that they might see an
Union of Catholics to reform the Church; yet at least they should not give
occasion to Heretics to unite themselves more, which they would do in case
they proceeded against the Queen of England. For undoubtedly they would then
make a General League against the Catholics, which would be the cause of great
Inconveniences. We may see by this how hardly this Holy Council was kept from
giving the world a Cast of its office in deposing Princes, and disposing of
their Dominions, and absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance; though we
are now told, this is none of the Doctrines of that Church; but however, it is
undoubtedly her practice. This Admonition was so effectual that the Pope
desisted at Rome, and revoked the Commission given to that purpose to the
Legates at Trent.

When the French Ambassadors had put these two Rubs in the way of the Council,
The French Ambassadors leave Trent, and go to Venice.
they retired, as the King their Master had before commanded them, to Venice;
and gave an account of what they had done to the Cardinal of Lorrain at Rome,
and to the King of France; this last approved it, but the former having made
his private Market with the Pope, who extremely flattered this proud,
turbulent, vainglorious Prelate, was very much displeased with what the French
Ambassadors had done in his absence at Trent. But when he came there and found
the Ambassadors were supported by the King, and that there was no fetching them
back from Venice till the things proposed by the Council were revoked, he
persuaded the Legates to compound the difference, and the Infallible Council
laid by these Decrees which displeased the Crown of France, and passed only a
general Decree against the Violaters of the Ecclesiastical privileges and
Immunities in the Twenty fifth Session. This was the last Session of this
Council, The last Session of the Council of Trent.
and was held the fifth and sixth of December. In it was determined the points
concerning Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Images and
Relics, the Prohibition of Duels, and all that pertain'd to the Reformation
of the Manners of the Clergy. All that had been done under Paul the Third,
Julius the Third, and two Years before this, in this Convention were then also
ratified and confirmed. And the Pope was desired to approve the same, and so
the Council was dismissed with Acclamations. The Pope made a grave Oration in a
Conclave of the Cardinals, and giving God unfeigned thanks that the Council was
ended, he commended the Emperor, the Apostolic Legates and the Bishops; and
said, Though he was free from the obligation of all Laws, yet he would cause
these to be exactly and inviolably preserved, and it any thing was omitted he
would supply it. The Protestant Ministers of Germany at the same time put out a
Protestation against this Council, subscribed by many of them.

Thus ended the Council of Trent, The censure of the Council.
which was desired and procured by Godly men to reunite the Church which began
to be divided, but has so est ablished the Schism, and made the parties so
obstinate, that the discords are become irreconcilable. And being intended by
Princes for the reformation of the Ecclesiastical Discipline, has caused the
greatest corruption and deformation that ever was since Christianity began: The
Bishops hoped to regain the Episcopal Authority, usurped for the most part by
the Pope; and it has made them lose it altogether, bringing them into greater
servitude. On the contrary it was feared and avoided by the Sea of Rome as a
potent means to moderate their exorbitant power, which from small beginnings
mounted by diverse degrees to an unlimited excess; and it has so established
and confirmed the same over that part which remains subject unto it; that it
was never so great, nor so soundly rooted. Thus far Polano.

The Emperor who was come as far as Inspruck to promote the Council, The
Emperor goes from Inspruck before the Council was ended.
finding that his being there did not only no good, as he thought it would, but
rather the contrary; the Popish Prelates suspecting his designs were against
the Authority of the Court of Rome, and were accordingly afraid of every thing,
so that the Difficulties and Suspicions did turn into bitterness, and ^ncrease
in number. Therefore having other business which would turn more to his
Advantage, he left that place and returned home; but he wrote first to the
Cardinal of Lorrain, That the Impossibility of doing good in the Council being
palpable, His sense of the Council.
he thought it was the duty of a Christian and wise Prince, rather to support
the present evil with patience, than by laboring to cure it, to cause a
greater. By which he seems to mean that any enormities were to be endured from
the Sea of Rome rather than to forsake it, and so correct them.

The Catholic Princes being blinded and misled by their Education, The Reasons
why the Council had no better success.
and not understanding that the right of calling Councils was in themselves, as
it was of old in the Christian Emperors, who called all the Ancient General
Councils, thought that they should by force of Arguments and modesty, extort
some Reformation from them, but when they saw they could not agree amongst
themselves what was absolutely necessary, France and the Empire asking more
than King Philip was willing to admit, and the Pope being as stoutly resolved
whatever happened not to suffer his Power, Grandeur or Wealth to be abated.
Lastly, when they all saw that the Protestants would never submit to any
Council that was called and managed by the Pope or his Legates, they all became
weary of it, and desired it might be ended as soon as was possible, and any way
to deliver themselves from the charge, trouble, and vexation of this
unprofitable, or rather mischievous Conventicle.

But then as to the Roman Catholics of this Age, who would fain persuade us
that nothing was amiss; that there was no need of any Reformation; that all the
differences arose from misrepresenting the Doctrines and Practices of the
Church of Rome; and that this Council was one of the most holy Assemblies of
Learned, Impartial and Religious men that ever sat. These I say are a a
pleasant parcel of Gentlemen, and presume that we are as ignorant of, and
unconcerned for the Histories of former times, as those who profess to be led
by an implicit faith in all they have the confidence to teach them; which is a
great mistake.

From this day forward the Protestants renounced all commerce and friendship
with the Church of Rome; and she has by this Council put her self out of the
power of a Reconciliation; so that now the Quarrel is put entirely into the
hands of God, and all humane wisdom is baffled for ever. Time, the Sword, or
the Providence of God may perhaps at last put an end to it, but no Counsel or
Device of men ever shall.

I should here have ended this Continuation, The State of Religion in Piedmont.
but that I have been forced to leave some things unspoken to continue the
thread of my Relation, which I will now go back to and gather up, that the
Story may be the more complete and perfect. Whilst the Council was sitting,
the Cardinal of Ferrara traveling through Piedmont and Savoy, found the
Affairs of that Country as to Religion not much other than in France. In diverse
places of the Marquisate of Saluzza, all the Priests were hunted away; and in
Cherie and Cuni, places belonging to the Duke of Savoy, and in many other
Cities near unto them, many were of the same opinions with the Hugonots, and
many even in the Duke's Court also did profess them, and more were discovered
every day. And however the Duke had set forth a Proclamation a Month before;
That all that followed those opinions should within eight days depart out of
the Country, and some did thereupon depart, yet afterward he commanded there
should be no proceedings against them, and pardoned many who were condemned by
the Inquisition, and made their Process void, as also those who were in the
Inquisition, and not condemned; and gave leave to some that were departed to
return.

About the same time there happened a great tumult, and popular commotion in
Bavaria, A Tumult in Bavaria for the Cup.
because the Cup was not allowed, nor Married men suffered to preach; which
disorder proceeded so far, that to appease them, the Duke promised in the Diet,
That if in all the Month of June a resolution were not made in the Council of
Trent, or by the Pope, to give them satisfaction, he himself would grant both
the one and the other. The news of this coming to the Council, the Legates
dispatched Nicholas Ormonet to persuade the Luke not to make that Grant. To
whom the Duke replied, That to show his obedience to the Apostolic See, he
would use all means to entertain his people as long as he could, expecting and
hoping that the Council would resolve that which they saw to be necessary,
notwithstanding the Resolution made before by it. Reasons against granting
Marriage to the Clergy.
But the Council had good reason to deny this last, because (say they) it is
plain that Married Priests will turn their affections and love to their Wives
and Children; and by consequence to their House and Country, and so that strict
dependence which the Clergy has on the Apostolic See, would cease; and to
grant Marriage to Priest would destroy the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and make
the Pope to be a Bishop of Rome only. And in another place they tell us that
having House, Wife and Children, they (the Clergy) will not depend on the Pope,
but on their Prince; and their love to their Children, will make them yield to
any prejudice of the Church; and they will seek to make the Benefices
Hereditary, and so in a short space the Authority of the Apostolic See will be
co^fined within Rome. Before Single Life was instituted, the Sea of Rome
received no profit from other Nations and Cities; and by it, is made Patron of
many Benefices, And the Cup to the Laity.
of which the Marriage of the Clergy would quickly deprive her: And that all
would become Heretics if the Cup were granted to the Laity, and so a gap would
be opened to demand the Abrogation of all positive Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, by which only the Prerogative given by Christ to the Church of
Rome, is preserved; for by those which are of Divine appointment, no profit
does arise, but that which is spiritual: So that the Princes who expected any
redress from them were in a fine case.

Camden in his History of Queen Elizabeth assures us, The French Affairs after
the Peace till the end of the Council.
the true reason why the Prince of Conde clapped up this Peace upon such easy
and disadvantageous terms, was because he had been deluded by the Queen with
the vain hopes of succeeding his Brother the King of Navarr, as General of all
the Forces of France; and that he should marry the Queen of Scotland too, which
he afterward refused.

The English were then possessed of Havre de Grace, The Siege of Havre de Grace.
and had a Garrison in it; and now both the Protestants and the Roman
Catholics united their Forces to deprive them of it, without repaying any of
the Money the Queen had expended in the War, or considering what need they
might after have of that Princess's protection and assistance. Both parties on
the contrary protest, That if the English do not forthwith restore that place,
they should forfeit their Right to Calais, which was reserved to them by the
Treaty of Cambray; and when this would not do, they proclaimed a War against
the English in France the 7th. of July; which was returned them by the English
till they should restore Calais. The Earl of Warwick who was then Governor of
Havre de Grace, finding the French well disposed to betray the English in that
Town into the hands of their Countrymen, and that they had entered into a
Conspiracy to that purpose with the Rhinegrave, who lay not far off with some
German Forces: He thereupon turned all the French both Protestants and Papists
out of the Town without any difference, and seized upon all their Ships. The
French thereupon (without ever reflecting on their own Conspiracy against the
English) began a loud complaint, That the English came not to protect the
French in their distresses, but to get the possession of the Town, dealing with
them not as with Brethren, but as Foreigners. And hereupon the French resolved
to take this place upon any terms from the English; and the King sent a Trumpet
to the Governor to demand the Town; who returned for an Answer, That if the
King of Spain would pass his word that Calais should be restored according to
the Treaty of Cambray, at the time by it appointed; and that the King of
France, the Queen Mother, and the Princes of the Blood Royal, would confirm the
same by their Oaths, and Register it in all the Parliaments of France, and then
give them Hostages of the Prime Nobility of France, he would then deliver up
the Town. This being rejected, the 22d. of July, Montmorency the Constable took
the field, all things being by that time prepared to reduce it by force. The
next day they summoned the Town again. Warwick replied, he would suffer death
rather than deliver up the place without the Queen's knowledge. The Protestants
fight against the English.
His Messenger whom he sent with this Answer happened to meet one Money a
Protestant French Captain, with whom he had been familiarly acquainted in the
Siege of Roan, to whom he said, He much wondered to see the Protestants of
France, who were of the same Religion with the English, and for whose relief
they came into France, in the Camp against them. Le Money replied, As you fight
for your Queen so we for our King; the contest is now for our Country, and
Religion is no way concerned. The business of Religion is now determined and
settled by the King's Edict once for all; and therefore you, Sir, are not to
wonder if of Friends we are suddenly become your Enemies, and resolved to
destroy you if you do not deliver up the place to the King. When the Earl of
Warwick heard this he sent presently into England for Supplies. There was then
a Plague in the Town which discouraged the English more than all their Enemies
without. There came some Ships with Relief from England, but the Plague
continuing, the Queen to preserve so many brave men, gave order to the Earl of
Warwick to surrender the place, upon as Honorable Terms as he could get. The
28th. of July the Articles were Signed; the next day there came sixty Ships,
and 1800 men to the Relief of the place, Havre de Grace surrendered to the
French.
but it was too late; so the English that remained, were sent on Board the
Fleet, who had the misfortune to carry this Plague with them into England, and
within one year there died in London only, 21530 persons of this Disease. A
Plague in London.
There was so much joy in France for the recovery of this small place, that the
Chancellor of France said openly That now the most malicious must needs
confess, That the granting Liberty of Conscience had at once delivered France
from a most destructive Civil War, united the Princes of the Blood Royal, and
enabled them to recover too what had been seized by their Enemies during the
War, and that chiefly by the help of the Protestants, who before were so
dreadful to them, whilst they fought for their Religion.

The Queen, to cut off all pretenses to the Guardianship of the King, by the
advice of the Chancellor, Charles the Ninth declared out of His Minority by the
Parliament of Roan.
resolved to have him declared out of his Minority by the Parliament of Roan;
pursuant to a Constitution of Charles the Fifth King of France, made in the
year 1373, though he had then entered only into the Fourteenth year of his age;
which was accordingly done the 19th. of August; when he declared again, That he
was resolved not to suffer his Edicts to be disputed by his Subjects, as had
been done during his Minority; and especially the last, for the peace of
Religion, which he was resolved to make all his Subjects obey, till it was
otherwise settled by a Council. This Decree met with some opposition from the
Parliament of Paris, which pretends to be the Supreme Court of that Kingdom;
and said, they ought to have had the honor of declaring the King of Age, and
no other, which was soon overruled.

The desire I had to prosecute the Affairs of France, and the Story of the
Council of Trent, The Scotch Affairs in 1562.
has kept me from mentioning Scotland and its Affairs; so that I am behind hand
with that Kingdom two years. In the beginning of the year 1562, Mary Queen of
the Scots, took her Progress toward the North: At Sterling she was Petitioned
by certain Commissioners of the Church for the Abolishing of the Mass, and
other Superstitious Rites of the Roman Religion, the punishing Blasphemy, the
contempt of the Word of God, the Profanation of the Sacraments, the Violation
of the Sabbath, Adultery, Fornication, and other like Vices condemned by the
Word of God, but not punishable by the Laws of Scotland. That all Suits for
Divorce should be remitted to the Judgment of the Church; or at least, trusted
to men of good knowledge and conversation; and that Popish Churchmen might be
excluded from places in the Session and Council. This Petition being read by
the Queen, she replied, That she would do nothing to the prejudice of the
Religion she professed, and that she hoped before a year was expired to have
the Mass and Catholic Profession restored through the whole Kingdom. And so in
a rage turned her back and left them.

In January 1563. And 1563.
John Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews was committed to the Castle of
Edinburgh, for saying and hearing Mass; the Abbot also of Corsragnal, and Prior
of Withern, John Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews committed for hearing Mass.
had the same treatment; and diverse Priests and Monks were censured for the
same cause. The Scots thought by these Severities to terrify the Queen into a
compliance with their Religion. And it is certain that in a Parliament held at
Edinburgh in May this year she passed many Acts in favor of the Reformation.
However certain it is, some of the Protestants made her an ill requital: For in
August following, certain of the Queens Family remaining in the Palace of
Edinburgh called Holy-Rood House, and having a Priest to attend them, and
perform the Romish Service in the Chapel, diverse of the Inhabitants of
Edinburgh, out of curiosity or devotion resorting thither, great offense was
taken at it, and the Preacher began to complain of it as a disorder. Whereupon
some of the Citizens went thither to see if it were so; these being denied
Admittance, they forced the Gates of the Queens Palace; took several of those
who were there assembled and carried them to prison; the Priest and some few
others escaping by a Postern, or Backdoor. This Uproar was very great, and yet
it was related to the best advantage to the Queen, who was then out of Town;
she was very much incensed, as she had good reason, against these Zealots; and
swore she would shortly make them Examples of her Royal Indignation. The Earls
of Murray and Glencarne however wisely interposed and appeased her anger for
the present. Soon after John Knox was called before the Council, John Knox
called before the Council for Sedition.
and charged as the only Author of this Insolent Sedition, and likewise for
stirring up the people by his Circular Letters to Tumults, whenever he thought
fit. He answered, That he was never a Preacher of Rebellion, nor loved to stir
up Tumults; contrariwise he always taught the People to obey their Magistrates
and Princes in God. As to the Convocation of the Subjects, he had received from
the Church a Command to advertise his Brethren when he saw a necessity of their
Meeting, especially if he saw Religion to be in peril: And had often desired to
be discharged of that burden, but still was refused. Then speaking to the Queen
with wonderful boldness: His bold Answer.
He charged her in the name of Almighty God, as she desired to escape his heavy
wrath and indignation, to forsake that Idolatrous Religion which she professed,
and by her power maintained against all the Statues of the Realm. He was going
on when the Earl of Morton, then Chancellor of Scotland, fearing the Queen
might be yet more exasperated against all the Protestants of her Kingdom, by
his indiscreet zeal, commanded him to hold his peace and go away. After this,
things were carried more peaceably between the Queen and the Church, the Earl
of Murray making it his business to propound their Petitions to her, and to
return her Answers to them.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this HISTORY.
A.
ADiaphorists, who, Page 478, 481. Adolph Count Schawenburg is made Archbishop
of Cologne by the Pope, 417. Enters upon the Resignation of the Archbishop,
418. His first Mass, 457. Makes his public Entry into Cologne, 499. He leaves
Trent, 543. He makes a League with the House of Burgundy, 560. Adrian succeeds
Leo X. 50. Sends a Legate to the Diet of Nuremberg, 54. And a Breve to
Frederick, Ibid. Writes a long Letter to the States assembled at Nuremberg, 55.
And to Private Persons against Luther, 56. As also to the Senate of Strasburg,
Ibid. An account of his Life, Ibid. He is chosen Pope, 57. Writes to the
College of Cardinals, Ibid. And to the People of Rome, Ibid. Goes to Rome,
Ibid. His Instructions to the Diet at Nuremberg, 58. Desires an Answer to them,
60. Dies, 66. Agricola, vide Islebius. Aix, Parliament of Aix make a Cruel
Decree against the Waldenses, 343. Albert of Brandenburg, Bishop of Mentz and
Magdeburg, 2. Luther writes to him. Vide Luther. Is made Cardinal, 4. His
Speech to the Electors at Frankfort, 14. He Proclaims Charles the Fifth's
Election, 18. Answers Luther's Letter kindly, 31. Makes a Speech to Charles the
Fifth, 37. Is concerned in the Ban by which Luther was Proscribed, 49. Sends
Ambassadors to the Protestants at Smalcald, 153. Dies, 354. Albert of
Brandenburg, Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, wars with Sigismund King of
Poland, 99. Demands Succors from Germany, Ibid. Swears Allegiance to
Sigismund, Ibid. Marries and is made Duke of Prussia, Ibid. What he did is
rescinded by the Emperor, 139. He is Proscribed, 161. He assists Osiander, and
Banishes those Ministers who refuse his Doctrine, 511. Albert Marquis of
Brandenburg assists Duke Maurice, 417. He keeps Rochlitz, 420. Is taken
Prisoner by the Duke of Saxony, Ibid. Set at liberty, 428. Goes into France to
mediate a League between the French King and Duke Maurice, 549. His Declaration
of War against the Emperor, 551. He joins D. Maurice and the Landgrave's Son,
555. He wastes the Country about Ulm, 556. He is very cruel to the Norembergers,
561. Fines the Bishops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg, 562. Makes Peace with the
Norembergers, Ibid. He writes to the City of Ulm to yield to him, 563. He
deserts the Confederates, and wars in his own Name, 567. Breaks in upon the
Bishops of Mentz and Triers, Ibid. Demands his chief Castle of the Bishop of
Triers, Ibid. He falls upon the Bishops upon the Rhine, 571. His Demands of the
Strasburgers, Ibid. He besieges Frankfort, 572. Makes War against the Bishops
of Mentz and Spire, Ibid. And robs the Churches of those Bishoprics, 573. Is
received at Triers, Ibid. Marches into Luxemburg, 574. Makes a Peace with the
Emperor, 575. Beats the French at Pont a Mousson, Ibid. Complains to the
Franconian Bishops, 577. Refuses an Accommodation at Heidelberg, and declares
War against the Bishops of Franconia, 578. Takes Bamberg, and spoils the
Country, Ibid. Makes War upon Duke Maurice, 581. War is declared against him,
Ib. His Answer to their Declaration, 584. His Territories are invaded, Ibid. He
is routed by D. Maurice, 585. Writes a Letter to D. Maurice's Subjects, 586.
Renews the War against the D. of Brunswick, 591. Is routed by him, Ibid. He
retires toward France, 592. He is Proscribed, 594. Sues in vain to have it
taken off, 595. He Remonstrates to the Diet of Ausburg against the
Norembergers, 599. By continuing the War he is at last Outed of all, 601. Goes
into France, 604. Writes to the Diet at Frankfort, Ibid. Albert Count Mansfield
goes against Muncer's Rabble, 84. He routs them, Ibid. Albert of Brunswick
killed, 404. Albertus Magnus, vide Aquinas. Aleander (Hieronymus) sent against
Luther to Frederick by the Pope, 38. Made a Cardinal, 39. Alexander de Medicis
recovers Florence, 132. is killed by his Kinsman Lorenzo Medicis, 209. Alaski
sent by Ferdinand Ambassador to Solomon, 270. Imprisoned by him, 271. Aloisia
Mother to Francis I. writes to Pope Clement during his Captivity, 98. Makes a
League with Henry the VIII. 102. Amstorfius, vide John Frederick Elector of
Saxony. Anabaptists, their Original, 110. Their Doctrines at Munster, 190.
Their Book called the Restitution, 196. Their Supper, Ibid. their 28 Apostles,
Ibid. Who were all Executed, 197. They write to the Landgrave, 198. Their
Hellish Doctrines, Ibid. Their Book of the Mysteries of Christ, 199. Angelical
Doctor, vide Aquinas. Anne Boleyne Wise to Hen. VIII. Beheaded, 208. Anthony D.
of Lorrain forbids his Subjects to read Luther's Books, 75. Defeats the Boors
in his Country, 81. Kills 18000 of them, Ibid. Of which many after Promise of
Life was granted, Ibid. He negotiates a Peace between the Emperor and French
King in vain, 320. Dies, 327. Antinomians, their Original, 244. Apparition of
Ghosts frequent in the times of Popery, 172. Aquinas (Tho.) chiefly quoted to
prove Indulgences, 3. Studied at Cologne and Paris. 4. Scholar to Albertus
Magnus, Ibid. Sainted by Pope John XXII, Ibid. Dies, An. 1274. Ibid. Called
Angelical Doctor, Ibid. Arbitrators, Elector of Mentz, and Prince Palatine
chosen to mediate between the Protestant Princes, and the Emperor, 154. Their
Answer to the Prince's Propositions, 158. Aristotle better used by the Lovain
Doctors than Luther, 29. Arnstadt, a Town in Thuringia, a Convention of
Protestants there, 251. Arras, vide Anthony Perenot Granvell. D'Avalos (Ferd.)
Marquess of Pescara, heartens the Imperialists to Fight at Pavia, 79. Accuses
the French King, 295. Augsburg a Diet there, 4. The Diet at Ausburg removed to
Spire, 97. They embrace the Protestant Religion, 109. Commissioners to frame a
Decree there, 135. The Tenor of it, Ibid. The Decree of that Diet, 139. They
publish a Book against the Ecclesiastics, 212. They promise to lend no more
money to the Emperor, 389. They capitulate with the Emperor, 418. A Diet called
to Ausburg, 435. It is an Armed Diet, 437. It is opened, Ibid. A Decree there
about a free Council, 467. Another Armed Diet at Augsburg, 499. The Decree of
the Diet about a Council, 512. Their Divines examined of a sudden by Granvell,
and sent out of Germany, 516. Is surrendered to D. Maurice and the Confederate
Princes, 555. Great Contests about Religion in the Diet, 621. The Allegations
of the Papists against the Protestants, 622. The Decree of the Diet, 626.
Augsburg (Cardinal of) vindicates himself, 633. Augustane Confession read to
Charles the Fifth, 129. Oppugned by the Popish Divines, 130. Augustine Monks at
Wittemberg forbear saying Mass, 49. Two Augustine Friars examined at Brussels,
63. Burnt, 64. Augustus suceeds his Brother Maurice in the Electorate of
Saxony, 587. Calls a Convention of his States; what is their Answer to his
Proposals, Ibid. Refuses to appear at the Diet of Ausburg, 612. Austrian
Nobility Petition Ferdinand for Liberty of Conscience, 285. They renew their
Instances, 287. They Address again, 628. Their Reply to Ferdinand's Answer,
630. Ferdinand's Answer to their Reply, 632.
B
BAden, a Disputation there of both Parties of Switzers, 105. The Points
disputed of, Ibid. Bamberg (Wigand Bishop of) Quarrels with the Elector of
Brandenburg, 152. Barbarossa the Turkish Admiral takes Castlenovo, 251. Lies
with his Fleet at Thoulon, 314. He Besieges the Castle of Nizza, Ibid. When he
could not take it, he retires to Thoulon, 316. As he retires from Thoulon,
makes sad ravages in Italy, 326. Barnes (Rich.) Burnt at London, 269.
Basil-Council asserted the Superiority of Councils to a Pope, 10. Oecolampadius
Preaches there, 76. Great Dissentions about Religion, 116. Images broken down
and burnt upon Ash Wednesday, 117: Mass abolished there, Ibid. The Form of the
safe Conduct which was granted at the Council of Basil, 539. Bavaria, the Dukes
oppose the Election of Ferdinand King of the Romans, 158. The D. of Bavaria
intercedes for the D. of Brunswick, 307. Beaton (David) Cardinal, Archbishop
of St. Andrews killed, 382. Becken (Otho) gives the Landgrave of Hesse an
Account of a Confederacy of the German Princes, 114. Beghardi, vide Picards.
Belgrade, vide Solomon. Bellay (Sieur de Langey) sent by K. Francis to
Smalcald, 183. His Speech to the Protestants there, Ibid. Dies, 309. S.
Bernard, his Letter to P. Eugenius, 24. Bern, the Cantons of Bern desire a
Public Dispute at Bern, 110. They Publish Theses of Disputation. 111. There is
a Disputation held, Ibid. They abolish Popery, 112. They join with the
Zurichers to stop Provisions to the other Cantons, 155. They are slack in
sending the Zurichers Relief, 156. Bichling (Count) condemned to die for siding
with the French, 326. Is pardoned, Ibid. Blancer (Ambrose) disputes at Bern,
111. Preaches up the Reformed Religion at Constance, 112. Leaves his Monastery,
Ibid. Assists Bucer in constituting a Protestant Church at Ulm. 149. Bohemians
Communicate in both Kinds, 26. Their Suppression consulted about in the Fourth
Lateran Council, 27. Sects amongst them, 53. They invade Saxony unwillingly,
408. They return Home, 409. They refuse to Fight against the Elector of Saxony,
417. The Nobility of Prague desire a Convention to be called, 420. A League
amongst them, Ibid. They Write to Ferdinand and Duke Maurice, 423. They Write
to the Moravians to defend their Liberties, 424. They Write to Ferdinand,
interceding for the Duke of Saxony, 425. And prepare for War. Ibid. They stand
by the Duke of Saxony, 426. They promise to comply, 427. Pope Boniface the 8th.
appointed a Jubilee every 100 Years, 9. Book Printed in French against the
Hucksters of Sacred things, 178. An Account of it, Ibid. Boors rise in Swaben,
76. Are quieted, Ibid. Rise again there, 79. Publish their Demands, Ibid. They
treat with the Deputies of the Empire at Ulm. 80. They are Routed by George
Truchses at Lippen, Ibid. The Boors in Algow disperse themselves, Ibid. They
Rise in Franconia, Ibid. Killed Count Helfenstein at Winsperg, Ibid. Are Routed
by Truchses, 81. He punishes those who killed Count Helfenstein, Ib. Another
body takes Wirtzburg, Ibid. Are Routed by Truchses, Ibid. Up in Lorrain. Ibid.
There Defeated. Ibid. And every where else in Germany, Ibid. Many killed
Treacherously, after Promise of Life, Ibid. The demands of the Boors in
Schwabia, 90. Bourbon, vide Charles D. of Bourdeaux, a Sedition there, 474.
Quelled and the Inhabitants Punished Severely, 475. Brandenburg (Duke of)
Appeals to a General Council from the Bishop of Bamberg. 152. Brandenburg
(Elector,) vide Joachim; the Marquesses of Brandenburg act against the
Protestants, 376. Bremer's Answer to the Proposals made to them by the Princes,
502. Brentius (John) in great Distress at Hall about the Interim, 461. Received
by the D. of Wirtemberg, 462. He draws up a Confession of the Divines in the
Duchy, and is esteemed by the Duke, 515. Bruly (Peter) Preaches the Reformed
Religion in the Netherlands, 341. Is seized upon at Tournay, Ibid. The
Protestants in Germany intercede for him, Ibid. He is Examined, 342. Burnt.
Ibid. Brunswick (Hen. D. of) hot against the Protestants, 239. His Letters to
the Bishop of Mentz and Eldo, intercepted by the Landgrave, 246. He Quarrels
with the Elector of Saxony, 247. Accuses the Protestants, 267. Hires
Incendiaries to burn some Towns in Saxony, 275. Who is accused of it to the
Emperor, Ibid. He is thrown out by the Saxon, and the Landgrave, 298. Appeals
to the Imperial Chamber, 304. Protestants in the Diet of Spire, 319. The Story
of the Dukes Mistress, Eve Trottine, 322. He answers the Calumnies of the
Confederates, 323. His Country sequestered into the Emperor's Hands, 326. He
cheats the French King of his Money, 351. His Duchy sequestered to the Emperor,
352. He is Obstinate, Ib. Raises an Army, 352. Makes great spoil in the Duchy
of Brunswick, Ibid. Is opposed by the Landgrave, 353. Emploies D. Maurice to
Mediate for him, Ibid. Breaks the Truce, Ibid. Fights the Landgrave, 354.
Surrenders at Discretion, Ibid, Offers to betray the Popish Councils to the
Landgrave, 388. Is set at Liberty, and goes to the Emperor at Hall, 432.
Commences his Actions against the Landgrave in the Imperial Chamber, 474.
Besieges Brunswick, 500. Outed of his Country by Volrat Count Mansfield, 576.
Complains of it to the Emperor at Metz. Ibid. Leagues with Maurice, 578.
Plagues his Westphalian Neighbors, 579. Routs Albert, 591. Besieges Brunswick,
593. Makes an Agreement with John Frederick D. of Saxony, Ibid. Prosecutes the
War in Albert's Country, 594. Raises Money from the Cities in the lower Saxony,
602. Bucer (Mart.) meets Luther at Marpurg, 121. Endeavors to unite Luther and
Zuinglius, 141. Constitutes a Church at Ulm, 149. Goes to Cologne at Gropper's
Invitation, 288. Is kindly received by the Bishop, Ibid. Preaches at Bon, 310.
Is opposed by the Clergy of Cologne, 311. Opposes Malvenda about Justification
at Ratisbon, 359. Goes from the Conference, Ibid. Is sent for to Ausburg, 454.
Rejects the Interim, 457. Goes into England, 479. And dies at Cambridge, 513.
Buda Besieged by Ferdinand, 284. Taken by Solomon by a Trick, 285. Budaeus
(Will.) dies, 269. Bull de Coena Domini, what, 42. Bull (Golden) what, 19.
Buren (Maximilian Count of) comes to assist the Emperor, 397. He joins the
Emperor, 403. Takes Darmstadt, 414. And Frankfort upon Composition, Ibid. Dies,
478.
C
CAden (Mich.) sends an Account to Nuremberg of their Ambassadors being
confined at Piacenza, 125. Presents a Protestant Book to Charles, ibid. For
which he is in danger, ibid. But makes his Escape, ibid. Caesar (Leonard) Burnt
for Relgion, 110. Calvin (John) Preaches at Strasburg, 241. Answers Cardinal
Farness's Speech against the Protestants, 266. Writes an Antidote against the
Sorbon^ Doctors, and a Book of Relics, 314. Is expelled Geneva, 616. Campegio
(Cardinal) goes to Nuremberg, 66. Writes to the Elector Frederick Duke of
Saxony, 67. His Speech to the Princes of the Empire, 68. His Reply to their
Answer, 69. His Answer to the Deputies from Strasburg, 73. makes a Speech at
the Diet at Worms, 271. Capua (Nich.) Archbishop of Capua against Reformation,
238. Sends a Copy of the Draught into Germany, ibid. Caracciolus (Martinus)
sent to Frederick by the Pope against Luther, 38. Made a Cardinal, 39.
Cardinal. The Delegate Cardinals draw a Model of Reformation, 233. The
Cardinals at the Council of Trent answer Mendoza's Speech, 360. Carolostadius
(Andrew) disputes with Eckius at Leipzick, 22. Pulls down Images at Wittemberg,
52. Goes over to the Enthusiasts, ibid. Writes against Luther about the
Eucharist, 97. Excuses himself from being engaged with the Boors, ibid. Begs
Luther's Protection, ibid. Capnio, vide Reuchlin. Cajetan (Tho. Card.) sent by
Pope Leo to the Diet at Ausburg, 4. Exhorts the Princes of the Empire to defend
it against Selymus the Turk, ibid. Treats with Luther at Ausburg, 7. Commands
Stupits to treat privately with Luther, 8. Exclaims against the Council of
Constance in the Council of Lateran, 10. Writes to Frederick, complaining
against Luther, ibid. Publishes Leo's Bull at Lintz, 12. Sends it to the
Bishops of Germany, ibid. Exasperated the Breach of Luther, 24. Casa (John)
Archbishop of Beneventum, the Pope's Legate at Venice, 475. Writes in defense
of Sodomy, 477. Prince Casimir of Brandenburg raises Troops upon Charles the
Fifth's Election, for his Service, 18. Catharinus (Ambrosius) writes in defense
of the Pope's Supremacy against Luther, 40. Catharine of Austria Wife to Henry
the Eight, dies, 202. Catharine de Medicis Married to Henry the second of
France, 168. Chabot Brian (Philip) Admiral of France Condemned, 272. Restored,
277. Chamber (Imperial) Delegates appointed to Reform it, 161. They Prosecute
the Protestants with Vigor, 184. They Proscribe Minden, 245. Vide Imperial
Chamber in I. Charles the Fourth Emperor, made the Golden Bull, An. 1356. 19.
Charles Duke of Bourbon, besieges Marseilles, 76. Takes Rome, 109. Blocks up
the Pope in the Castle of St. Angelo, Ibid. His Soldiers commit great
Insolences, Ibid. Dies, 110. Is attainted by the French King, Ibid. Charles
the Great made Emperor at Rome, 150. Charles King of Spain Competitor for the
Empire, 13. His Answer to Prince Palatine, 18. His Genealogy, 19. The
Conditions which were imposed upon him as his Election, 20. Goes into England,
25. Thence into the Low Countries, ibid. Summons the Electors to Aix la
Chapelle, 36. Meets them there, 37. Enters the Town in state, ibid. The
Ceremonies of his Coronation, ibid. His Oath, ibid. Goes to Cologne, and calls
a Diet to Worms, 38. Promises Luther a public hearing at the Diet, 41. Writes
to Luther, and gives him safe Conduct, 42. Writes to the Princes against
Luther, 44. Proscribes him 48, 49. Makes War with Francis I, 50. And takes
Milain, ibid. Returns into Spain, 51. Goes into England by the way, and makes a
League with Henry VIII. ibid. Answers the Complaints exhibited by the free
Cities against the Diet at Nuremberg, 66. Complains to the Diet, that the
Decree of Worms was not observed, 73. Chides the States and Princes for
attempting to call a General Council, 75. Takes King Francis Prisoner at Pavia,
79. Desires that a Diet may be called at Ausburg, 96. Treats a Peace with
Francis, 102. The Articles of Peace, ibid. Writes to the Diet at Spire, that
the Decree at Worms should be kept, 103. Marries the King of Portugal's
Daughter, 105. Answers Pope Clement's angry Letter, 106. His Letter to the
College of Cardinals, 107. He answers the Confederates Proposals, 109. He
leaves off public Sports, when he understood that Rome was taken, 109. Accuses
the French King of Breach of Faith, 112. Answers the French King's Challenge,
115. Calls a Synod to be held at Spire, ibid. Answers the Protestant
Ambassadors at Piacenza, 124. Confines the Protestant Ambassadors to their
Lodgings, 125. Calls a Diet at Augsbourg, 126. Is Crowned at Rome by the Pope,
ibid. Makes his Entry into Augsbourg, 127. Makes a Speech to the Princes of the
Diet, ibid. Consents at last that the Augustane Confession should be read to
him, 129. His Speech to the Princes, 133. He threatens the Protestant Prince,
134. Debates with them about a Decree. 135. As also with the Deputies of
particular Cities, 138. Denies the Liberty which the Protestants demanded, 139.
Rescinds Albert of Brandenburg's Transactions with the King of Poland, ibid.
Calls the Electors together to choose a K. of the Romans at Cologne, 142. His
Reasons for choosing a King of the Romans, 143. He commands the Protestants to
acknowledge Ferdinand King of the Romans, 148. He gives them notice of a
Turkish Invasion, ibid. Calls a Diet at Spire, 152. Removes it to Ratisbon,
155. And confirms a Peace there to all Protestants, 160. Sollicites for aid
against the Turks to little purpose, 161. Goes to Italy, 162. Writes into
Germany to obey Ferdinand, ibid. His Ambassador goes with the Pope's Legate to
the D. of Saxony, ibid. His Ambassador's Speech to the Duke, 163. Stands to the
determination of Ferdinand concerning the D. of Wirtemberg, 174. Goes into
Africa, 180. Takes Goletta, ibid. Restores Muley Hazem to the Kingdom of Tunis,
ibid. Encourages the Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber, 184. His Speech
against the French King, 204. Writes to the Protestants in Germany, 208. Is
unsuccessful in france, ibid. Sends Eldo his Ambassador to Smalcald to treat
with the Protestants, 212. Makes a Truce with the King of France, 232. Meets
Francis at Aigues Mortes, 239. Accommodates with the Protestants at Francfort,
248. Goes through France into Flanders, 252. His Answer to the Protestants
Ambassadors, 255. He punishes the City of Ghent for its Insurrection, 262. He
writes to the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave about a Peace, 263. Deniels
the D. of Cleve's Petition, 266. Confirms the Decree at Haguenaw, 269. Invites
the Protestants to meet at Worms, ibid. He dissolves the Conference at Worms,
272. Appoints Persons to conferr at Ratisbon, 276. His Exhortations to them,
ibid. Referrs Religious Matters to a Council. 282. He makes a Private Grant to
the Protestants, 283. Complains of the D. of Cleve, ibid. Sails into Africa,
285. Loses his Fleet by a Storm, ibid. Writes to the Senate at Metz to allow no
Change in Religion, 298. His Manifesto against the French King to the Pope,
300. His Answer to the Cardinals of the Mediation who were sent by the Pope,
303. His Soldiers waste Juliers, and take Duren, ibid. Writes to the
Protestants from Genoa, 311. Has an Interview with the Pope, 312. Refuses to
Confirm Parma and Piacenza to the Pope's Son, ibid. Delivers Leghorn and the
Castle of Florence to Cosmo Medicis, ibid. Makes his Son King of Spain, ibid.
Makes a League with the K. of England, ibid. Answers the Protestants
Ambassadors from Smalcald, ibid. Refuses to make up the Business with the D. of
Cleve, 313. He threatens the Hildesheymers, ibid. Writers to the Senate of
Cologne, ibid. Goes to Bonne, 314. Make a prosperous War upon the Duke of
Cleve, 315. Restores him upon his Submission, ibid. Sends to the City of Metz
to renounce the Reformed Religion, 316. Goes into Guelderland, 317. Makes the
French yield at Landrecy, ibid. Answers the Saxons and Landgrave's Letter,
ibid. Opens the Diet of Spire with a Speech, ibid. Waves the Controversy
between the D. of Brunswick and the Confederate Protestants, 319. His
Expedition into France, 326. Makes a Pacification with the French King, 327.
Makes Severe Edicts against the Lutherans in the Netherlands, 342. Comes to
Worms, 348. His Ambassadors to the K. of Poland, ibid. Endeavors a Treaty of
Peace with the Protestants, 349. Makes a Truce with the Turk, 351. Takes the
Clergy of Cologne into his Protection, ibid. Cites the Archbishop of Cologne,
ibid. Writes to the Doctors of the Conference at Ratisbon, 359. Answers the
Protestant Ambassadors about the Elector of Cologne, 360. He goes to Spire, on
his way to Ratisbon, 367. Treats with the Landgrave and the Elector Palatine
there, 368. Comes to Ratisbon, 374. Opens the Diet, ibid. Sends the Cardinal of
Trent to Rome to solicit for assistance, 375. Makes Preparation for War,
ibid. Answers the Protestant Deputies, 376. Writes to the Protestant Free
Cities, ibid. Writes to the Duke of Wirtemberg, 377. He sends an Embassy to
the Switzers, 380. Makes a League against the Reformed, 381. Acquaints the
Elector Palatine with the Reasons why he made War upon the Protestants, 383.
His Letter to the Archbishop of Cologne, 385. His Forces at Ratisbon, 389. He
Outlaws the Elector of Saxony, and the Landgrave, ibid. Invites D. Maurice to
take Possession of the Landgrave's and the Saxon's Territories, 391. Refuses to
hear the Protestant Messengers, 394. And answers their Objections, ib. Is
joined by the Pope's Troops, ibid. An account of his Army, 395. He marches to
Ratisbon, ibid. His great Courage, 398. He and the Pope pretend different
causes of the War, Ibid. His Letter to the Protestant Switzers, Ibid. He takes
Donawert by Surrender, 405. Is Master of the Danube, 406. Is oppressed at
Gienghen a Town on the Danube, and uses Tricks to get off, 407. The Plague in
his Camp, Ibid. Removes his Camp, 410. Recovers by Surrender several Towns in
Frankenland, 412. Writes a severe Letter to the Duke of Wirtemberg, Ibid.
Commands his Subjects not to obey him, 413. Takes Ulm by Surrender, Ibid. Is
reconciled to the Duke of Wirtemberg, 415. Several Protestant Cities yield to
him, 416. Goes to Ulm, 417. He receives Lindaw and Essing into favor, Ibid.
Commands the Archbishop of Cologne to stand by the Popes Sentence, Ibid. He
raises Forces against the Elector of Saxony, 419. He receives the Strasburghers
Submission, 423. His Letters to the States of D. Maurice, Ibid. And to those of
Prague, Ibid. Another Letter of his to the States of Bohemia, 425. His
Expedition against the Duke of Saxony, 426. His clerity in overtaking him, 427.
Defeats him and takes him Prisoners, Ibid. Condemns the Duke of Saxony to
Death, Ibid. Proposes conditions of Peace to him, and calls a Diet at Ulm, 428.
Proposes Conditions of Peace to the Landgrave, 430. Answers the Landgrave at
Hall, 432. Detains him Prisoner treacherously, 433. Intends to fall upon
Magdebourg, but is diverted by Vogelsberg's raising Troops in Germany, 434. Is
reconciled to some Towns in Saxony, 435. Publishes his Pacification with the
Landgrave, Ibid. Squeezes Money from the Germans, 436. And proscribes
Magdebourg, Ibid. Solicites the Switzers to make a League, 437. Makes a Truce
with the Turk, Ibid. Moves the College of Princes to desire the Pope to remove
the Council to Bononia, 439. Answers the Proposals made by the Cities of the
Empire at Augsbourg, 441. Sends an Embassy to the Pope about the Council Ibid.
Excuses the Landgrave's Confinement, Ibid. Refuses to set him at Liberty, 442.
Confines him closely, 443. He makes a Report to the States concerning a
Council, 453. Raises Money of the States at the Diet, 460. Makes a Reformation
in Ecclesiastical Matters, 463. Which is approved of by the Bishops, 464. His
answer to the States about Disbanding of the Army, 466. He Writes to the
Princes about receiving the Interim, 468. Proscribes several who served under
the Protestants, Ibid. Changes the Government of Augsbourg, 469. Determines for
the Count of Nassaw against the Landgrave, 470. Sends Spaniards privately to
Constance, Ibid. Answers to the desires of the Strasburghers, 471. Outlaws the
City of Constance, Ibid. And will hear no Plea's in their behalf, Ibid. He
dissolves the Government of Ulm. 472. Goes to Spire and so into the Netherlands
with the Saxon and the Landgrave, 473. He detains the Duke of Saxony, 474.
Sends the Popes Indult to the German Bishop, 483. Writes to the States out of
the Netherlands, and appoints a Diet, 493. He comes to Augsbourg with his Son,
496. His severe Decree against the Lutherans in the Netherlands, 497. Which is
very injurious at Antwerp upon account of Trade, 498. His Army besieged
Tripoly, 500. He commands the Duke of Brunswick to lay down Arms, Ibid. He
complains of the Magdebourghers and Bremers, 501. Moderates the Edict of
Religion in the Netherlands, Ib. He is very earnest that the Magdebourghers
should be Prosecuted, 503. And desires to know why the Interim is not observed,
Ibid. His Edict against the Magdebourghers, 504. Is very severe upon the
Landgrave after his fruitless endeavors to escape, 505. Quarrels with his
Brother about a Successor to the Empire, Ibid. His Edict against all that
Assist the Magdebourghers, 512. He pronounces sentence against the Landgrave
for the Lordship of Dietz, 513. Publishes a Declaration against Octavio
Farnese, 515. Calls the States to the Council of Trent, Ibid. Accuses the
French King of Assisting the Turk, 518. Publishes a Declaration against him,
522. His answer to the Ambassadors who intercede for the Landgrave, 534. He
answers the complaints of the Spiritual Electors, 535. His Ambassadors have
long and frequent Conferences with the Saxon, Wirtemberg and Strasburg, Agents
at Trent, 538. Raises Soldiers to oppose the Confederate Princes, 557. His Men
make an Incursion into Champaigne, 558. He flies from Inspruck to Villach, 560.
Sets the Duke of Saxony at liberty, Ibid. His Letter to the Princes Mediators,
568. His answer to their Letter, 569. His answer to the French Ambassadors
Letter, 570. Changes the Government of Augsbourg, 573. He charges the
Franconians to oppose Marquess Albert, 574. goes into Lorrain and to
Strasbourg, Ibid. Lays siege to Metz, 575. His Army in the Netherlands takes
Hesdin, 576. He rises from the siege of Metz, Ibid. He Writes to Marquess
Albert, 577. His answer to his own Ambassadors about the Controversy between
Albert and the Franconian Bishops, 579. Befieges and takes Terouanne, 580.
Retakes Hesdin, 586. His advice to the Princes of Germany, Ibid. He Furnishes
Albert with Money underhand, 591. Carries the War into Picardy, Ibid. Ratifies
the Proscription of Albert, made by the Imperial Chamber, 598. His Letter to
the States of Germany, 606. His answer to the German Princes, 616. Makes the
Duke of Alba his General in Milan, Ibid. His Fleet engages the French Fleet,
618. He resigns the low Countries to his Son Philip, 620. Goes into Spain. 638.
Charles Prince of Spain Born, 350. Christian I. King of Denmark dies, 62.
Christian II. King of Denmark overthrows Steno Stura. 62. Burns his dead Body,
Ibid. Loses Sweden, Ibid. Is banished from Denmark, Ibid. Appeals to the Diet
at Nurenberg, Ibid. Is taken Prisoner, 161. His Son dies, Ibid. Christina, Wife
to the Landgrave, Sollicites for the Landgrave's Release, 441. Dies for Grief,
485. Christopher Succeedes his Father Ulric in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, 502.
His Duchy is rid of the Spaniards, 528. He sends Ambassadors to the Council of
Trent, Ibid. They are gulled in the Council by the Cardinal of Trent, and the
Emperors Ambassadors, 530. They apply themselves to Count Monfort, 537. They
join with the Saxon Ambassadors, and the Deputies to Solicit a hearing of the
Protestant Divines in the Council of Trent, 537. etc. They leave the Council,
541. New Ambassadors are sent from the Duke of Wirtemberg to Trent, 543. The
Wirtemberg Divines go to Trent. Ibid. Who exhibit their Confession, Ibid. They
Publish their Protestation there, 544. At the breaking up of the Council, the
Writemberg ambassadors give in their Opinion of it, 547. Cheregatus
(Franciscus) Legate to P. Adrian at Nuremberg, 57. Cities of the Empire
complain against the Diet at Normiberg, 65. and in the Diet of Spire against
the Decree of Worms, 103. They complain against Mendicant Friars, 104.
Immunities of the Clergy, Ibid. And against Holy days, Ibid. Cities for the
Reformed Religion Protest against the Decree of Spire, 120. Are for
acknowledging Ferdinand King of the Romans, 151. Some Cities quarrel at the
Taxes laid at Coblentz to carry on the War at Munster, 198. Catholic Cities
complain that they are Excluded from the Princes Councils at Ratisbon, 282.
Some Cities refuse at Spire to grant subsidies against the French, 326. They
refuse to submit to the Council of Trent at Augsbourg, 440. Clareback (Adolph,)
Burnt at Cologne for Religion, 121. Clement the V. inserts into the Canon Law
that Emperors are Subject to the Pope, 38. Clement the VII. succedes to Adrian,
66. Sends Cardinal Campegio to the Diet at Nuremberg, Ibid. Writes to D.
Frederick of Saxony, Ibid. Sends a Golden Rose to Henry the VIII. of England,
75. Writes to the Parliament of Paris, 97. Enters into a League with Charles
the V. 105. Writes expostulatory Letters to him, 106. Writes to the King of
Poland to be ready to send Deputies to a General Council, 142. Sends a Legate
to the Duke of Saxony, 162. His Legate's Speech to the Duke of Saxony, Ibid.
Goes to Marseilles to meet Francis, 168. Marries his Neice, Catharine de
Medicis, to his Son Henry, Ibid. Dies, 174. Cleve: Duke of Cleve sues to the
Emperor for Guelderland, 266. His Treaty with the French King, 277. Marries the
Queen of Navarre's Daughter, Ibid. Retakes Duren, 304. A Pacification Attempted
between him and the Emperor, 307. Submits to the Emperor, 315. Renounces his
League with France, and demands his Wife, 316. Intercedes with the Archbishop
of Cologne to lay down his Bishopric, 418. Coblentz, a Town in the Bishopric
of Triers, upon the Confluence of the Rhine and the Moselle, 13. Some Princes
meet there to quiet the Stirs of Munster, 197. Cologne University Condemns
Luther's Writing, 27. Condemn and burn Reuchlin's Book, 30. The Elector of
Cologne (Herman) calls a Provincial Council, 209. Endeavors a Reformation,
310. Confers with Bucer, Ibid. Opposed by the Clergy, 311. Who Publish their
Anti-Didagma, Ibid. And oppose Bucer, Ibid. The Bishop Mediates for the Duke of
Cleve, 313. The Clergy plead against their Archbishop, 340. They appeal to the
Pope and Emperor, Ibid. The Archbishop Answers their appeal, Ibid. They
Subscribe the Appeal, 341. The Archbishop is cited by the Emperor and the
Pope, 351. Answers to his Citation to the Emperor, 352. Appeals to a Council,
411. The Archbishop is deposed by the Pope, 417. He is Persuaded to resign his
Bishopric, 418. Vide Adolph Count Schauwenbourg. Herman the Old Bishop dies,
573. Conclave: The Ceremonies there practiced in the choosing of Popes, 489.
Confederate Princes against Charles the V. propose conditions to him, 109. Vide
Maurice. Consecrations of all Sorts, Bells, Churches, Altars, etc. 481, 482.
Constance Council decreed a Pope subject to a Council, 9. That safe Conducts
should be Null to declared Heretics, 47. That the Laity should Communicate in
one Kind, Ibid. The Bishop of Constance (Hugh) opposes Zuinglius, 51. Sends a
Book about Images to the Senate at Zurich, 72. They abolish Popery, 112. They
send Deputies with humble Submission to the Emperor, 469. Their Bishop dies of
an Apoplexy, Ibid. They repulse the Spaniards who would seize the Town, 470.
Upon their being proscribed, they desire the Switzers to intercede for them,
471. They surrender entirely to the House of Austria, 474. The Conditions upon
which K. Ferdinand receives them, ibid. Contarini (Card.) the Pope's Legate at
Ratisbon, his Opinion at the Diet, 279. His Exhortation to the Bishops, 280.
His Speech is communicated to the States, ibid. He gives in other Papers to the
Diet, 281. Protests by Letter against a National Council, 282. Accused to the
Pope, and dies, 299. Cosimo succeeds Alexander de Medicis in the Duchy of
Florence, 210. Marries Eleanor Daughter to the Viceroy of Naples, ibid. Cosmus,
vide Cosimo. Coyre, Bishop of Coyre recalled by the Grisons from the Council of
Trent, 529. Cranmer (Tho. A. B. of Canterbury) calls Bucer and Fagius into
England, 479. Vindicates himself from the aspersions of the Papists, 590. Is
sent to the Tower, ibid. Burnt at Oxford, ibid. Crescentio (Cardinal) the
Pope's Legate at the Council of Trent, 518. Dies at Verona, 548. Falls sick
with seeing an Apparition of a Black Dog, ibid. Cronberg (Walter) Grand Master
of the Teutonick Order, 99. Sollicites Char. V. for aid against Albert the late
Grand Master, 139. Which was granted, ibid. The Emperor in the Diet of
Ratisbon ratifies Cronberg's Title, 161. Cusanus (Nicolaus Cardinal), vide
Sigismund.
D
DEcius (Philip) writes for the Council of Pisa, 27. Denmark, vide Christiern
K. of Denmark sent no aid to the Protestants, 415. His Ambassador intercedes
for the Landgrave, 534. Deux-Ponts, vide Wolfgang D. of Deux-Ponts. Diazi
(John) goes to the Conference at Ratisbon, 365. Is earnestly persuaded by
Malvenda to turn Papist, 366. And by his Brother Alfonso Diazi, ibid. Goes to
Newbourg, ibid. Is Assassinated there, 367. The Ruffians fled to Inspruck,
ibid. Ditlebius (Valentine) his Letter to Frederick, 33. Doria (Andrew) a
Genoese, Char. V's Admiral, restores Liberty to his Country, 416. His Kinsman
Joannin Doria is killed in an Insurrection, ibid. Dragut a Pirate forced from
Tripoly by Char. V. flies to Constantinople, 500.
E
EBleben (Christopher) Negotiates a Peace for the Landgrave, 430. Dies for
Grief that the Conditions were so treachersouly kept, 434. Eckius (John) Writes
against Luther, 3. Disputes with him at Leipzick, 21. Maintains the Pope's
Supremacy against him, 22. Exasperates the Quarrel, 24. 34. Disputes at Baden
with Oecolampadius, 105. Disputes with Leonard Caesar, 110. Answers the
Augustan Confession, 130. Answers, the Confession of the Confederate Cities,
139. Is rewarded for his zeal in oppugning Heresy, Ibid. Is displeased with
the Book which was presented to the Diet at Ratisbon, 278. Writes to the
Princes against the Collocutors, 282. Eckius, a Lawyer draws up Luther's
charge, at Worms, 42. Questions him if he will defend his Books, Ibid. Replies
to Luther's Plea, 44. Commands him to leave Worms, 46. Edward, VI. of England
born, 232. Succeeds his Father, 418. Beats the Scots by the D. of Somerset,
440. Establishes the Reformation in England, 443. Publishes a Declaration about
the War in Scotland, 454. The Mass is abolished in England, 463. The Admiral,
the D. of Somerset's Brother, is Beheaded for Treason, 479. Troubles in his
Reign, 485. Concludes a Treaty of Peace with France, 492. And a Peace
concluded, 495. Bologne Restored to the French, ibid. He dies, 585. Egmont
(Charles Count) dies, 240. Eldo (Mathias) Vice Chancellor to Char. V. sent
Ambassador to the German Princes, 212. His Speech to them at Smalcald, 213. His
Reply ex Tempore to their Answer, 218. He sollicites a Holy League amongst the
Popish Princes, 245. Loses his Interest in the Emperor's Court, 255. Elector,
vide Albert, 14. The Elector's Answer to the Emperor at Ratisbon, 281. The
Electors of the Rhine meet about the Elector of Cologne, 356. The Electors
separate their Councils at the Diet of Ratisbon, 375. Ecclesiastical Electors
severe for the Interim, 477. And hold Synods wherein the Trinkets of Popery are
restored, 481. They complain of the Soldiers who came from Magdebourg, 535.
Emperor, how chosen, 19. Now subject to the Pope in his Election, 38. Empire,
vide Princes. English refuse to pay First Fruits for Benefices of small value,
63. English Bibles Printed at Paris, 241. Enthusiasts begin to Preach in
Germany, 52. Erard Bishop of Liege dies, 240. Erasmus writes to Frederick in
Luther's behalf, 21. And to Luther encouraging him to go on, but calmly, ibid.
And to Rome in favor of Reuchlin, 31. Writes about Free Will, 75. Writes
against the Reformers under the Title of Gospel-teachers, 122. Writes to
Campegio to promote Unity in Germany, 133. His Jest upon Eckius and Faber, 139.
Quarrels with Luther again about Free Will, 170. Dies, 209. His Colloquies
forbidden by the Delegate Cardinals, 236. Erixon (Gustavus) wrests Sweden from
Christiren King of Denmark, 62. Marries Steno Stura's Daughter, ibid. Ernest D.
of Brunswick taken Prisoner by the Emperor, 427. Is set at liberty, 428.
Exorcisms with the Ceremonies, 481. Eysenach, a Town in Thuringia, a Convention
of the Protestants there, 244.
F.
FAber (John) Deputy to the Bishop of Constance at Zurick. 57. Faber (Jacobus)
Stapulensis persecuted by the Sorbonists, 98. The King of France writes on his
behalf out of Spain, ibid. Farel (William) Preaches at Metz, 290. Farnese
(Cardinal) his Speech to the Emperor against the Protestants, 264. Retires from
the Emperors Court, 266. Goes to the Diet of Worms with the Emperor, 348. Goes
from thence to Rome, 349. Farnese (Octavio) General of the Pope's Troops which
helped the Emperor against the Protestants, 394. His Parma secured to him by P.
Julius the III, 492. Puts a French Garrison into Parma, 513. Is Cited to Rome,
ibid. Pursues the Business of Parma, 514. Being supported by the French King it
occasions a War, ibid. Ferdinand Archduke of Austria Marries, 50. Executes
the Ban severely against the Lutherans, 54. Claims the Kingdom of Hungary,
after K. Lewis's death, 105. Is made K. of Bohemia, 110. His claim to Hungary
what, 114. Made K. of the Romans, 144. The Terms upon which the Protestant
Princes promise to acknowledge him, 157. Makes a Treaty of Peace with the D. of
Saxony, 173. Allows Ulric to be D. of Wirtemberg, ibid. Inhibits the
Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber, 184. Suspends them till the Meeting of
the next Diet, 185. Sends an Embassy to the Switzers not to aid the French
against the Emperor, 207. Is routed by the Turks, 231. Goes to the Diet at
Haguenaw, 267. His Proposals to the Protestants there, 268. His Answer there
about the Procedings of the Imperial Chamber, 269. Prepares to invade Hungary,
270. Sends Alaski his Ambassador to Solomon, ibid. Is overthrown at Buda, 284.
His Answer to the Austrian Nobility, 287. His Speech to the Diet at Spire, 288.
Opens the Diet at Nurenberg, 298. Makes an unsuccessful War in Hungary, 304.
Opens the Diet at Nurenberg, 305. His Answer to the Protestants Petition, 307.
Is acknowledged King of the Romans by the D. of Saxony, 325. His Daughter is
Betrothed to the D. of Saxony's Son, ibid. Opens the Diet at Worms, 343.
Answers the Deputes of the Protestants, 345. Goes to the Diet at Ratisbon, 374.
Denounces War against the Saxons, 409. His Answer to the Bohemians, 417. His
Demands to the Bohemians, 420. His Letters to the Bohemians, 423. He Answers
their Letters, 424. He writes to them again, 425. His Commissioners to the
Convention of States in Bohemia, 426. His Army, ibid. Writes again to the
Bohemians, 428. Writes to them again from Leutmeritz, 431. Goes to Prague and
forces the Bohemians to submit, 434. Obtains vast Sums of Money from the Free
Towns, 436. Raises Money of the States at teh Diet, 460. Receives Constance,
and imposes strict Conditions upon them, 474. Complains at the Diet of
Augsbourg of the Irruptions of the Turks, 511. Aid is granted him by the
Princes at Norimberg, 512. Treats with D. Maurice about Peace at Lintz, 556.
Goes to Passaw to Mediate a Peace, 563. Presses D. Maurice to stay a while for
the Emperor's Answer, 568. Goes again to the Emperor to Villach, ibid. Brings
the Emperor's Answer back to Passaw, 569. He there answers the French
Ambassador in the Emperor's Name, 570. Opens the Diet of Augsbourg, 598.
Publishes an Edict about Religion, 602. Which is answered by the States of his
Country, ibid. He comes to Augsbourg, 607. Opens the Diet with a Speech, ibid.
What effect it had upon the Diet, 610. Banishes two hundred Protestant
Ministers out of Bohemia, ibid. Invites the Princes to the Augsbourg Diet, 612.
Mediates between Papists and Protestants at Augsbourg, 624. Answers those
Papers that were dispersed in the Di^t, 625. His Answer to the Protestants
Reply, 626. Sollicites the Princes of Germany against the Turk, 628. Answers
the Address of the Austrian Nobility, 630. Replies to the Austrians Answer,
631. Is Solicited by the Bavarians for Liberty of Conscience, 633. He goes
into Bohemia, ibid. Fevre d'Estaples, vide Faber Stapulensis. Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, Beheaded for not acknowledging King Henry Supreme Head of the
Church, 180. Made Cardinal in Prison, ib. Flisted (Peter) burnt at Cologne for
his Religion, 121. Florentines aid the French against Charles, 131. Send
Ambassadors to him with Submissions, 132. They yield to him after a years
Siege, ibid. Fox (Edw.) Bishop of Hereford, his Speech to the Protestants at
Smalcald, 188. Desires a Private Conference, 189. Which is allowed, ib. France,
a Persecution of the Lutherans there, 175. Francis King of France, Competitor
for the Empire, 13. Is troubled that Charles V. is preferred, 19. Makes a
League with the Switzers, 48. Takes Milan, 76. Besieges Parma, ibid. Is taken
Prisoner there, 79 Writes into France in Favor of Faber Stapulensis, 98. Falls
sick in Prison, 102. Treats a Peace with Char. V. ibid. Leaves two Sons
Hostages in Spain, 103. But makes a League with the Pope and Venetians against
the Emperor, 105. Writes to the Princes of the Empire, 108. Publishes an
Apology for engaging in War with Char. V. ibid. Sends Letters of Defiance to
Char. V. 112. Makes a league with Henry VIII. ibid. Challenges Char. V. to a
Duel, 112. Concludes a Peace with him at Cambray, 121. The Articles of it,
ibid. His Letter to the Protestant Princes, 149. Marries Catharine de Medicis
to his Eldest Son Henry, 168. He goes in Procession to St. Genevieve, 178. He
writes to the German Princes to take off Misunderstandings, 179. Sends Bellay
to Smalcald to the Protestants, 182. His Opinion about the Points of
Controversy in Germany, 186. He offers to enter into a Leage with the
Protestants, 187. Makes War upon Savoy, 203. Defeats Charles's Armies in
Provence and Picardy, 208. Writes to the Princes of Germany, inveighing
against the Emperor, ibid. Marries his Eldest Daughter Magdalen to James V. of
Scotland, 209. Complains of the Emperor in the Parliament of Paris. 210. His
Answer to the Protestants Letter, 230. Chides the D. of Wirtemberg by his
Ambassador at Francfort, 249. Gives private Assistance to the D. of Cleve, to
whom he proposes a Marriage with his Niece, 266. He is displeased with the
Emperor, ibid. Sends an Ambassador to Haguenaw, 267. Persecutes the Lutherans,
ibid. Commands Supplications for Peace to be made throughout his Kingdom, 269.
Sends Ambassadors to the Diet at Spire, 289. Their Harangue there, ibid.
Prepares for a War against the Emperor, 292. Purges himself of Pescara's
Accusations, 296. Appoints Prayers for success to his Army, ibid. Declares War,
ibid. Sends Longueville and Van Rossem into Flanders, ibid. Attaques Charles in
five places, ibid. With not much Success, ibid. He demands aid of the Turk,
ibid. His Speech to the Rochellers, 305. His Answer to the Emperor's Letter to
the Pope, 307. Takes Luxembourg, 316. His men retire from Landrecy, 317. He
sends an Embassy to Spire, 319. His Herald is ill received at Spire, ibid. He
beats the Emperor at Carignan, 323. The Speech of his Ambassadors, who should
have gone to Spire, 324. Concludes a Peace with the Emperor at Soissons, 327.
His Answer to the Switzers about the Waldenses, 347. He makes a Peace with King
Henry VIII. 382. He refuses to assist the Protestants, 403. He suffered the
Protestants to be Persecuted, and 14 Burnt, 411. He dies, 424. Was a great
Patron of Learning, and Learned himself, ibid. Gave 100000 Crowns apiece to the
Landgrave, and the Saxon, ere he died, 425. Is Buried, 429. Francis the Dauphin
dies suspected of Poison, 208. Francfort upon the Oder, a City in the
Electorate of Brandenbourg, 2. Francfort upon the Mayn, a City in Franconia,
13. A Diet held there, 247. Where things are accommodated with the Protestants,
248. Reconciled to the Emperor and Fined, 414. A Diet held there, 604. Their
Answer to the French King's Letter, 605. Franciscan Friars at Orleans, their
Imposture about the Provost's Wife, 170. A Franciscan Preaches a Bloody Sermon
before the Emperor at Worms, 349. Franco (Jerome) the Popes Legate Sollicites
the Switzers against the Protestants, 390. Franconian Bishops commanded by the
Emperor to submit to Marq. Albert, 575. They appeal to the Imperial Chamber,
577. Cannot conclude with him at Heidelberg, 578. Are invaded by him, ibid.
Frederick K. of Denmark publishes a Declaration against Christian II. 62. Is
called to the Danish Crown from the Duchy of Holstein, ibid. Frederick (Prince
Palatine) goes Ambassador to Char. V. upon his Election, 18. Desires the
Emperor to go into Germany, ibid. Represents him at the Diet at Nuremberg, 63.
Writes to the Senate at Strasbourg to desist from Innovations, 76. Restrains
the Solderis from Cruelty to the Boors at Worms, 81. Succeeds his Brother
Lewis in the Electorate, 321. Establishes the Protestant Religion in the
Electorate, 356. Goes to Spire with the Landgrave to meet the Emperor, 368.
Treats with Granvell, 372. Demands to know the Reasons of the War against the
Protestants, 383. Endeavors a Reconciliation amongst all sides, 384.
Reconciled to the Emperor, 413. Receives the Interim, 461. Helps the
Confederate Princes against his will, 569. Frederick D. of Saxony Connives at
Luther, 2. Intercedes with Cajetan for him at Augsboug, 7. Answers Cajetan's
Letter, 11. Sends Cajetan's Letter to Luther, ibid. Reads none of Luther's
Books, nor bears his Sermons for some time, 12. Gives his Vote for Charles K.
of Spain to be Emperor, 18. Refused it when offered, ibid. Would take no Money
of the K. of Spain's Ministers, ibid. Falls sick, 25. His Suit at the Court of
Rome, 33. His Answer to Ditlebius, ibid. His Answer to Aleander and
Caracciolus, 39. Conveys Luther away privately, 49. Writes to the University of
Wittemberg to act calmly in taking away the Mass, 50. Dies 84. Frederick of
Brandenbourg, made Archbishop of Magdebourg, 526. Frederick (Son to John
Frederick) of Saxony, Marries Duke Maurice's Widow, the Landgrave's Daughter,
616. His Wife dies, 628. Fregoso and Rink Ambassadors from Francis to Solomon
killed upon the Way, 284. Frisius (John) Answers Popish Questions at Wurtzburg,
603. Friars, Great Men desire to be buried in Friars habits, 251.
G
GEneva, Popery abolished there, 112. Disturbances there upon Calvin's
Expulsion, 616. Genovefe or Genevieve the Patroness Saint of Paris, 178. Six
Lutherans burnt on a Procession day to her, Ibid. Genoa, vide Doria. George
Duke of Saxony writes to Henry the VIII. against Luther, 65. His discourse with
Muncer, 86. Returns a Spiteful answer to Luther's Letter, 101. Disowns any
Confederacy against the Reformed Religion, 114. His Tricks against the
Lutherans, 167. He complains of Luther to the Elector of Saxony, 168. Quarrels
with John Frederick Elector of Saxony, 206. Dies and leaves his Duchy to his
Brother Henry, 249. George Duke of Mecklenbourg makes War against the
Magdebourgers, 500. Defeats them, Ibid. Is taken Prisoner by them, 505. Is
killed with a great Shot after he had joined Duke Maurice, 569. Germany, a
Plague in Germany, 285. German Bishops write to the Pope about the Council of
Trent, 439. Gerson, what he was, 10. Ghendt, a City in Flanders an Insurrection
there, 251. They are Punished for it, 262. Gonzaga (Frederick) made first Duke
of Mantua by Charles the V. 127. Gonzaga (Ferdinand) siezes upon Piacenza upon
Petro Aloisio's death, 439. Reduces it to the Emperors Obedience, Ibid. Granvel
outs Eldo from his Interest in Charles's Court, 255. He sends Ambassadors to
the Protestant convention at Smalcald, 255. Goes to Worms, 270. His Speech at
the Diet, Ibid. Presents a Book to the Diet at Ratisbon, of the heads of the
Conference, 276. His Speech at Norimberg in the Emperors Name, 306. Answers the
Landgrave's Letter about the War intended against the Protestants, 357. Treats
with the Landgrave and the Elector Palatine at Spir^ 370, 372. Treats with the
Deputies of the Protestant Cities at Ratisbon, 377. He urges the Strasburghers
to receive the Interim, 464. and insists upon it, 465. Dies, 499. Granvel
(Anth. Perenot) Bishop of Arras succedes his Father in the Ministry, 499. Gray
(Jane) Married to Guilford Dudley, 580. And proclaimed Queen of England
pursuant to King Edward's will, 588. Grignian (Francis Amb.) his Speech at
Worms, 350. Gritti (Lewis) Councellor to Solomon, 175. His Son Andrew made
Bishop of Five-Churches, Ibid. He is beheaded, Ibid. Gropper (John) and
Phlugius vindicate themselves from Eckius's Aspersion, 282. Invites Bucer to
Cologne, 288. Falls off from the Bishop and Writes the Anti-Didagma as it was
thought, 311. Is very insolent in the Council of Trent, 535. Guelderlanders
rebel, 232. Custavns King of Sweden alters Religion, 391. Guteling's
(Balthazar) Speech to his Soldiers, 381.
H
HAguenaw, a Diet there, 267. The Acts of the Assembly there, Ibid. The decree
at Haguenaw, 266. Heideck, takes several Towns for the Protestants, 388. Routed
by Duke Maurice, 504. Taken into the service of Duke Maurice. Assists the
Magdeburghers, 514. Henry the VII. Emperor refuses to pay Allegiance to the
Pope, 38. Henry the VIII. Writes against Luther, 50. Is called defender of the
Faith, Ibid. Is Pensioner to Charles the V. 51. His Daughter Mary is Betrothed
to Charles, Ibid. Writes to the Princes of the House of Saxony against Luther,
65. Receives a Golden Rose from the Pope, 75. Writes a Scornful answer to
Luther's Letter, 101. Makes a League with France, in the absence of King
Francis, 102. Makes a League with Francis against Charles, 112. His answer to
the Protestant Princes of Germany, 150. Is dissatisfied about his Marriage with
Catharine, 169. Sues to be Divorced, Ibid. They are Dilatory at Rome, Ibid. He
Marries Anne Boleyn, 170. Is declared in Parliament head of the Church, Ibid.
Revokes Peter Pence, Ibid. Sends Fox Bishop of Hereford Ambassador to the
Protestants at Smalcald, 188. His Ambassadors winter at Wittemberg, 205. His
Letter to the Protestants, Ibid. He beheads Anne Boleyn, 206. Quells a rising
in England, 209. His Reasons against the Council of Mantua, 231. His Reasons
against the Council at Vicenza, 250. He enacts in Parliament several things
about Religion, 251. Marries Anne of Cleve, Ibid. His Answer to the Elector of
Saxony's Ambassador, 255. Beheads ( romwel Earl of Essex, 267. Is divorced from
Anne of Cleve, Ibid. Marries Catharine Howard, Ibid. Burns Papists and
Protestants for Religion, 269. Beheads Catharine Howard for Adultery, 289.
Marries Catharine Parr, Ibid. Makes a successful War in Scotland, 324. He makes
an Expedition into France, 327. Takes Bologne, Ibid. Makes a Treaty of Peace
with France, 355. Forewarns the Protestants in Germany of their danger, 356.
Dies, 418. Henry of Zutphen suffers for Religion in Germany, 75. Henry Duke of
Saxony refuses to change his Religion to gain the Duchy, 249. But gains it by
George's Death, 250. Henry Dauphin of France has a Daughter, 382. Henry the II.
of France succeeds to Francis the I. 424. Is Crowned, 435. The Ceremony of it,
Ibid. Persecutes the Lutherans severely in France, 456. Enters Paris in State,
484. Crowns his Queen, Ibid. Persecutes the Lutherans, Ibid. Makes a League
with the Switzers, Ibid. Regains several Places from England, 485. Publishes
another Edict against the Lutherans, 492. Sends a Letter to the Pope about his
assisting Octavio Farnese, 514. He declares War against the Emperor with his
reasons, 517. Justifies himself from Leagues with the Turk, 518. Sends the
Abbot of Bellozane to Trent, with a Letter to the Council, Ibid. He Publishes
an Edict against the Pope, 521. And another against the Lutherans, Ibid.
Answers the Emperors Declaration, 522. Hinders the Switzers from sending
Ambassadors to the Council of Trent, 528. He sends Ambassadors to Duke Maurice,
529. Makes Peace with the Pope, 548. He declares War against the Emperor, 553.
Calls himself Protector of the Liberties of Germany, 554. He takes Toul,
Verdun, Metz, 555. Takes, an Oath of Allegiance from the People of Metz, Ibid.
His Treaty with the Strasburghers, 557. His answer to the Princes Ambassadors,
558. The reasons of his leaving Germany, 559. His answer to the Switzers, Ibid.
He Wastes Luxembourg, 563. His Ambassadors Speech at the Treaty of Passaw, 564.
He Sollicites again by Letters from Aichstadt, 567. He brings his Men from
Luxembourg back into Artois, 571. Is offended with the Pacification at Passaw,
572. Writes to the Emperor, 576. Sends a Declartion to the States of the
Empire, 577. Carries on the War in the Low Countries, 603. But is beaten in
Tuscany in the Sienese War, 604. His Letter to the Diet at Francfort, Ibid.
Takes Casal, 613. Carries on the War into Montferrat, 617. Hereford, vide Fox.
Herman, vide Cologne. Hesse, vide Philip Landgrave. Hildesheym a City in the
Duchy of Brunswick, embraces the Protestant Religion, 300. they are accused by
their Bishop to the Emperor, 313. Hogostratus (James) a Dominican writes
against Luther, 4. Commissioned by Maximilian to Examine Jewish Books, 30.
Writes against Reuchlin, Ibid. Is cast by the Bishop of Spire, Ibid. Appeals to
Rome, Ibid. Leaves his Cause, Ibid. Examines two Augustine Friars at Brussels,
63. Holland, an Inundation there, 137. Hooper (John) Bishop of Gloucester burnt
for his Religion, 607. Huberine (Caspar) an Interimist, Preaches at Augsbourg,
535. Hugh (Capet) makes himself King of France, 150. Huglie (John) a Protestant
burnt for Religion by the Bishop of Constance, 105. Hungarians beg for
assistance at the Diet of Spire, 324. Their Horse join Duke. Maurice, 409.
Husse (John) Preaches Wiclef's Doctrine, 46. Appeals from the Pope to Christ,
Ibid. Went to the Council of Constance with safe Conduct, 47. There burnt,
Ibid. Hutton (Ulricus) a Noble Man of Franconia, 65. Favors Luther and dies,
Ibid.
I
JAmes the V. of Scotland Marries King Francis's Daughter, 209. His Queen dies,
230. Makes a War with England unsuccessfully, 304. Dies, Ibid. Jerome Bishop of
Brandenbourg, 2. Jerome of Prague burnt at the Council of Constance, 47. Jerome
Bishop of Ascoli summons Luther by P. Leo's Order to appear at Rome, 5. Jews
compared with Roman Clergy, 29. Illyricus (Matthias Flaccius) Writes against
the Adiaphorists, 498. Imperial Chamber (Vide Protestants) is set up again in
the Diet at Augsbourg, 466. The Judges fly from Spire for fear of the
Confederate Princes, 557. They answer Marquess Albert's Deputation about the
Franconian Bishops, 577. They decree in Favor of the Bishops, 578. Indulgences
Preached up in Germany, 1, 2. Confirmed by Pope Clement's Decree in the
Extravagants, 9. Why granted, 273. Indult, vide P. Paul the III. P. Innocent
the III. Decreed to the Electoral Princes a right of choosing the Emperor, 21.
His decree de Majoritate and Obedientia, 107. Inquisition, its Original, 434.
Inquisitors about the Emperor's Edict of Religion in the Netherlands, how they
proceed, 498. Interim, drawn up at Augsbourg, 454. The heads of it, 458. Often
Revised and Corrected, 459. Sent to Rome, ibid. The Electors differ in their
Opinion about it, ibid. Those who draw it up are rewarded, 468. It is disliked
on both sides, Ibid. Confuted by the Saxon Divines, 481. Joachim, Elector of
Brandenbourg sends an Embassy to the Elector of Saxony, 242. Sends Agents to
Eysenach, 244. Made Geneali ssimo against the Turks, 292. He Strikes in with
the Papists in the War against the Smalcaldick League, 375. Interposes for a
Peace, 418. With the Landgrave, Ibid. Intereedes for Saxony, 427. And his Life
was spared at his Intercession, 428. Intercedes for the Landgrave, 429.
Remonstrates to the Emperor for him at Hall, 433. Calls Bucer to Augsbourg,
454. Angry with him for not subscribing the Interim, 457. Receives the Interim,
461. Acts with Duke Maurice in the Magdeburgick War, 505, 506. He sends
Ambassadors to the Conncil of Trent, 526. His Ambassadors with those of D.
Maurice, Solicit the Emperor about the Landgrave, 531. John XXII. P. vide
Aquinas. John King of Denmark overthrows the Swedes, 62. Dying, leaves his Son
Christian of six Years of Age, Ibid. John succeeds his Brother Frederick of
Saxony, 84. Goes to Franck-hausen against Muncer's Gang, Ibid. Comes to the
Diet at Augsbourg, 127. Excuses the Landgrave's going from Augsbourg to the
Emperor, 131. Procures the removal of the Guards from the Gates of Augsbourg,
131. Is cited by the Emperor to Cologne, 141. Sends his Son and goes himself to
Smalcald, 142. Writes to the Confederate Princes to hinder an Election of a
King of the Romans, 143. Protests by his Son against Ferdinand's Election to be
King of the Romans, 144. Pleads Age and demands safe conduct before his going
to the Diet at Spire, 153. Gives an Answer to the Elector of Mentz and the
Prince Palatine, 154. The conditions upon which he would acknowledge a King of
the Romans, 157. Dies, 161. John Frederick (Son to John) D. of Saxony answers
the Emperors and Popes Ambassadors, 163. Yields to acknowledge Ferdinand K. of
the Romans, 173. Answers Vergerius's Propositions for a Council, 181.
Negotiates with Ferdinand to stop the Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber,
185. Goes to Smalcald, 189. Negotiates with Henry VIII. of England, 205.
Quarrels with his Cousin George D. of Saxony, 206. He communicates the Embassy
of the Elector of Brandenbourg to the Landgrave, 243. His Answer to the
Brandenbourghers Embassy, Ibid. Goes to the Convention at Eysenach, 244.
Quarrels with the D. of Brunswick, 247. Writes to the French K. in behalf of
the D. of Wirtemberg, 249. He sends Ambassadors into England, 252. He Answers
the Emperors Letters, 263. Quarrels with Naumburg about a Bishop, 288. Puts in
Amstorfius, Ibid. Makes War upon the D. of Brunswick with the Landgrave, 298.
The Declarations of the Reasons of their undertaking, Ibid. Their answer to the
Message of the States of the Empire, 299. Intercedes to no purpose for the D.
of Cleve, 313. Accommodates with King Ferdinand, 325. His Son is affianced to
K. Ferdinand's Daughter, Ibid. Writes to the Emperor about the D. of Brunswick,
354. He arms against the Emperor, 384. He and the Landgrave declare War
against the Emperor, 385. Sends his Son John William Ambassador to D. Maurice,
406. Writes to Ulm to the Confederates for Assistance, 409. Is in danger upon
the Retreat of the Army, 412. Raises contributions upon Papists, Ibid. Writes
to the States of D. Maurice's Country, 414. Besieges Leipzick, 417. Takes most
of Maurice's Towns and his own again, Ibid. Writes to the City of Strasbourg,
419. Takes Rochlitz by Storm, and Marquess Albert of Brandenbourg Prisoner,
420. His Ambassadors to the Bohemians, 424. He takes some Towns from D.
Maurice, 425. Is overthrown at the Forest of Lochawer, 427. Taken Prisoner,
Ibid. Condemned to die, Ibid. Bears it bravely, Ibid, Accepts the Emperors
Proposals, 428. Absolves his Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, 429. His
Heroical Courage in refusing the Interim, 462. He is used with great Harshness,
463. Declares he will not persuade his Sons to receive the Interim. 469. Is
carried Prisoner into the Low Countries, 473. And kept with the Emperor, 474.
Is brought back into Germany with the Emperor, 496. Is dismissed by the
Emperor, 573. Sollicites to be restored upon Maurice's Death, 587. Dies, 596.
The differences between him and the Elector Augustus, 597. John Prince Palatine
steps between the Landgrave and the D. of Brunswick at the Diet of Spire, 319.
John Marquess of Brandenbourg answers to the Saxon's and Landgrave's Letter.
387^ Refuses the Interim, 460. Illebius (Joannes Agricola) Preaches up
Antinomianism, 244. Recants, 245. Assists in Drawing up the Interim, 454.
Jubilee Reduced to 50 Years by Pope Clement, 9. P. Julius II. obliged to call a
Council in 2 Years, 26. Refuses to appear at that of Pisa, Ibid. Calls another
at the Church of St. John de Lateran in Rome, Ibid. Excommunicates the Pisan
Cardinals, 27. Dies, Ibid. His decree concerning Appeals, 35. P. Julius III.
(de Monte) Inaugurated, 492. gives his Hat to a Youth, Ibid. Secures Parma to
Octavio Farnese, 492. Publishes Bulls to call a Council at Trent, 503. They
Offended many, 505. Cites Octavio Farnese to Rome, 513. Writes lovingly to the
Switzers, 514. Publishes Indulgences at the Council of Trent, 542. Publishes a
Declaration of Thanksgiving for the Reduction of England, 611. Dies, 614.
K.
KIng of the Romans; terms of choosing one, 157. The manner of their Elections,
158. Knights, the ceremony of their Creation, 37. Knipperdoling a great
incendiary in Munster, 193. Made public Hangman of the Town, 194. Is taken at
the Storm of Munster, 201. and executed with John of Leyden, 202.
L.
LAndgrave, vide Philip Landgrave of Hesse. Landre (Francis de) a Preacher at
Paris, 297. Articles exhibited against him, ibid. His Answer, ibid. Recants,
309. Latimer (Hugh) burnt for his Religion at Oxford, 619. Langus (Matthew)
Bishop of Gurk, vide Maximilian. Made Cardinal, 27. Lateran, Fourth Council,
its Dignity, 26. Immortality of the Soul debated in it, 27. Lautrec leads an
Army into Italy, 110. Takes Alexandria and Pavia, ibid. Besieges Naples, 115.
Dies before it, ibid. Lenoncour (Robert Cardinal) made Bishop of Metz, 499.
Assists the French King in the taking of Metz, 555. Pope Leo X. Publishes Bulls
of Indulgences, 1. Sends Cajetan to the Diet at Augsbourg, 4. Summons Luther to
appear at Rome, 5. Writes to Cajetan to fetch Luther to Augsbourg, and to
command all persons to declare their abhorrence of his Opinions, ibid. Writes
to Frederick D. of Saxony to abandon Luther, 6. And to Venize to command him to
take care of Luther, ibid. Publishes a Bull, Nov. 8. 1518. For Indulgences, 12.
Favors the Election of Francis, I. 14. Meets him at Bononia after the defeat
of the Switzers at Marignano, 14. Concludes the fourth Lateran Council, 27.
Answers the Elector of Saxony's Letter, 34. Publishes a Bull against Luther,
35. Condemns his Books and gives him 60 days to repent, Ibid. Else he
Excommunicates him, 36. Makes a League with the Switzers, 48. And with Charles
V. 50. Dies, Ibid. Leva (Antonio de) Charles V.'s General in Provence, 208.
Unsuccessful there, Ibid. Lewis XII. Sends Ambassadors to the Council of Pisa,
26. His Kingdom put under an Interdict by P. Julius, 27. Lewis K. of Hungary
craves aid from the Diet at Nurenberg, 54. Overthrown by Solomon and killed,
105. Lewis Prince Palatine stands up for the preserving Luther's safe conduct
at Worms, 44. Sends Ambassadors to Smalcald to the Protestants, 153. Dies.
321. Lewis D. of Bavaria, vide Bavaria. Leyden (John of) a Tailor, 192.
Preaches Anabaptism at Munster, Ibid. Incenses the Mad Multitude, 193. Marries
Matthew's Widow, 194. Publishes Polygamy by Inspiration, 195. Is made King of
the Anabaptists, Ibid. Administers the Supper to his Subjects, 196. Beheads one
of his Queens, 199. Is obstinate to the last, 201. Is taken in the surprise of
the Town by Opersteyn, Ibid. Garried about for a sight, 202. Executed, Ibid.
His Body set in a Cage upon a Tower in Munster, Ibid. Lindaw, the City of
Lindaw receives the Interim, 472. Lintz, a Town of Austria upon the Danube, 12.
Lions, Nine Persons burnt there for Heresy, 587. De Lire is sent to the
Landgrave with Conditions, 442. Locusts in Germany, 298. Lorrain's (Cardinals
of) Harangue to the Pope about a Council, 443. Lovain Divines rail at Luther,
21. Condemn his Writings, 27. Censure them publicly, 31. They Propose Articles
against the Reformation which the Emperor Ratified, 343. Lubeckers make War
against Christian K. of Denmark, Son to Frederick, 203. Lucern one of the
Swisse-Cantons, vide Switzers. They study to introduce the Reformation there
but in vain, 618. Luther (Martin) Preaches against Indulgences at Wittemberg in
1517. 2. Writes October. 31. to Albert Bishop of Mentz and Magdebourg against it,
Ibid. Publishes 95 Theses against Indulgences, Purgatory, etc. Ibid. Sends an
Explication of them to the Bishop of Brandenbourg and to Stupitz, Ibid.
Vindicates himself to Pope Leo, Ibid. Answers Eckius, 3. Answers Prierias's
Dialogue, ibid. Rejoyns upon Silvester's reply, 4. Answers Hogostratus, Ibid.
Desires that his Cause may be heard in Germany, 6. Is urged to retract his
Theses by Cajetan at Augsbourg, 7. Submits to the Pope, but refuses to recant,
Ibid. Referrs himself to the Judgment of the German Universities with that of
Paris, Ibid. Gives his Opinion in Writing to Cajetan, 8. Goes from Augsbourg,
two days after, Ibid. And Writes to Cajetan when he went away to excuse
himself, Ibid. Appeals from the Pope not rightly informed, to his Determination
after full Information, 9. Luther Answers Frederick's Letter excusing his
Retreat from Augsbourg, 11. He appeals from the Pope to a General Council, 12.
He Writes Submissively to Pope Leo, 13. Goes to Leipzick to Dispute, 21.
Opposes the Popes Supremacy against Eckius, 22. Writes Submissively to the Pope
at Miltitz's desire, 23. His Character of the Court of Rome, 24. Makes
Proposals for Peace, Ibid. Writes a Book of Christian Liberty, 25. Another
called Tessaradicus, Ibid. And about confession and Vows, Ibid. And Communion
in both kinds, Ibid. He anwsers the Lovain and Cologne Divines, 27. He Writes
to Charles V. 31. And to the States of the Empire, Ibid. And Submissively to
the Bishop of Mentz, 32. And to the Bishop of Mersburgh, 33. Opposes the Popes
Bull, and appeals to a General Council, 36. Writes about the Babylonish
Captivity, Ibid. Condemns the Doctrine of the seven Sacraments, Ib. Writes
against the Popes Bull, Ibid. His Books burnt by the Popes Messengers to
Frederick, 39. He burns the Canon Law and the Popes Bull, Ibid. His reasons for
it, Ibid, 40. Answers Ambrosius Catharinus, 40. Promises to appear at Worms in
a Letter to Frederick, 41. Is put into the Bull de Coena Domini, 42. Turns it
into High Dutch and writes Animadversions, Ibid. Goes to Worms, ibid. Is
dissuaded from it, Ibid. To no Purpose, Ibid. Owns his Books, ibid. Takes time
to consider of his defense, ibid. has a day allowed, ibid. Pleads to his
Accusation before the Emperor and States, 43. Answers Eckiu's Returns upon his
Plea, 44. Meets Commissioners who were to hear him privately, ibid. His Answer
to the Commissioners, 45. Parlies with them, 46. Submits to the next General
Council, ibid. Goes home from Worms, ibid. Writes to the Emperor for
Protection upon the Road, ibid. And to the States, ibid. Drolls in his Answer
to the Parisian Censure of his Books, 47. Writes Letters to strengthen his
Friends in his Retirement, 49. And Books against the Mass and Monastic Vows,
and one against Latomus, ibid. Answers Henry the VIII. sharply, 50. Returns to
Wittemberg, 51. Excuses it to Frederick, ibid. Disapproves the taking down of
Images, 52. He writes to the Bohemians to persuade them to Unity, 53. Writes
against false Bishops, ibid. Calls himself Preacher of the Gospel, ibid.
Refuses to stand to the Determination of any under God, 54. Translates Adrian's
Instructions to the Diet, with Remarks, 60. Interprets the Decree of the Diet
at Nuremberg, 64. And adds thereto a Discourse against Private Masses, 65.
Admonishes the Princes of Germany, 75. Writes de. Servo Arbitrio against
Erasmus, ibid. Warns the Saxons of Muncer, 86. Writes a Book to prevent
Sedition, ibid. His Answer to the Demands of the Boors in Schwabia, 90. His
Monitory Epistle to the Princes and Nobility, 94. His General Epistle to
Nobility and Boors, 95. His Alarm against the Boors, 96. Censured as too sharp,
ibid. He defends it afterward, ibid. Writes against Caralostadius, about the
Eucharist, 97. Undertakes his Protection upon his Submission, ibid. Marries a
Number, ibid. Differs with Zuinglius about the Eucharist, ibid. Writes
submissively to Henry VIII. 100. And to George D. of Saxony, 101. Complains of
K. Henry's Answer, 102. Has a Conference with Zuinglius at Marpurgh, 121.
Writes to the Bishops at the Diet of Augsbourg, 140. Comforts Melancthon, ibid.
He defends the League of Smalcald, 148. He persuades the Leipzickers to
continue Protestants, 168. He justifies himself from the Charge of Rebellion,
ibid. Quarrels with Erasmus, 170. Writes against the Anabaptists at Munster,
199. Wrote against the Draught of a Reformation, published by the Delegate
Cardinals, 238. Writes against the Antinomians, 244. Preaches at Leipzick,
250. He publishes a Book about the Authority of Councils, ibid. He writes
against the D. of Brunswick, 272. He Installs Amstorfius, 288. Writes against
Phlugius, ib. Writes a Camp Sermon for those who went against the Turks, 292.
His Opinion about Magistracy, 293. His second Camp Sermon, 294. His Prayer
against the rage of the Turks, 295. He writes about the Sacrament, 340. Answers
what the Lovain Doctors wrote against the Reformation, 343. Publishes a Book
against the Roman Hierarchy, 349. His Theses about Government, ib. His
Ludicrous Pictures about the Pope, ibid. Writes to dissuade the Protestants
from Releasing the D. of Brunswick, 354. He goes to Isleben to be an Arbitrator
between the Counts Mansfield, 362. Falls sick, ibid. His Prayers, 363. Dies,
ibid. Is buried at Wittemberg, ibid. His Life, ibid. His Skill in the German
Language, ibid. His undaunted courage, ibid.
M.
MAgdebourg, refuses to submit to the Emperor, 434. Is Proscribed, 436. In
great distress upon that account, 485. They publish a Manifesto, 486. Another
Manifesto of theirs, 496. They are by the D. of Mecklenbourg, 500. Conditions
are proposed to them, 501. They publish a third Declaration, ibid. They Sally
out briskly upon Maurice, 502. They answer the Deputation of their own States,
502. They overcome D. Maurice in a Sally, and take the D. of Mecklenbourg
Prisoner, 505. They are solicited to surrender, 506. The Declaration of the
States and Clergy against them, ibid. Their Answer to it, 508. A Mutiny in the
Town, 515. They accept of a Peace, 528. Their Preachers Vindicate themselves to
D. Maurice, 529. They get credit by their constancy, ibid. Malvenda opens the
Conference at Ratisbon, 359. Treats of Justification, ibid. Answers Bucer,
ibid. Mantua, a Council called to meet there, by P. Paul III. 207. The D. of
Mantua demanded a Garrison before the Council should sit, 230. Marcellus II.
chosen Pope, 615. Dies after a Reign of 22 days, ibid. Marot (Clement) an
account of him, 310. Mary Q. of Hungary made Governess of the Netherlands, 149.
Goes to Augsbourg to Mediate for the mitigation of the Emperors Edict, 501.
Holds a Convention of the States of the Netherlands at Aix la Chapelle, 560.
She stops the Landgrave at Mastricht, 573. Mary Q. of Scots, Troubles in her
Minority, 316. Affianced to Prince Edward of England, ibid. Is carried into
France, 477. Mary (Daughter to Henry VIII.) Proclaims her self Queen of
England, upon K. Edward's death, 589. Enters London, ibid. Makes Gardener
Chancellor, ibid. Beheads the D. of Northumberland, ibid. She Establishes the
Popish Religion again in England, 591. Orders a public Disputation at London,
593. Dissolves K. Edward's Laws about Religion in Parliament, 595. Marries Pr.
Philip of Spain, ibid. Breaks Wiat's Conspiracy, 596. Beheads Jane Gray, and
the Duke of the Suffolk, ibid. Banishes Foreign Protestants out of England,
597. Publishes a Book of Articles about Religion, ibid. Commits the Princess
Ellizabeth to the Tower, 598. Her Marriage with K. Philip is solemnized with
great splendour, 604. Calls a Parliament, wherein England is again subjected to
Rome, 605, 606. Dissolves that Parliament, 607. Burns several for Religion,
ibid. She mediates a Peace between the Emperor and King of France, 616. It was
reported that she was with Child, ibid. She increases the Persecution in
England, ibid. Her Ambassadors return home from Rome, 618. She calls a
Parliament, where she proposes the Restitution of the Church Lands, in vain,
627. Martyr (Peter) comes into England and professes Divinity at Oxon, 443.
Disputes there about the Lord's Supper, 483. Is in trouble upon Edward's Death,
590. Applies himself to Cranmer, ibid. Gets leave to be gone, Ibid. Goes to
Zurich, 637. Matthews (John) a great Prophet among the Anabaptists, commands a
Community of Goods, 194. Runs Truteling through with a Pike by Inspiration,
ibid. Is run through himself by a Soldier, ibid. Maurice (D. of Saxony) Marries
the Landgrave's Daughter, 272. Quarrels with the Elector of Saxony, 292. Is
wounded in Hungary, 304. Refuses to enter into the Protestant League after his
Father's death, ibid. Makes Laws for the Government of the Country, 311.
Endeavors an accommodation between the D. of Brunswick and the Landgrave, 353.
Persuades the D. of Brunswick to surrender, 354. Purges himself of Treachery,
ibid. Holds a Secret Conference with the Emperor at Ratisbon, 380. Has a
Conference with K. Ferdinand, 391. Calls a Convention of the States at
Chemnitz, 405. Consults against the Protestants, ibid. His Friends write to the
Protestants, 406. He writes to the Landgrave, ibid. Writes to the Elector, 409.
And to his Son, ibid. Takes most of the Electors Towns, ibid. Is ill spoken of,
and Lampoon'd by the Protestants, 410. Publishes a Manifesto to clear himself,
ibid. Joins Ferdinand to go toward Bohemia, 423. Intercedes for the Landgrave,
429. Writes to the Landgrave to comply, 430. Receives Wittemberg with the rest
of the Electorate from the Emperor, 431. Exacts an Oath of Allegiance of John
Frederick's Subjects, ibid. Promises the Landgrave to interceed with the
Emperor at Hall, 433. And Remonstrates about it, ibid. Receives the Wittemberg
Divines Graciously, 435. He is invested in the Electorate Solemnly at
Augsbourg, 457. Calls a Convention at Meissen, who draw up a Form of Religion
for Saxony, 478. Intercedes with Prince Philip for the Landgrave, ibid. Writes
to the States to clear himself from the imputation of Popery, 484. His Deputies
at Augsbourg protest against the Council of Trent, 499. He engages in the
Expedition against the Magdebourghers, 502. He is made Generalissimo of that
War, 503. He attacks the Magdebourghers, 504. Defeats Heideck and Mansfeldt,
ibid. He promises the Landgrave Aid secretly, 505. Routed in a Sally by the
Magdebourghers, ibid. Proposes Conditions of Peace to the Town, 515. Commands
his Divines to draw up a Confession of their Faith, ibid. Demands a safe
Conduct for his Divines to go to the Council of Trent, 516. Sends the Proposals
to the Magdebourghers by Heideck, 521. He holds a Convention about the business
of Magdebourg, 525. He takes an Oath of Fidelity from the men of (
atzenelbogen, 526. He concludes a Peace with the City of Magdebourg, 528.
Complains of the Preachers, ibid. Hatches a War against the Emperor, 529. Sends
Ambassadors to the Emperor about the Landgrave, 531. He holds a Conference with
Prince William, the Landgrave's Son, 534. His Ambassadors come to Trent and
declare their Instructions, 537. They join with the Agents of Wirtemberg and
Strasburg to solicit for the hearing of the Protestants in the Council, ibid.
The Saxon Divines are upon their way to come to the Council, 541. The
Ambassadors complain against Perlargus, ibid. Maurice sends Letters to his
Ambassadors, 542. They leave Trent secretly, ibid. His care for the release of
the Landgrave, 549. He declares War against the Emperor, 550. Takes the Field
and joins with Marq. Albert, 555. He goes with the other Princes, and besieges
Ulm, 556. Treats with Ferdinand of Conditions of Peace, ibid. Writes to the
French King, 558. His Army Skirmishes with the Imperialists, 559. A Mutiny in
his Camp for want of Pay, ibid. His Soldiers make the Emperor fly from
Inspruck, 560. Which is Plundered, ibid. They Publish a Declaration, ibid. He
restores the Outed Ministers, ibid. His Grievances at the Treaty of Passaw,
563. His Proposals at the Treaty, 566. He is impatient of delay, and hastens
Ferdinand, 568. He returns to the Confederates, 569. Besieges Francfort, ibid.
At last he accepts a Peace, 571. Sends his Forces into Hungary, 573. Sends
Commissioners to treat with John Frederick's Commissioners to no purpose, 577.
Went to Heidelberg to mediate between Albert and the Bishops, 578. Makes a
League with the D. of Brunswick, ibid. Declares War against Marq. Albert, 581.
He overcomes Albert, and is killed in the Fight, 586. His Death foretold by
Prodigies, ibid. Maximilian (Emperor) holds a Diet at Augsbourg, 4. Writes in
August 1518. to Pope Leo to correct Luther, and to put an end to his growing
Heresies, 5. Dies, Jan. 12. 1519. 13. Sends Ambassadors to the Council of Pisa,
26. Goes off to Pope Julius, 27. Sends Langus to the Lateran Council, ibid.
Commissions Hogostrate and Reuchlin to examine Jewish Books, 30. Wars with the
Switzers, 469. Maximilian (Son to Ferdinand) comes into Germany out of Spain,
505. Is well beloved, ibid. He returns home from Spain, 529. Is honorably
received at Trent, 535. Goes to Brussels, 637. Mecklenbourg, vide George D. of
Mecklenbourg. Mechlin almost consumed by Lightning, 392. Medices, the rise of
that Family to Greatness, 169. Meinier President of the Parliament of Aix
persecutes the Waldenses, 345. Uses the Inhabitants of Merindol and Cabriers
barbarously, 345, 346. Meissen, John Bishop of Meissen, Opposes Luther about
Communion in both kinds, 25. Melancthon (Philip) comes to Wittemberg, 21. Goes
to Leipzick, ib. Answers the Parisian Censure of Luther's Books, 47. Comes to
the Diet at Augsbourg, 127. One of the Protestant Deputies there to mediate an
Accommodation, 132. Very much disconsolate, 140. Comforted by Luther, ibid.
Comes to Cologne, 310. Defends Bucer, 311. His Opinion about Indifferent
Things, 481. He draws up a Confession of Faith for the Saxon Divines, 515.
Congratulates John Frederick's safe Return home, 574. Sends Letters of Comfort
to the Banished Bohemian Preachers, 613. Mendoza sent by the Emperor to the
Council of Trent, 360. Ambassador to Strasbourg, 419. His Speech to the Pope
about the Council from the Emperor, 443. Sends the Pope's Answer to the
Emperor, 445. Mentz, the Seat of the Elector, four German miles from Francfort,
13. Elector of Mentz, vide Albert. The Elector approves the Interim craftily in
the Diet, 460. Sends the Pope's Indult into the Landgraviate, 483. Denies to
Register Maurice's Protestation against a Council, 499. He leaves Trent, 543.
He flies from Albert of Brandenbourg, 567. He dies, 614. Mersburgh, Bishops
Answer to Luther, 33. Milan, the Council removed thither from Pisa, 27. Miltitz
(Charles) Bedchamber man to Pope Leo, vide Wittemberg. Miltitz sent by Leo to
Frederick against Luther, 12. Treats with Luther, 23. And the Augustine Friars
concerning him, ibid. Minden proscribed by the Imperial Chamber, 245. Mirandula
(Joannes Picus) his Books Censured, 28. Monte (Cardinal de) the Pope's Legate
at Bononia, His Answer to the Pope's Letter, 444. His Insolent Usage of Vargas
the Emperor's Ambassador at Bononia, 446, 447. made Pope, and called Julius
III. 492. Montmorency (Anne) made Constable of France, 239. Is in disgrace,
277. Gains Favor with Henry II. King of France. Takes Metz for the French
King, 555. His Treaty with the Deputies of Strasbourg, 557. More (Sir Thomas)
Chancellor of England, 180. Beheaded for not denying the Pope's Supremacy,
Ibid. Morin (John) under-Provost of Paris prosecutes the Protestants severely,
175. Morone (John) Legate to P. Paul III. at Spire, 291. Muleasses K. of Tunis
outed of his Country comes to Augsbourg, 457. Muncer (Thomas) begins to Preach
in Franconia, 52. An account of his Enthusiasm, 83. Settles at Mulhansen, 84.
Turns out by the Rabbles help all the Magistrates, ibid. Joins with the Boors
of Swabia and Franconia, Ibid. Is routed by Count Mansfield, Ibid. Retires with
his Gang to Franck-hausen, Ibid. His Speech to the Rabble, 85. His men
frighted, 86. Routed by the Princes Army, Ibid. 5000. of them taken, Ibid.
Muncer taken at Franck-hausen, Ibid. Racked to confess his accomplices, Ibid.
Beheaded, Ibid. Munster a City in Westphalia possessed by the Anabaptists, 174.
The Senate Estabilsh the Reformed Religion there, 191. They make a treaty with
the Bishop, 192. Banish the Anabaptists, Ibid. They are Tumultuous there, 193.
It is besieged by its Bishop, Ibid. Who is assisted by the Neighboring
Princes, 194. A great Famine in the City, 198. The Princes threaten to send the
Force of the Empire upon them, 197. Murner (Thomas) a Franciscan Friar
complains to Campegio against the Senate of Strasbourg, 73. Musculus
(Wolfgangus) flies from Augsbourg to Bern for not subscribing the Interim, 461.
N.
NAples a sedition there because of the Inquisition, 434. Nassaw (Count of)
desires the Elector of Saxony to come to the Diet at Spire, 152. Henry of
Nassaw Charles V's. General in Picardy, 208. Unsuccessful there, Ibid. William,
Son to Count Nassaw succeeds the Prince of Orange, 327. Naves discourses with
Count Solmes about the War designed against the Protestants, 357. Speaks to the
Landgrave at Spire in the Emperors name, 368. Dies, 419. Naumbourg, the Chapter
choose Phlugius for their Bishop, 288. Netherlands, Reformation gets footing
there, 341. Northumberland (John D. of) Marries his Son Guilford Dudley to the
Lady Jane Gray, 580. Is siezed on at Cambridge, 589. And beheaded by Q. Mary,
Ibid. Nuremberg, a Diet convened thither, 51. Their Ministers accused to the
Popes Legate, 62. The Acts of the Diet Published, 63. The treaty of
Pacification removed hither from Schurnfurt, 160. A Peace is there concluded,
Ibid. A Holy League there drawn up amongst the Popish Princes, 245. Another
Diet there, 298. The decree of that Diet, 299. The Netherlands Ambassadors
accuse the^^. of Cleve in the Diet, 306. The Decree of the Diet, 307. Their
quarrels with Albert of Brandenbourg, 561. Vide Albert, their Answer to
Albert's Remonstrance, 599.
O
OBersteyn (Ulrick Count) made General of the Army against the Munster mad Men,
197. His Soldiers are tumultuous for want of Pay, 200. He carries the Town at
last, 201. Ockham (William) Condemned by the University of Paris, 28. What his
Doctrine, 29. Oecolampadius (John) Preaches at Basil, 76. He embraces the
Doctrine of Zuinglius, 97. Disputes at Bern, 111. Meets Luther at Marpurg, 121.
Dies, 156. Orleans, vide Franciscan Friars. D. of Orleans dies, 352. Osiander
comes to Marpurg to the Conference betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, 121. Sets up a
new Sect about Justification in Prussia, 511. Rails against Melancthon and the
Saxon Divines, 512. Dies at Coningsberg, 575. His Sect in Prussia promise to
submit to the Augustane Confession, 632. Otho Prince Palatine Embraces the
Protestant Religion, 300. Recovers his Country, and Joins with the Confederate
Princes, 556. Oxford, a dispute there concerning the Lord's Supper, 483. Oxline
(John) a Minister carried by force from his House by the Governor of Turegie,
76. This Occasions the Canton of Zurich to remonstrate, 77.
P.
PAlatine (George) vide Spires. Palatine ( Prince) vide Lewis, vide Otho.
Palaeologus (John) Emperor of Constantinople comes to the Council of Ferrara,
10. Pall, the excessive charge of it, 273. The Ceremony of its consecration,
274. Passaw a Treaty there, 563. The Princes Mediators there answer Maurice's
Grievances, 564. And they answer the French Ambassadors Speech, 565. They
exhort the Emperor to a Peace by Letters, 566. They answer the Emperors
Letters, 568. The heads of the Pacification, 572. Paris Doctors of that
University appealed against P. Leo for Abrogating the Pragmatick Sanction, 10.
Censure the Books of Reuchlin, 30. And condemn Luther's Books, 47. An Account
of the Faculty of Divinity at Paris, 48. A Young Gentleman of Thoulouse burnt
there for Religion, 239. They are severe upon the Lutherans, 296. The manner of
Proceedings upon him, 297. Their Divines at Melun draw up Articles against the
Reformation, 342. The Parliament answers the K. of France's Edict, 619. Paul
III. (Farnese) chosen Pope, 174. Instructs Vergerius how to stave off a
Council, 175. Issues out Bulls to call a Council, 206. And others to reform the
Vices of Rome, 209. Prorogues the Council called at Mantua, 230. Is Sollicitous
to reconcile the Emperor and the King of France, 232. Appoints a Commit of
Cardinals to Examine the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, 233. Nominates
Vicenza for the Session of the Council, 238. Returns to Rome, 241. Prorogues
the Council without Limitation, 250. Sends his Legate to the Emperor, 264.
Makes War upon Perugia, 266. The Speech of his Legate at the Diet of Spire,
291. Allows a Council to be held at Trent, 292. Sends Cardinals to mediate
between the French K. and the Emperor, 303. Commends the Chapter of Cologne in
a Letter to them, 313. Writes an Answer to the Letter of the Princes, 320.
Writes a sharp Letter to the Emperor to chide him for the Decree of Spires,
337. Creates several Cardinals, 340. Summons the Council once more to Trent,
Ibid. Endeavors to raise a War against the Lutherans, 348. Sends his Legates
to Trent, 360. Writes to the Swisse Bishops to come to the Council of Trent,
374. Excommunicates the Archbishop of Cologne, Ibid. Writes to the Switzers to
persuade them to join against the Protestants, 382. He publishes a Bull
declaring the causes of the War against the Protestants, 388. Makes the Count
Schawenbourg Archbishop of Cologne, 417. His answer to the Cardinal of Trent
and Mendoza, 444. His Letter to his Legate at Bononia, Ibid. His answer to the
Emperors Ambassador, 445. And Letter to the German Bishops, ibid. His answer to
the Emperors, Ambassadors, to justify the removal of the Council to Bononia,
450. His animadversions upon the Interim, 459. Sends Legates into Germany, 473.
Who bring an Indulgence or Indult of several things, 482. He dies, 487. Libels
come out against him with accounts of his horrid Lusts, 488. His Funeral, ibid.
He instituted the order of the Jesuits, 615. Paul IV. (Caraffa) chosen Pope,
615. Pelargus (Ambrose) Reflects insolently upon the Protestants in the Council
of Trent, 541. De Pensier a Lutheran Divine recants at Paris, 309. Pescara,
vide d' Avalos. Peter Pence, what, 170. Petro Aloisio, P. Paul III's Bastard,
D. of Parma and Piacenza, 438. Is Assassinated at Piacenza, 439. His flagitious
life, Ibid. Phefecorn (John) a Convert Jew, 29. His Petition to Maximilian,
Ibid. Writes against Reuchlin, 30. Phifer a Companion of Muncer's, 84. Philip
Landgrave of Hesse, his Speech to his Soldiers against Muncer, 85. His
discourse with Muncer; 86. Arms for fear of a Confederacy against the Reformed
Religion, 114. Departs privately from the Diet at Augsbourg, 131. Makes a
League for six years with the Reformed Switzers, 141. Answers the Arbitrators,
154. Endeavors to restore Ulric Duke of Wirtemberg, 169. And brings it about,
173. Writes to acquaint the Emperor with his Proceedings for Duke Ulric, 174.
Makes his submission to Ferdinand about Ulric's business, 179. Commands his
Divines to answer the Anabaptistis Books, 198. He sends an answer to their mad
Proposals, Ibid. Goes to the Convention at Eysenach, 244. Intercepts the D. of
Brunswick's Letter, 246. He Writes in his own Vindication to the German
Princes, 247. Excuses the D. of Wirtemberg to K. Francis by Letter, 249. He
answers the Emperors Letter about a Pacification, 263. Joins with the Elector
of Saxony against the D. of Brunswick, 298. Opposes the Duke of Brunswick, 353.
Submits to an accommodation, Ibid. Receives the D. of Brunswick upon surrender,
354. Writes to the Emperor concerning him, Ibid. Writes again, 355. Answers the
Emperors Letter, Ibid. Writes to Granvel about the War intended against the
Protestants, 356. Writes to Naves about the same business, 358. Goes to Spire
to Meet the Emperor, 368. Treats with him, Ibid. And with Granvel and Naves,
370. And with the Emperor again, 373. Is courteously dismissed, Ibid. Sends
notice to Ratisbon of the Emperors Preparations, 376. He arms against the
Emperor, 384. His Forces, 388. He sends his Son William to Strasbourg, ibid.
Refuses to Confer with the Duke of Brunswick, ibid. His Men skirmish with the
Spaniards, 395. His bold advice to set upon the Emperor, 397. Comes near the
Imperialists with his Army, 404. A Skirmish between him and the Prince of
Sulmona, 407. His Letter to the Mauricians, ibid. And to Maurice, 408. Is in
danger upon the Retreat of the Army, 412. Writes to Maurice his Son-in-Law, ib.
He rejects the Emperor's Proposals, 423. He justifies himself from the
Reproaches about Surprising Francfort, 426. Is invited to come to Leipzick,
429. Articles of Peace are proposed to him, 430. Which he accepts, 431. Goes to
Hall to the Emperor, 432. Signs the Articles, and submits to the same in
Person, ibid. Is detained Prisoner, 433. Letters are spread abroad in his Name
as if he allowed of the Interim, 463. Is carried Prisoner into Flanders, 473.
And sent to Oudenard, 474. His Subjects refuse the Interim, 477. New
Intercessions for him in vain, 479. The Ministers in his Country refuse the
Pope's Indult, 483. He attempts an escape, 504. Not succeeding, is kept close
Prisoner, 505. He relieves the Oppressed Ministers Liberally, 517. He is set at
liberty, and stopped again, 573. He returns into his own Country, 574. He accepts
a Mediation in the Difference with the Count of Nassaw, about Catzenelbogen,
617. Which still keeps in Suspense, 620. Has a Meeting with Augustus Elector of
Saxony, 633. Philip Prince Palatine Governor of Vienna when Solomon besieged
it, 121. Forces him to raise his Siege, Ibid. Philip Son to Charles V. comes
through the Netherlands into Italy, 477. Is received at Genoa, Ibid. And at
Milan, 478. Goes into Germany, Ibid. Enters Brussels, 479. Homage is done to
him in the Law Countries, 485. He marries Queen Mary in England, 604. He has
Naples and the Kingdom of Jerusalem Ibid. With the Duchy of Milan resigned to
him, 605. Goes into Flanders to meet his Father, 618. He enters upon the
Government of the Netherlands, Ibid. Sends Ambassadors into Germany to acquaint
them with his New Government, 628. Phlugius (Julius) vide Gropper. Chosen by
the Chapter of Naumbourg to be their Bishop, 288. Is admitted one of the
Presidents of the Conference at Ratisbon, 359. Assists in drawing up the
Interim, 454. Phlugius (Caspar) heads the Bohemian Confederates, 423. Is
condemned of High Treason, 434. Picards, a Sect of the Bohemians, 53. Picus,
vide Mirandula. Pisa, Council there, 26. Called by Cardinals, Ibid. Reasons of
so doing, Ibid. Suspends P. Julius, 27. Remove to Milan, Ibid. P. Pius's Decree
concerning appeals, 35. He altered his Opinion from what it was at the Council
of Basil, 36. Excommunicates Sigismund, ibid. Poiet (William) Chancellor of
France disgraced, 299. Pool (Reginald Cardinal) sent Nuncio from the Pope to
the French King, 210. Writes a Book called a Defense of Ecclesiastical Unity,
ibid. Made Cardinal by P. Paul III. 211. Loses the Popedom on suspicion of
Lutheranism, 490. Is detained in Germany by the Emperor, 594. Returns into
England, 605. Reconciles the Nation to the Sea of Rome, 606. Writes to the
Emperor and King of France to mediate a Peace, 615. Popes anciently subject to
Emperors, 38. Pragmatick Sanction, vide Paris. Priests, the Ceremony of their
Degradation, 64. Prierias (Sylvester) writes against Luther, 3. He assert^ the
Pope to be absolute head of the Church, ibid. Replies to Luther, 4. Princes of
the Empire disagree about the Emperor's Letter against Luther, 44. Complain of
the Pope's Proceedings in the Affairs of Germany, 60. Return an Answer to
Adrian's Letter to the Diet, ibid. Draw up an account of the Grievances of
Germany, which they gave to the Pope's Legate, 63. Their answer to Campegio's
Speech at Nuremberg, 68. They write to Charles V. to make haste into Germany,
108. They write again, 110. Write from Spire to the Senate at Strasburg, 116.
Princes of the Reformed Religion Protest against the Decree of Spire, 119.
Deliberate about a League amongst all Protestants in Germany, 122. They answer
the Emperors Proposals at Augsbourg, 133. Several of the Princes declare upon
what Terms they allow a King of the Romans, 157. Protestant Princes refuse a
league with Francis against the Emperor, 187. Those assembled at Coblentz write
severly to the Anabaptists at Munster, 197. Catholic Princes Opinion at
Ratisbon, 281. They answer the Legates Letter, 283. They Interceed for the D.
of Cleve, Ibid. Some of them writes to the Pope, 320. The Popish Princes
separate answer at the Diet at Worms, 344. They write to the Bremers, 501.
They meet at Noremberg, 512. Several Princes send Ambassadors to the Emperor to
interceed for the Landgrave's Liberty, 533. Others desire the French King to
desist from his in roads into Germany, 558. A Convention of them meet at
Francfort, 579. They write to the Emperor about the Peace, 616. Protestant
Princes, vide Princes, vide Protestant. Protestants, the Original of the Name,
120. their Ambassadors had audience of Charles at Piacenza, 123. They appeal to
his Answer, 125. They consult of a League at Smalcald, ibid. And quarrel about
Religion, ibid. Break up without a final Resolution, ibid. The Protestant
Deputies meet at Noremberg, 126. Resolve that Religion should be debated at
Augsbourg, 129. Present a Confession of Faith to the Emperor, ibid. Press to
have it read, ibid. The Protestants defend the Augustane Confession in writing,
131. Answer Truchses's Speech, 134. They debate with the Emperor about
Religion, 135. They leave the Diet, 137. The Deputies of the Associate Princes
demand liberty of Conscience from the Diet at Augsbourg, 139. The Protestant
Princes write to the Kings of France and England to wipe of those Calumnies
which had been thrown upon them, 145. They summon all the Protestant
Confederates to Smalcald, 147. They solicit the Dane and Northern Princes,
and Free Cities to join with them, ib. Their Answer to the Emperor's Summons,
149. the Protestant Princes refuse to acknowledge Ferdinand K. of the Romans,
151. They answer the Ambassadors of the Elector of Mentz and the Palatine at
Smalcald, 153. Both parties of the Protestants have a good understanding about
the Lords Supper, 159, Their Conditions of Pacification, ibid. They give in a
full answer, 164. Their decrees in order to a Council, 167. They give in their
Answer to Vergerius's Proposals for a Council, 181. They meet at Smalcald,
ibid. Their answer to the French Ambassador at Smalcald, 185. Their answer to
the English Ambassador, 188. They protest against the Proceedings of the
Imperial Chamber, which shall be contrary to Charles and Ferdinand's Decrees,
189. They draw up Articles of a League with Henry VIII. 204. They meet at
Francfort, 206. And receive several Cities into the League, ibid. They break
off Correspondence with Henry VIII. Ibid. They send Complaints to the Emperor
against the Prosecutions of the Imperial Chamber, 208. They answer the Emperors
Letter, 209. They meet at Smalcald, 212. Their answer to Eldo the Emperors
Ambassador, 215. Their rejoinder upon Eldo's reply, 221. Their Decrees at
Smalcald, 226. Their Reasons why they refuse to Meet at Mantua, whither P. Paul
III. had convened them, Ibid. They send Reasons of their Actions to K. Francis,
230. The Protestant Princes meet at Brunswick, 239. Their Answer at Eysenach,
244. They call a Convention at Arnstadt, 251. They send Ambassadors to the
Emperor into Flanders, 253. They write to the French King, 254. They meet at
Smalcald, 255. They answer the Ambassadors sent by Granvel to procure a
Pacification, 257. They answer King Henry's Propositions, 262. Make a Decree to
interceed with the French King for the Protestants if he would not take it ill,
Ibid. And resolve to oppose the Proceedings of the Imperial Chamber, ibid.
Their answer to King Ferdinand's Proposals at Haguenaw, 268. Their Answers to
the Emperors Proposals, 276. They interceed with the French King for the
Protestants, 277. They address to the Emperor in the Diet, 279. Their answer to
Contarini's Papers, 280. They Petition the Emperor, 281. They answer
Contarini's Letter against a National Council, 283. They absolutely decline the
Jurisdiction of the Imperial Chamber, 304. They Petition Ferdinand at the Diet
of Noremberg, 306. They oppose the decree of the Diet, 307. They meet at
Smalcald, 312. Send Ambassadors to the Emperor at Spire, ibid. They meet at
Francfort, 317. They protest against the Duke of Brunswick's voting at the
Diet, 319. They ^ccuse the Duke of Brunswick publicly in the Diet, 322. They
persist in their Accusation, 323. Their answer to Ferdinand at Worms, 344.
Their Petition to him, 345. The Protestants meet at Francfort, 356. Reports are
spread of a War against them, ibid. Another meeting at Francfort, 357. They
send Deputies to interceed for the Elector of Cologne, ibid. They are accused
of a Conspiracy, ibid. They are accused of a Conspiracy, ibid. They still urge
the business of Cologne, 360. The Protestants Deputies meet at Worms, 373.
They complain at Ratisbon that Diazi's Murder was unrevenged, 374. Their
Opinion of the Council of Trent, 375. They are apprehensive of War, ibid. They
demand the reason of the Preparations, 376. Their Deputies return home from
Ratisbon, 380. The first of their Commanders, ibid. Their Deputies meet at Ulm,
381. They send to the Venetians and Grisons, ibid. They send Ambassadors to the
Switzers, 383. They Petition the Emperor, 384. They send Ambassadors to France
and England, 385. They write to the Marquess of Brandenbourg to dissuade him
from assisting the Emperor, 387. They publish a Manifesto against him, Ibid.
Their first exploits in the War, 388. They write to the D. of Bavaria, 392.
Their demands of the Switzers, 393. They declare War against the Emperor, ibid.
They dispute what Title to give the Emperor, 394. They march ^o Ratisbon, ibid.
The names of the principal Confederates, 395. The Spaniards break into their
Camp, ibid. Their oversight in not taking the Landgrave's advice, 397. Their
address to the Bohemians, 399. Their Declaration concerning Incendiaries sent
out by the Pope, ibid. Their answer to the Instrument of Proscription, ibid.
They raise their Camp from Ingolstadt, 403. They write to the reformed
Switzers, 404. They lose an opportunity of taking the Emperor at Grienghen,
407. Their Council of War writes to Maurice, 408. They write to several
Imperial Cities and Princes to join with them, ibid. The Confederates Deputies
meet at Ulm, 409. Answer the Elector of Saxony's demands, ibid. They send an
Embassy into France and England, 411. They are in danger and withdraw their
Camp, ibid. In the retreat they run a risque, 412. They differ from the
Catholics at Augsbourg about the Council of Trent, 440. They are Solicited to
submit to the Council, ibid. Their Ambassors at Trent insist upon such a safe
conduct for their Divines as was granted at the Council of Basil, 539. The
demands of their Divines in the Council, 546. The Protestant Princes make a
League at Nuremberg, 614. They acquaint the Emperor with it, ibid. Their answer
in the Diet of Augsbourg to the Papists Allegations, 623. Their reply to
Ferdinand's Answer to their Papers, 626. Prussia vide Albert of Brandenbourg,
vide Sigismund of Poland, vide Wolfgang grand-Master.
R.
RAtisbon, Catholic Lords there with Campegio, confirm the Decree at Worms
against Luther, 74. Make Regulations for the Reformation of the Clergy, 75. The
Princes do not meet at Ratisbon at the Diet, 110. The Diet removes thither from
Spire, 155. The Articles of the Treaty of Nurenberg are there confirmed, 160. A
Diet there, 272. The Acts of the Diet at Ratisbon, 275. The Presidents and
Witnesses at the Conference, 276. The Acts of the Diet, 278. The Decree of the
Diet, 283. They promise Aid against the Turks, ib. A Conference is appointed
there, 351. The Names of the Conferrers, ibid. It is refused by the Papists,
352. The Conference opened, 358. The Names of the Presidents, ibid. The Points
disputed upon, ibid. It breaks up, 359. A Diet there, 374. Reformation in
Germany, its Original, 273. Religion, those of the Reformed Religion begin to
form a League, 105. Renate Prince of Orange is killed, 327. Reuchlin (John
Capnio) Commissioned to examine Jewish Books, 30. His Answer to Maximilian,
ibid. Answers Phefercorne's Book, ibid. Is Cited to Mentz, ibid. Excepts to
Hogostratus as a Judge, ibid. Appeals to the Pope, ibid. Is acquitted at Rome,
ibid. Dies, 55. Rhodes taken by Solomon, 57. Richard Elector of Triers, vide
Triers. Ridley (Nicholas) Bishop of London burnt at Oxford for Religion, 619.
Rochell, an Insurrection there, 304. Quieted, 305. Rome, Court of Rome, it is
Description, 24. A great Inundation there, 137. Roman Clergy, vide Jews.
Romans, vide King of the Romans. Rotman (Bernard) Preaches up the Reformation
at Munster, 190. Declares himself an Anabaptist, 192.
S.
SAmson (Friar) Preaches Indulgences at Zurick, 22. Savoy, D. of Savoy quarrels
with Geneva, 203. Loses most part of his Country to the French, ibid. Accuses
the French King, 323. Dies, 602. Saxons embrace Luther's Doctrine of the
Eucharist, 97. Saxony, Prince of Saxony's Answer to the Arbitrators, 159.
Quarrels in the Churches there about Indifferent things, 481. Scherteline
(Sebastian) marches toward Inspruck with his Army for the Protestants, 388.
Leaves the Camp, 406. Retires from Strasbourg to Constance, 418. A Fine is set
upon his Head by the Emperor, 554. He raises men in Germany for the French
King, ibid. Is reconciled to the Emperor and King Ferdinand, 594. Schwabian
Confederates beat Ulric D. of Wirtemberg, 80. They refuse a Truce with the
Boors, ibid. They rout the Boors at Saltzbourg, 81. An Account of the Schwabian
League, 82. The Schwabian Cities mediate betwixt Albert and the City of
Noremberg, 562. Schwinfurt, a Town upon the Main, there the Princes mediate an
Accommodation, 156. The Treaty is removed to Norenberg, 160. Sepsy, vide
Sepusio. Sepusio claims the Crown of Hungary after K. Lewis's death, 105. vide
Vaivod of Transylvania. Dies, 269. His Son put under Solyman' Protection, 270.
Servetus (Michael) Burnt at Genoa, 593. Seymour (Edw.) D. of Somerset,
Protector of K. Edward VI. and the Kingdom in his Minority, 418. Is Imprisoned,
485. Released, and Marries the D. of Northumberland's Daughter, 492. Is again
made a Prisoner, 528. And Beheaded, 538. Sforza (Francis) obtains the Duchy of
Milan of Charles V. 122. Marries Christina the K. of Denmark's Daughter, 174.
Dies, 180. Sibylla of Cleve, Wife to John Frederick Elector of Saxony,
sollicites the Emperor for her Husband, 429. Is received Graciously by the
Emperor, ibid. She dies, 596. Sickius (Francis) at War with the Bishop of
Triers, 56. Sickness, Sweating Sickness in Germany, 121. Sidonius (Michael) a
Champion for the Mass at Augsbourg, 437. Assists in Compiling the Interim, 454.
Siena revolts from the Emperor, 573. Is Besieged by the D. of Florence, 598.
Retaken by the Emperor's Forces, 615. Sigismund takes Cusanus Prisoner, 36.
Appeals from the Pope to a Couucil, ibid. Calls the Council of Constance, 47.
Begs the assistance of the Empire against Zisca, ibid. Sigismund K. of Poland
Wars against Albert, Great Master of the Teutonick Order, 99. Makes him D. of
Prussia, ibid. His Answer to the Emperor's Ambassadors, 348. His Plea given in
by his Ambassador Alaskia about the Duchy of Prussia, 445. He dies, 450.
Sixtus IV's Decree concerning the Virgin Mary, 377. Sleidan (John) sent by the
Protestants Ambassador into England, 352. Sent Deputy from Strasbourg to the
Council of Trent, 529. He applies himself to the Emperor's Ambassadors, 531.
Complains of Gropper to the Council of Trent, 535. Joins with the Wirtemberg
and Saxon Ambassadors in their Solicitations with the Emperor's Ambassadors,
537. Takes leave of the Emperor's Ambassador, who stops him, 545. Leaves Trent,
546. Deputy from Strasbourg to the French King, 557. Treats with him, and the
Constable, ibid. Dies, 638. Smalcald, a Town in Franconia, belonging to the
Landgrave of Hesse, vide Protestant. League at Smalcald, 142. The Confederates
of the League expostulate upon the motion to chase a King of the Romans, 143.
The League renewed, 189. A Convention of the Protestants there, 212. Solomon
makes War in Hungary, 50. Takes Belgrade, 51. And Rhodes, 57. Invades Hungary,
103. Besieges Vienna, 121. Breaks up the Siege, ibid. Makes a new Irruption
into Austria, 161. His Troops are defeated, ibid. Imprisons Alaski, Ferdinand's
Ambassador, 271. Strangles his Son Mustapha, 594. Solmes ( Count) vide Naves.
Spira (Francis) his dismal Story, 475. Spires. Bishop of Spires appointed to
hear Reuchlin's Cause, 30. Decrces in favor of him against Hogostratus, ibid.
A Diet held there, 103. The States there differ about Religion, 104. But their
Breaches are made up, ibid. And they make a Decree about Religion, ibid. The
Princes Assembled here write to the Senate of Strasbourg about the Mass, 116.
The Diet there assembled, 118. They refuse the Deputies of Strasbourg to sit in
the Diet, ibid. They make a Decree about Religion, ibid. The Princes of the
Reformed Religion protest against the Decree, 119. As also the Free Cities,
120. A Diet called thither, 152. Removed to Ratisbon, 155. Another Diet called
there, 288. A mighty full Diet, 317. A Decree there which angers the Papists,
325. States of the Empire. Some at Ratisbon desire to referr every thing to the
Pope's Legate, 279. They treat with tho D. of Cleve to restore Guelderland,
285. They send a Message from Nurenberg to the Saxon and Landgrave about the D.
of Brunswick, 299. Write to the Switzers not to aid the French King, 321. They
acquaint Maurice the Elector of Brandenbourg with the Emperor's Resolution
about the Landgrave, 442. Strasbourg, Priests marry there, 66. The Bishop cites
them, ib. They justify themselves, ibid. The Bishop writes to Campegio,
complaining of the Senate, 73. The Senate justify themselves to Campegio,
ibid. And Parley with him upon his Answer, 74. The Popish Clergy complain
against the Senate to the Council of the Empire, 76. The Senates Answer, 79.
Their Ministers draw up an Apology, ibid. Quarrels there about the Mass, 115.
They stience the Popish Ministers. ibid. The Bishop complains to the Diet at
Spire, 116. Mass abolished there, ibid. Their Deputies protest, upon their
being denied to sit in the Diet, 118. Their Divines answer Erasmus, 122. Makes
a League with the Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland, 126. Which is resented by
the Council of the Empire, ibid. They with some other Consederate Cities
exhibit a Confession at Augsbourg to the Emperor, 130. They debate the matter
further against the Emperor, 138. They are oppugned by Popish Divines, ibid.
They set up a School, 241. Their Letter to the Emperor to dissuade him from the
War, 378. They make their Peace, and are fined, 423. They refuse the Interim,
464. And stand to it to Granvell, 465. They send their Judgment of the Interim
to the Emperor in a Letter, 471. In a Consultation they resolve to accept of
the Interim, 472. They send Deputies with another Letter to the Emperor, 473.
Their Bishop writes to them about yielding, ib. They are commanded to agree
with their Bishop, 474. They write to the Emperor of the Bishops unreasonable
demands, 478. The Bishop says Mass again, 479. Quarrels between him and the
Senate about the public Professors, 480. The Senate and the Bishop agree, 485.
Mass first said in the Cathedral, 491. Derided by the People, ibid. Whence the
Priests fly, ibid. The Bishop complains to the Emperor, 496. But the Breach is
made up, ibid. The Bishop complains against the Preachers, 513. The Senate
sends Sleidan their Deputy to the Council of Trent, 529. vid. Sleidan. They
answer the Demands of Marq. Albert, 571. Stroza (Peter) a Florentine gulls the
Protestants with Promises of Money, 404. Stupitz (John) General of the
Augustine Friars, 2. Stura (Steno) vide Christiern. Sturmius (James) dies, 594.
Sweden, vide Gustavus. Switzers oppose the Election of Francis I. to the
Empire, 14. An account of their Commonwealth, 48. Had a Custom that Priests
should publicly keep Concubines, 51. They complain against Zuinglius in a
Convention of Estates, 66. They assemble at Lucern, and make Edicts against the
New Religion, 67. They Remonstrate against those of Zurick, 69. They join with
Zuinglius in the Doctrine of the Eucharist, 97. They meet 12 Cantons to Dispute
at Baden, 105. The Popish Cantons make a League with Ferdinand, 118. Seeds of
Civil Wars arise amongst themselves, 120. Which are taken up, ibid. They make a
League for six years, with the Landgrave of Helse, 141. Do not refuse to join
in the League of Smalcald, if Comprehension be allowed them, 148. Not admitted
into the League, 151. The Popish Cantons League against the Zurichers, 155.
They overcome the Zurichers, 156. They overcome them again, ibid. They conclude
a Peace, ibid. The Protestant Cantons interceed with the French King to remit
his Severities toward the Protestants, 210. They answer the Letter which was
sent to them by the States of the Empire, 323. Interceed to the French King for
the Waldenses, 347. They give an answer to the Protestants Embassy, 392. They
answer the Emperors Letter, 398. The Protestant Cantons differ in their Answer
about the War from the Popish ones, 399. Their Answer to the Protestants
demands, 404. Two Protestant Cantons refuse a League with Henry II. King of
France, 484. Sylvius (Aeneas) vide P. Pius.
T.
TEcelius (John Tetzel) a Dominican writes against Luther's ninety five Theses,
2. Teutonick order its institution, 99. They subdue Prussia, ibid. Thomas of
Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, 241. Killed by some of King Henry II's Court,
ibid. His rich Shrine, ibid. Canonized, 242. Toledo (Don Francisco de)
Ambassador from the Emperor at the Council of Trent, 374. Treats vigorously
with the Protestant Ambassadors there, 539. Transylvania Vaivod claims the
Kingdom of Hungary against Ferdinand, 112. Writes about it to the Princes of
the Empire, ibid. Invites Solomon into Germany, 121. Is made King of Hungary by
Solomon, ibid. Dies, 269. His Son is delivered up to Solomon, 285. Made Vaivod
of Transylvania, ibid. Transylvania revolts from Ferdinand, 633. Tregerus
(Conradus) disputes with the Preachers of the Reformed Religion at Bern, 111.
Trent nominated by the Pope to hold a Council, 292. Allowed by the Catholic
Princes of Germany, ibid. Protested against by the Protestants, ibid. The
Council called, 296. It is opened, 361. The first Session, ibid. The decrees of
it, 362. The second Session, ibid. The third Session, 373. The fourth Session
with its decrees, 377. The French Ambassadors Speech in the Council, ibid. It
is put off, 391. What number of Bishops were there, ibid. Decrees made there
about Justification, 416. The seventh Session, 422. The Council is divided and
some go to Bononia, 425. The Emperors Deputies commanded not to stir thence,
ibid. The Councilis divided, 439. Cardinal of Trent speaks to the Pope about
removing the Council, 443. The Council meets once more at Trent, 513. Sits
formally, 518. Receives the French King's Letter, ibid. The Ceremony of their
Sessions, 520. The way of making Articles and Canons, 521. They decree the
business of the Lords Supper, 525. They leave some things to be disputed when
the Protestants should come to the Council, 526. The form of their safe
conduct, ibid. They answer the French Kings Letter, 527. They make decrees
about Penance and Extreme Unction, 530. Long debates about a Safe Conduct at
Trent, 539. They are wonderfully divided, 546. Fly from Trent in haste, 547.
And they prorogue the Council for two Years, 548. Treves, vide Triers. Triers
(Elector) makes a Speech for Francis I. 16. Persuades Luther to yield, 46. Very
courteously, ibid. Richard the Elector makes War with Francis Sicking, 56. Not
for Religion, ibid. Kills several Boors at Worms, 81. After they had thrown
down their Arms, ibid. Dies, 149. The Elector of Triers leaves the Council of
Trent, 542. Truchses (George) Head of the Schwabian League, 80. Routs the Boors
in Schwaben, ibid. And at Winsberg, 81. Burns the Town, ibid. Routs others in
Franconia, ibid. Makes a Speech to the Protestant Princes in the Emperors Name,
134. Turegie, vide Oxline. Turks (vide Solomon) their Original, 295. They
invade Hungary, 314. They take Tripoly, 518. Their Fleet takes Corsica, 591.
Their Fleet scours the Coasts of Italy, 617.
V.
VAiod, vide Transylvania. Valla (Laurentius) his book censured, 28. Vargas
(Francisco de) and Martino Velasco, the Emperors Ambassadors, protest against
the Council at Bononia, 446. Venetians make a League with the Emperor against
Francis, 204. They conclude a Peace with the Turk, 252. They publish a
Proclamation about Religion against the reformed, 468. Venize (Gabriel)
Provincial of the Augustans in Germany, vide Leo. Vergerius (Peter Paul) the
Popes Legate at Augsbourg, 127. Had orders to manage the business of a Council
cautiously, 166. Is recalled into Italy by P. Paul III. 147. And sent back with
the old Instructions, 175. Consults with the Duke of Saxony at Prague, 180.
Sent to Naples to the Emperor, 204. Appointed of the Committee to draw up a
Bull for the calling of a Council, ibid. His Speech at Worms, 272. Talks with
Spira at Padua, 475. Turns Protestant, 476. Persuades his Diocese of Justinople
to join with him, ibid. Being Persecuted, settles in the Valteline, 477. And
thence removes to Tubing, ibid. Writes a Book to disswad the Switzers from
sending to the Council of Trent, 528. Vey, a Lawyer of Baden speaks to Luther
from the Commissioners at Worms, 45. Exhorts him to submit his Books to the
Emperor and Princes, 46. Vienna vide Solomon. Visconti Dukes of Milan their
Pedigree, 203. Ulm receives the Protestant Religion, and a Church is
constituted there, 149. Is reconciled to the Emperor and fined, 413. A Diet
called thither, 428. What was done at it, 431. Adjourned to Augsbourg, 432. The
Government changed by the Emperor, 472. Their Divines refuse with great Courage
to acknowledge the Doctrine of the Interim, ibid. Their Ministers are released,
479. Their answer to Albert's Proposals, 563. Ulric Duke of Wirtemberg claims
his Country, 79. Is repulsed by the Schwabian Confederates, 80. Is restored
into it by the Landgrave of Hesse, 173. Engages to be Feudatary to Ferdinand,
ibid. And recovers his Country entirely, 174. He acknowledges himself Feudatary
to Ferdinand, 180. Is admitted into the Protestant League, 206. Excuses himself
by Letter to King Francis, 249. He with Upper Germany first takes Arms, 380.
Writes Supplicatory Letters to the Emperor, 413. Is received upon hard
Conditions, 415. He makes his Submission to the Emperor in Person at Ulm, 421.
Receives the Interim, 462. Dies, 502. Vogelsberg (Sebastian) raises Men in
Germany for Henry King of France, 434. Is beheaded at Augsbourg for it, 456.
W.
WAradin (George Martinhausen Bishop of) made a Cardinal, 528. Is killed for
Commotions in Transylvania, 535. Waldenses Persecuted, 345. Barbarously
Massacred at Merindol, 346. Their Opinions, 347. Wenceslaus (Emperor)
intercedes for Husse, 46. Wiat (Sir Thomas) rises in Kent upon Queen Mary's
Marrying King Philip, 594. Is suppressed, 596. Executed, 598. Wiclef (John)
Preached against the Pope in England, 46. His Bones ordered to be Burnt by the
Council of Constance, 47. William, vide Bavaria. Winchester (Stephen Gardener
Bishop of) he writes a Reproachful Book against Bucer, 340. Is Imprisoned for
Obstinacy, 511. Made Lord Chancellor by Queen Mary, 589. An account of his
Proceedings in the Divorce of Henry VIII. ibid. He dies of a Dropsy, 627.
Wirtemberg, vide Ulric, and Christopher. Wittemberg, a City of Saxony upon the
Elbe, and an University, 2. Connives at Luther, ibid. They write to Pope Leo in
his behalf, 6. And to Miltitz that he might be tried in Germany, ibid. And to
Frederick in excuse of Luther's proceedings against Cajetan, 12. The University
abett the Augustines in not saying Mass, 49. Their Reply to Frederick about
that Matter, 50. Wolfgang made Grand Master of Prussia, 324. His Plea at the
Diet of Augsbourg about the Teutonic Order, 447. Is driven out of his Country,
571. Wolfgang D. of Deux-Ponts absolutely refuses the Interim, 480. Yet
promises to obey the Emperor as far as he could, 481. Wolsey dies for
Discontent, 170. Worms, a Diet called thither, 38. It is opened, 41. Luther
Proscribed by an Edict there, 48. A Diet called to punish the Anabaptists, 200.
Another Diet called there, 201. A Convention cited thither, 268. The Heads of
the Conference at Worms, 271. A Diet there, 343.
Z.
ZIsca (John) raises a War in Bohemia against Sigismund in revenge of Husse's
death, 47. Zuinglius (Ulricus) comes to Zurick, 22. Opposes Friar Samson about
Indulgences, ibid. Disswades the Switzers from serving abroad in the Wars, 48.
Defends himself against the Bishop of Constance, 51. Writes to the Switzers to
allow Marriage among their Priests, ibid. Disputes with John Faber in the
Assembly at Zurick, 57. Acquits himself of the Accusation of the States, 66.
Preaches up the abrogation of Images, ibid. Differs with Luther about the
Sacrament, 97. Would not go to the Conference at Baden, 105. Disputes at Bern,
111. Disputes with Luther at Marpurg, 121. Is killed, 156. Zurick, vide
Zuinglius. They refuse to serve abroad at Zuinglius's desire, 48. They est
ablish the Reformation, 57. They Answer the Remonstrance of the other Cantons,
70. And the Bishop of Constance's Book abort Images, 72. They remove Images,
76. They Expostulate with the other Cantens about the seizing of their
Ministers, 77. The Mass abolished there, 82. They stop Provisions from the
other Cantons, 155. They are routed in Battle, 156. And so a second time, ibid.
And at last conclude a Peace, ibid. The Ministers of Zurick answer Gardiner's
Book, 340.
A TABLE TO THE CONTINUATION.
A.
ALbert Marquess of Brandenburg dies, 13. Alva's War on the Pope, 9. He goes to
Rome, 11. The Emperor's Ambassadors to the Electoral Princes to carry his
Resignation, 6. Dr. Woton, English Ambassador in France, 14. Between France and
King Philip at Peronne, 19. At Cambray, 22. In France, 27. To the Diet of
Germany, 28. The Popes Ambassadors to the Christian Princes and to the Council,
49, 62. Admitted by the Princes of Germany of the Augustane confession, 63.
Refused by Queen Elizabeth, 64. His Legates to Trent, French Ambassadors to the
Council of Trent, 87. The Ambassador of Spain received, 91. Lansac Ambassador
for France at Rome, 94. The French Ambassadors protest against the Council, 95.
And go to Venice, 96. Andelot Marshal of France loses the favor of his
Prince, 19. Suspected to be in the conspiracy of Bloys, 43. Sent for Succors
into Germany, 78. Is in the battle of Dreux, 80. Defends Orleans, 82. The
Archbishop of Toledo suspected of Heresy, 48. An Assembly of the great Men of
France at Fountainbleau, 44. Of the three Estates decreed, 46. Opened at
Orleans, 51. Prorogued, 52. Reassembled at Pont Oyse, 58. An Assembly of the
Delegates of France, 68.
B
BAbotz a Town in Hungary besieged, 5. The battle of St. Quintin, 15. Of
Graveling, 20. Of Dreux, 80. The Bavarians demand the Cup and the Marriage of
their Clergy in a Tumult, 97. Bellay (Jean) Cardinal Dies, 50. The Bible
sufficient alone to determine the controversies of Religion, 60. Books
prohibited and why, 86. Bona Sfortia Queen of Poland dies. Du Bourg (Anna) a
member of the Parliament of Paris offends the King, 31. Is Prosecuted, 32.
Condemned and Executed, 34.
C
CAlais its Form and Strength, 17. Siege and taking from the English, 18.
Proffered to the Queen, 41. Catharine de Medicis Queen Dowager of France made
Regent, 33. She preserves Conde and Navar, 47. She shows great favor to the
Protestants, but yet underhand opposed them, 56. Suspecte^h the Nobility, 57.
Excuses the conference of Poissy, 60. Dissembles the Rudeness of Laines, 61.
Solicited to begin a Persecution by the Spaniards, 65. She prohibits the
worship of Images, 69. She puts her self and her Son under the Protection of
the Prince of Conde, 72. Yet out of fear joins with the Catholic Lords, 72.
And betrays Conde, 73. She pretends she is at Liberty, ibid. She thanks Conde
for his good Service, 75. She treats with him, 75, 79. She fears the Duke of
Guise after the battle of Dreux, yet makes him General, 81. After he was slain
she more earnestly desired a Peace than before, 83. She excuses the Peace when
made, 91. She complains of the proceedings in the Council of Trent, 94.
Catzenello bogen resigned, 13. Cavii, 11. Charles V. Emperor resigns Spain and
the Empire, 5. Goes into Spain, 7. His Letter to his Son, 15. His Death and
Character, 23. Charles the IX. King of France succeeds his Brother, 47. Carried
by force to Paris, 72. Is declared out of his Minority at fourteen years of
Age, 99. Charles Cardinal Caraffa strangled, 64. Christian King of Denmark
dies, 26. The Church ever pure and spotless, 51. Civitella a small City in
Italy baffles the French, 10. Coligni Admiral of France taken in St. Quintin,
15. Suspected to be in the conspiracy of Bloys, 43. Recommends a toleration as
necessary, 44. Delivers a Petition for the Pro^estants, 45. Made General
after the Battle of Dreux, 81. Disownes the having any hand in the Murder of
the Duke of Guise, 83. Dislikes the Peace of Orleans, 84. Colonna ( mark
Antony) 8. Conde (Lewis) the concealed head of the conspiracy of Amboys, 42.
Detained for it, 43. Leaves the Court, 44. Imprisoned (...) Orleans, 47. Freed
upon the Death of the King, 48. Acquitted in the Parliament of Paris, 56.
Reconciled to the Duke of Guise, 58. The Queen desires his Protection, 71. He
declares a War against the Catholic Lords, 73. Taken at the battle of Dreux,
80. Makes a Peace at Orelans, 84. The Conference of Poissy resolved on, 58.
Began, 59. One at Worms, 13. Conquet in Britain taken by the English, 21. The
Conspiracy of Bloys, 42. Discovered first by a Protestant, 43. Constantio
Confessor to Charles V. burnt, after he was dead for Heresy, 35. The Copthites
pretend submission to the Pope, 57. Cosmus Duke of Florence obtains the
possaession of Siena, 10. Procures a Peace for the Duke of Ferrara, 11. And the
Assembling of the Council of Trent, 49. Ruins the Power of the Caraffa's, 26.
Councils are not to change the Doctrines or Customs of the Church, 45. A
National Council decreed in France, 46. That of Trent procured to avoid it, 49.
Recalled, 62. Writ against by Vergerius, ibid. Protested against by the
Protestant Princes of Germany, 63. Opened, 86. Complained of by the Queen of
France, 94. Accused for invading the Rights of Princes, 95. Protested against
by the French, ibid. 96. Ended and Censured, 96. The reason why it had no
better Success, 97.
D
DAvid (George) a famous Anabaptist, his Life, Doctrine and Death, 28, 29.
Diepe taken by the Protestants, 74. Surrendered, 78. Diana Duchess of
Valentinois, 30. Dietmarsh conquered, 26. Diets at Ratisbonne, 12. At
Augsbourg, 27. At Naumburg, 63. At Francfort, 89, 13. At Brisgow, 89. A
Disputation rejected when enforced by an Army, 41. Doway attempted by the
French, 9. Dreux the battle of, 80. Dunbar dismantled, 42. Dunkirk taken by the
French, 20.
E
EGmont (Count) General at Graveling, 21. Elizabeth Queen succeeds, 22. Is
severely treated by the Pope, 23. She at first refuses, but at length leagues
with the Protestant Scots, 40. She is kind to Mary of Scotland, 67. And after
this Leagueth with the Prince of Conde, 77. She rejects the Council of Trent,
64. And the Council designed to depose her, 90. The Question Whether Episcopacy
is of Divine Institution? Debated in the Council and rejected, 87. Erick King
of Sweden succeeds Gustavus his Father, 49. Is Crowned, 64.
F
FAith not to be kept with H^reticks, 37. Broken by R. Catholics 53, 54.
Designed to be broken when time serves, 91. A Turkish Fleet sent to the
Assistance of the French, 19. The English Fleet make an unfortunate Expedition
into France, 21. One of LI. Ships attend Charles V. into Spain, 7. A Fleet of
90. carries his Son Philip thither, 35. The English fleet procures the victory
at Graveling, 22. Ferdinand Brother of Charles V. His War in Transylvania and
Hungary, 4, 5. The Resignation of the Empire to him, 6. He is elected Emperor,
22. He confirms the Peace of Passaw, 12. 28. He gives a brisk answer to the
French Ambassador, ibid. He Solicites the Protestant Princes to submit to the
Council of Trent, 62. Paul IV. refuses to acknowledge him to be Emperor, 22.
He expresses his dislike of the proceedings of the Council of Trent in a Letter
to the Pope, 90. Hinders them from proceeding against Queen Elizabeth, 96.
Ferrara, the Cardinal of, 85. The Duke of Ferrara makes his Peace, 11. His
Death, 36. Francis Otho Duke of Lunenberg dies, 36. Francis II. Succeeds Henry
II. his Father in France, 33. Having before Married Mary Queen of the Scots,
19. He is reported to have the Leprosy, 34. Claims England in the Right of his
Wife, 38. Dies, 47. Francford quarrels fatal, 11. Frederick I. King of Denmark
dies and is Succeeded by Frederick, II. His Son, 25. He conquereth Dietmarsh,
26. His answer to the Popes Legate, 63. Frederick III. Duke of Bauaria, 36.
G
GUise (the Duke of) sent into Italy, 10. Recalled, 11. Made General in France,
16. Takes Calais, 17. But is the cause of the defeat near Graveling, 20. He is
made Lieutenant General of France, 43. He procures the persecution in France,
30. Reconciled to Conde, 58. Recal'd to Court by the K. of Navar, 70, 71. He
frights the Queen into a Compliance with the R. Catholic Lords, 72. Becomes
General in the end of the Battle of Dreux, 81. And is slain by one Poltrot
before Orleans, 82. Gran, a City in Hungary surprised, 5. Gustavns King of
Sweden dies, 49. Guines taken, 18.
H.
HAly General of the Turkish Forces in Hungary, his Actions, Character and
Death, 4. Hamilton (John) Archbishop of St. Andr^^s committed for hearing Mass,
99. Havre de Grace surrendered to the English, 77. Retaken by the French, 98.
Helinoa Queen of France dies, 36. Henry II. King of France breaks his Oath by
the Procurement of the Pope, 9. He recovereth Calais out of the hands of the
English, 17. Zealous for the Roman Catholic Religion, 20. He discovers a
secret design between him and K. Philip, to the Prince of Orange, 27. Is
persuaded to persecute the Protestants of France, 30. He is incensed against
the Parliament of Paris, 31. The Protestant Princes of Germany write to him,
32. His Death and Character, 33. His designs against England, 38. K. Philip
desires a Peace, that he may be at leisure to extirpate Heresy, 27. All
Heretics to be persecuted with Fire and Sword, 30, 31. Faith not to be kept
with such. 53, 54, 91. Princes to be deposed for Heresy, 92, 93. Philip much
commended for his Severity to Heretics, in the Council of Trent, 91. No Peace
to be made with such, ibid. Dangerous to Government, 51. Hospital made
Chancellor of France, 44. His Speech to the Assembly of Princes, ibid. He
assures the Clergy there should be a National Council if the Pope would not
call a General, 48, 49. His Speech in the States at Orleans, 50. At the opening
of the Conference of Poissy, 60. At the opening of the Assembly of the
Delegates, 68. He opposes the Declaring a War against the Prince of Conde, 72.
He procures Charles IX. to be declared of Age, 99. And ascribes the driving the
English out of France to the Liberty of Conscience granted to the Protestants,
ibid.
I.
Ignatius Loyola the Founder of the Order of Jesuits, his Death and Story, 13.
Images set up in the Streets of Paris to be worshipped, 35. Ordered not to be
worshipped any where, 69. The Reasons why the Protestants destroyed them, 84.
The Images of the twelve Apostles of massy Silver lost, 76. The Worship of
Images and Relics commanded by the Council of Trent, 96. The Inquisition
promoted by Pope Paul IV. 27, 36. Desired by the Clergy of France, 44. Allowed
to proceed summarily against the greatest persons, 92. Cites the Queen of
Nawar, and several of the French Prelates, but is opposed by the King of
France, 92, 93, 94.
K.
KErsimont Governor of Britain, 2. Kirkwall taken and burnt, 23. Knox (John)
stirs the Scots to reform, 37. His Maxims occasion great devastations of
Church-building, 66. He is accused as the Author of a Tumult, 99.
L.
LAines, the second General of the Jesuits, very rude in the Conference of
Poissy, 61. The Protestant League, 77. Leith made a French Colony, 40. Summoned
by the Scotch Nobility, 41. Besieged by the English, ibid. Surrendered and
dismantled, 42. Livonia falls off from the Sea of Rome, 57. Lorrain, (the
Cardinal of) opens the first Proposals for a Peace with K. Philip, 19.
Reprehends Henry II. of France, 33. He is suspected the Author of a Slander,
34. He reflecteth severely on Coligni, 45. Designs to make a Speech for the
three Estates, 51. He opposes the Progress of the Reformation, 57. Procures
the Conference of Poissy, 58. Disputes in it, 60. Opposes a National Council,
64. Leaves the Court, 65. Advises Mary Queen of Scots to leave her Jewels in
France, 66. Treats with the Protestant Princes of Germany, 69. He goes to the
Council of Trent, 88. Visits the Emperor at Inspruck, 90. He is ordered to
defend the Peace of Orleans, 91. He is gained over to the Pope's side, 94. He
goes to Rome, ibid. Returns to Trent, 96.
M.
Man's taken by the Protestants, 74. Deserted, 76. Mary Queen of England raises
some Religious Houses, 11. She joins with King Philip against France, 14. Is
advertised by him of the Designs of the French upon Calais, 18. Makes an
unfortunate attempt by her Fleet on France, 21. She dies when there was a
Parliament sitting, 22. Mary Queen Regent of Scotland summoneth a Parliament,
36. Breaks her Faith, 37. She leaves Edinburg, and goes to Dunbar, 38.
Reproaches the Lords of the Congregation for holding correspondence with the
English, 40. She is deposed, 41. Her Death and Character, 42. Mary Queen of
Scotland Married to the Dauphine of France, 19. Resolves to return into
Scotland, 65. Arrives there, 66. Endeavors to restore Popery, 67. Refuses a
Petition against it, 99. Mary Queen of Hungary dies, 36. Marriage of the Clergy
why forbidden, and continued so, 97. Massacre at Vassy, 70. Of Sens, 74. Mills
(Walter) the last Martyr in Scotland, 24. Melancthon (Philip) dies, 50. Minart
(Anthony) a bloody Persecutor, 30, 31. He is shot dead in the Streets, 34.
Popish Misrepresentations of the Protestants in France, 16, 33, 34. Montmorancy
Constable of France, averse to the Spanish War, 14. Taken Prisoner in the
Battle of St. Quintin, 15. Discharged, and labors for a Peace, 22. Designed
for ruin by the Guises, 46. Procures the laying aside the use of the Arms of
England, 39. Enters Orleans, 48. He is set against the Reformation, and the
King of Navar by the Queen, 56. Taken in the Battle of Dreux, 80. He refuses
to consent to the Liberty of Conscience, 84. He takes Havre de Grace, 99.
Montmorancy (Francis) Son of the former, gives his Father wise advice, 56.
N.
NAples (the Kingdom of) annexed to the Sea of Rome, 9. Navar (Henry King of)
suspected to be in the Conspiracy of Bloys, 43. And in that of Lions, 46. He is
solicited to come to the Assembly of the States by his Brother the Cardinal,
ib. Comes and is confined, 47. Discharged and advanced, ibid. Becomes terrible
to the Pope, 49. Favors the Reformation, 56. Very earnest for a National
Council, 65. He joins with the Popish party, 69. Excuses the Massacre of
Vassy, 71. Is shot at Roan, and dies, 77. His Character, ibid. The Queen Cited
before the Inquisition after his Death, 92. A National Council desired in
France, 45, 64.
O.
OLiver Chancellor of France employed against the Members of Parliament, who
were suspected of Heresy, 33. Desirous of a Reformation, and an hater of
Bloody Persecutions, 43. Obtains a Pardon for the Conspirators of Boyse, ibid.
He dies weeping for what he had done, 44. Orleans, an Assembly of the three
Estates of France opened there, 47, 50. Surprised by the Protestants, 73.
Besieged, 82. Ostia besieged and taken, 9. Retaken, ibid. Otho Henry Duke of
Bavaria, dies 36. Orange, (William of Nassaw Prince of) Ambassador for Charles
V. 6. Being Ambassador in France he learns a Secret, 27.
P.
PAliano Fortified, 9. Restored to King Philip, 11. A Parliament in England,
22. In Scotland, 36. Another that setles a Confession of Faith, 42. Another
which confirms and settles it, 66. One held at Edinburg, in which Mary Queen of
the Scots passed several Acts in favor of the Reformation, 99. The Parliament
of Paris awed by Henry II. 31. Claims the Right of declaring the King out of
his Minority, 99. Paul IV. Pope, his Temper, 7. His War against King Philip, 8.
He ruins his Relations, 26. He refuses to acknowledge Ferdinand Emperor of
Germany, 22. And Queen Elizabeth, Queen of England, 23. Erects many
Bishoprics, 27. His death, and the rage of the People against him, 36. Peace
made between King Philip and the Pope, 11. Proposed between France and Spain,
19. That of Passaw confirmed, 28. That of Cambray fatal, 30. That of Orleans
disproved by Coligni, 84. And by the the Fathers of Trent, 91. Perrenot Bishop
of Arras, 19. A Persecution in France, 16. One designed in the Netherlands, 27.
One in France, 30. In Spain, 35. In Piedmont, 52. In the Netherlands, 55.
Philbert Duke of Savoy his Marriage, 33. Pius IV. Elected, 36. Delays the
calling of a Council, 48. Is at last persuaded to renew that at Trent, 62.
Despises France, 86. Afraid of the French Bishops coming to that Council, 88.
Is promised a victory over the Council, 89. Reproached by the King of France,
96. Pretends to be-free from the Obligation of all Laws, ibid. Philip II. King
of Spain, engaged in a War against Paul IV. 8. And France, 9. Leaves the
Netherlands, 35. He is much commended by Pope Paul IV. 31. Endeavors to
raise the power of the Bishops, and depress the Pope's in the Council of Trent,
90. His Severity much commended there, 91. He is solicited to endeavor the
Preservation of the Romish Religion in France, 61. Poltrot who Assassinated the
Duke of Guise, an account of him, 82. Princes, the Pope has power to depose
them, and to dispose of their Dominions, 62, 92. Denied by the King of France,
94. Prioli (Lawrence) Duke of Venice dies, and is succeeded by Jerome his
Brother, 36.
Q.
QUintin (Jean) makes a long Apology for the Clergy in the Assembly of the
three Estates at Orleance, 51. He dies of Grief for the Reflections made on it,
ibid. St. Quintin besieged, 14. Taken, 15.
R.
REligion ought not to be the occasion of Rebellions, 50. A Remonstrance of the
Protestant Princes of Germany, 12. Riga Reformed, 57. Rouen, or Roan taken by
the Protestants, 74. Twice besieged, and at last taken by the Roman Catholics,
77. Rome prepared for a Siege, 8. And might have been taken.
S.
SArdinia, (the Isle of) proffered to the King of Navar, 65. Savoy inclined to
a Reformation, 97. St. Quintin. See Quintin. Sanfloriano, a Cardinal, 10.
Sactaries never to be suffered, 51. But to be severely treated, 91. Segni, a
strong City in the Papacy taken, 10. Seldius, (Vice Chancellor) Ambassador, 6.
Siena consigned to the Duke of Florence, 10. Sigeth, a City in Hungary twice
besieged, 4. Sleidan (John) his Death and Character, 7. Succession in the
Clergy, 61. A Synod held by the Protestants of France in the time of a violent
persecution, 31.
T.
THermes a Marshal of France defeated, 20. Thionville taken, 10. A Toleration
granted to the Protestants of France, 68. Transylvania revolts, 4. The Treaty
of Cambray, 22, 30.
V.
VAlence (the Bishop of) favors the Reformation, 45. Valenza taken, 9.
Vallidolid, 35. Vassey, a Town in Champaigne, 70. Vergerius (Paul) a Cardinal
writes against the Council of Trent, 62. Vienne (the Archbishop of) for a
National Council, 45. The Vocation or Call of the Ministry, 61. Vinoxberg
taken, 20.
W.
WAr in Italy, 8. Between France and Spain, 14. In Piedmont, 53. The Reasons of
the Scotch War, 40. The beginning of the Civil War of France, 72. Wentworth
(Lord) Governor of Calais, 17. William Prince of Henebery dies, 36. Dr. Wotton
Ambassador in France, 14. At Cambray, 39.
Z.
ZEaland (the Province of) oppose the Continuance of the Spanish Forces in the
Netherlands, 48.
ERRATA In the History.
PAge 27. line 20. for Church, read Lurch. l. 23. r. Lewis XII. p. 31. l. 7. r.
Tortosa p. 32. l. 41. r. Ambitious as Lucifer himself; That he. p. 36. l. 38.
concerning. r. called. p. 39. l. 47. r. Brindisi. p. 43. l. 29. Ensure. r.
Ensnare. p. 45. Work r. Rock. p. 46.. 2. l. 1. resumed r. repeated, p. 80.
Sturney r. Sturmius, as often as it occurs, p. 94. l. 38. our r. your, p. 115. l.
36. Cantreck r. Lautrec, p. 119. l. 5. Anbald r. Anhalt, p. 134. l. 52. r. Vey.
p. 143. l. 10. convenient r. inconvenient, p. 157. l. 14. r. Nordlinghen. p.
170. l. 37. 740. r. 728. p. 184. l. 58. r. Mecklenbourgh. p. 189. l. 1. r. out
of his, etc. p. 200. l. 63. danger r. hunger. p. 206. l. 21. Campodune r.
Kempten p. 209. l. 61. first r. fifth. p. 215. l. 21. impression upon r. inroad
into. p. 230. l. 34. r. Pomerania. p. 232. l. 36. r. Aleander. p. 242. l. 10.
r. John the Vaivod. p. 264. l. 52. r. did not only, etc. p. 269. l. 45. r.
Budaeus, p. 270. l. 24. r. than that that long, etc. p. 284. l. 26. Indico r.
Ynigo. l. 45. r. Rene. p. 287. l. 16. Mark r. Work. p. 288. l. 48. Religion r.
Provinces, p. 289. Compert r. Rampart. p. 292. l. 28. r. Vendosme. l 29. Nivern
r. Nevers. p. 293. Concord r. Counsel. p. 294. l. 6. r. first place to be, etc.
p. 317. l. 14. edge r. Egg. p. 338. l. 38. Ozias r. Uzziah. p. 356. l. 40. r.
Mentz. p. 361. l. 53. Esdras r. Ezrah. p. 363. l. 13. slept r. stepped. p. 443.
l. 8. r. Ebbleben: p. 435. r. Nevers. p. 439. l. 30. implorable r. implacable.
p. 441. l. 50. severity r. security. p. 447. l 20. r. Vicenza. l. 24. r.
Morone. l. 27. r. Santacruce. p. 468. l. 35. Pecord r. Record. r. Riseberg. l.
48. r. Rochlitz. p. 471. would r. should. p. 473. l. 11. r. Fano. p. 475. l.
28. r. Casa. p. 477. l. 19. Gelou r. Gelenius. p. 478. l. 50. Fez r. Tunis. p.
481. l. 19. r. Matthias Flaccius Hlyriucus, and as often as it occurs. p. 518. l.
23. r. Vienna. p. 519. l. 34. r. Lewis Hutin. p. 531. l. 41. with r. of. p.
545. l. 60. would r. should. p. 554. l. 38. r. Bay. onne. p. 580. In the
Contents, l. 4. Albert r. Maurice. p. 594. l. 33. r. Blasseburg. p. 618. l. 58.
r. Barbara.

In the Continuation.
Page 8. l. 55. Security r. Severity, p. 10. l. 18. r. brought together an
Army. p. 28. l. 15. drought r. draught. p. 25. l. 2. 1233. r. 1523. p. 28. r.
600000 Crowns. p. 56. l. 62. perished r. persisted. p. 59. r. from Zurich. p.
60. l. 41. thing r. nothing. p. 90. l. 11. Annals r. Annates.


