TRUE CATHOLIC AND APOSTOLIC FAITH maintained in the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

By ANDREW SALL, Doctor in Divinity. Being A Reply to several Books published
under the names of J.E. N.N. and J.S. against his Declaration for the Church of
England, and against the motives for his Separation from the Roman Church,
declared in a Printed Sermon which he Preached in Dublin.

Psalm. 27. v. 1. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after,
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

Printed at the Theater in OXFORD, 1676.

IMPRIMATUR

RAD. BATHVRST Vice-Can. Oxon.
June 23. 1676.
To his EXCELLENCY The most Honorable Arthur Earl of Essex, Viscount Malden,
Baron Capel of Hadham, Lord Lieutenant, General, and General Governor of his
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Hertford, and
one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD.
HERE I present to your Excellency a defense of the true primitive and Catholic
Apostolic Faith, maintained and professed in the Church of England, against the
assaults of Adversaries, so bold ^s to present the venem they spit against it,
one of them to a most Illustrious person of the Court of England, another to
the generality of the people, and a third to your Excellency, representative of
our Gracious Sovereign in Ireland. This last in a mockery, like that of Judas
betraying our Savior with a kiss, while he endeavors to bereave your
Excellency of the life of your soul, telling you that I. S. page 140. and 304.
the Church of England, your Mother, is not the Church of Christ, nor any part
of it; that no Saint (which is to say, no just man or true servant of God) was
ever of it; that you cannot without Blasphemy, alledg Scripture for your
Tenets, with other like most insolent opprobries, He styles himself your
Excellencies most humble and faithful servant. He would have your Excellency
burn the defenders of your Church, for offering to deny that we are all
confessedly Schismatics.

When our Adversaries are so bold and active, it is much our concern, to watch
and stand on our guard. I should prove undeserving the Gracious protection and
favor, I have from your Excellency, enabling me to appear for truth, if in
this Exigency I did desert the defense of it. I will therefore, b^ Gods Holy
assistance, betake me to the arms o^ his Holy word, to resist the insulting,
and detect the fraud of subtle and violent adversaries of the true Catholic
Faith, appearing under the veil of defenders of it; and endeavor to show with
unfaigned, plain and solid proofs, that the Faith we profess in the reformed
Church of England (in which many other Illustrious nations join with us) is the
true primitive Catholic Apostolic faith, which our Savior Jesus, and his sacred
Apostles taught and established on earth; that our adversaries, branding us
with Heresy and Schism, are themselves the prime cause of all the schisms and
confusions, which too long have vexed Christianity; and are guilty of as many
Heresies, as Articles coined by them in after ages, which I hope we shall prove
to be opposite both to Canonical Scripture, and to the Doctrine and practice of
the Primitive Catholic and Apostolic Church. In which opposition certainly the
true nature of Heresy does consist; however they to their own advantage, would
make men believe, that the Popes pleasure and decrees, must be the rule of all,
and nothing Heresy, but what is opposite to them.

His pretended Infallibility, Supremacy, Vice-Godship, and such like big
sounding Titles, (but emty, as here will appear) have frighted a great part of
men to become slaves unto him. The invention of Purgatory, indulgences,
remissions, and other engines of lucre, have increased his means to maintain
his usurped power. My work will be to show with plainess of reasons, suitable
to the sincerity of my intention, and apposit to overthrow their sophistry,
that the forementioned tenets of the Romish faction, fuel of all the
Combustions of Christendom, are not from above conveied by the Holy Ghost, but
conceived in the mints of earthly passions: for the wisdom that is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, without partiality, and without Hypocrisy. Jam. 3.17. Such is
not the wisdom taught by the Roman Court, or Church, (if they will have it so
called.) It is not pure, but corrupted with many pernicious errors as will
appear in this Treatise. It is not peaceable, but contentious; not easy to be
entreated, but obstinat against all reasonable overtures of peace, against the
continual and ardent desire of all good Christians for a Council truly
Occumenical and free, wherein the Roman Bishop and faction, as others, may sit
with like freedom and indifferency to judge, and to be judged, by the lord of
God, and rules of Christian sincerity, as practiced in those purer ages of
primitive Christianity. Nothing will satisfy them, but a blind obedience, and
entire submission to their will. Far are they from being full of Mercy: their
thoughts are not of peace, but of death and destruction to all their fellow
Christians, that will not be of their party.

All this I shall endeavor to demonstrate by a close and serious Examen of the
particulars conducing to the discovery thereof, with no other design then the
Glory of God, with no prejudice or Passion against the Roman Church, but with a
hearty desire of the happiness of it; that setting aside all profane policy, it
may return to that primitive purity and luster it had, when the Faith of it was
praised throughout the whole World, Romans 1.8. and so join heart and hands with
other Christians to the Edification, and thereby to to the Conversion of
Infidels, and to the increase and splendour of Christianity. This being my real
intention, as well as the hearty wishes of all good men in the reformed
Churches; sure I am, that my study, and endeavors to this end, will be
protected and countenanced by your Exellency; Whose happiness Eternal, and
Temporal, is the hearty and continual Prayer of

Your Excellencies most Devoted Servant, and Chaplain ANDREW SALL.

THE PREFACE.
SAINT John tells us, that all the world lies in wickedness. 1 Jo. c. 5. v.
19. that hatred; envy, malice, avarice, and ambition, are the most common
^actice of men. If so, who can expect a general ap^ause of his actions, exposed
to public view? What ^eed tho in it self just and commend^ble, did ever ^^ease
a bitter enemy? What elegancy of speech, what ^^rength of reasons, could ever
sound well in the ears of ^im whose cause they opposed? And if envy reign^^th,
could that black passion ever omit to lessen ^he credit of such as were
applauded? But if others ^retend to be wits, (now called so) it is not for them
^o let any action pass without a Censure; or without ^inding in it a flaw, at
least of a sinister intention. Men judicious at this rate must not look upon
any ^ction of another, with a right eye. When Vahash the Ammonite reduced the
inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead to ask ^uarter, he denied to allow it to them, but
on condition that he might thrust out all their right eyes, 1 Samuel 11.2. So
does the Devil when possessed of any man (says (...) Peter Blesensis) he pulls
out his right eye of Charity and sincerity, and leaves him the left of envy and
malice, inclined only to see or to imagine defects.

Men's imaginations are to actions of others as moulds to metal. The same
metal powered into a mould of an Angel, will make an Angel, and cast into the
mould of Devil, will frame a Devil. And indeed the metal before indifferent,
thus ill figured, is revenged of the Devilish mould, declaring by the ^hape he
got in it, the condition thereof: So honest and indifferent actions, denigrated
by a ma^icious Hic est oculus little in universa terre, non dexter sed sinister.
Blessens. Epist. 14.
apprehension, do betray the evil temper of the mind, which thus disfigured
them. But if Avarice and Ambition, those ravenous and unmerciful passions do
contribute their aid to blow the Coals of Hatred Envy, and Malice, what fume
will they not raise to blast the reputation of the best and most laudable
endeavors?

Wherefore he that puts himself willingly into the Claws of these Monsters,
that seeks applause where such Passions reign, regards little the quiet of
his body, or mind. He cannot enjoy himself, not Christ, which is worse ( says
Non vivit sibi (and quod nequius est nec Christo) qui domificavit in cordibus
aliotum. Simon de Cassia. li. 4. de vita Salvatoris. c. 2.
Simon de Cassia) who builds in the hearts of others: not himself, whilst he
is a Slave to so many Masters as Heads of men, each one more variable then the
wind it self; no^ Christ, S. Paul affirming, that if he pleased men, he should
not be the servant of Christ. Gal. 1.19.

These considerations made me desire earnestly to spend the remnant of my days,
retired and unknown, to prepare the better for the long day of Eternity which I
resolved when first I entertained a thought of relinquishing the errors of my
former Profession, and sticking to the Evangelical Doctrine of the reformed
Church. But it seems that Sovereign Providence vigilant over all, was pleased
to dispose otherwise of me. For being actually ordering my concerns for a
voyage to the end aforesaid, it pleased God that a paper containing the reasons
of my dissatisfaction with the Roman Church, by way of soliloquie with God,
(that by further Prayer and consideration, I might be ascertained of his Holy
will,) dropped from me, and fell into the hands of some of the Romish
Communion, who so incensed my former Friends and relations against me, by a
report that I was already become a Protestant Minister, as made them out of a
blind Zeal threaten to destroy me, not unlike those who conspiring against S.
Paul, swore they would not eat nor drink until they killed him. Act. 23.12.
Which being made known to the Lord Archbishop, the Mayor, and other English
Gentlemen of the City of Cashel, they bestirred themselves so generously to
procure my safety, as may resemble that noble proceeding of the Roman Governor
Claudius Lysias, in defending S. Paul from the conspiracy of his Brethren
against him. They sent by several ways to seek after me, and acquaint me of the
danger I was in: they prepared a party to relieve me if any violence should be
offered me, and sent an officer of horse with other Gentlemen, by the way they
understood I was to come, to bring me with security into the City, and prevail
with me to go directly to the Lord Archbishops Palace, to be under his
Protection, being not secure of my life in my former habitations.

From the place where I had this notice given to me, I wrote immediately to the
Noble man from whose House I ^^me, giving him an account of what happened to
m^, and withal assuring him, that tho necessity forced me to go under that
protection, I would never declare against the Roman Church, whilst any hope
was left of being satisfied in the doubts I had, and delivered by writing
against several tenets and practices of it; which to one of my temper was not
to be performed by vulgar cries, or emty pregnancies, but by solld and plain
reasons, grounded upon the infallible word of God, such as I humbly conceived
those reasons to be, which I proposed for Motives of my discontent with the
present practice of the Roman Church. And I desired him to declare so much, and
communicate my Letter to several persons of Honor, his Relations, and my good
Friends, who had much Experience of my Sincerity and Constancy in asserting
what I conceived to be truth on all occasions, that they giving further notice
of it might direct to me any person or persons, that should be thought fit to
give me the satisfaction I desired.

Coming to Cashel, I sent the like notice to the Vi^ar General of the Romish
Clergy there, desiring him, that if any of their Bishops or other Clergy did
intend to give me satisfaction to the reasons contai^ in my paper, which was
among them, they wo^ appoint me a time and place of meeting, and t^^ should
find my heart and ears open to truth, be^^ resolved to lose my life, sooner
then the true Catho^ and Apostolic faith, wheresoever I found it to be p^^ and
uncorrupted.

I may truly say that neither I did leave any stounmoved, nor omitted any care,
or labor, I co^^ imagine conducible for quieting my mind, and setting me in my
former profession (no Tree after m^^ years growth, and deep rooting in a kind
Soil, (...) plucked up with more violence, then I was wroug from my natural
inclination, and sensible comfort forsake the Society, and Communion of my for^
friends and brethren.) Neither did they omit any d^ gence or industry to hinder
my parting from the^^ and to recall me after my separation; of both wh^^^ things
I will give here a brief and perfect account: the manifestation of truth, and
satisfaction of such desire to know it.

The first return I had to my invitation before m^tioned, to a trial of my
reasons of discontent with (...) Romish Communion, was a Letter from the Supe^
of the Jesuits in Ireland, dated 12. May 1674. of (...) Tenor following

Dear Sir,
Being loath to give credit to the strange rep^ divulged here of you, I make
bold to desire you to me know whether you forsook the Catholic, and do (...)
with the Protestant Church: for all your best frie^ c^iesty I, can hardly
believe that your wit (...) wisdom should be subject to such inconstancy,
un^perhaps by some Melancholy fit, or some other dise^per, proceeding from I
know not what discontent jealousy conceived against me, or any other of the you
know. If any such thing there be, I humbly beg of you to acquaint me therewith
by your Letter commended to the post Office in Dundalk, and do engage my word
to you, that you shall have all satisfaction imaginable that lies in my power,
and that you shall find me always ready to render you any service that may be
expected from

Loving Sir, Your ever assured JOHN FREE alias S. R.


To this Letter I answered immediately in terms of no less kindness and sincere
amity, that I did and would declare wheresoever he was concerned, that neither
he nor any other of his Society did ever give me any discontent, which might be
the cause of the Resolution I was upon; that my dissatisfaction was of a higher
nature, and that it was a great error to imagine that any dislike of particular
Persons should work in me an alteration of this kind, it being well known how
easily I might remedy any discontents in Ireland, by repairing to the place of
my former habitation and emploiments in Spain, and how good a reception I was
to expect there even in that season, as to him was well known.

This Letter being miscarried, or not reaching to him (as he signified) before
my declaration made at C^shel, (after many days retirement, and serious
consideration of the matter, and no hope appearing of receiving satisfaction to
my scruples) he wrote another to me of the 16. of June following, repeting the
same expressions of fear, that either he or some of his brethren might have
given me some discontent, to occasion my change, and desiring, if any such did
happen, I might give him notice thereof, that I may give you (said he) any
satisfaction possible, and that union at least of Christianity if not of
Religion, may remain entire among us. He desired further that I would consider
seriously unde and quo, whence and whither I was going, and what great
inconveniences might follow.

To this Letter also I answered immediately, repeting my former assurances given
to him, of no injury or discontent received from him, or any of his Society, as
a cause or occasion of my change, and that I did heartily embrace his offer of
maintaining union of Christianity among us, if not of Religion, which was my
own constant inclination and hearty desire. As for considering unde and quo,
whence and whither I went, that I did consider it with Prayer and Study of many
years, and the grounds of my resolution thereupon would soon appear in public;
and I desired he should prevail with some able men of his Fraternity to reply
to them with that gravity and modesty, which becomes learned and religious
men; that on both sides, we might concur with our studies, to the Glory of God,
and manifestation of his truth, setting a side all wonted acerbities, which if
used would confirm me, and all men of good judgment, in a dislike of their way
and spirit.

Soon after, at my arrival in Dublin, he sent another Letter to me of the 24.
of June, with a message by word of mouth, by a Gentleman of my Relation,
earnestly craving an opportunity of a private conference with me, with an offer
made by the said Gentleman of all favor and assistance, if I did desist even
then from proceeding in my resolution, and desired I would signify either in
private, or in public, the reasons of my discontent with them. To this I
answered, that I conceived some inconveniences in private Conferences in that
occasion, and expected no quiet of mind by them; that the case being already
public, I judged the handling of it in public to be more expedient both for the
Service of God, and my particular satisfaction, the matter going through a more
exact Trial that way; and consequently I did proceed, declaring in a Sermon
preached a few days after, to a very great and noble Auditory in Christ's
Church of Dublin, the reasons of my discontent with the present practice of the
Roman Church, in such moderate terms, as may be seen in the same Sermon printed
and extant in the hands of many, desiring to be answered with the like
moderation, and formal Style, setting aside satirical, and scurrilous Libels,
to which I was not to afford any either reading or answer. And long it was
before I heard of any serious reply made to my proposals, but silly Libels of
this latter kind, which the sober sort of their own party thought unworthy to
be published, and I thought them to be as little worthy of my regard. In the
mean time having taken my dwelling, since my coming to Dublin, in Trinity
College near it, and that University being pleased to have me incorporated with
it, in the quality of Doctor in Divinity, at the performance of Acts usual to
such a degree, I published a Divinity Thesis, directly intended for a
Justification of my resolution taken, by a strict enquiry and examen of it in a
public dispute, and containing to that purpose two conclusions touching the
main points of our Controversy, and to which all the rest may be reduced.

The first was, That out of the Roman Church there is a safe way for Salvation.

The Second, that the way of the Church of England, is safer to Salvation then
that of the Church of Rome. By the former I intended to justify my constant and
continual aversion to that horrid and arrogant position of the Romanists, that
out of their Communion there is no Salvation, the fountain of so many bloody
Tragedies, and unchristian animosities, which have bin the disgrace and
destruction of the Christian Church these many years. By the Second, I proposed
to justify the election I made of the Church of England, as the more sure way
to Salvation, each one being obliged by the law of that Charity which every one
ows to himself, to take the way he conceives to be most secure in a matter of
so high a consequence.

To these conclusions I invited seriously and ea^nestly all manner of persons,
having obtained free license for them to come and argue, from the Lord Primate
our Vice Chancellor, and from the other Heads of the University concerned, as
may appea^ by the Letter following, which I wrote with the The^^ enclosed to a
certain Learned Doctor of the Romis^ Communion.

Honored Doctor,
In pursuance of my earnest desire to discover the truth in the matter of
greatest concern, by all the ways I could think expedient for it, I am to
defen^ by public dispute next Thursday in the Chapel (...) this College, the
Thesis I send to you enclosed her^ in performance of my promise; I signified to
my Lord Primat, to the Provost of the College, and the Moderator of the
disputes, my desire, that any learne^ man of whatsoever condition, might be
permitted (...) oppose; and they all granted my request, it being no the custom
of the Church, and Universities of England and Ireland, to keep their people
from rea^ing, and hearing the reasons of their adversaries, a else where you
know it is. And as Suarez, Bellarmin, and others, the ablest defenders of the
Roma cause, are read here with due regard to their learning, so any learned man
will be welcome to our d^sputes, and in his good behavior will have a surwarrant
of his indemnity for what he shall say against us by scripture and reason. And
where the arswer may seem deficient, he may with confiden^ go on with contra
sic argumentor by that modest a^ clean way of schools. But if his reply should
be so^^ foul words or rudeness, tho I have resolved to pas^ over that kind of
opposition, I may not assure that the ^udience here, (which is to be very
Illustrious and ^^arned) may bear it. I heartily pray to God, he ^ay send us
all Grace to seek after sincerely, and happily find out, the true way of
serving and praising him. And so I rest.

Sir, your Sincere Friend to serve you ANDREW SALL.


At this invitation the said Doctor, with some others of the Romish Communion,
came to our di^^utes, but for reasons to them best known, they resolved not to
oppose in that public manner; neither did we by their defaults want learned and
able opposers; for several of our own Doctors of Divinity, and Masters of Arts
members of this University, well furnished with skill in Controversies and the
best arguments our adversaries have, did propose them vigorously upon the chief
points controverted, reduceable to the Heads I proposed for Thesis, and by vote
even of the Romish Auditors present, they were not wanting to the duty of able
disputants; nor could I understand that any did miss a satisfactory answer to
the Arguments used, which were many, and all in the presence of the most
Reverend Father in God, James labord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of all
Ireland, our Vice- Chancellor, and of the Right Reverend I others in God, the
Lord Bishop of Kildare, the Lord ^^shop of Ossery, the Lord Bishop of Killalo,
and of a very great and flourishing number of learned men ^^th of the Clergy
and Gentry.

This trial being over, my great longing was, for a serious and well considered
reply, to my reasons proposed in print, which by that way might be performed,
without pretense of fear or want of liberty. Long was I in expectation, when at
last came out a shower of Books against me, one upon the back of another. The
First that appeared upon the stage, was I. E. a fit person to break the Ice, a
rough trotter, with a book of a small bulk, and less sense, bearing a
Thundering title.

A sovereign counterpoison prepared by a faithful hand for the speedy
reviviscence of Andrew Sall, a lat^ Sacrilegious Apostate. The rest of the
title page, was bestowed in magnifying the force of that Book, (...) inform the
ignorant, to resolve the wavering, and (...) confirm the constant, well
principled Roman Catholi^ Under so magnificent a Title, who would not expec^ a
strong and formal answer to my arguments against the Popes Infallibility,
Supremacy, Transubstantiation Purgatory, indulgences, and other tenets of the
Roman Church, that I took in hand to confute? Bu^ instead of this, he presented
to his Reader two or thre^ (we may call) common places, dropped from a st^dent
of some College.

1. Of the happiness of the Restoration of the So^ of man.

2. Of the true essence of the Divine Faith.

3. Of the happiness of Christian Religion.

And thence without the least attempt of applying those Documents (which he so
calls) to any purpose, he falls abruptly a railing in the rest of his boo^ at
the Church of England, and at those he conceive to concur to my conversion to
it, in such a rude am raving style, as to all judicious men, he seemed to (...)
stark mad and unworthy of any regard or answer and that I understand to be the
opinion of sober me of his own party. But to my person his term are so
Heterogeneous, as may resemble a monste composed of a Siren and a Tiger;
extravagantly e^toiling me above the skies for what I was before, a^ depressing
me under the abysms for what I a^ at present, now calling me sacrilegious
Apostat^ and now Dear Andrew, sweet Andrew, and what not.

With what propriety his book may be called a Counterpoison I know not, if it
be not, that the commendations he bestows upon me in one place, may be an
Antidote against the venem he and his fellow railers spit against me in others.
You have bin heretofore (says he) known and counted a Philosopher, both by
words and deeds, you spoke great things, and did likewise practice them, and
after p. 27. before you were vir Apostolicus a most resplendent Star in the
Firmament of the true Church, a Religious Priest, conferring life of grace on
others, called by the hand of God to a most high and Sovereign dignity and
Honor, before a chaste and Evangelical Missioner, raised from a Sall to be a
Paul, a Preacher of the word and penance. Now turned to be Saul persecuting,
and warring in a most furious manner, against the heavenly fortress of true
faith, become a wretched lying and vile Protestant, plunged in all vices
contrary to those former virtues, not to repete more of his dirty terms.

A grave and Honorable prelate reading this strange Contraposition; replied
they were beholding to him for giving so good account of what I was before, but
needed not his information for what I am now, themselves knowing that better.
And this egregious writer, being questioned in a private discourse, with what
truth he could say that I was become so deboist, since I came to the reformed
Church, living all that time very abstemious, and retired in Trinity College of
Dublin, and in a good repute with those that conversed with me, he answered
that he never meant that I should be really guilty of those vices, but in a
Metaphorical sense, That the Church of England being a Harlot, I embraceing the
Communion of it, became guilty of a spiritual uncleanness, and all those vices
he mentions. He cannot deny that I know this to have bin his answer. We
thought such equivocations, and mental windings to be only among the prime
Politicians of that party, but when we find them in one so simple as Mr. I. E.
his book shows him to be, the sickness seems to be too far spread among them.
Well contented he would be that his proselytes should understand I should be
really guilty of the debauchery he speaks of. But if he be brought to a test,
he is provided of the reserve aforesaid to come of.

This specimen which I give of the man's Genius, will I presume quit me, in good
Judgments of all obligations to further regard of what he says to me: but I
will not discharge my self of the duty of defending the Church of England,
against his barbarous injuries and calumnies, which I will perform God willing
in the whole discourse of this Treatise, resolving the objections of others,
and with some reflections at the end upon part of his peculiar Extravagances, to
let the world know, how different the condition of the Church of England is for
Piety and learning, from what his malice would make his blind Flock believe of
it.

The next book of those published against me that came to my hand, was one
entitled the Bleeding Iphigenia, by way of a Preface to another greater a
preparing, which soon after appeared under the Title of the Doleful fall of
Andrew Sall etc. both written by a grave and ancient Prelate of my acquaintance
in Spain; who in both of them dolefully laments a supposed fall of mine from
the Catholic faith into Heresy, and enlarges in magnifying the virtues and
learning of the prime Fathers and Doctors of the Church whose company he says
I have forsaken, and cries against the errors and vices of many Heretics which
he mentions, drawing their pedegry down from Cain, whose society he says I
have embraced, and concludes conjuring me by all that is Holy and precious on
earth, and in Heaven, that when the last visit of God comes upon me, I may be
found a true professor of the Holy Roman Catholic Apostolic Faith.

The good will and Pious intention of this Prelate I truly love and honor, and
accordingly will endeavor to satisfy him in sober, serious, and sincere terms.

If it were so indeed as he supposes, that I should have fallen from the Holy
Catholic Apostolic Faith, I should be the most unhappy, and worthy to be
lamented of all men; but I am certainly persuaded I have rather fastened my
self to it, by the change I made, and I hope shall make it appear so to all
unbiassed men in the progress of this book. And to his request that I be found
a true Professor of the holy Catholic Apostolic faith, I promise him
faithfully, it shall be my constant and inflexible resolution to hold that
faith to the end of my life, wheresoever it be uncorruptly professed, whether
in Rome or Jerusalem, or else where; I know it is not tied to places. And in
truth and sincerity of my heart, I say to God in the words of holy David, which
I have put for a Motto in the Frontispiece of this work, One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord and to
inquire in his Temple. Psalm. 27.4. This desire appeared early in me, having
betaken my self in my younger years, to that course of life, which I conceived
to be most expedient to come to God, and dwell in his house, by the strict
practice of Piety and learning, secluded from the world in a society of great
reputation for both. And in that course I did persevere, whilst that
apprehension lasted: but having discovered errors therein opposite to the
primitive Catholic and Apostolic faith, leading to the house of God, and
finding by serious and due considerations, the same true faith to be professed
uncorruptly in the reformed Church of England, I did constantly resolve to
embrace it, in prosecution of my foresaid professed design of dwelling in the
house of God, I mean in the true Catholic Apostolic Church. And as no human
force or industry, could win me to this change, without a strong interior
motion, and full persuasion of being in the right, so all arts and endeavors
by terrors or allurements are vain to recall me, this interior persuasion
persisting, which I find rather confirmed then weakened by all industry
hitherto used to draw me from it, as I hope will appear to the dispassioned
reader by the sincerity of my discourses in this Treatise.

The fourth and last book of those published against me that came to my hands,
was one of J. S. bearing Title the unerring unerrable Church. Whosoever the
said J. S. be, if we measure him by his conceit of himself, his contemt of his
adversaries, his boast of his arguments for unanswerable, and the brags of his
Friends in his behalf for matchless, certainly he is the Goliath of their Camp,
of Gigantic stature among them. I was not a little joied to find a person of so
great repute and trust, engaged in answering my arguments. If I find it easy to
render void his answers, and to confute his arguments, then may I expect to be
at full quiet in my persuasion, and immovable against all their oppositions,
whereof the prudent Reader will be judge after he has viewed our encounter.

And whereas the main strength of this Combatant lies in his calumnies and
impostures, wherewith he besets thick the front or Preface of his Book, I will
in this place remove that engine. To lessen the weight of my arguments with a
great number of Readers, who rely much upon the credit of the writer, he will,
he says, strip me of those Titles which my public emploiments for many years
have given me, and with a kind of power never heard of before, will make, that
I should not have bin what really I was, to the knowledge of many thousands of
men living. Finding me styled Professor of controversies, in the Irish College
of Salamanca, he says resolutely, that no Controversies were taught in that
College these forty years: in which undertaking he has bin so unlucky, that
several persons of Honor in Ireland, who have bin in Spain, and do know the
language of it, saw an Instrument in Spanish yet extant in my keeping of the
Inquisitor General of Spain, giving me License for having and keeping
prohibited Books upon the account of being professor of Controversies in the
aforesaid College after the Tenor following.

En la villa de Madrid a 15. de Junio 1652. etc.
En la villa de Madrid a quinze dias delmes de Junio de mily seiscientios y
cinquenta, y dos annos. El Illustrissimo y Reverendissimo Sennor Obispo de
Placentia Inquisidor General en los Reynos y Sennorios de su Magestad y de su
consejo etc. dio Licentia al P. Andres Salo de la campania de Jesus, Rector del
Collegio de Irlandezes de Salamanca, y Lector en el de la catedra de
Controversias contra Herejes, paraque por tiempo de un anno, que comience a
correr y contarse desde (...), dia de la fecha, pueda tener, y leer libros
prohibides para el efecto de escrivir y impri^^ir, y dar ala estampa qual quier
libro o tratado. y le encargo, que si hallare en algun libro antiguo, o
moderno, alguna proposition censurable, no comprehendida en el ex purgatorio,
compliendo con su obligacion, lo advierta y de cuenta dello asu Sennoria
Illustrissima o al consejo por lo que importa al servicio de dios nuestro
Sennor. De lo qual testifico yo e^^ infra escrito secretario de camara de su
Sennoria Illustrissima.

El Ldo Pedro Lopez de Brinnas.


And at the bottom of the leaf on the left hand corner, are written these
words, assentada a fol. 138 which is to say, set down page 138. I suppose of
the Book where Licenses given were enrolled, to preven^ the using of
supposititious ones. Thither I remit Mr. S. if he doubts of the Legality of
this Instruments. The foresaid Instrument turned to English says thus.

In the Town of Madrid the 15. day of the month of June 1652. the most
Illustrious and Reverend Lord Bishop of Palencia, Inquisitor General in the
Kingdoms and Dominions of his Majesty and of his Council etc. gave License to
Father Andrew Sall of the Society of Jesus, Rector of the Irish College of
Salamanca, and Reader in it of the Chair of Controversies against Heretics,
that for the time of one year, which shall begin to run and be counted from
this day of the date hereof, he may keep and read prohibited Books, for the
purpose of writing printing or Publishing any Books or Treatises, and has
charged him, that if he find in any Book ancient or ^odern, any censurable
proposition, not comprehended in the expurgatory, complying with ^is duty, he
shall advertise and give notice of (...) to his Grace, or to the Council, for
the importance of it to the service of our Loird God, of which I certify the
undernamed Secretary of the Cabinet to his Grace

Licentiat Peter Lopez de Brinnas.


For each one of the three years I was in that Office ^he like instrument was
sent to me, and each of the ^id years my name enrolled in the matricle or
public Books of that University, for Rector of the said College of it, and
Reader of Controversies. Mr. ^. S. may go thither, and see himself to his shame
^ound a liar. The like shame he shall meet with, ^or saying I was never a
Reader of Moral Theology in ^e Roial College of the Society in that University.
The Superiors and Lectors of the said College in the ^ear forementioned, and my
Auditors, which were (...) chief part of the Students of Divinity of the
Jesuits ^n that province of Castile, will be on a trial, wit^esses of the
profligat boldness and imposture of I. S. ^et several Jesuits now living in
Ireland, who at that ^ime were Students of Divinity in the foresaid College of
Salamanca, and saw me sit with the other Di^inity Professors examining yearly
their sufficiency ^or promotion, and were examined by me, let them (...) say be
put to their oath, and if they will not forfeit their ears by the law of this
land for perjury, they must testify against I.S. and his impostures.

Finding me styled professor of Divinity in Pa^plona, Palentia, and Tudela, he
says that there is no^ nor was at any time Divinity taught in the Colleges of
Palentia, and Tudela; and he may as we say in some places of Spain, that there
is no suc^ thing as a Lecture of Divinity in Oxford or Cambridg^ With some he
may meet in that part of the world, that could not contradict him; and happily
it is (...) with him now where he is. To some of his familiars he may persuade
his saying; but to expose it t^ public view by print, shows clearly that
passion h^^ blinded him not to see his shame: for certainly it would appear no
less insolent in Palentia or Tudela, to sa^ that there is not, nor was at any
time a Lecture (...) Divinity in those Colleges, then if you should s^^ in
Oxford or Cambridg so much of those Universitie^ A numerous Congregation of
Priests, and Student of Divinity to be priested, of those two great and famous
Cities, and of the Country about, who were my auditors, will cry out against
such a blind and bo^^ writer, that has no regard to truth in what he says.

He allows me the honor of having bin Reader (...) Divinity in the College of
Pamplona, which is (...) small wonder, that being one of the most famo^^ and
flourishing Colleges the Jesuits have in Spa^^ and consequently to his purpose
declared, to rob (...) of that Credit, as he may do with the same grou^ he did
with the rest, that is to say with only his bo^^ assertion or fiction, without
any proof alleged. B^^ he does it to bring upon me a greater discredit, t^ling
his Reader that if they h^^ bin contented w^^^ me, I might have continued
longer in that emploiment and this we must take upon his credit, tho a
co^vinced bankrupt in truth. But how shall I refu^^ him at this distance from
those men, and in the present difficulty of getting their testimony in my
favo^^ I admire and praise Gods providence in putting in^^ my hands abundant
evidences to repulse the spite^^ attemt of this virulent Adversary. I will to
his con^^sion produce here two testimonies that may suffice ^^r many; the one
of a Prelate, the other of a Prince. ^he former is of a grave and aged Bishop,
then supplicating to the Provincial of Castile for my continu^^ce at Pamplona,
by a letter of the tenor following.

Admodum Reverendo in Christo Patri Martino de Lesaun Castellanae Provinciae
societatis Jesupraeposito provinciali.
Admodum Rdo in Christo pater,
Capiens per ultimum tabellarium rumorem de P. Salo brevi inde abituro jussione
tua, in mentem venit quod dixit Job, Venit mihi timor quem timebam: vix enim
quidpiam praeter peccatum in Deum meum et cladem Religionis and patriae plus
timendum censui ^^t dolendum, quam imperium de ejus migratione. Cur, pater
colendissime, scholam ^ampelonensem Magistro tam claro, populum ^cclesiaste,
Principes and Magnates regni Con^^liario in foro Conscientiae, and me praesulem
afflictum and moerentissimum, ac gementem in exilio, spolias unico meo solatio?
Quid aliis nostro incommodo bonus esse vis? Sed haud dubie ibi subditum tuum
vivere malis, ub^ Deo melius famulans proximo poterit magi^ prodesse? Si ita
est, relinque illum Pampelon^ ^bi hactenus praeter obsequia societatis
occasion mutuae inter nos consuetudinis (dumibi vixerim) multum profuit
patriae su^ in spiritualibus, ut modo sit literarum colloquio. Muta igitur
obsecro sententiam tuam pr^ majori bono animarum, and Salum (ut mecum
allaborans multis sternat viam salutis) indulge paulisper mihi and patriae
suae, and spond^^ fore ut te non poeniteat tam sancti consilii. Multa, si
expediret omnia pandere, offerre possum, quae monere possent Reverendissimam
paternitatem tuam manibus and pedibus ire in meam sententiam. Expectans
benignum responsum tuum, deosculor sacratas manus

Reverendissimae paternitatis tu^ Amantissimus in Christo servus Nichol.
Episcopus Fernensis.


For such as understand not Latin thus it goes i^ English.

To the Right Rd Father in Christ Martin de Lezaun Provincial Superior of the
Society of Jesus in the Province of Castile.
Right Rd Father in Christ,
Understanding by the last post, that Father Sall is to remove shortly from
that City by your orders, Jobs saying comes to my mind, The thing which I
greatly feared is come upon me. For certainly besides my sins against my God,
and ruin of my Country and Religion, I could hardly conceive any thing more to
be feared and grieved by me, then the order of his departure. Why, most
Reverend Father, will you deprive the Schools of Pamplona of so famous a
Master, the People of a preacher, the Princes and Peers of the Kingdom of a
Counselor in matters of conscience, and me an afflicted sad Prelate groaning
in Banishment, of my only comfort? Why will you be good to others at our loss?
But doubtless you will have your subjects to be, where serving God better, he
may be more benefiaial to his brethren: if so, leave him at Pamplona, where
hitherto besides the functions of the society, by occasion of our mutual
communication while I lived in that City, he has don much good to his country
in their spiritual concernments, as now is don by exchange of Letters. Alter
your opinion therefore, I beseech you, for the greater good of souls, and lend
Sall for a while to me and to his Country, and I promise you that you shall not
repent of so good a resolution. If it were convenient to discover all, I could
alledg many things which would induce your Reverend Paternity to a free and
full consent to my proposal. Expecting your favorable answer I kiss your sacred
hands

Your most Reverend paternities most affectioned servant in Christ Nichol.
Bishop of Fernes.


The Author of this letter is yet living where Mr. S. may come to him and be
certified of the case. And tho he be of my present Antagonists, I know he has
so much of truth and honesty in him, as not to deny his writing: for even now
he confesses that his opinion of me, and the opinion of all that knew me, was
conforming to what that letter represents, whatsoever be come of our present
Controversies.

The second testimony I have to be produced here more public and full to this
purpose, is that of the Earl of S. Stephen, General of the Spanish army in
Castile, Viceroy and Captain General first of the Kingdom of Gallicia, then of
Navarr, and last of Peru, a Prince of as great repute for his learning and
piety, as for his Government of Kingdoms and arms. Being Viceroy of Navarr,
and Resident in Pamplona Metropolis of that Kingdom, all the time I was there
teaching Philosophy and Divinity, and being often present at my public
functions, as well of moderating disputes in Schools, as of preaching in
Churches, and moreover having bin pleased to render me very familiar with
himself, for his direction and consultation in matters belonging to my
profession and calling, at last delivered his opinion of me, for teaching,
preaching, and behavior, in an Elogy inserted among others of men he honored of
his age, and would have to live in the memory of posterity in a book of his
works presented by his two Sons to Pope Alexander the 7th entitled horae
succisivae Didaci Benavidii comitis Sti Stephani Proregis Navarrae, etc. and
printed at Lions in France in the year 1660. In the page 278. of the said Book
he has this Elogy touching me.

Rdo P. ANDREAESALO Hiberno Societatis Jesu Elogium.
DIgnus Fama, and familia Ignatiana
Vir,
Hybernus patria, and Vernans literis.
Superasti Haereseos Pelagi, ac
Mortalitatis saevientes
Procellas
In Religionis tutum
Sinum traductus.
Salo, Sales, Sapientiam
Cognomentum, Verba, Men's,
Promunt.
Patriae calamitatibus, and Calamo notus.
A natalitiis oris, ore cum Nestoreo
Ad Hispanas Scholas accessisti.
Inservisti etiam sacra Eloquentia rostris.
Et quod mirum,
De Coelesti Patria non Patrio sermon
Sed Hispano elegantissime
Perorasti.
Vere peregrinus sermo a Peregrino!
Ac dum te auribus usurpo,
Qua dissertatorem Scholasticum,
Qua Coeli Oraculorum interpretem,
Hinc me sagatum acuminibus
Armas,
Hinc me togatum divinis
Legibus instruis.
Quod magis
In tuis literis sine litura
Mores suspicio.
Desinis esse Ibernus, factus Iber:
Desinis esse Iber, JESUS assecla
Factus.
Hoc cautum ut habeas
Volo:
Te exemplo hamare,
Quem meus amat
Calamus.
I forbear turning these words into English, both for the insufficiency I find
in me for keeping their Elegancy in the Translation, and for my unwillingness
of delivering in words of mine own, Elogies whereof I acknowledge my self most
unworthy, and which I could not behold without confusion. The book was sent
unto me by the Bishop of Pamplona to be examined before it was printed, as the
custom there is, and so bears my censure and approbation of it in the
beginning. But the foresaid elogy was then concealed from me, and inserted
among the rest, after the Copy went out of my hands: and truly I was surprised,
and is no small confusion finding it in the book after it was printed. But I
see Gods great providence fore seeing the present malignant attemt of my
adversary upon my credit, was pleased to have this Antidote prepared against
his venem.

I hope the judicious Reader will not ascribe to any appetit of vain Glory the
exhibiting of the foresaid testimonies, to which the just and necessary defense
of my credit did force me. And whereas my adversary is so bold as to appeal
even to the Protestant reader, for justifying his attemt in robbing me of the
Titles given to me, with a confessed design of weakening thereby my cause and my
arguments with the vulgar, I embrace the same appeal, and desire the same
reader to judge, whether it be right or reason I should desert his cause, and
mine in this exigency. Shall we let their insolent and presumtious vaunt run
unchekt, wherewith they blind the simple, saying that no man of understanding
or honesty can leave their Church for the reformed; that both Religion and
learning have fixed their tents among them, so as out of their Society neither
may be found: that the dullest wits coming to them, are illuminated and
refined, and the most sublime, by leaving their Communion, are blinded and
stupefied.

This robber of titles certainly shall meet with something in his Encounter
with me, that will trouble him more then those callings of Professor and
Rector. Many Professors of Divinity and Rectors of Colleges have I known
(without any great presumtion I may say it) who in debates of this kind, could
not put their opposers into such streights as I. S is like to find himself in,
at the trial of his book, now to be taken in hand. But being he conceives that
those callings may add force to my arguments with some readers, I will defend
them in spite of his malice, and endeavor to forward the truth of God, by all
that is mine by right.

And if it be true what some of his party, to give more credit to this calumny,
do report, saying that the Author of it is a Jesuit of my acquaintance in
Spain, if so, I say, his guilt is hainoussy aggravated thereby, as being a
formal and willful impostor with certain knowledge of the untruth of what he
says, he having bin a master of a Grammar School in one of those Colleges
where I was Professor of Divinity, and where he says Divinity was never taught,
and knowing certainly that I had all those emploiments which he denies I should
have had; for which cause several of the Romish Clergy and Laity in Ireland,
who know the same, have detested the impudence of this man, in denying a thing
so publicly known.

I could not but imagine that some person capable himself of so desperate a
folly as to take upon him fictitious titles, should be author of this rude
calumny: for men's apprehensions of others are commonly a testimony of their own
temper, as is observed in the beginning of this Preface. And if the said Jesuit
be Author of that book and of the calumnies of it, the observation now
mentioned is fully verified in him: for to my certain knowledge, this man being
sent away from Spain before he was ripe in learning, to magnify his mission
with private friends, gave himself a title, so ridiculously and Chimerically
fictitious, that if I did mention it here, it would bring upon him an incurable
confusion; not to wound him to deeply, I forbear to unfold the matter further
at present. But I have declared it to a person of quality of his acquaintance
with a message to him and his brethren, that if they will not stand to the
offer of their Superior above mentioned, of union in Christianity and civil
demeanor, nor will accept of my invitation to a trial of our cause by a grave
and Scholastic way, becoming Christians and learned men, but must force me out
of it by calumnies and slanders, they may possibly find, that it is not want of
materials, that keeps me from throwing dirt in their face (as others commonly
do departing from them) but want of inclination to such practices: and when
their Vide Caramvel Theolog, fundamentali fundamento 551. N. 1589.
great Doctors teach them to raise false testimonies whereby to discredit their
adversaries, as this man does, I hope they will allow me to repel with truth,
tho bitter, the assaults of malicious enemies.

After the publication of these four Books, now mentioned, the last and great
engine applied by my former brethren to recall me, was a large and solemn Bull
of Pope Clement the 10. now reigning in Rome, signed and Sealed by his
Protonotarius Apostolicus, Claudius Agrete, assuring me in terms of full
Legality, an entire and absolute Remission of all that is past, and a favorable
reception to my former condition and privileges, if I would return to them.
This Bull came into my hands by Dublin post in September last, with a letter
about it of few lines in Latin, without subscription, inticeing me to an
acceptance of the favor offered, and concluding with admonishing me of evil
designed against me, if I did not consent to it; of which designs against me, I
have had more notice given to me, then I am willing to publish: I thank God for
delivering me hitherto, and I pray that he may correct the ill affected minds
that harbor such cruel thoughts.

To the offer made by that Bull of pardon and favor I answer, that I want a
more necessary indult from the true supreme Head of the Church our Savior
Jesus Christ, for submitting to the present Laws and Commands of the Roman
Church, opposite, as I do conceive, to the Commandments of God, the Doctrine of
Christ, and the practice of the primitive Apostolical Church, as I hope to make
appear in the following Treatise to the indifferent Reader, by the help of God.

And finding the above mentioned I. S. more eager in challenging me to answer
his Syllogisms, and his party more confident of them, I hastened my reply to him
for the print, but some delays intervening which gave me way to have the
second part (which (...) intended to be of my reply) finished, before this
other could be printed, I have resolved to leave his own place to Mr. I. S.
which is the last, and begin with my reply to N. N. declaring by occasion of
his objections, that the faith we profess in the Church of England is that (and
no other) which Jesus Christ, and his Apostles taught, and was professed by the
faithful, in the first and better ages of Christianity; that we have in this
Church all those titles, and rights which do qualify a Church for truly
Catholic, even according to the rules prescribed by the ablest writers of the
Romish party, whereby all those loud cries against us for Heretics and
Scismaties appear to be no better then emty bubles, and mere wind, only apt to
delude weak and ignorant people; and thence I will proceed to declare how their
ordinary stuff of arguments against us, is bottomed constanly upon false
suppositions and misrepresentations of our Doctrine and practices, which if well
known to the sober and sincere sort of Roman Catholics, they would be far
otherwise affected then they are toward the Church of England, by the false
informations of ignorant or malicious instructors.

O may the Father of light and the God of truth open the eyes of men blinded
with earthly passons, that they may see and follow the true way to everlasting
happiness declared to us by his dear Son Jesus, that his will and glory may be
the common aim of all our wishes and writing, and of all our actions; that our
Studies and endeavors be not to make the breach among Christians wider, but to
reconcile them in Christ, that thus united in him, we be at length happily
united among our selves in the profession of true faith in our good Savior
Jesus, to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory for ever
and ever Amen.

A TABLE of CHAPTERS
Of the First PART.
CHAP. I. A Summary account of the Contents of N. N. his two Books, and a
Distribution of the points to be handled in relation to them. page 1. CHAP. II.
That the Church of England is a true Catholic Church, and the Doctrine
professed in it, truly Catholic and Apostolic. page 6. CHAP. III. Suarez his
Argument taken from the propriety of the word Catholic applied to prove that
the Church of England is truly Catholic. page 14. CHAP. IV. The Church of
England proved to be Apostolic upon the foundation laid by Suarez to rob it of
that calling. page 21. CHAA. V. Of the succession and Lawful Ordination of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the reformed Church of England. page 27. CHAP.
VI. The Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in King Edward the Sixth
his time, and after, proved to be legal and valid. pap. 41. CHAP. VII. How far
the form of Ordination used in the Church of England, agrees with that of the
ancient Church declared in the fourth Council of Carthage, and how much the
form prescribed by the Roman Pontifical of this time differs from the ancient
^orm. page 49. CHAP. VIII. How far the Church of England does agree with the
Romish, in matter of Ordination, and wherein they do differ, and how absurd the
pretention of the Romanists is, that our difference herein with them should
annul our orders. page 57. CHAP. IX. That the succession of Bishops and Clergy
since the Reformation, is much more sure and unquestionable in the English
Church, then in the Romish. page 6^. CHAP. X. A further cause of Nullity
discovered in the Election of Pope Clement the 8th. page 75. CHAP. XI.
Nullities declared in the Popedom of Paul the 5th. and others following. page
81. CHAP. XII. Of the large extent of Christian Religion professed in the
Church of England. page 89. CHAP. XIII. Of the several large and flourishing
Christian Churches in the Eastern Countries not subject to the Pope. page 98.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Jacobites, Armenians, Maronites, and Indians. page 110. CHAP.
XV. A reflection upon the Contents of the three Chapters precceding, and upon
the pride and cruelty of the Romanists in despising and condemning all
Christian Societies not subject to their Jurisdiction. page 116. CHAP. XVI.
Inferences from the Doctrine preceding of this who'e Treatise against the
several objections of N. N. page 121. CHAP. XVII. The Reformation of the Church
of England, vindicated from the slanderous aspersions of N. N. and
other-Romanists. page 130. CHAP. XVIII. A view of N. N. his discourse upon
Transubstantiation, and upon the affinity of the Roman Church with the Grecian.
page 132. CHAP. XIX. N. N. His Book entitled the bleeding Iphigenia examined,
his abusive language bestowed therein upon persons of Honor; and his censure
upon the Kings Majesty reprehended. page 140. CHAP. XX. That it is not lawful
for subjects to raise arms and to go to war with their fellow subjects without
the consent of their Prince. The Doctrine of killing men and making war by way
of prevention and on pretext of Raligion, confuted. page 148. CHAP. XXI. A
Conclusion of my discourse with N. N. with a Friendly Admonition to him. page
171. CHAP. XXII. A check to I. E. his Scandalous Libel; and a vindication of
the Church of England from his false and s^anderous report of it. page 178.
The SECOND PART.
CHAP. I. AN Anatomy of Mr. I. S. his Genius and drifts appearing in his
Dedicatory Epistle to my Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. page 1. CHAP. II. A
vindication of several Saints and worthy Souls, our Ancestors, from the
sentence of Damnation passed upon them by I. S. page 6. CHAP. III. Mr. I. S.
His cold defense of the Infallibility of his Church examined. page 14. CHAP.
IV. That Protestants have a greater security for the truth of their Doctrine
then Papists have. page 19. CHAP. V. Mr. I. S. His prolix Excursion about the
Popes Authority, requisite to know which is the true Scripture, declared to be
impertinent, and the state of the question cleared from the confusion he puts
upon it. page 27. CHAP. VI. Mr. I. S. His defense of the Popes pretended
infallibility from the censure of Blasphemy, declared to be weak and
impertinent, his particular opinion censured for heretical by his own party.
page 33. CHAP. VII. Our Adversaries corruption of Scripture detected. page 41.
CHAP. VIII. Mr. I. S. His horrible Impiety against the Sacred Apostles and
malicious impostures upon the Church of England reprehended. page 46. CHAP. IX.
Our Adversartes pretention to prescription and Miracles in favor of the
infallibility of their Church rejected: his impostures upon me and upon the
Church of England discovered further. page 53. CHAP. X. A Check to Mr. I. S.
his insolent Thesis prefixed for title to the 8th Chapter of his book, that the
Protestant Church is not the Church of Christ nor any part of it. That they
cannot without Blasphemy alledg Scripture for their tenets. And his own
argument retorted to prove, that the Roman Church is not the Church of Christ.
page 59. CHAP. XI. A Refutation of several other engagements of Mr. I. S. in
that 8th. Chapter. page 66. CHAP. XII. Mr. I. S. His answer to my objections
against the Popes in fallibility refuted, his defense of Bellarmin, of the
General Council of Constance, and of Costerus, declared to be weak and vain.
page 70. CHAP. XIII. Our Adversaries foul and greater circle committed,
pretending to rid his pretention of infallibility from the censure of a circle,
his many absurdities and great ignorance in the pursuit of that attemt,
discovered, a better resolution of Faith proposed according to Protestant
principles. page 77. CHAP. XIV. A Reflection upon the perverse Doctrine
contained in the resolution of Faith proposed to us by Mr. I. S. and the
pernicious and most dangerous consequence of it. page 85. CHAP. XV. Mr. I. S.
his defense of the Popes Supremacy declared to be vain, their pretense to a
Monarchical power over all Christians, whether in Spiritual or Temporal, proved
to be unjust and Tyranical. page 92. CHAP. XVI. How falsely Mr. I. S. affirms
the Irish did not suffer by the Popes prohibiting them to subscribe to the
Remonstrance of fidelity proposed to them. page 100. CHAP. XVII. The complaint
of Papists against our King for the Oath of Supremacy he demands from his
subjects, declared to be unjust. page 103. CHAP. XVIII. Our Adversaries essay
in favor of Transubstantiation examined, his challenge for solving two
Syllogisms answered. page 110. CHAP. XIX. Several answers to my arguments
against Transubstantiation refuted. page 118. CHAP. XX. Ancient Schole men
declare Transubstantiation cannot be proved out of Scripture, and that it was
not an Article of Faith before the Lateran Council, Mr. I. S. his great boast
of finding in my check to their worship of the host, a prejudice to the
Hierarchy of the Church of England, declared to be void of sense and ground.
page 126. CHAP. XXI. Mr. I. S. His weak defense of their half Communion
confuted page 135. CHAP. XXII. The Roman worship of Images declared to be
sinful, page 142. CHAP. XXIII. Mr. I. S. His defense of the Romish Worship of
Images from the guilt of Idolatry confuted, the miserable condition of the
vulgar, and unhappy engagement of the learned among Romanists touching the
worship of Images discovered. page 148. CHAP. XXIV. Our Adversaries reply to my
exceptions against their invocation of Saints declared to be impertinent. page
159. CHAP. XXV. A great stock of Faults and Absurdities discovered in Mr. I. S.
his defense of Purgatory. page 168. CHAP. XXVI. The Argument for Purgatory
taken from the 12th. of S. Matthew. v. 32. solved. 173. CHAP. XXVII. The attemt
of our Adversary to make the Doctrine of Purgatory an Article of the Apostles
Creed, declared to be vain. page 185. CHAP. XXVIII. How weak is the foundation
of the grand Engine of Indulgences in the Roman Church. page 188. CHAP. XXIX.
The unhappy success of Mr. I. S. his great boast of skill in History, touching
the Antiquity of Indulgences, discovered. page 195. CHAP. XXX. Of the strange
and absurd terms used in the grants of Indulgences, and the immoderate
profuseness wherewith, and slight causes for which they are granted. page 199.
CHAP. XXXI. The Dismal unhapiness of the Romish People in having their Liturgy
in a tongue unknown to them. page 212. CHAP. XXXII. The cruelty of the Roman
Church in prohibiting the Reading of Scripture to the People, and their common
pretense of Sects and Divisions arising among Protestants refuted. page 216.
CHAP. XXXIII. Mr. I. S. His engagement touching the Immaculate conception of
the Virgin Mary, and the practice of Confession, confuted. page 219. CHAP.
XXXIV. A Reflection upon the many Fallacies, Impertinencies, Absurdities, and
Hallucinations of Mr. I.S. his Book, which may justify a Resolution of not
mispending time in re^urning any further reply to such writings, and a
^onclusion of the whole Treatise, exhorting him to a consideration of his
miserable condition in deceiving himself and others with vanity. page 222.
TRUE CATHOLIC and APOSTOLIC FAITH Maintained in the CHURCH of ENGLAND. PART. I.
Being A Reply to N. N. his two Books, the one entitled, The Bleeding
Iphigenia, the other, The doleful fall of etc. with a reflection upon I. E. his
Libel entitled, A Soverain counterpoison, etc. and a Vindication of the Church
of England from the calumnies of them, and of their Party.

CHAP. I. A summary account of the Contents of N. N. his two Books, and a
distribution of the points to be handled in relation to them.
AN useful Proposal being made in the Senate of Athens by a person of ill
repute, those wise Senators accorded the same should be tendered by another of
a clearer fame, that it might carry by his authority more weight, and be the
better accepted. The like seems to have bin practiced with me by my Brethren of
the Romish communion. Reasons of discontent with the Church of England, and
great affronts of it being presented to me, by J. E. in his Book or Libel
entitled, A Soverain counterpoison, etc. they justly suspecting that I would
slight that onset, out of a dislike to the person, because of his rude and
passionate expressions, have taken care that the same and other motives of
discontent should be proposed by another of greater repute; an aged, and grave
Prelate, renowned for learning and virtue, and one much respected by me. He is
pleased to give me marks of former acquaintance for knowing him, but without
commission of further discovering him to the Reader, then under the character
of N. N.

In the beginning of his Preface, (which came forth in a separate Tractate) he
tells me how much he was surprised and troubled, seeing a Copy (he received in
Print from London) of my Declaration for the Church of England. This paper
indeed (says he) gave me a great heaviness of heart, for I loved the Man
dearly, for his amiable nature and excellent parts, and esteemed him both a
pious person and a learned, and so did all that knew him. And after bemoaning
my fall (as he calls it) from a little heaven, the state of Religion, wherein
(says he) for a time he shined, like a little Star, in virtue and learning, he
declares his anger against me, and purpose of serving me not with the Waters of
Shiloah that go softly, but with those of Rezin more tumultuous, to wash me
from the stains of Heresy.

And after this, leaving me, he falls abruptly on lamenting the miseries of
Ireland, and complaining of injuries done to the natives of it, and justifying
their proceedings in their late Insurrection, which he will not have to be
called Rebellion. In this he spends that Tractate, and then proceeds to the
greater Book designed against me, giving to it this title, The doleful fall of
Andrew Sall, Jesuit of the fourth vow, from the Roman Catholic and Apostolic
faith, lamented by his constant friend, with an open rebuking of his embracing
the Confession contained in the 39. Articles of the Church of England.

This Book he begins with a Rhetorical, or Satirical exclamation against my
resolution of embracing the said Confession: and proceeds to relate at large
the virtues and learning of Saint Hierom, Saint Augustine, Saint Ambrose, and
other holy Doctors of the Church, whose company he says I have forsaken: and
then makes a large list of Heretics of all ages beginning with Luciser, whom he
will have to be the first Heretic before Man's creation, and so coming down all
along by Cain, Lamech, the Giants, Cham, Jannes, and Jambre, with others
mentioned in holy writ, to these of the latter times, relating their execrable
vices and errors; of all which he will have me to be guilty, and an associate
of those Heretics, for embracing the Confession contained in the 39 Articles of
the Church of England. He pretends to discuss, and censure some of them, as
also some parts of my Declaration, and makes a scandalous Narrative of the
English Reformation, and finally concludes with a fervent exhortation to me to
return to the Roman Church.

By this Scheme I deliver of that Book, the prudent Reader may judge how
tedious a labor it were to take notice of every thing contained in it, and how
impertinent, I being so far from what he supposes me to be, and from being
concerned in the Heresies, and for the Heretics he mentions. Yet the quality of
the person, the sacred tie of friendship which he professes for me, and the
good intention I am to believe he had in his writing, and above all the love of
truth obliged me to undeceive him, and others that may be of his opinion, in
the great and gross mistake he is in touching my condition, and that of the
Church of England, whose Communion I have embraced. I will therefore declare,

First, That the Religion we profess in the reformed Church of England, is no
other then the true, Primitive, Catholic, and Apostolic Religion, taught by our
Savior Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, and practiced in the first and purer
ages by the Primitive Church.

Secondly, That we have nothing to do with the Heresies N. N. attributes to us:
and his Brethren practicing such calumnies, do manifest it is not the Spirit of
God that moves them.

Thirdly, That the professors of the Evangelical Doctrine in the Reformed
Churches are not so few or despicable, nor the Romish faction so considerable,
as they would make the Ignorant believe.

Fourthly and lastly, I will refute some seditious Doctrines delivered in his
first Book, that is a preface to the second, and will conclude with a check to
J. E. his calumnies and barbarous abuses fastened on the Protestant Church.

CHAP. II. That the Church of England is a true Catholic Church, and that the
Doctrine professed in it is truly Catholic and Apostolic.
YOu begin the first Chapter of your Book against me, N. N. (under this
character you will be named,) You begin I say, with a Rhetorical exclamation in
these terms, O Sall, tell us what domincering Spirit of darkness, what black
temtation has drawn you out of the house of God? I may justly return for
answer an other exclamation better grounded, and say, O N. N. tell us what
domineering spirit of blindness, what black presumtion is this, that so
generally possesses your faction amidst the light of so learned an age, that a
person of your years and degree should not know, that in the House of my
Heavenly Father there are many Mansions? that it extends further then the
quarters of the Roman Pope? that by quitting his jurisdiction, I forsake not
the whole house of God? But tho you declare to your Reader, that your purpose
is not to deal with me Scholastically, but Historically, that is to say, (as I
find) not by reason, but by railing, and by calumnies, wherewith your usual
armories are plentifully stored, and by emty flourishes upon false grounds; I
will not engage in like manner with you, but prove Scholastically, that is to
say, with formal and solid arguments demonstrate, that in all your cries you
beat the air and not me; that all of them are grounded upon a false
supposition; that by forsaking the Romish communion I did not forsake the
Catholic Church; that the Church of England, whose communion I embraced, is a
very noble and sound member of the Catholic Church, and the Doctrine professed
in it, and proposed to the People for the object of their belief, is truly
Catholic and Apostolic, free from all Heresy and falsehood. And when I have
proved so much in a rational and Scholastic style and method, it will appear
how vain your attemt is of working on me, by loud cries against Heresies
wherein I am not concerned, as if you were hunting a wild Boar in a forest to
drive him by clamor and shouting into your nets. It is reason that wins me, and
whereby I desire to win others, not exclamations and cries of that kind.

I will not repete the just complaints delivered by many learned Writers of the
arrogance of your party, of their absurdity and impropriety of terms in
pretending that they alone are the Catholic, that is to say the Universal
Church, being at the best but a part of it, and the same very corrupt, and not
the greater part but the less by very much, as hereafter will appear.

To go through with my engagement of proving by Scholastical exact reasons,
that the Church of England is a true Catholic Church, I Will take up the
arguments urged against this verity by one of the ablest Schoolmen that ever
wrote in favor of your cause, employed by the Pope against our great and
learned K. James, I mean Francis Suarez Jesuit; I will I say take up the
arguments wherewith this famous Schoolman pretends to rob the Church of England
of the glorious title of a Catholic Church, and declare by that way of arguing
which Logicians after Aristotle do call argumentum mirabile, that they prove
the contrary, and confirm the Church of England in its right to the title of a
true Catholic and Apostolic Church. It will indeed appear a singular triumph of
truth, that the weakest defender of it should wrest Arms out of the hand of the
ablest opposer, and beat him with his own weapons. A trial of this great power
of truth, I offer now to the view of the ingenious Reader in my encounter with
Suarez on this Subject. I will not pursue all the amplifications and excursions
of this voluminous Writer, as not suitable to the brevity and perspicuity I
intend to follow; yet I will take up the foundations of all his arguments upon
this subject, and apply them to my purpose aforesaid.

Franciscus Suarez in his volume entitled, defensio Fidei Catholicae and
Apostolicae adversus Anglicanae sectae errores, in his first Book from the 12.
Chapter of it forward, endeavors to prove, that the Church of England is not a
Catholic Church, and therefore that the Faith of it is not a Catholic Faith.
The first foundation he lays to this purpose is this, that these two things
Catholic Faith and Catholic Church are so united, as the one may not be found
separate from the other, so that no Church may be Catholic wherein the Catholic
Faith is not professed, neither may the Catholic Faith be found in any Church
that is not Catholic. Thence he proceeds to prove, that the Roman Church is
Catholic, because it has a continual succession from the first Church that was
so called, and retains the same Faith which the primitive Catholic Apostolic
Church did profess; for which he cites Tertullian saying, Doctrinam Catholicam
esse in Ecclesia Romanensi, that in the Roman Church Catholic Doctrine is
professed, which is as much (says Suarez) as if he had said, its a Catholic
Church: from all which Suarez concludes n. 13. that the Church of England is
not Catholic, because it is not the Roman Church, nor united with it, and there
is but one Catholic Church, as we confess in the Creed.

How hard a task Suarez has in proving to complete his argument, that in the
present Church of Rome that Faith, and no other, is taught which the ancient
Church called Catholic did teach, may appear by all my former discourses
against their new coined Articles never mentioned in the Primitive Church.

But my present work will be to show, how his argument wherewith he pretends to
prove the Roman Church to be the Catholic, does with more force evince the
Church of England to be truly Catholic. And thus I form it to that purpose. In
whatsoever Church that Faith is professed which was taught in the ancient
Church first called Catholic and Apostolic, that Church is truly Catholic and
Apostolic: In the Church of England Tertul. in praescriptionibus, cap. xx.
is professed that Faith, which was taught by the ancient Church first called
Catholic and Apostolic; therefore the Church of England is truly Catholic and
Apostolic. If we prove the minor proposition, Suarez cannot in justice deny the
consequence. And if he will insist upon his pretention of such a disunion of
his Church with that of England that both may not be Catholic, let the second
consequence be of his own making, that their Church is no Catholic Church: for
it is not my intention to make them worse then the Doctors of the Church of
England do, who allow them to be members, tho corrupt, of the Catholic Church.
The minor proposition wherein the stress of my argument consists, I prove thus;
The Faith taught by the ancient Church, first called Catholic and Apostolic, is
that contained in the three Creeds, that of the Apostles, of N^^e and
Athanasius, profess^d and declared in the first four General Councils, of Nice,
Ephesus, Constantinople and Chalcedon, received by the faithful in the four
first ages of the Christian Church; All this Faith is professed by the Church
of England, as Suarez confesses to have bin declared by King James, and is to
be seen in his Majesty's Epistle to Cardinal Perron written by Isaac Causabon:
Therefore that Faith is taught in the Church of England, which was taught by
the Primitive Church, first called Catholic and Apostolic; and consequently is
a Church truly Catholic and Apostolic, according to the foresaid rule given us
by Suarez, and laid for a foundation of his argument to prove the Roman Church
to be Catholic. And truly it cannot but appear strange, that any Christian, not
blinded with partiality or prejudice, should imagine, that the sacred Apostles,
entrusted to preach saving Doctrine to all the World, should not have given a
sufficient notice of it in the system of Articles they left to us: That those
venerable Fathers of the purer ages of Christianity, congregated in the four
first general Councils, should give us but a diminute account of Catholic and
Apostolic belief: that the Popes Infallibility, Supremacy, and other articles
of latter impression in the Roman Church, should be so essential to Christian
Faith, as none may be saved without a belief of them.

This argument may be confirmed by the testimony of Athanasius related by
Suarez in the chapter above mentioned, number. 2. saying, that the collection of
Articles contained in his Creed is the Catholic Faith: haec est Fides
Catholica, etc. this is the Catholic Faith, which except a Man believe he
cannot be saved: but in the Church of England that Faith called Catholic and
contained in the Creed of Athanasius is believed and professed, therefore if
any Church professing the Catholic Faith is Catholic it self, the Church of
England professing this Catholic Faith, is truly Catholic.

The second foundation laid by Suarez in the same chapter n. 6. to prove that
his Church is Catholic, is to say, that it did in all times profess the Faith
of that Creed, wherein the Church is called Catholic: But the Church of England
does and always did profess the Faith of the same Creed; therefore it has the
same right to the like calling.

The third foundation laid by Suarez from the 15. number. of the said chapter, is
a sign or distinctive used by ancient Fathers for to know a Church or
Congregation truly Catholic, and to distinguish it from another not Catholic;
That whenever any Sect takes its name from the master or teacher of such a
Doctrine, and the followers of it do call themselves by such a name, neither
the Doctrine nor the followers of it are Catholic: For which he alleged the
testimony of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Lactantius, and Others. And the reason or
cause of this distinctive is, that every Heresy brings in some novelty against
the ancient Faith, and new things must have new names whereby to be known and
distinguished from others.

But it is very remarkable how this subtle disputant, otherwise very exact and
formal in his discourses, pretending to rob the Church of England of the name
of Catholic by the principle now mentioned, comes to confirm the same name upon
it, not finding it capable of the foresaid note of a Sect not Catholic. For
pretending to name it from Calvin, he finds an obstacle in it, because Calvin
does not approve a chief Doctrine of it. Then he passes to call it Henrician
from King Henry the Eigth, because from him the Church of England did learn to
acknowledge the King for Head or supreme Governor of the Church in his own
dominions. Against this also he meets with several obstacles, to which I will
add this other very considerable, that this practice of the Church of England
is by many ages more ancient then the time of Henry the Eight, whereas it
allows no other Supremacy to our King over the Church, then such as the Godly
Kings of Israel, and the Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church did
exercise in their respective Dominions, as is declared in the 37. Article, and
in the second Canon of the Church of England. Since Suarez, can not find the
name of Lutheran, Calvinist, Henrician, or any other taken from any particular
Author, or teacher, to be agreeable to this Church, it must follow from the
above mentioned note of a Catholic Church delivered by him, and taken out of
ancient Fathers, that it is a Church truly Catholic, that being the only name
it self own's. And the Preachers of it, praying for our King, do style him
Defender of the Faith truly Catholic and Apostolic; and King James in his
Monitory to the Emperor, and other Christian Princes, styles himself, Defender
of the Faith truly Christian, Catholic and Apostolic, of the ancient and
Primitive Church; and we do all pray heartily, that our Kings may never defend
any other Faith then this.

CHAP. II. Suarez his argument taken from the propriety of the word Catholic,
applied to prove that the Church of England is truly Catholic.
THe fourth foundation laid by Suarez, in the 14th Chap. of his foresaid Book,
to prove that the Church of England is not Catholic, he takes from the
propriety and meaning of the word Catholic. He supposes, that according to the
etymology of the word in Greek, Catholic is the same as Universal, or Common:
which Universality he says is fourfold in relation to the present purpose.
First, as to the matter or object of our belief, that it be entire,
comprehending all points belonging to Christian and saving Faith. Secondly,
that it have an Universal or common reason of belief: which common reason or
rule must be Divine truth, or the Word of God, whereby he gives testimony to
truth, according to that expression of Saint Paul 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. When ye
received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of men, but as it is in truth the word of God. Thirdly, Universality is
required in relation to the degrees and orders of persons, according to that
description of a Church given by Optatus Milevitanus, Lib. 2. contra
Parmenianum. Certa membra sua habet Ecclesia, Episcopos, Presbyteros, Diaconos,
Ministres, and turbam fidelium, that the Church has its certain members,
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Ministers, and a Congregation of the faithful. The
fourth and chief universality required for the propriety of the name Catholic
is, that a Church to be such be extended over all the parts of the Earth,
according to the declaration of the said Optatus, Lib. 2. Contra Donatistas:
ubi ergo erit proprietas Catholici nominis, quod sit rationabilis and ubique
diffusat; that the propriety of the name Catholic requires it should be a
Church rational and diffused over all places.

Suarez endeavors to prove, that all these proprieties of Universality
belonging to a Catholic Church, are wanting to this of England, that it may be
called Catholic. First, as to the material universality or integrity of
Articles necessary to a Catholic Faith, he pretends that the Church of England
is deficient in several Articles, as he promises to prove elsewhere, but at
present singles out as chief that of the Popes Supremacy, which the Church of
England denies, and he promises to prove that it belongs to a Catholic Faith. I
commend Suarez his ingenuity and perspicacity in striking the nail in the head.
This indeed is that stumbling stone and Rock of offense, This is the chief and
I may say the only cause of that irreconcilable disunion of the Roman Church
with us. We know by certain and well authorized Tortura torti, Page 152.
records, that Pope Paul the Fourth offered Queen Elizabeth to approve of the
Reformation, if the Queen would acknowledge his Primacy and the Reformation from
him; and he being dead his Successor Plus the 4. prosecuted the same, as
appears by his letters written the 5 Cambden. Anno 1560.
of Twisden. H. Vind. Cap. IX. n. 5.
May 1560. and sent by Vincentius Parpalia, offering to confirm the Liturgy of
the English Church, if she would acknowledge his Supremacy. This being told by
Sir Roger Twisden (as he relates himself) to an Italian Gentleman versed in
public affairs, together with the grounds on which he spoke it; well, (said the
Gentleman) if this were heard in Rome among religious Men, it would never gain
credit; but with such as have in their hands the maneggi della corte (the
management of the court affairs) it may be held true. And indeed such as know
the spirit of that Court, may easily believe, that if this great point of the
Supremacy, the foundation of their power and grandeur were agreed upon, they
would easily wink at other dissentions. Whereof we have a pregnant testimony
from Bellarmin, Lib. 3. de Ecclesia Cap. 20. asserting, that even such as have
no interior Faith, nor any Christian virtue, are to be taken for members of
the Catholic Church, provided they do but outwardly profess the Faith of the
Roman Church, and subjection to the Pope, tho it be only for some temporal
interest. So ready they are in Rome to embrace all sorts of men, provided they
acknowledge the Popes Supremacy. This being established, all is well; being
denied, the best of Men and soundest Believers in Christ must be damned
Heretics by sentence of that Court.

But I shall declare sufficiently in the 15. Chapter of the 2d part of this
Treatise, how vain the pretense of Suarez and his party is, to make the Popes
Supremacy an article of saving Faith; how unjust and tyrannical an usurpation
it is: how far the best Popes in the Primitive Church were from pretending to
it, and more from pressing it upon Christians as an article of saving Faith.
And indeed it must appear strange to any impartial judgment, that the System of
articles contained in the three Creeds and four first general Councels, which
gained the name of Catholic to the Church first called so, should not suffice
to make a Church Catholic in all times. Therefore the Church of England
professing all those Articles is to be taken for truly Catholic, tho denying
the Popes Supremacy, not contained in the foresaid System, nor ever owned by
the Church first called Catholic, as hereafter will be proved.

As to the second sort of Universality, consisting in taking the Word of God
for a common reason or rule of belief, how can any pretend the Church of
England to be deficient herein, having ever protested that the Word of God
contained in Canonical Scripture is the prime and only rule of its belief,
while the Roman Church denies to stand to this rule, as unable to make out all
the belief it would force upon us. What Suarez pretends, that the Church of
England wants a rule infallible for knowing which is true Scripture, and the
true meaning of it, which they conceive to have themselves in the Popes
infallibility, I shall declare in the eighth Chap. of the 2d part of this
Treatise how vain it is, we having in universal tradition, and in the Writings
of the Holy Fathers, means sufficiently certain for knowing which is the true
Scripture, and which the true meaning of it in points necessary to Salvation.
As for others less necessary, if there be obscurity and diversity of opinions
among our Writers, so is there among theirs, nor could their pretended
Infallibility ever make them agree. Nay among the best and wisest Fathers of
the Church there was always a great diversity of opinions in points not
fundamental, without breach of Catholic and Christian union.

Now concerning the third kind of union or universality, consisting in a
hierarchical order of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, etc. Suarez is much
mistaken in saying, that we have them not true and legal. I will declare at
large from the fifth Chapter following, that we have all the security they
have, of a legal sucession and true ordination of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons. Its their concern we should not be found deficient herein: for any
defect conceived in our hierachy will reflect upon theirs.

Finally touching the fourth manner of Universality, signified by the name
Catholic, that a Church or Faith so called should be extended over all the
Earth, Suarez exceeds much in denying this property to the Church of England or
Faith professed in it, saying it passes not the bounds of British land. To
which is contrary that grave and modest testimony of King James, related by
Suarez in the same place, chapter xv. n 6. Nos Dei benesicio nec numero, nec
dignitate ita sumus contemnendi, qui ^^ono vicinis nostris exemplo praeire
possimis: quandoquidem Christiani orbis omniumque in eo ordinum inde a Regibus
liberisque Principibus usque ad insimae conditionis homines pars prope media in
nostram Religionem consensit. We, by the grace of God, are not so despicable
either for number or dignity, that we may not be a good example to our
Neighbors: whereas near the one half of the Christian World, and all orders of
People in it from Kings and Soverain Princes to the meanest sort of persons,
have already embraced our Religion. I shall declare hereafter from the XIX.
Chapter descending to particulars, that this saying of King James was both true
and modest, and that more then the one half of the Christian World agrees with
the Church of England in unity of Faith, sufficient to render them Catholic:
and that the Church of Rome may cease bragging of her extent, being now come so
short of that latitude which made her swell to the contemt of all other
Christian Churches, now far exceeding her in number and luster of Princes and
Kingdoms embracing the Faith professed in them.

Suarez preventing a check to his argument from this discovery in the XVI.
Chapter number. 4. of his said Book, premises, that this general extension of the
Catholic Church over all the World, is to be understood of extension either by
right or by actual possession, and tho the latter be deficient, the former of
right cannot want, Christ having commanded that his Gospel should be preached
to all the World. But how can Suarez pretend that this right should belong to
the Faith of his Church rather then to that of the Church of England? whereas
this latter preaches only for object of belief the Word of God contained in
the Gospel, and in the other Canonical Scriptures, while the Roman preaches
articles coined by her self, and never given to the Apostles to be preached, as
we shall show abundantly hereafter, refuting the errors of it.

CHAP. IV. The Church of England proved to be Apostolic upon the foundation
laid by Suarez to rob it of that Title.
SVarez, after having used his best endeavors to deprive the Church of England
of her right to the name of Catholic, with so little success as we have seen in
the precedent Chapter, he passes in the 17. Chapter of his foresaid Book, to
rob it of the name of Apostolic, and so to deprive King James of the title he
gives himself of Defender of the Faith truly Catholic and Apostolic.

To prove that the Faith of the Church of England is not Apostolic, he lays
this foundation; that two things are requisite to make a Faith or Doctrine
Apostolic. The first that it proceed in some manner from the Preaching, words
or writings of the Apostles. Secondly, that it be conveyed to us by legal
tradition and succession. The first is contained in those words of St. Paul,
Ephesians. 2.19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow
Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God, and are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. The second requisite is declared by
Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 3. in these words, Traditionem Apostolorum in omni
Ecclesia adest perspicere quae vera velint audire, and habemus annumerare eos
qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis and successores eorum
usque ad nos. Who are willing to hear truth must look upon the tradition of the
Apostles in all Churches, and we can number those that were ordained Bishops by
the Apostles and their successors to our own times.

Suarez pretends these two requisites to be wanting in the Church of England to
merit the Name of Apostolic. First, says he, because the Doctrine of it was
not preached by the Apostles, neither was it taken out of their Doctrine, or
conveyed to us by lawful tradition. Against which position he brings King James
protesting himself to believe, admit and reverence the Canonical Scripture, the
three Creeds, and the first four General Councils, in which sacred fountains he
judged the Apostolic Faith to be contained; and Suarez acknowledges that King
James spoke herein not only his own sense but the sense and belief of the whole
Church of England, which is no small glory to it.

But how can Suarez make out, that the Apostolic Faith and Doctrine is not
sufficiently contained in those sacred Fountains of the Scriptures, Creeds and
Councils received by the Church of England? See Reader and admire his answer.
Tho the Doctrine of the said Books considered in it self (says he) be Catholic
Apostolic Faith (or rather a part of it, for he pretends that all Catholic
Faith is not contained in those fountains) yet as it is received by sectaries,
either it is not Apostlic, or it may not be certainly taken for such. First,
because they cannot be certain whether those Books they receive be Canonical,
or the Councils legal. Secondly, that they cannot be certain of the true
meaning of the Scriptures Creeds or Councils. So that in conclusion, the
Divinity of our Savior, preached by a Romish Priest is Catholic Apostolic
Faith; but not so, when preached by one of the Church of England. I should
indeed think this only consequence to be a sufficient confutation of this
unhappy subtilty of Suarez: but further to his reason; when effectively we are
secured that the Scripture received by us is truly Canonical and Divine, and
our adversaries do allow it, what need is there for quarrelling about the
grounds and motives of our security therein? and touching the sense both of
Scripture, Creeds and Councils; the Se tria symbola in eo se^su interpretari,
quem illis esse voluerunt Patres atque concilia a quibus funt condita atque
descripta.
saying of K. James related by Suarez, n. 9. that he does take the Creeds in
the same sense which the Fathers and Councels by whom they were made were
willing to give to them, well considered, is both pious and prudent. When the
words of a Scripture or article are capable of different senses, all consistent
with Christian verity, and none repugnant to sound Doctrine, it is b^t Catholic
pretty to suspend a firm assent to one, and keep a readiness to adhere to what
may be the real intention of the sacred writer. For example, that article of
the Apostles Creed touching our Saviors descent into Hell, is capable of
different senses in relation to the Hell he descended into. Its a groundless
conjecture of Suarez that King James and the Church of England with him should
deny a real descent, and say he did suffer the pains of Hell in the garden; as
may be seen by the grave discourse of learned Dr. Pearson now Bishop of Chester
upon that article. We believe he descended really into Hell, that is to say
into some place, under the Earth, it may be without any absurdity to the Hell
of the damned, as declared in the second part of this Treatise, c. 27. But
whether it was that Hell or an other subterranean place he descended into, we
may with piety and prudence suspend our judgment, having no Divine oracle to
ground upon the determination of the place.

And Suarez gives us a signal example of this resignation of our intellects to
the intention of the Writer, in a matter less sacred then the Articles of the
Creed, I mean the expressions of Popes touching Indulgencies. Finding
insuperable difficulties, in giving a congruous sense to terms of that art,
which appear nonsense, as those of plena, plenior, plenissima, full, more
full, most full. If full or plenary, how can another be more full, etc. He
confesses not to understand the propriety of these and other expressions used
upon that Subject, but will rest upon the judgment of the Church, which knows
the meaning of those measures, as will be seen in the 39. Chapter. And
certainly all those of his party have need of this kind of resignation to rest
upon, if they will have quiet: for there is no article of Creed or Council
without diversity of Opinions touching the true meaning of it among their
Doctors.

But this Author has more to say to us, that the points, wherein we differ from
the Roman Church, were never taught by any of the Apostles. For example, says
he, to make the King Supreme Governor of the Church, (this nettles him still)
what place of Scripture, what History does warrant this Doctrine? What
Christian or Godly King did practice such a Supremacy over the Church? to which
I say, that we have a warrant for this subjection to our Princes in the words
of St. Paul, Romans XIII. 1. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher powers,
where no distinction is made betwixt the Ecclesa^ic and Secular. We have for
the same practice the examples of the Godly Kings of ^srael, and of Christian
Emperors in the Primit^^e Church, as will be declared hereafter Chap. XV. 1.
And our Doctrine herein, being built thus on the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, appears thereby to be Catholic and Apostolic.

And if any Doctrine of ours be not found grounded upon the same foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, we are all rea^y to make that pious confession of
our great King James, related by Suarez, Chapter XVII. n. 15. Ego vero id
ingenue spondeo, quoties Religionis quam profiteor ullum caput ostendetur non
antiquum, Catholicum, and Apostolicum, sed novitium esse ac recens (in rebus
sc. spectantibus ad sidem) me statim ab eo d^s^essurum. I do faithfully
promise, that whenever any point of the Religion I profess shall be found not
to be ancient, Catholic and Apostolic, but new and modern (as to things
belonging to Faith) I will presently depart from it. This much those of the
Roman Church cannot say with sincerity and truth, since several of their
tenants are not built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, but are
contrary to them, as is declared in the second part of this Treatise. Therefore
our Church and the Faith of it, rather then that of Rome, is truly Catholic and
Apostolic.

CHAP. V. Of the Succession and lawful Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, in the Reformed Church of England.
NOthing is affirmed more confidently, nothing more blindly believed by most of
the Romish party, then the nullity of the Protestant Clergy, that our Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, are not such effectively, but nominally, or by title, and
therefore unable to give Orders they have not, or administer Sacraments
depending upon such Orders. This I find by experience to be the greatest stop,
many of the more sober and serious of them have, in embracing the Communion of
the Church of England. They see clearly nothing is asserted by it which may be
thought Heretical or erroneous. And what it denies of superstructures added in
latter Ages by the Roman Church, they easily perceive them not to be essential
to Salvation. Their main scruple is, whether in this separation of the reformed
Churches from the Roman, a lawful succession of Bishops and Ministers was
retained, and a legal ordination of them continued: whether they may live and
die confidently relying upon the Ministry of the reformed Ministers for
consecrating, absolving, etc. without recourse to a Romish Priest.

This point I find to be so necessary for settling the minds of many in this
wavering age, that I thought convenient to examine it exactly, as far as may
consist with the brevity and clearness I aim at in this writing. To relate the
reproaches and calumnies of Romish Writers against our Ministry were endless
and impertinent. The shorter and readiest way will be, to show the truth and
right of our cause by positive undeniable arguments touching the lawful
succession and due Ordination of our Clergy. This being established, old
stories and slanders will fall of themselves. Who would not think it
impertinent in me to take notice of that very rude and ridiculous fable, of the
Ordination of Parker and others at the Naggs-head in Cheapside, most vigorously
and demonstratively refuted many years ago by Mr. Mason, and unhappily revived
of late by a certain Gentleman to his own great shame and discredit of his
cause, being evidently convicted of Impostures, by the Lord Bishop Bramhal in a
separate Treatise printed upon that Subject? Such base stuff as this, if
suitable to ears possessed with fury and blind passion, is unworthy of any
mention or regard among serious and sober Men.

Now coming to the point, after much reading and serious consideration upon the
matter, I wish heartily, I could find the succession of lawful Bishops so clear
and not interrupted in the Roman Church, from the Apostles times to the
Reformation, as we are able to show it in ours from the beginning of the
Reformation to our own days. It shall not be my present work to take notice of
doubts occurring touching the former. It will suffice for my purpose to
demonstrate, that from the beginning of Henry the Eight his reign (when no
doubt was of the legality of our Clergy) to this day, there has bin a lawful
uninterrupted succession and due Ordination of Bishops and other Inferior
Clergy in the Churches of England and Ireland. If the testimony of an adversary
will avail, we have that of Cudsem. de desper. Calvini causa, Cap. 11. page 108.
Cudsemius, who came into England the year 1608. to observe the state of our
Church, and the order of our Universities. Concerning the state of the
Calvinian Sect in England, (says he) it so stands, that either it may endure
long or be changed suddenly, or in a trice, in regard of the Catholic order
there, in a perpetual line of their Bishops, and the lawful succession of
Pastors received from the Church, for the honor whereof we use to call the
English Calvinists by a milder term, not Heretics but Schismatics.

Bellarmin is peremtory upon the contrary saying of all the Reformed Churches:
nostri temporis haeretici neutrum habent, id est nec ordinationem nec
successionem, the Heretics of our times have neither ordination nor succession.

Whatsoever be said of other reformed Churches, which I leave to speak for
themselves upon this point, we have clear evidences to show the falsity of the
Cardinals assertion as relating to the Reformed Church of England, and the more
criminal as more wilful calumny of Bristow, Harding, Sanders, Kellison apud
Masonli^. 1. cap. 2. Vindiciae Eccle^ae Anglicanae.
Bristow, Harding, Sanders, Howlet, Kellison, and other English Romanists,
whose malice must be Diabolical, or their ignorance supine and unexcusable, in
slandering their Country with what they knew, or easily might know to be an
untruth, as that stranger Cudsemius with due inquiry came to know.

For evidencing this point, of so great importance, Papists Prisoners in
Framblingham Castle, in Queen Elizabeth's time related by Mr. Mason. 1 Book 3.
Chap. of his English Edition.
that it was the cry of Papists to the Protestant Clergy in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and is still the challenge of many among them, if you can justify our
calling, we will come to your Church and be of your Religion; I am to premise
first as to matter of fact, that in all prudence, I am to rely with more
satisfaction upon the public authentic records of the Church and state of
England, touching the transactions of both, then upon the report of declared
bitter Enemies, such as those of the Romish faction are known to be. Whereas it
cannot but appear morally impossible, in any impartial judgment, that in so
grave, and wise a Nation as England is known to be, the Lords and Officers of
Church and State, should conspire and agree in deluding posterity with false
records. And on the other side, the Romish party is found guilty, by uncessant
experiences of aspersing, without measure or regard of truth, the protestant
cause and all defenders of it. Whereof the story of Ordination, at the
Nags-head, confidently revived of late by one of a great calling, and confuted
to his shame and confusion by the Lord Primate Bramhall, may be a conspicuous
evidence. To which I could add not a few more of my own experience and certain
knowledge. They got a great Person to relate in Dublin, that I was struck Dumb
at making of my Declaration in the Church of Cashel, and that I fell suddenly
Dead soon after, going in the Street. A miracle I suppose is put by this time
into the annual letters of Rome and Indies, to terrify others from following my
Example. An other Person of like quality was employed to testify, that after
my foresaid Declaration made at Cashel, an extraordinary concourse of People
being present at it, I went to a Noble-Mans House where my habitation was
formerly, and said Mass in it: whereas I was not out of the Archbishops
company from that day, until I came to Dublin with a considerable number of Men
and Arms to guard me. And after some Months constant retirement in the College
of Dublin, without ever lying out of it, or going abroad, but seldom to the
Castle, and few houses of the chief Prelates and Nobility, an Irish Papist told
confidently to one of my Lord Chancellors Gentlemen, (who related it to me
after) that he saw me few days before saying Mass at Kilkullen Bridge (where I
was not in some years before that time) after my public Sermon of Recantation
at Dublin; and the Gentleman asking how that could possibly be so, I being in
their sight and company, and never out of Dublin all that time, he took a Book
into his hand, and swore by it, that what he said was true. At this very
instant it happened, that I should come out of Christ-Church from Prayers in
company of an other Gentleman of the College, and my Lord Chancellors Gentleman
seeing me, asked of the swearer whether he did know me if he saw me: he
answered, yea; and asking whether I was of those two that went by, he said no.
But being told I was one of them, he confessed that he never saw me before. So
punctual as this are their reports of us. If they were but seldom, we might
take them for mistakes; but seeing them so frequent, and continual, we have too
much ground for suspecting a set purpose of imposing upon us, especially their
most creditable Doctors, teaching them, that it is lawful to raise false
testimonies in defense of their credit, that their opposers may not be
believed. The authors of this godly Doctrine, confessors and Preachers to
Emperors and Princes, you may see quoted by John Caramuel, Titular Bishop of
Misia in Theologia fundamentali, fundamento 55. n. 1589. This being so, it
appears how little credit is due to their testimonies against our cause and
persons.

I premise secondly, that by sacred orders a character indelible is given to
the person ordained whether Bishop, Priest or Deacon, that is to say a
spiritual sign or ability to certain functions incapable of being taken away by
humane power, or accident. So it is defined in the Council of Trent. sess. 7.
can. 9. Si quis dixerit in tribus sacramentis, Baptismo sc. Confirmatione and
Ordine, non imprimi characterem in anima, hoc est signum quoddam spirituale and
indelibile, unde ea iterari non possunt, anathema esto. If any shall say that
in these three Sacraments, Baptism, Confirmation and Order, a character is not
left in the Soul, viz. a spiritual and undelible sign (which is the cause they
may not be repeted) let him be anathema. It is not my present business to
dispute with the Council, upon what account it calls Confirmation and Order
Sacraments, but to note, that by it is defined, that sacred orders do leave a
character indelible, and that they ought not to be reiterated upon the same
person. The same Doctrine is delivered again in the 23. sess. 3. can. of the
same Council, adding, that who was once a Priest can never be made a Layman.
And in the eighth Council of Toledo cap. 7. and in the Council of Florence
under Eugenius the 4th in decre. de unione. Hence follows says Bellarmine,
that no superior power can hinder a Bishop from confirming and ordaining, if
he pleases to do it. And Peter Sotus says, that doubtless no Heresy,
excommunication, or even degradation, takes away the power of Orders, tho the
use of them may be unlawful; so as tho a Heretic, excommunicated or degraded
person, sin in giving Orders, or administering Sacraments, yet the actions are
valid: for where such a character is, says Bellarmine, God, in force of a
Covenant, does concur to produce a supernatural effect, to wit to give an other
Character even Episcopal.

Bellarmine de confir. cap. 12.
Peter Soto lect. 5. de inst. Sacer. lin. 5 fol. 279. edit. diling. an. 1560.
Ubicunque est talis character Deus ex pacto concurrit ad effectum
supernaturalem producendum. Bellar. de Sacramentorum effectu lib. 2. c. 19.
These two premises supposed, for examining the matters of fact, which is the
ground and foundation of this work, we are to rely upon the public authentic
Records of the Church of England, faithfully produced by Mr. Francis Mason, and
truly examined at the request of Mr. Fitz Herbert, who seeing a mortal wound
given to the Romish calumnies, against the lawful ordination of English Clergy,
by this narrative of Mr. Mason, desired that those Records related by Mr. Mason
should be shown to some learned persons of the Romish communion; which was
accordingly don by the most Reverend Father in God George Archbishop of
Canterbury, who having read this challenge in Fitz. Herberts Book, called to
him Mr. Collington, then reputed Archipresbyter, Mr. Laithwait, and Mr.
Faircloath Jesuits, and Mr. Leagume a secular Priest. All these being brought
before the Archbishop the 12. of May 1614. in presence of the Right Reverend
Bishops of London, Dunelm, Ely, Bath and Wells, Lincoln, and Rochester, the
said Records were given to them to see, feel, read, and turn; and having
considered all exactly, they declared that no exception could be taken against
that Book in their opinion; and the Archbishop desiring them to signify so
much by letters to Fitz Herbert, they promised to do it; as Mr. Champney
relates the story. And the same Records are at this day, and always to be
seen, if men will not be satisfied otherwise then by eyesight.

Fitz Herbert, Append. n. 13.

The Records produced by Mr. Mason being thus justified, we will take our
measures by them to clear this point. First our adversaries allow us, that the
Bishops ruling in England at the beginning of Henry the Eighth his Reign, were
lawful Bishops, and legally ordained according to the Canons and rites of the
Catholic Church. With Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury they begin their
quarrel. Against him, the Kings and Clergy of England, Becan insults thus.
Legitime consecrati non estis. A quo enim? an a Rege? at is consecrandi
potestatem non habet. An ab Episcopo Cantuariensi, vel aliquo simili? ne id
quidem. Nam Thomas Cranmerus, qui sub Hemico 8o Cantuariensem Episcopatum
obtinuit, non fuit consecratus ab ullo Episcopo, sed a solo Rege intrusus and
designatus; igitur quotquot ab eo postea consceratisunt, non legitime, sed ex
praesumtione consecrati sunt. You are not lawfully consecrated: for by whom
were you? Whether by the King? but he has not power to consecrate: or by the
Bishop of Canterbury, or some other such? neither that truly: for Thomas
Cranmer, who under King Henry the Eighth obtained the Bishopric of Canterbury,
was not consecrated by any Bishop, but intruded and designed by the King alone;
therefore as many as were afterward consecrated by him, were not consecrated
lawfully but by presumtion.

I cannot but note Becan's disingenuity, in deluding thus his Reader, as if he
would have him believe, that the Kings of England did take upon them, to
consecrate Bishops themselves, or to thrust into the Government of Churches men
not consecrated, contrary to what he knew well, or might easily know to be
true, having Popes, Cardinals, Priests and Jesuits to a^^ertain him of it, such
as were Clement the seventh, Paul the fourth, Cardinal Allen, Parsons,
Kellison, whose manifold testimonies of Cranmer to have been a true Bishop
Mason relates lib. 2. cap. 7. adding for farther evidence this following
testimony of the time, place, and persons ordaining him out of the public
Records.

Thomas Cranmerus consecratus 30. Martij, 1533. 24. Hen. a Joh. Lincolniensi
Joh. Exoniensi Hen. Asaphensi


Against all these evidences Henry Fitz Symon^ takes up the cudgils in defense
of Becan's assertion, that Cranmer was not consecrated by any Bishop but a mere
Layman, intruded upon that see of Canterbury by Henry the Eighth his sole will.
This he promises to demonstrate, a gravissimorum totius gentis authorum
monumentis and consularibus actis, by the testimonies of the most grave Authors
of the Nation, and public Act of Parliament. Seeing these big words, and
knowing upon what subject, I could not but sigh and grieve, remembering how
these Rhetoricians do delude poor credulous People with such swelling phrases,
founding high in the ears of Boys and Women, and of Womanish weak Men:
whereas being touched close they are found to be no better than a bubble,
floating pompously, and containing naught but wind.

Where he promises the testimonies of the gravest Authors of the Nation, in
favor of his pretension, he only brings one testimony: and of whom? of some
impartial writer? No, but of Sander. de Schism. lib. 3. page 296.
Sanders, the most passionate and bitter Enemy of the reformed Clergy that
could be named. But even his testimony how much to Fitz Simons purpose? he
relates these words of him: Henricus 8. radix peccati, cum ab Ecclesia and sede
Apostolica Regnum suum divisisset, decrevit ne quisquam electus in Episcopum
bullas Pontificias, vel mandatum Apostolicum de consecratione requireret, sed
regium tantum diploma afferret. Henry the E^ghth the source of evil, having
separated his Kingdom from the Church, and from the Sea Apostolic, has
decreed, that no Bishop elect should look for Bulls from the Pope for his
consecration, but only should bring the Kings Patent. And here Fitz Symons
stops fraudulently, pretending his unskilful Reader should understand by those
words, that the King did give the title of Bishops without any consecration.
But the words following of Sanders do overthrow his purpose, which run thus;
Sed Regium tantum diploma afferret, secundum quod a tribus Episcopis cum
consensu metropolitae ordinatus, jubebatur lege comitiorum facta ad imitationem
antiquorum canonum, esse verus Episcopus, nec alio modo ordinatum pro Episcopo
agnosci oportere, That he should bring the Kings mandat, according to which the
person ordained by three Bishops, with the consent of the Metropolitan, was by
Act of Parliament, made in imitation of ancient Canons, declared to be a true
Bishop, and that any person otherwise ordained should not be taken for a
Bishop. And is this to say that Henry the Eighth should give the title of
Bishops to, and intrude upon Churches, Persons without any consecration?

Truly this defense of Becan by Fitz Symons, is like the cause defended, both
guilty of fraud and disingenuity, so as we may call it malae causae pejus
patrocinium, of a bad cause a worse defense. Ke^lison in replic. contra Doct.
Sut. p. 30.
Kellison is more ingenious, saying thus: Cranmerum vere ordinatum non nego,
quia ab Episcopis Catholicis munus consecrationis accepit, ita and vixisse eum
and mortuum esse verum Episcopum fateor. I do not deny that Cranmer was truly
ordained, having received his ordination from Catholic Bishops: so as I confess
he lived and died a true Bishop. Let now the Author of Britonomachy, (I mean
Fitz Symons) come and reconcile this piece of Romanomachy. In the mean time, be
it concluded, that their testimonies against Cranmer are like those of the
false witnesses against Christ, which did not agree together. Mark XIV. 56. And
let that blessed Martyr, canonized by Christ for such, where he declared
blessed them that suffer persecution for justice, as Cranmer did for doing
justice to his King and Country, in maintaining their right against the
tyrannical usurpations of the Court of Rome, let him I say enjoy in glory the
indelible character of Bishop, which all the malice of his adversaries will
never be able to take from him. And let their calumny against the Church of
England be confounded, wherewith they pretend the ordination of our Clergy to
have been vitiated in that of Cranmer.

By this it appears, that all Bishops made in King Henry the Eighth his reign,
were true and lawful Bishops, as being consecrated by three Bishops, and
according to the accustomed rites of the Catholic Church, it being 25. Henr. 8.
c. 20.
enacted then, that the Consecrations should be solemnized with all due
circumstance, and moreover that the Consecrators should give to the consecrated
all benedictions, ceremonies, and things requisite for the same. And if thing
essential were abolished or omitted, certainly Sanders speaking purposely of
this point, would not have concealed it. But he rather says plainly, Sanders
de Schism. lib. 3. p. 29^.
it was King Henry's will, that the ceremony and solemn unction, should as yet
be used in Episcopal Consecration after the manner of the Church. But the ^
Mariae sess. 2. c. 2.
Statute of Qu. Mary puts the matter out of all doubt, enacting, that all
such Divine service and administration of Sacraments, as were most commonly
used in this Realm of England in the last Year of King Henry 8. should be used
and frequented through the whole Realm of England and all other the Queens
Dominions, and no other in any other manner, form, or degree. The makers of
this statute were of opinion, that Holy order was a Sacrament, and therefore
was administered in Queen Mary's time, as in King Henry's. They will not
pretend, that any form essential was omitted in Queen Mary's time, and
consequently must say the same of Orders given in King Henry's reign.

What Bishops, when, and by whom they were consecrated during King Henry the 8.
his time, Mr. Mason relates out of the public Records; as Thomas Cranmer in the
Year 1533. as above mentioned, next after,

Rowland Lee Conse. B. of Lichfield, 14. of Apr. 1534. by Thom. Canterb. John
Lincoln. Christ. Sidon.


George Brown Con. Arch-Bish. of Dub. 19. Mar. 1535. by Thom. Canterb. John
Roffens. Nichol. Sarum.


And so of the rest, until the year 1545. every one being consecrated by three
Bishops, and with the usual ceremonies, and the great penalty of praemunire
being denounced by Act of 2 5. Henr. 8. c. 20.
Parliament against any Bishop consecrating or consecrated otherwise.

CHAP. VI. The ordination of Bishops, Priests and D^acons in King Edward the
Sixth his time and after, proved to be legal and valid.
THe greatest opposition is against the ordination of our Clergy since the
Reformation of the ordinal Vasquez, to. 3. in 3. p. disp. 240. c. 5.
or ceremonies of ordination in time of King Edward the sixth of which,
Kellison speaks thus; in King Edwards time neither matter nor form of
ordination was used, and so none were truly ordained. Against this rash and
slanderous censure of Kellison, I will produce the testimony of Vasquez and
Bellarmine, men of greater credit and knowledge touching the matter and form of
ordination. Vasqu. declares the matter of Episcopal ordination to be only the
imposition of hands, and the form those words, receive the ^oly Ghost, which
are said by three Bishops together, and relates Major, and Armilla for the same
opinion, proving it first out of Scripture, 1 Timot. IV. 14. Neglect not the
gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy with the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery. Out of which place Kellis. reply to Dr. Sutlif fol
31.
Vasquez thus argues solidly, unde sequitur manifest eam mannum impositionem
esse materiam, ac proinde verba quae simul cum ea proferuntur, esse formam. Nam
gratia Sacramentalis in ipsa applicatione materiae and formae, and per ipsam
confertur. Whence follows manifestly, that such imposition of hands is the
matter, and consequently the words pronounced with it the form: for Sacramental
grace is conferred in the very application of the matter and form and by it.
Then he proceeds to prove by testimonies of Fathers, that three Bishops ought
to concur in the Ordination of a Bishop, and that what is not performed by all
three, belongs not to the essential matter or form. But in all the Roman
Pontifical, says he, no other ceremony is appointed to be performed by three
Bishops, but only the imposition of hands, therefore that alone must be the
matter, and consequently only the words pronounced with it the form of
Episcopal Ordination.

That three Bishops are necessary for ordaining a Bishop, (which was a
foundation laid by him for the former argument), he proves, first by the the
testimony of Pope Anacletus, Anaclet. in Epist. 2 decretali, c 2. Anicetus,
Damas. and alnapod Valgoez. 243. c. 6. an. 63.
affirming that the first Archbishop of Jerusalem, James called the just,
Brother of the Lord according to the flesh, was ordained by Peter, James, and
John Apostles, giving therein a rule to successors, that a Bishop should not be
ordained by less then three Bishops. Anacletus adds, that he learned so much
from St. Peter, by whom he was himself Priested. Secondly, Pope Anicetus
delivers the same, adding it was so practiced instituente Domino, by the
institution of Christ. Thirdly, he alleges the first Council of Nice, with
several other Councils and Fathers to the same purpose.

If you oppose, that the foresaid words, Receive the Holy Ghost are too general
for a form to ordain a Bishop: he answers, that being pronounced by three
Bishops laying their hands upon the Person ordained, they specify the degree of
a Bishop, since thereby they signify, that they receive him to their own
proper order and degree: the conjunction of three Bishops laying their hands
upon the person ordained, being only proper to the ordaining of a Bishop, as he
proves Disp. 243. c. 6. Thus much Vasquez, Disp. 246. n. 60.
Vasquez touching the matter and form of Episcopal ordination.

Pellar. de Sacra. in Genesis lib. 1. c. 18.
Bellarmine contributes not little to the proof of this verity (tho with less
coherence to another Doctrine he supposes, as I will declare after.) For
speaking of Sacraments in general, he says, that all Sacraments of the new Law
are composed of visible things as matter, and of words, as form. And Idem de
Sacra. ordinis. c. 9.
coming to speak of Holy Order, which he supposes to be a Sacrament, he says
that there is no mention in Scripture of any visible sign that may be a matter
of it, but only the imposition of hands. Whence it follows, that holy Order
being of Divine institution, and declared in Scripture, as he proves well, the
essential constitutes of it must be likewise in Scripture. And therefore no
other visible sign or matter proportionable for it being in Scripture, it
follows that only the imposition of hands must be the matter of it.

How well this agrees with what Bellarmine in the same place supposes, but
proves not, that in the Ordination of a Priest, not only the imposition of
hands, but also the delivering of the chalice and patin belong to the essential
matter, let him consider. He quotes Dominic Soto, and others saying, that the
delivering the chalice with Wine, and the patin with Bread, is the only matter,
and the words pronounced by the Bishop delivering them, is the form of
Ordination of the Priest, the words are these, accipe potestatem offerendi
Sacrificium, take power of offering a Sacrifice. Bellarmine proves
efficaciously, that the imposition of hands is a matter essential to
Ordination, but supposes without exhibiting any proof of it, that the
delivering of the chalice and patin is also a part essential of the matter,
saying against Sotus, that not only the delivering of the Instruments, but also
the imposition of hands, is a matter essential in the ordination. This I say
seems not to agree well with what he said before, that in Scripture no mention
was made of any Symbol, that could be taken for a matter of Ordination, but
only the imposition of hands. And truly the proof he alleges out of Sotus or
others, that the words of their Pontifical, accipe potestatem offerendi
Sacrificium provivis and defunctis, are contained in those others of our
Savior at the last Supper, hoc facite in meam commemorationem, Do this in
remembrance of me, is notoriously weak: gratis dicitur, gratis negatur; as it is
said without ground, so it may be denied without regard.

Now as to the form of Ordination Bellar. de Sacramento Ordinis lib. 1. c. 9.
Bellarmine tells us, that all agree in taking for form the words that are
pronounced by the minister when he exhibits the sensible signs or matter, he
adds, that tho the Scripture does not mention particular words to be pronounced
in each order, yet the ancient Fathers of the Church, Ambrose, Jerome, and
Augustine, do expressly teach, that a form of words suitable to each Order is
required, and was practiced so in the ancient Roman Ordinals, and so is
practiced to this day in the Ordinal of the Church of England, which in King
Edward the sixth his time was disposed according to the more qualified ancient
Ordinals used in the Catholic Church. In the Ordination of Deacons, the Bishop
lays his hands severally upon the Head of every one of them, kneeling before
him, saying, Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon in the
Church of God committed unto thee, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, etc. After delivering to every one of them the New
Testament, he says, Take thou authority to read the Gospel in the Church of
God, and to preach the same, if thou be thereto licensed by the Bishop himself.

In ordaining Priests, the Bishop, with the Priests present, do lay their hands
severally upon the Head of every one that receives the order of Priesthood,
the Receivers kneeling, and the Bishop saying, Receive the Holy Ghost for the
office and work of a Priest in the Church of God now committed unto thee by the
imposition of our hands: whose Sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven; and
whose Sins thou do retain, they are retained; and be thou a faithful
dispenser of the word of God and of his holy Sacraments, in the Name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

In the consecration of Bishops, the Archbishop and Bishops present, do lay
their hands upon the Head of the elected Bishop kneeling before them and the
Archbishop, saying,

Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a Bishop in the Church of
God now committed unto thee, by the imposition of our hands, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. And remember that thou
stir up the Grace of God which is given thee by this imposition of our hands:
for God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of power, and love and
soberness.

The Church of England being thus exact in observing the form and matter
essential to holy Orders, it appears how rash and false was Kellison, in
saying, that in King Edwards time neither matter nor form of Ordination was
used. How vain and windy Fitz Symons Britonomach. p. 3^9.
Fitz Symons his flourish, cum in Sacramento mutatur materia, forma, intentio
faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, quae ejus essentiam conficiunt, desinit esse
Sacramentum, omnium qui ante te vixerunt, tecum vivunt, and post te victuri
sunt, orthodoxe sentientium consensu. When in the Sacrament the matter, form,
and intention of doing what the Church does (which make up the essence of it)
are changed, it ceases to be a Sacrament, by the common consent of all
Catholics that lived before you, do live with you, and after you shall live.
Truly Fitz Symons seemed to study more how his phrase should be round and
sounding, then to furnish it with sense and truth, so as without injury I may
say here of him, dat sine mente sonum. Setting aside what belongs to the matter
and form; who told Fitz Symons that the Ministers of the Church of England in
the administration of Sacraments have not an intention to do what the true
Church of God does? And tho their intention were to do expressly what their own
Church of England does and not what the Church of Rome, Bellarmin declares that
not to be an alteration annulling the Sacrament: non est opus intendere quod
facit Ecclesia Romana, sed quod facit vera Ecclesia quaecunque illa sit, vel
quod Christus instituit, vel quod faciunt Christiani; imo si quis intendat
facere, quod aliqua Ecclesia particularis and falsa, ut Genevensis, and
intendat non facere quod Ecclesia Romana, respondeo etiam id sufficere: nam qui
intendit facere quod Ecclesia Genevensis, intendit facere quod Ecclesia
universalis: It is not necessary, says Bellarmin, to have an intention of
doing what the Church of Rome does, but what the true Church which soever that
be: nay if he should intend to do what some particular false Church which he
thinks to be true, as that of Geneva (says the Cardinal) even that will
suffice: for he that intends to do what the Church of Geneva Bellar. de Sacra.
in Genesis lib. 2. c. 27.
does, intends to do what the Universal Church does, of which he believes the
Church of Geneva to be a member. Then Fitz Symons was mistaken when he said,
that the supposed alteration in the intention of the Ministers did annul the
Sacrament by consent of all Catholics, if he will not have Bellarmine to be put
out of that number; not to take notice of his extravagancy in making the
intention of the Minister, an essential constitute of the Sacrament, nor of the
dismal confusion and discomfort he brings upon his proselytes, by making the
effects of Sacraments depending upon the foresaid intention, whereof no Man
receiving a Sacrament can have a full certainty: the words of the Minister I
can hear and his action I can see, but of his intention I can never be entirely
assured.

Then if the matter and form of Order necessary and essential be retained in
our Church, as we have seen, and no reasonable doubt is left of the intention
of our Ministers to do what the Church of England does (which according to
Bellarmin's supposition now mentioned is sufficient,) How comes Fitz Symons to
say, that in the matter, and form, and intention of our Ministers, such
alteration is made as annulls our Sacraments?

CHAP. VII. How far the form of Ordination used in the Church of England,
agrees with that of the ancient C^^rch, declared in the fourth Council of
Carthage, and how much the form prescribed by the Roman Pontifical of this
time, differs from the ancient f^rm.
AS in many other points, so in this of Crdination especially, I cannot but
admire how bold the Romish Writers are in imposing upon the ignorant, that
themselves are the observers of antiquity, and the Reformed Churches the
contemners of it: whereas indeed the main purpose of the Reformation was, to
cut off the superstitious innovations of the Romish Church, and sti^k to the
Christian simplicity and gravity of the Primitive Apostolic Church. This will
appear evidently by comparing the present form of Ordination used in the Church
of England, with the most qualified of ancient formularies established in the
fourth Council of Carthage, celebrated by 214. Fathers (whereof St. Augustine
was one) in the year 398. Honorius and Arcadius being Emperors, of which
Council Baronius gives this honorable Character, Extitit hujusmodi
Carthaginense Concilium, veluti Ecclesiasticae promtuarium disciplinae, non
quidem recens inventae, sedantiquioribus Baron. An. 393. n. 68.
usu receptae, atque ad pristinam consuetudinem revocatae. This Council of
Carthage was as it were a treasure of Ecclesiastic Discipline, not newly
invented, but used by the ancient, and restored to the former custom. He adds
that this Council was taken as a pattern by the other Churches, both Eastern
and Western.

I have perused carefully this Council, and conferred it with our form of
ordination set down in the Book of Common Prayers, as also with the form of
Ordination used in the Roman Church, as contained in their latter Po^tifical,
published by Authority of Pope Clement the 8. and printed at Rome in the year
1595. Clement complains of many errors crept into the former Pontificals, and
purposes to mend them in this latter according to the rule of ancient
integrity: for which purpose, it seems, no better rule could be taken then the
foresaid Council of Carthage, for the reasons aforesaid of Baronius.

Now if we show, that our form of Ordination is more agreeable to that of the
Council of Carthage, then the form prescribed in the Roman Pontifical, we shall
prove that we stand for the most warrantable antiquity, and consequently for
right in this point. I will not dispute now about those called inferior Orders
in the Roman Church, both because none will pretend them to be essential to
Church Discipline, and the duties appropriated to them are performed in both
Churches, sometimes by persons constituted in no order, and sometimes by those
in sacred Orders. I will therefore only treat of the three sacred orders
proposed by Suarez, out of Optatus Milevitanus, as necessary to the
constitution of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, to wit Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

And beginning with Deacons, the said Council in the fourth chapter has only
these words, Diaconus cum ordinatur, solus Episcopus, qui eum benedicit, manum
super caput illius ponat, quia non ad sacerdotium sed ad ministerium
consecratur. When a Deacon is ordained, only the Bishop, who blesses or
ordains him, is to lay his hand on his Head, because he is not ordained to
Priesthood but to ministry. Here we have three things declared, the Minister,
the matter, the order: the Minister is only the Bishop: the matter or the
exterior sign, is the imposition of hands: the form is not described in
particular, but is included in the word benedicit: for to bless here is nothing
else but to pronounce the words by which the power of this order is conferred
to the Person ordained; all which is exactly performed in the Ordinationof
Deacons by the Church of England, as we have seen in the Chapter precedent.

Now touching the Ordination of Priests, the Council decrees thus, Presbyter
cum ordinatur, Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super caput illius tenente,
etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt manus suas juxta manus Episcopi
super Caput illius teneant. When a Priest is ordained, the Bishop blessing him
and laying his hand on his Head, the Priests present are likewise to lay their
hands on his Head together with the Bishops hands. Of this decree likewise the
Church of England is as observant, as the Roman is negligent: for in their
present Pontifical above mentioned of Clement the Eighth, I see no mention made
of what the Council decrees, that the Priests present should lay their hands
together with the Bishops hands upon the Head of him that is to be Priested,
and their practice goes accordingly. But in lieu of this ceremony decreed by
the Council of Carthage, I find many others substituted in the foresaid
Pontifical of which the Council makes no mention, such as those about the
amict, albe, girdle, maniple, stole, cope, candles, crosses, oil, and the like.
And which is more remarkable, the Council makes no mention of that great and
chief ceremony used in the Roman Church and appointed in the aforesaid
Pon^ifical, and wherein some of their Authors will have the very essence of
Priestly ordination to consist, as we have seen above out of Bellarmin, that
the Bishop is to deliver to the person to be Priested, after having anointed
his hands with holy Oil, the Chalice with wine and water, and the Patin over it
with the host or wafer, saying, Accipe potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo,
missasque celebrare tam pro vivis, quam per defunctis, Receive power to offer
sacrifice unto God, and to celebrate Mass for the living and the dead. If this
ceremony were so essential, or the power of sacrificing were so inherent to
Priestly ordination, as the present Church of Rome will have it to be,
certainly that grave and venerable Council of Carthage would not have passed it
over with so deep a silence, when it descended to particularize the duties and
performances of inferior Ministers not so necessary as those of Priests, as
may be seen in the ensuing Chapters of that Council from the fifth chapter
forward.

Finally touching the Ordination of Bishops, the aforesaid Council of Carthage
has these words, Episcopus cum ordinatur, duo Episcopi ponant and teneant
Evangeliorum Codicem super Caput and cervicem ejus, and uno super eum fundente
benedictionem, reliqui omnes Episcopi qui adsunt manibus suis Caput ejus
tangant. When a Bishop is ordained, let two Bishops put and hold the Book of
the Gospels over his head and neck, and one blessing him, let all the other
Bishops that are there present touch his Head with their hands. Here three
things are required, the giving or placeing of the Book, the imposition of
hands, and the blessing to be given, whereof the placeing of the Book is no
essential part, as Vasquez in 3. p. disp. 240. w. 63.
Vasquez declares, and so both Churches deviate something from the form
mentioned: for if we are to believe Vasquez, and the Pontifical he quotes, the
Book of the Gospel is put upon the shoulders of the Bishop consecrated, not by
the Bishops consecrating, but by one of the Chaplains; and he relates out of
Pope Clement, that anciently it was performed by the Deacons, who are no
Ministers of this Order. Neither do I find by Mr. Mason, that the Pontifical he
saw, does contradict what Vasquez says; yet I find it otherwise, in the Roman
Pontifical forementioned of Clement the Eighth, to be seen in the Library of
Dublin University; where it is ordered, that the Bishop consecrating, together
with the Bishops assisting to help him, do place the Book over the neck and the
shoulders of the Bishop consecrated, without saying any word, one of the
Chaplains of the Bishop elect kneeling behind him, and holding the Book, until
it be given to his hands; and then the Bishop consecrating, and the other
Bishops assisting him, do touch with both their hands the head of the Bishop
elect, saying, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, Receive the Holy Ghost. And in
supposition that the mode of placeing the Book is not essential to this
Ordination, certainly the form prescribed by the Church of England in this
particular is very decent and apposite to the purpose of this action: the
Archbishop, or other Bishop consecrating, delivering the Bible to the Bishop
consecrated, saying, give heed unto reading, exhortation and Doctrine, with
other wholesome admonitions touching his pastoral duty.

Now touching the essential parts of this ordination, which do consist in the
imposition of hands as matter, and the benediction, or words pronounced by the
Bishop consecrating, as form, the Church of England is exact in observing the
form prescribed by the foresaid Council of Carthage; since it orders, that all
the Bishops present should lay their hands upon the Bishop elect, and only the
Archbishop or Bishop consecrating, should bless or pronounce the words of the
form, saying, Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a Bishop in the
Church of God now committed unto thee, by the imposition of our hands, in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ch^st. Here the Roman
Pontifical deviates from the foresaid form prescribed by the Council of
Carthage, ordering, that both the Bishop consecrating and the Bishops assisting
should pronounce the words of the form, saying, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum.

By this we see, how exact the Church of England is, in observing all the
essential and necessary parts and ceremonies prescribed, by that renowned
Council of Carthage, for the ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. As
for other ceremonies not essential, the Council of Trent it self declares, that
even in the administration of Sacraments (whereof they will have Orders to be a
part) they may be altered by the Church, as the condition of matters, times and
places may require. Neither is this to be understood of the Church Universal,
congregated in a general Council only, but also of each particular Church;
whence proceeded the great variety of Rites, in things indifferent, amongst the
ancient, and even modern Christians of several places and orders, approved by
that grave sentence of Lib. 1. Epist. 41.
Gregory the Great, in una fide nihil ossicit Sanctae Ecclesiae consuetudo
diversa. And as the Roman Church upon this account introduces new rites, why
may not that of England abolish others, especially such as are found to be
superstitious? for which the Distinct. 63. Quia
Canon law gives this warrant, Docemur exemplo Ezechiae frangentis serpontem
aeneum, quae in superstitionem vertuntur, illa sine tarditate aliqua, and cum
magna autoritate a posteris destrui posse. We are taught by example of
Hezechias, that such things as turn to superstition, may be without delay, and
with authority extirpated in after ages. As a good husband cuts off, not only
rotten, but superfluous branches, that may suck away the sap from the main
tree; so any Church that is free and independent (such as this of England is)
may cut off superstitious and superfluous rites and ceremonies, which by their
multiplicity may distract both the Ministers and Congregation, and take their
attention from the main object of their devotion. And certainly who ever
considers the vast number of ceremonies used now by the Roman Church and
prescribed in their Pontifical, will find it a task not easy for even a good
capacity to comprehend and practice them all, and very hard to think of
elevating the mind withal to prayer or meditation.

CHAP. VIII. How far the Church of England does agree with the Romish in matter
of Ordination; wherein they differ; and how absurd the pretention of Romanists
is, that our difference herein with them should annul our orders.
AS the Church of England did not think convenient to follow that of Rome, in
all their superfluous ceremonies, especially such of them as are noxious, and
opposite to the sincerity of Christian discipline; so it does not grudg to go
along and conform with them, in what they retain of ancient integrity.

In many things we agree with them. First, that only Bishops are to give
Orders. Secondly, that none be promoted to Orders without the title of a
benefice, or sufficient patrimony (which is far more exactly observed in the
English then in the Romish Church.) Thirdly, that the persons to be Ordained be
examined as to behavior and ability. Fourthly, that certain times and days
are appointed for Ordination. Fifthly, that the persons to be ordained, ought
to appear in the Church. Sixthly, that they receive their Orders on their
knees. Seventhly, that they receive the Communion. All this is commonly
observed in both Churches (but more exactly and indispensibly in the English)
as to Orders in general.

Now as to particular Orders; we agree in the following points, as to Deacons.
First, that the Archdeacon presents them to the Bishop. Secondly, that the
Bishop enquires of the Archdeacon, whether he knows them to be worthy of that
Order. Thirdly, that the Bishop admonishes the Congregation, that if any person
has any thing to say against them, he should declare it. Fourthly, that the
Bishop instructs them in the duty they are to perform. Fifthly, that litanies
are said, and the Bishop exhorts the Congregation to pray for the Persons to be
ordained, that they may be fit Ministers in that sacred Order. Sixthy, that the
Bishop gives them the Book of the Gospels, and power to read them in the Church
of God. Seventhly, that one of the Deacons newly ordained should read the
Gospel. Herein we agree. But we differ from the Roman Church. First, where they
add to the litanies the invocation of Saints and Angels. Secondly, where power
is given to the Deacons to read the Gospels for the dead. Thirdly, that what is
not expressly delivered by the Roman formulary, is more clearly expressed by the
English. As for example, the Order of Deacons in the former is given by these
words, Receive the Holy Ghost for power to resist the Devil and his temtations
in the Name of the Lord, which being too general, and common to all Christians,
is made more proper and apposite to the function of Deacons, by these other
words used in the English ordinal, Receive authority to exercise the work of a
Deacon in the Church of God committed to thee, in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Fourthly, that we red^ce the tedious variety
of vestments and ceremonies used in the Roman Church, to a more grave and
decent form, and more suitable to Christian simplicity.

As to the order of Priesthood, agreeing with them in the essential parts of
the matter and form, and some indifferent ceremonies, we differ from them.
First, that a Priest with them is anointed with Oil. Secondly, that power is
given him to offer a proper sacrifice, and really propitiatory, as well for the
dead as for the living, of all which no mention is made in the aforesaid
Council of Carthage. Thirdly, that with them only the Bishop lays his hand on
the head of the Priest to be ordained; but with us all the Priests present do
lay their hands upon his head together with the Bishops hands, according to the
express order of the Council of Carthage.

Finally touching the Ordination of Bishops, agreeing with them in the
essential parts of matter and form, belonging to that Order, and in some
accidentaly ceremonies, as before declared, we disagree with them in some
considerable superstructures. First, that in both Churches a mandate is
required for receiving this order; but in the Romish from the Pope, in the
English from the King. Secondly, in both Churches an Oath is required, which in
the Romish is in favor of the Pope, in the English in favor of the King.
Thirdly, in both Churches an examen is premised; and tho the Romish pretends to
follow the Council of Carthage herein, yet they insert their decretal Epistles
and obedience to be performed to the Bishop of Rome, whereof no mention is made
in that Council. Fourthly, they use an heap of vestments and ceremonies, of
which neither the Apostles, nor primitive Church ever had notice, which are too
tedious to relate, and more to practice. Finally and chiefly they demand a new
Symbol or Creed, coined in the Council of Trent, to be professed by him that is
to be ordained Bishop, containing among other articles, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Indulgences, obedience to the Pope of Rome, articles never mentioned
by the Apostles, nor by the ancient Creeds, nor by the Council of Carthage, nor
by any of the four first general Councils.

Now Reader consider, how rude and rash are the cries of the vulgar Romish
writers and preachers against our Orders, as invalid for not conforming with
the whole heap of their ceremonies, tho in the substantial and essential parts
we agree. For besides the intrinsic falsity of their assertion, it brings a
manifest ruin and nullity upon all their own Orders; since both we and they
suppose, that inferior Orders may not be given, but by the Bishops, and
Bishops may not be made but by other true and lawful Bishops. Then if the whole
bulk of ceremonies and requisites prescribed in the present Roman Pontifical
(of Clement the 8th above mentioned) be necessary for a valid Ordination of a
Bishop, it follows evidently, that there is no lawful Bishop, and consequently
no lawful Priest, or Deacon at present in the Church of Rome. This consequence,
I prove thus: no Bishop was Ordained after the rites, ceremonies and requisites
(above mentioned in the Roman Pontifica) for 300 and more years in the ancient
Roman Church; then if the aforesaid stock of ceremonies and requisites be
essential to a valid Ordination, no lawful Bishop was made all that while in
that Church; and it being necessary, as is supposed before, that Bishops must
be made by other lawful Bishops, it follows evidently, that all the train of
Bishops or Men so called by the Roman Church in after ages, were no true
Bishops, and consequently no Priests, or Deacons made by them, were true
Priests, or Deacons.

That Bishops were not ordained after the present rites and ceremonies of the
Rom^n Pontifical for the first 300 and many years after in the Roman Church
(which is the ground of all this discourse) requires no more proof then to read
over the Roman martyrology used to be publicly read in their Churches, or the
lives of Popes written by Platina, or any other of their Historians, where you
shall see, that the present heap of ceremonies, rites and requisites prescribed
in the said Pontifical, was never introduced at once, but successively; several
Popes in several times, and ages signalizing their reign with new rites,
ceremonies and requis^tes, whereof their very different Pontificals published
in several ages may be a further evidence. Of whose great disconformity that
samous Episcopus Pientinus in proaemio Pontificalis ad Innocent.
compiler of ceremonies employed by Innocent the 8th gives this remarkable
testimony in the preface of his Pontifical, speaking to the said ^nnocent.
Pontificalis libri emendationem (beatissime Pater) tuo jussu aggressus sum,
opus sane laboriosum, varlum, atque ut multis fortasse gratum, ita and invidia
plenum. Rei enim vetustate, Ecclesiarvm multitudine, temporum and Praelatorum
varietate effectum est, ut vix duo aut tres codices inveniantur qui idem
tradunt. Eodem modo, quot libri, tot varietates; ille deficit, hic
superabundat; alius nihil omnino de ea re habet, raro autn unquam convenient. I
have taken upon me (most holy F^ther) by your command the Reformation of the
Pontifical Book, a work indeed laborious, various, and as perhaps grateful to
many, so likely to beget envy too: for it came to pass by the antiquity of the
Subject, the multitude of Churches, and the diversities of times and Prelates,
that scarce two or three Books may be found which may deliver the same thing:
as many Books as there are, so many are the differences; one is deficient,
another superabundant, another has nothing at all of this subject: so that they
seldom or never agree.

By this (Reader) you may see how blind the presumtion of Romanists is in
pretending our Orders should be null for not conforming with the rites and
ceremonies of their present Pontifical, whereas upon that account the
ordination of their Bishops and Clergy in precedent ages, must have been null,
and consequently their present Bishops and Clergy, derived from them and
depending upon them, must partake of the same nullity.

CHAP. IX. That the Succession of Bishops and Clergy, since the Reformation, is
much more sure and unquestionable in the English Church then in the Romish.
IF Men had a due regard of their own defects, and of the Reformation of them,
they would busy themselves less in finding fault with their Neighbors. And if
the Ministers and Writers of the Roman Church, did reflect sufficiently upon
the lamentable corruptions introduced, and enthroniz'd among themselves, they
would be less bold in casting dirt in the face of others, that with more right
and ground may cast it in theirs.

I have declared in the precedent Chapters, by rules and principles generally
received, that the form of Ordination used in the Church of Englana since the
Reformation is legal and valid, as comprehending the essential parts belonging
to each order, and that in the ceremonial part we are more exact in observing
the rules of antiquity and the primitive Christian Church, then the Romish
party. Now it remains to show, that the succession of our Bishops and Clergy
from those of unquestioned legality before the Reformation, and the due
Ordination of them according to the said rules and rites, is more clear and
unquestionable with us then with the Roman Church.

As for the Bishops of England Mr. Mason gives an exact account of their
Succession and lawful Ordination, the time and place of it, the persons
conscerating them, running upon several Dioceses, especially that of
Canterbury, from the time he published his Book, which was the year 1638. to
the time of K. Henry the Eighth when the validity of Ordination was not
questioned: grounding his narrative upon the authentic Records kept in London.
And in the same Records may be found the like account of the ensuing
ordinations from Mr. Masons time to this day.

The like account may be found in the several Registries of the Churches of
Ireland from our days up to the aforesaid time of Henry the Eighth, and
touching the prime Church that of Armagh, I found the ensuing account of the
Succession and Ordination of Archbishops in it, from the present Archbishop,
the most Reverend Father in God James Lord Archbishop of Armagh Primate of all
Ireland (to the great comfort and benefit of it: since the blindest passion
cannot miss to see in his Grace the Idea, of a most renowned and perfect
Prelate,) In the hands of his worthy Vicar General and Judge of his Prerogative
Court the noble and Learned Dudley Loftus Doctor in Laws, I found, I say, the
account following of his Grace his lineal succession from the Bishops of
unquestioned authority in Queen Mary's time.

James Margetson, Consecrated the 27. of January, 1660. by John Bramhal
Archbishop of Armagh, etc. in the Cathedral Church of St. Patric in Dublin.

John Bramhal, Doctor of Divinity was Consecrated Bishop of Derry, in the
Chapel of the Castle of Dublin, the 26. of May 1634. by James Usher,
Archbishop of Armagh, etc.

James Usher, Doctor of Divinity was Consecrated Bishop of Mead at Droghedah,
in the Church of St. Peter Anno 1621. by Christopher Hampton, Archbishop of
Armagh, etc.

Christopher Hampton, Doctor of Divinity was Conseciated Bishop of Derry, May
the 5. 1613. in the Cathedral Church of St. Patric, by Thomas Jones,
Archbishop of Dublin, etc.

Thomas Jones, Doctor of Divinity was Consecrated Bishop of Mead, in the
Cathedral Church of St. Patric Dublin the 12. of May, 1584. by Adam Loftus,
Lord Archbishop of Dublin, etc.

Adam Loftus, Lord Archbishop of Dublin was Consecrated Archbishop of Armagh
in the Church of St. Patric Dublin Anno 1562. by Hugh Curwin Lord Archbishop
of Dublin, etc.

Hugh Curwin, Doctor of Laws was Consecrated Archbishop of Dublin the 8. of
September 1555. being the third of Queen Mary, together with James Turbirwill
Bishop of Exeter, and William Glin Bishop of Bargor. Each one of the other
Bishops of Ireland, may give the like account of their lawful ordination and
lineal succession from the Bishops of unquestioned auto^ity in King Henry the
Eighth and Queen Mary's time, no exception is known to have bin taken against
the legality of any of them, and the Laws being so severe and the penalties of
praemunire so heavy against any Bishop that would enter otherwise then by the
Rites and requisites above mentioned and justified, it is morally incredible
that any would permit any defect to intervene in his Consecration that might
bring upon him so great a damage.

It Is not so with the Bishops or Popes of Rome. We have not only conjectures,
but clear evidences by a learned and exact Pen of their own party, that none of
the Bishops or Popes who usurped that see from Gregory the 13. was a lawful
Bishop or Pope. The treatise penned upon this subject in Latin, and dedicated,
to King James bore this title, The new Man, or a supplication from an unknown
person a Roman Catholic unto James the Monarch of Great Britain, and from him
to the Emperor, Kings, and Princes of the Christian World, touching the causes
and reasons, that will argue a necessity of a General Council to be forthwith
assembled against him that now usurps the Papal chair under the name of Paul
the Fifth. This treatise being published by order of so excellent a Prince, as
the World knew King James to be, it were a blind insolence to say it should not
be real and unfeigned; and a treatise so destructive to the credit and interest
of the Roman Court, being not disproved for the space of nine years by any of
that party, as reported by Mr. William Crashaw translator of the said treatise
from Latin into English, in the year 1622. nor to this day by any that we know,
it is a clear argument they wanted means to gainsay the truth of it. I will
reduce to a brief sum the heads of his proof as well to matter of fact, as of
Law, that the election of Pope Sixtus the fifth succeeding Gregory the
thirteenth was null and invalid, and consequently the Cardinals created by him
were no true Cardinals, nor the Popes elected by such Cardinals true Popes.

For ground of this discourse it is to be supposed, that any simoniacal
contract intervening in the election of a Pope, such an election is therefore
rendered null and invalid, as is declared in the Bull of Julius the 2d set out
against Simonaical elections of the Pope, whose words are as follows. If it
shall hereafter fall out through the Devils malice the Enemy of Mankind, or the
ambition or covetousness of the Elector, that when we, or any of our
Successors, shall by Gods appointment, be removed from the Government of the
Church on Earth, the election of the new Pope be made and don either by him
that is ch^sen, or by any other or more of the College of Cardinals, by the
Heresy of Simonaical contract, giving, promising, or receiving any goods of
any kind, or Lands, or Castles, or offices, or benefices, or by making any
other promise or obligation, of what kind soever, whether they do it by
themselves, or another, by a few or by many, and whether the election be
accomplished by the voices of two parts of the Cardinals divided in three, or
by the uniform, consent or voices of them all, whether it be done by way of
assumtion, or adoration, yea tho there be no writing made at all.

We determine define and declare.

That not only the election or assumtion so made, shall be from that very
moment void, and of none effect, and no power or faculty shall accrue to him
thereby thrust in, of any administration, government or jurisdiction, in
matters spiritual or temporal, but also that it shall and may be lawful to any
Cardinal present at the said election, to except against the said intruder, and
to call him into question for the crime of Simony, as of a true and undoubted
Heresy, that so being an Heretic he may be of all men accountedas no Pope, or
Bishop of Rome, etc. Neither shall such simonaical election be any time
afterward made valid by any subsequent inthronization, coronation, no not by
any adoration made, or obedience or homage don or sworn to him by the
Cardinals, no not tho it be don by the whole College, nor by any action that
may or can be done, nor by any continuance or course of time. But it shall and
may be lawful to all and every Cardinal, yea even those that were present and
consenting to the said Simonaical election or assumtion, not only before but
even after any such enthronization, adoration, homage, or obedience don, and
not to them alone, but to the whole Clergy and People of Rome, and to all the
subjects of the Roman Church, and to all the Lords, Governors, Captains, and
Commanders, as well of the City and palace of St. Angelo within the City, as of
all other Castles, Towers, and fortresses, and to all Ministers and officers
whatsoever, to refuse to yield him any honor, homage, or obedience, and to
revolt from him so chosen and enthroniz'd, and from all obedience to him, and
that safely and lawfully they may hold, esteem and eschew him, and all
fellowship with him, as a Magician, Ethnic, Publican, and Arch-heretic, And
further we determine, that by the authority hereof it shall and may be lawful
to the Cardinals, even those that were present at the Simonaical election, and
consented not thereunto, and to those that shall afterward dissent and depart
from him, to appoint forthwith a general Council, and to call and summon the
same, into such a convenient place as to them shall seem expedient, etc. Thus
far the words of Julius his Bull.

Now as to the fact, the said Author tells us a thing known to millions of Men,
that when Gregory the thirteenth was deceased, and the Cardinals assembled in
the Conclave for the election of a new Pope, the said ^ixtus Quintus being then
the Cardinal of Montalto, that himself might be chosen, plainly bought of
Aloisius the great Cardinal of Aste, his voice and the voices of all the
Cardinals depending of him, which were known to be far the greater number, and
able to carry it with whomsoever they went. And in consideration thereof, he
promised him not in a word alone, but by open writing, subscribed and ratified
under his own hand, that whereas there was a principal Prelate one Hieronymus
Mathaeus, whose possibility was great to be a Cardinal, but then was at no
little odds with Cardinal Aloisius, Sixtus or Montalto solemnly promised him
that during his reign, he would never make the aforesaid Mathaeus Cardinal, if
he by his own voice and his accomplices would make him Pope. Cardinal Aloisius
accepted of the condition, and so the Bargain was concluded, and accordingly he
gave him his voice, and got all his party and faction to do the like, and so
Sixtus carried it from all Competitors, and was chosen Pope; which was so
openly known that Aloisius never made bones to say in a public presence, that
Pope Sixtus was his Creature and the work of his own hands. This being so,
every one may see it is the very case declared in the aforesaid Bull of Julius
the second against Simonaical elections.

If it be objected that the aforesaid decree of Julius binds not, but where the
fact is famous eviident and notorious, it is answered, that the aforesaid fact
of Sixtus was made public and notorious in manner following. Sixtus after his
election, violated his Faith, and broke the promise made to the Cardinal of
Aste; and contrary thereto made Hieronymus Mathaeus Cardinal; which the
Cardinal of Aste took so to heart, that for anger and grief he fell deeply
sick: but before his death, to recompense the new and ill made Pope as he
deserved, he sent the agreement and covenant he had of Sixtus, to Philip the
second King of Spain, even the very Original it self, who hereupon in the year
15^9. sent the Duke of Suez to Rome as his Ambassador extraordinary, to give
Sixtus notice hereof, and to intimate to him the present necessity of a general
Council for the declaration of his election to be Simonaical, and to require
the Lords, the Cardinals such as were created by his predecessors, and the
other Prelates and Clergy to whom it belongs, to appear in the said Council to
be holden in Spain at the City of Sevil in Andalusia.

And tho this business could not proceed to full effect, for that Sixtus upon
this intimation made to him, knowing he should be condemned by his own hand, of
mere fear and desperation fell sick and died, (having only that way left to
prevent deprivation) yet by this beginning his Simonaical covenant and election
thereupon ensuing was called into question, or as the Lawyers say drawn into
judgment and made notorious. Neither did the King of Spain more then right, for
by divine law all Catholics may rise against an Heretical Pope, and ^n C. si
audier is 23. q. 5. Isidorus desummo bono lib. 7. relatus in Cap.
that Law of God is related in the Body of the Canon Law. And in the case of
Simonaical election that secular Princes have power to call a Council, is the
plain text of Isidore that ancient Father, which is related in the Canon Law.

To proceed therefore; Sixtus, by the virtue of the said constitution of
Julius, which is inscribed in the Body of the Canon Law, being a Magician, an
Eth-nic, and an Arch-heretic, could not therefore, nor had power in him to
create Cardinals, for as much as he was ipso facto despoiled and deprived of
all jurisdiction, power and faculty spiritual and temporal: and all use and
exercise of such jurisdiction spiritual and temporal is by the Law so far
forbidden him, that all acts by him don in that kind are absolute nullities, as
don by him that has no power at all to do them.

Now from this ground thus laid, it follows by infallible inference, that all
the Popes since Principes scculi 22. q. 3.
Sixtus the fifth were intruders, and not one of them a true Pope. For after
his Death Cardinal Montalto his Nephew entering the conclave with forty voices
in his faction, by the strength thereof was elected Vrbanus the seventh; who
living but a few days, by the same means Gregory the fourteenth was chosen
into his place, who continued but ten Months; after whom by the same voices
entered Innocentius the ninth who held the Papacy but two Months: at last was
chosen Clement the eighth by the same voices; who by the permission of God
continued this intrusion and usurpation for thirteen years. Now that none of
these were, nor could be true Popes, is thus demonstrated.

Unto the election of all these concurred the voices of those Cardinals created
by Sixtus the fifth, whereupon it follows inevitably that all those elections
are plain nullities, since by the constitution of Pius the fourth touching the
Reformation of the conclave in the election of Popes, the power of choosing the
Pope is granted only to the College of Cardinals, which is to be understood of
true and lawful Cardinals: but the Cardinals who made all those elections were
no true Cardinals, being made by Sixtus the fifth who was no true Pope, and
therefore had no place nor power to make them, therefore the aforesaid
elections of Popes from Sixtus, being made by no true Cardinals, were no
elections, but absolute nullities in the Law to all intents and purposes.

Now that such titular Cardinals as were created by him that is no true Pope
are no true Cardinals, and consequently can give no voice, nor make any lawful
or good election is evident by continual precedents of former times in the
Roman Church. Such is the case of Benedict the thirteenth, who sitting at
Avignion created diverse Cardinals; but for as much as he was judged no true
Pope, but an Antipope, and an usurper, therefore all by him created were no
Cardinals, and so were held and reputed till their dying day. And when after
the death of Alexander the fifth, he that was called John the 23. in the time
of that long and miserable Schism, intruded himself unlawfully into the Papacy
at Bononia, where he then was Legate, and so being Pope created diverse
Cardinals, they were all reputed and judged to be no true Cardinals in the
Council of Constance; and a new and true Pope was then chosen, named Martin the
fifth, not by the said Cardinals (because they had no power) but by the whole
Council. From all which and more of this kind that may be produced, it
follows evidently, that the Cardinals so called, created by Sixtus the fifth
being no true Pope, are no true Cardinals, and consequently cannot make
election of a Pope, and therefore all by them chosen were no Popes but mere
intruders and usurpers.

CHAP. X. A further cause of nullity discovered in the election of Pope Clement
the Eighth.
BEsides the former cause of no true Cardinals concurring to the election of
Clement the 8. it is found to be void in another respect: for two parts of the
Cardinals concurred with one consent on another, namely Cardinal San Severine
(as the aforesaid nameless Roman Catholic author relates.) For they called him
by name, they took him and lead him to the Chapel of St. Saint Paul, where
they performed their ceremony of adoration to the new elected Pope: that in
this place they make him sit in the Popes chair of state, and by public
scrutiny they proclaim him Pope: and that this make a full and legal election
of a Pope, the text of the law expressly teaches in these words, Ca^licet de
vitanda de electione.
He who shall be elected and received by two parts of the Cardinals with
uniform consent, let him be held and received of the whole and universal Church
as true Pope without all question or contradiction. Now by what is above related
by our Author, it appears that the Cardinal Saint Severine was chosen by two
parts of the Cardinals with full consent, and by them conducted, and placed in
the Popes seat; therefore he was lawfully chosen Pope, and so ought to have bin
accepted; but see, Reader, (and admire the Arts of that Court) how this poor
Man was put off.

When this was don, and whilst the rest of the Cardinals that were without were
expected (for such is the custom, that when two parts have made election, the
third part which consented not, but co^ld not hinder, are expected to come to
the place where the new elect is adored by two parts that chose him, and from
whence the election is to be published; that so all being together, the
election man be said to be made by all, without contradiction of any Man while
the rest I say, was expected to come in, there came into the Chapel Cardinal
Gesualdus and Ssortia (the former whereof was Dean of the College of Cardinals)
and by a crafty and wicked device, disturbed the election in truth and in law
already made. Gesualdus cries out, my Lord's, let us number the voices, to see
if two full parts have consented; whereupon he began to count, not hasting to
make an end, but leisurely proceeding with intermissions and delays, which he
did purposely to a crafty end, that Cardinal Saint Sfortia might have time also
to act his part, which he failed not to do: for in that mean time he got two of
the Cardinals out of the Chapel who had given their voices, and carried them
into another place called Sala Regia; and leaving them there he returned to the
rest, and largely lays open to them, the rigor and severity of San Severino
(for they feared his justice, he being a just and upright Man) and hereupon the
greater part of them most perfidiously got them out of the Chapel, and
assembling together with the rest made a new election of Cardinal Aldobrandine,
who was called Clement the Eighth; and this is the truth of that business.

Now that the former election of San Severine was good and effectual in law, is
a clear case: for the voices that chose him were for number complete and
sufficient, when they pronounced him for Pope, and set him in the chair. And as
for the ceremonious solemnity used in the elections, that all the Cardinals
sitting in their order together with him that is to be chosen, every one in
order shall say, I such a one choose such a one to be Pope; and that the
Secretary of the Conclave shall take the scrutiny, and write down every ones
voice; it is not an essential part of the election, or necessarily, or
essentially required to make an election: for the express words of the Text do
declare, define and peremtorily pronounce him to be Pope instantly, as soon as
he is chosen and received by two parts of the Cardinals; and he is then by the
Law said to be accepted and received of the Cardinals, when they take him and
convey him to the Chapel aforenamed, and make him sit down in the Popes seat;
and he is said to be chosen or elected, when the said two parts declare their
consent and agreement upon him to be Pope. Now all these concurred in and upon
the Cardinal San Severine; and when the election is thus don by public and open
denunciation, there needs no Scrutineers to take the voices, as is clear by the
law. And this is one way of choosing the Pope, and is called the way of
assumtion, whereof mention is made in the foresaid Bull of Julius the second,
and by this way which is as sufficient and effectual in law as the other, was
Cardinal San Severine chosen; and wanted nothing required by the law to the
essence of a true election, but only some formalities, which by the law are not
necessary. Nor is it material to say, he wanted inthronization or ordination,
or kissing of his foot, for all these are but effects and consequences of a
true election; and are appointed to be don to him that is elected, but do not
help forward his election, and the election is properly held don and perfected
before they be performed; as any man may see in the aforesaid Bull of Julius
the second.

Neither is the calling together of all the Cardinals necessarily required; for
it is expressly commanded in no law, and as for the text of the Canon law,
called licet devitanda; it shows the validity of the election, as is soundly
proved by Cardinal Jacobatius, who shows, that at least a Council is to be
called, to declare whether the election be good or no; and that they may not
proceed to the election of another. The election therefore of Clement thus
made, is to be held a nullity, as being don by deceit and fraud, according to
the express text of the law laid down in these words, ^n. C^in nomine Domin^
did. 28.
But if any shall be elected, ordained, Jacobat. tr. de Council. part. ^. ar. 4.
n. 154.
or inthronized Pope through sedition, presumtion, or any ingeny or trick of
wit, contrary to this our sentence and Synodical decree pronounced in open
Council; by the authority of God and his Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, we
pronounce him subject to the great curse, and separated by perpetual Anathema
from all Society with Gods Church, together with all his authors, factors, and
abettors, an Antichrist, an intruder and destroyer of Christian Religion, etc.

Abb. in d. licet devitanda n. 11. ver. exposuit Ruffiensis.
And after Cardinal Hostiensis the great Doctor called the Abbot, in his
commentaries on the text, expound's the word ingeny to be craft, collusion and
deceit, and such like, as was the election of Joh. the 22. that was afterward
condemned in the Council of Basil. For when after the Death of Alexander the
fifth, the Cardinals assembled at Bononia, and consulted about the choice of a
new Cardinal; Cossa, who then was Legate there, a man potent and warlike,
obtained of the Electors by his greatness, that they would commit the whole
power of the election to him: which they had no sooner granted him, but he
forthwith elected himself. But, for as much as upon examination of the matter
in public Council, it was found to be compassed by fraud and deceitful tricks,
he was therefore deprived by the Council. From whence it follows, that
Clement could not be taken for a true Pope, both for that he was chosen by such
as had no power to choose, as also that that choice by them made was wrought by
fraud and deceit, and to the injury of another lawfully chosen before: and was
therefore void, tho it had bin done by such as had bin lawfully enabled to make
such an election.

CHAP. XI. Nullities declared in the Popedom of Paul the fifth, and others
following.
THe forementioned Roman Catholic author discovers another egregious fraud
and cheat, used in the election of Paul the fifth succeeding Clement the
Eighth, wherewith they turned out the Cardinal of Florence lawfully elected, to
bring in factiously this Paul before called Cardinal Borg^esius. The
particulars of that intrigue are to be seen in the first chapter of the said
treatise n. 15. besides which damnable fraud and the nullity of the Cardinals
electing, both rendering the election void; our Author discovers another foul
cause of nullity in the Popedom of Paul the fifth in regard of his notorious
Simony. For which it is to be presupposed, that the Pope, as Pope, is not free
from the crime of Simony, nor exemted from incurring censures in that case; as
Aquinas proves at large, concluding and resolving, that the Pope, as well as
any other, may incur the vice, and come within the compass of the crime of
Simony, if he takes money for any spiritual thing. Of the same opinion are all
the Divines, that write upon that place of Aquinas. In consequence to which
doctrine, the Aquin, 2.2. q. 100. art. 1. ad. 7.
Council of Basil even for this crime and sin of Simony, called in question,
examined, convicted, and condemned Eugenius the fourth then Pope, and deprived
him of the Papacy. The words of the Councils decree are these. By this
definitive sentence of the great and universal Holy Council, which is here
recorded in writing, for all the World to know, and all posterity to take
notice of, the Council pronounces, decrees, and declares, Gabriel formerly
called P. Eugenius the 4. to have bin, and so to be a notorious and manifest
and contumacious rebel to the warnings and commandments of the universal
Church; and that he still persists in the said open rebellion; and does
therefore condemn him for a wilful contemner and violater of the holy ancient
Canons, a perturber of the peace and unity of the Church, a notorious
scandalizer of the universal Church, a perjured, incorrigible, and Schismatical
Simonist, and therefore a forsaker of the Faith, an Heretic, a dilapidator and
consumer of the rights and riches of the Church committed to his trust; and
has thereby made himself an unprofitable member, and not only unworthy and
unfit for the Papal power, but of all other title, degree, honor or dignity
Ecclesiastical. Whom the aforesaid General Council does by the power of the
Holy Ghost, declare and pronounce, to be by the Law deprived of the Papacy and
Bishopric of Rome, and by these presents it does depose, remove, deprive, and
throw him out.

Now that the Pope Paul the fifth was guilty of Simony, and deserves to be
treated as Eugenius in the Council of Basil; our Author declares in the
foresaid treatise chapter the 2. from the second number, by the words
following. In the Datary, which is an office at Rome, wherein all matters of
benefices and businesses of that kind are expedited, this is the course and
custom at this day. It is duly observed, that the benefices belonging to the
Popes collation, whether reserved to his gift, it falling void in the month
that belongs to the Papacy, which in regard of their far distance from Rome, or
that they are with cure, cannot be given to his Nephew Borghesius, are given to
some of the Suitors or competitors, that are of that Country, or next adjoining
to it. For they take order, that none be bestowed presently, but ly vacant for
a time; that so a whole concourse of competitors may flock together for it:
which is not don for any good end, that so they might know the difference of
the suitors, and give it to the worthiest, as by the decree of the Council of
Trent they are bound to do: but that they may learn which is the richest, and
so may know how to make the best bargain. To this end, the time of this
competition is appointed at a certain day, whereof public notice is given, that
so all the suitors may come, and that the officers of the datary may learn in
that time which of all that seek it, are best able to buy out and extinguish
the pension that is laid upon that living. For this is the fashion now in use;
the Pope charge every living in his gift with a pension more or less:
ordinarily it amounts to half of the whole value of the benefice; if but a
third part, it is held easy and favorable; but sometimes it extends to two
parts of the whole divided into three: which don, he provides by an other
ordination, that by present payment of five years profit, the pension shall be
exringuished. Now when by this concourse and comparison of competitors, they
have found which of them is best able to buy it, on him presently it is
conferred, and so not the worthiest but the wealthiest carries it: and thus are
all the Popes livings bestowed at Rome. Now he that comes thus to a benefice,
by paying down five years pension before hand, buys it full dear; for he paies
for it at the rate of 30. in the 100. over and besides his personal service.
For the clearing of this point; Suppose a benefice worth 300 Crowns a year:
this is sure to be charged, being so great a Living, with a pension of the
largest size, namely some 200; that so one 100 may be left to the Incumbent; he
then that comes to it in this manner, pays down a 1000 Crowns for the pension,
and an 100 more for writing, and seal of his Bulls, and for expedition; and so
all laid together, he buys his living of 300 at the rate of 30. for the
hundred, besides his personal service and cure of Souls.

Moreover whereas in the Council of Trent, certain Simoniacal tricks and
devices called regressus and expectatives, are flatly forbidden; the Pope, to
delude the Councils decree, grants coadjutorships, with assurance of future
succession after his Death to whom he is made coadjutor; but makes them pay one
years profit for the expediting and dispatch of their Bulls. Now these
coadjutorships are the very same, and tend to the very same end, even to bring
in by hook and crook sums of money: for by these pensions, and buying out of
pensions, this Pope has scraped up twenty hundred thousand Scutes, all which he
has bestowed in buying lands for his Nephew. He bought of Sarelly a goodly
large territory called Rignanum, near unto Rome, at the price of 353000 Scutes.
The City of Sulmona in the Kingdom of Naples he bought of the King of Spain,
and gave for the same the sum of 150000 Scutes.

He purchased those goodly demains, called the four Casalia, within the
territories of the City of Rome, which cost no less then 700000 Scutes. In the
mountanous Countries belonging to the City, which are commonly at six in the
hundred, he made a purchase that stood him in 400000 Scutes.

He has built a palace, and called it after his own name the palace of
Burghesius; upon the Fabric whereof he has bestowed 300000.

He has so enriched the Cardinal Burghesius his Nephew in private Stock and
wealth, that his very movables are esteemed worth 600000 Scutes.

Good God? what a mighty wealth is here? and I appeal to any that knows the
Court of Rome, if this could be got together by any means into the Popes own
Coffers and private purse, but only out of that office of the benefices called
the Datary. Therefore this one demonstration is presumtion sufficient enough,
to prove his foul and detestable Simony; seeing it is certain, that the whole
name and blood of the Burghesies were but of a mean estate, nay many of them
are known to have run out of their livings, and to be little better then
bankrupt, when this man got the Popedom.

Hitherto the words of the foresaid Author, who promised to justify all that he
had said to be true out of the Authentical Books, Records, and writings extant
in Rome: and that out of the Register of the Popes Bulls it shall appear, to
whom each benefice has been given, and with what pension they were charged. Of
all which the Spanish Nation can give a large testimony: for many of them
dealing in businesses of benefices at Rome, have transacted them in this manner.

The conclusion of all before said is, that if Simoniacal contracts do annul
the election of a Pope; and the same crime committed after his election,
depriveth him of all right to that place, and calling: if all Cardinals made by
such unlawful and criminal Popes, were no Cardinals; and Popes made by unlawful
Cardinals are no Popes, as is established by the Laws and Canons forementioned;
if all those nullities of Simonies, frauds and cheats have intervened in the
election of Sixtus and following Popes, as hitherto recorded, and no care has
bin taken of repairing those nullities, as is manifest, but rather the like
practices continued to this day; as is well known to those that are acquainted
with that Court; all this being so, it follows as a forceable consequence,
that there is not in the Sea of Rome any true Pope, nor has bin since Gregory
the thirteen.

How strange will all the precedent narrative appear to many poor Irish and
English Roman Catholics, who are not permitted to know more then their beads,
and some small prayer Book, with the litanies of the conception, of Saint
Joseph, Sancta Theresa, etc. and a list of great indulgences for very small
devotions? But such as know by sight or faithful relation, the intrigues of
Rome (whereof my good friend N. N. who gave me the occasion of this discourse,
is one) will easily perceive, that all which is said, is very suitable to the
language and practice of that Court.

Now, therefore, let the poor Souls consider by these particulars, what metal
that Roman holiness is, which they so blindly adore. And let their bold and
presumtuous instructors forbear to censure the Ordinations of the Church of
England, in which no such dirty practices did ever intervene, when their prime
See is defaced and disgraced with such public and peremtory exceptions against
the usurpers of it: and let them cease boasting as they do, of a wicked
practice, reordaining such as were ordained in the Church of England, if they
chance to pass to their communion, whereas it is not less sacrilegious and
unlawful to reordain persons already lawfully ordained, then to rebaptize such
as were lawfully baptized, according to Gregory the great his declaration: Lib.
2. Epist. 32. end. 10. Cap. 58.
Sicut baptizatus semel, iterum baptizari non debet, ita qui consecratus est
semel, in eodem iterum ordine consecrari non debet. As those who were baptized
before, ought not to be rebaptized again; so he that was once consecrated,
ought not to be consecrated again in the same order. The same was decreed in
the Council of Carthage, chapter 38. and before in the Council of Capua, as related
by the said Council of Carthage, and by Baronius in the year 139. To transgress
the decrees of these grave and an^ient Councils, is the boast of Romanists,
when they brag of not admitting Priests ordained in the Church of England, to
the function of Priesthood with them, if they be not ordained again after their
ceremonies. Which point of presumtion and contemt of ancient Canons, the Church
of England refuses to learn from the Romish, admitting to the practice of their
respective orders among us such as have bin ordained in the Romish Church; tho
we have far greater reasons to suspect their ordinations, as disagreeing with
ancient Canons, then they have to suspect ours; as we have hitherto largely
declared.

By all this discourse it appears, how groundless is the scruple of such as
refuse to join with the Church of England, for fear that the ordination of its
Clergy is not valid; whereas we have all the certainty (and even more) for the
validity of our ordination, that the Roman Church has for hers: and how much
Suarez was mistaken in affirming, that the Church of England has not the
Ecclesiastic hierarchy composed of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, necessary to
the constitution of a Catholic Church.

CHAP. XII. Of the large extent of Christian Religion professed in the Church
of England.
THe fourth and chief kind of universality proposed by Suarez, as necessary to
the constitution of a Catholic Church, is the extent of it over all the parts
of the Earth. This he denies to the Church of England, as not passing (says
he) the Limits of the British Dominions. But if he speaks of the Faith
professed in the Church of England (as he ought to do for the present purpose)
he was greatly mistaken. Here I will show, that King James's saying (as Suarez
relates) that the one half of the Christian World do join with us in the same
Faith, did not exceed the bounds of truth and modesty; and that of three parts
of Christians, two do join with us in the profession of the Faith of Christ
contained in the Apostles Creed; tho not of all contained in the Creed of
Trent, whereby the Roman Church alone is singled from us, and from all other
Christian Churches: not unlike Ismael, whose hand was against every one, and
every Man's hands against him. And as the Donatists would confine the Church of
God to that corner of Africa they inhabited; so the Romanists would not have it
extended further then their jurisdiction; declaring for excommunicated and
damned, all that join not with them in obedience to their Pope. That they may
be ashamed, or weary of their blind presumtion and cruelty, in offering to
mangle and deface in this manner the Church of God (if avarice and ambition,
the genuine cause of this proceeding, is capable of shame or amendment) I will
give to the People blinded by them a view of the multitude of illustrious
Nations and Religious Believers in Christ, which they do rashly if not
maliciously condemn, and segregate from their communion.

And beginning with Protestants inhabiting Europe, from the remotest parts
thereof Eastward, in the Kingdom of Polonia, containing under its dominion
Polonia, Lituania, Podolia, Russia the less, Volhinia, Massovia, Livonia,
Prussia, all which united in a roundish enclosure are in circuit about 2600
miles, and of no less space then Spain and France laid together. In this so
large a Kingdom, the Protestants in great numbers are diffused through all the
quarters thereof, having in every Province their public Churches and
Congregations, orderly severed and bounded with Dioceses, whence they send some
of their chiefest men of worth unto their general Synods, which they have
frequently held with great celebrity, and with such prudence and piety, as may
be a happy example to be followed by all Christian Churches; and likely would
be followed upon a due consideration, if the insatiable avarice and boundless
ambition of Rome, aspiring desperately to a monarchical power over all, did not
obstruct all the ways, that sincere piety and zeal of Religion can imagine for
the peace of Christians.

For as much as there are diverse sorts of these Polonic Protestants, some
embracing the Waldensian or the Bohemic, others the Augustan, and some the
Helvetian confession, and so do differ in some outward circumstances of
discipline and ceremony; yet knowing well, that a Kingdom divided cannot stand,
and that the one God, whom all of them worship in Spirit, is the God of peace
and concord, they jointly meet at one general Synod: and their first act
always, is a religious and solemn profession of their unfeigned consent in the
substantial points of Christian Faith necessary to Salvation. Thus in general
Synods at Lendomire, Cracovia, Petricove, Woodslave, Torun, they declared upon
the Bohememic, and Helvetic and Augustan confessions severally received amongst
them, that they agree in the general heads of Faith, touching the Holy
Scripture, the sacred Trinity, the person of the Son of God, God and Man; the
providence of God, Sin, free will, the Law, the Gospel, justification by
Christ, Faith in his name, Regeneration, the Catholic Church, and supreme head
thereof, Christ; the Sacraments, their number and use, the state of Souls after
Death, the Resurrection, and life Eternal.

They decreed, that whereas in the forenamed confessions there is some
difference in phrases and forms of Speech concerning Christ's presence in his
holy Supper, which might breed dissension, all disputations touching the manner
of Christ's presence should be cut off, seeing all of them do believe the
presence it self; and that the Eucharistical Elements are not naked and emty
signs, but do truly perform to the Faithful receiver, that which they signify
and represent. To prevent future occasions of violating this sacred consent,
they ordained, that no man should be called to the sacred Ministry, without
subscription thereunto; and when any person shall be excluded by
excommunication from the Congregation of one confession, that he shall not be
received by them of another. Lastly, For as much as they accord in the
substantial verity of Christian Doctrine, they profess themselves content to
tolerate diversity of ceremonies, according to the diverse practice of their
particular Churches, and to remove the least suspicion of rebelling and
sedition wherewith their malicious and calumniating adversaries might blemish
the Gospel: tho they are subject to many grievous pressures, yet they earnestly
exhort one another to follow that worthy and Christian admonition of
Lactantius: defendenda Religio est non occidendo, sed moriendo; non saevitia,
sed patientia; non scelere, sed side: illa enim bonorum, haec malorum sunt.

This is the State of the Professors of the Gospel in the Elective Monarchy of
Polonia; who in the adjoining Countries on the fouth, Transylvania and Hungary,
are also exceedingly multiplied. In the former by the favor of Gabriel
Bartorius Prince of that Region, who not many years since expelled thence all
such as are of the Papal faction, in a manner the whole Inhabitants (except
some few rotten and p^trid limbs of Arrians, Antitrinitarians, Ebionits,
Socinians, Anabaptists, who here, as also in Polonia, Lituania, and Borussia
have some public assembly) are professed Protestants; and in Hungary the
greater part, especially being compared with the Papists.

Thence Westward in the Kingdom of Bohemia, consisting of 3200 Parishes and its
appurtenances, the Marquisates of Lusatia, and Moravia, the Dukedom of Silesia
(all which jointly in circuit contains 770. miles) and in Austria it self, and
the Countries of Goritia, Tirolis, Cilia, the principalities of Suevia,
Alsatia, Brisgoia, Constance, the most part of the People are Protestants,
especially of the nobility; and are in regard of their number so potent, that
they are formidable to their malignant opposites. And they are near of the same
number and strength in the neighbor Countries of the Archduke of Gratzden (a
branch of the house of Austria) namely in Stiria, Carrabia, Carniola.

But the condition of the Protestants residing among the Cantons of Helvetia,
and their confederates the City of Geneva, the Town of Saint Gall, the Grisons,
Vallesians, seven communities under the Bishop of Sedan, is a great deal more
happy and settled: in so much, that they are two third parts, having the public
and free practice of Religion: for howsoever of the 13. Cantons, only these
five Zuric, Scathausen, Glarona, Basil, Abbaticella are entirely Protestant;
yet these in strength and ampleness of territory much exceed the other seven;
and hence Zuric in all public meetings and embassies, has the first place,
being chief of the five.

Now coming to Germany, the whole Empire consists of three orders or states;
the Princes Ecclesiastical, the temporal Princes, and the free Cities. Of the
Ecclesiastics the Archbishop of Maidenburg and Breame, with the Bishoprics
thereunto belonging are under the Protestants, as also the Bishoprics of
Verden, Halberstad, Osnaburg and Minden.

The temporal Princes all (none of note excepted) besides the Archduke of
Austria, and the Duke of Bavaria, are firmly Protestants. And what the
multitudes of Subjects are professing the same Faith with these Princes, we may
guess by the ampleness of Dominions under the government of the chief of them,
such as are the Prince Elector Palatin, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of
Brandenburg, the Duke of Wirtenburg, Landgrave of Hesse, Marquess of Baden,
Prince of Anhalt, Dukes of Brunswic, Holst, Lunenburg, Meckleburg, Pomeran,
Swyburg. Among whom the Marquess of Brandenburg has for his Dominion not only
the Marquisat it self, containing in circuit about 320 miles, and furnished
with 50 Cities, and about 60 other walled Towns; but likewise a part of
Prussia, the Region of Prignitz, the Dukedom of Crossen, the Seigneuries of
Sternberg and Corbus, and lately the three Dukedoms of Cleve, Dulic and Berg,
of which the two former have either of them in circuit 130 miles. The free
Cities, which were in number 88. before some of them came to the possession of
the French, Polanders, and Helvetians, are generally Protestants, especially
those called the Hans Cities, very rich and powerful, situate in the northern
part of Germany, inclusively, between Dantisk eastward, and Hamburg westward.
As for Ratisbon, Argentine, Augusta, Spire, Worms, Francfort upon Main, both
Papists and Protestants in them make public profession.

Nearer to us are the Provinces of the low Countries, governed by the States
General; namely Zutphen, Vtrecht, Overissel, Gronninghen, Holland, Zeland,
West-Friesland, in which only Protestants have the public and free exercise of
their Religion. The power and strength of these Provinces is too much known for
to need a relation of it. Pagi. Christianography chap. 2.
I find in Mr. Pagit related, that they contain about 210 Cities compassed with
walls and ditches, and 6300 Towns and villages, and more; and that they keep
about 30000 Men in continual garrisons.

Now passing from the united Provinces into France, those of the Religion (as
they usually style them) are seized of above 70 Towns having garrisons of
Soldiers, governed by Nobles and Gentlemen of the Protestant Religion, they
have 800 Ministers retaining pensions out of the public finance, and are so
dispersed through the chief Provinces of the Kingdom, that in the Principality
of Orange, Poiclou almost all the Inhabitants, in Gascony half, in Languedoc,
Normandy, and other western Provinces a strong party profess the Protestant
Religion. Besides the Castles, and Forts that do belong in property unto the
Duke of Bullen, the Duke of Rohan, Count of Laval, the Duke of Trimovil,
Monsieur Chastillion, the Marshall of Digniers, the Duke of Sully, and others.

Now if to all the forenamed Kingdoms, Principalities, Dukedoms, States,
Cities, abounding with professors of the Reformed Religion, we add the
Monarchies of Great Britany, Denmark, Sweden, wholly in a manner protestants,
we shall find them not inferior in number and power to the Romish party;
especially if we consider, that the main bulk here of Italy and Spain are by a
kind of violence and necessity, rather then out of any free choice and judgment
detained in their superstition, namely by the jealousy, cruelty, and tyrannous
vigilance of the inquisition, and by their own ignorance; being utterly
debarred from all reading of the Holy Scriptures, and of controversial Books,
whereby they may come to the knowledge of truth and of their own errors.

If any shall object that the Protestants, in diverse Countries before
mentioned, cannot be reputed as one body and one Church; by reason of many
differences and contentions among them, let him consider, that however many
private persons living among Protestants, rather then of them, have strained
their weak understanding to coin several erroneous tenants, and by them have
bred dissentions and animosities: yet these wicked practices are not to be
imputed to the whole s^cred community of Orthodox Churches, whose harmony and
agreement in necessary points of Faith are to be seen and esteemed by their
public confessions of their Faith, which they have divulged unto the whole
World by public authority; and in which they do so agree, that there is a most
sacred harmony between them in the more substantial points of Christian
Religion necessary to Salvation. This is manifest out of the Confessions
themselves, which are the Anglican, Scotian, French, Helvetian, Belgic,
Polonic, Argentine, Augustane, Saxonic, Wirtembergic, Palatine, Bohemic, or
Waldensian. For there is none of the Churches formerly pointed out in diverse
places of Europe, which does not embrace one of those confessions; and all of
them do harmoniously conspire in the principal articles of Faith, and which
nearest concern our Eternal Salvation; as in the divine essence and divinity of
the Everlasting God, the sacred Trinity of the three Glorious Persons, the
blessed Incarnation of Christ, the Omnipotent providence of God, the absolute
Supreme head of the Church Christ; the infallible verity and full sufficiency
of Divine Scriptures for our instruction to life Everlasting, etc. In none of
those confessions is to be seen that heap of desperate Heresies which my
Antagonist N. N. attributes to the Church I have followed, and wherewith
Bellarmine, and Becan, and other Romish controvertists do make their volums
swell, to fill the minds of their proselytes with hatred and animosity against
the Reformed Churches, whilst in them such impious Heresies are most seriously
rebuked, and learnedly refuted by pen and tongue, from Chairs, and Pulpits, as
I am daily seeing, to my great comfort; and no small grief, to consider the
disingenuity of Romanists in fomenting animosities among Christians, by
calumniating thus the opposers of their errors.

CHAP. XIII. Of the several large and flourishing Christian Churches in the
Eastern Countries not subject to the Pope.
TO all men truly zealous of the honor of God and of his Son Jesus Christ, it
cannot but be comfortable, to see how happily the blessed Apostles have
complied with the command of our Sovereign Lord and Savior; Math. 28 ^9
Go and teach all Nations, baptizing in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; and how gloriously the Churches planted by them, have
persevered in the Faith of our Savior, in spite of the greatest persecutions,
and under the greatest Enemies of the Christian name, such as the Turk is known
to be: and yet under his Domions is a numberless number of Christians; of which
the Grecians are, for antiquity, number and dignity, the chief. They acknowledge
obedience to the Patriarch of Constantinople, under whose jurisdiction are in
Asia, the Christians of Natolia, Circassia, Mengrelia, and Russia, as in Europe
also the Christians of Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Thrace, Bulgaria, Servia,
Bosnia, Walachia, Moldavia, ^odolia, and Moscovia, together with all the
Islands of the Aegean Sea, and others about Greece, as far as Corfu; besides a
good part of the large Dominion of Polonia, and those parts of Dalmatia, and
Croatia, that are subject to the Turkish Dominion: all which Congregations of
Christians, subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople, do exceed in number
them of the Romish Communion; as I find recorded by diligent Brerewood
inquiries cap. 15. Pagit Christianography. cap. 2.
Writers, whereof Pagit says, that Christians make up the two third parts of
the Grand Signiors Subjects.

All these Churches do deny the Popes Supremacy: they account the Pope and his
Church Schismatical. The Patriarch of Constantinople does yearly upon the
Sunday called Dominica invocavit, solemnly excommunicate the Pope and his
Clergy for Schismatics. They deny Transubstantiation; touching which point
Cyril Patriarch of Constantinople delivers this excellent confession, as
agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of England, as opposite to the Romish:
In the Eucharist (says Cap. 17. Page 60.
he) we do confess a true and a real presence of Christ, but such a one, as
Faith offers us, not such as devised Transubstantiation teaches: for we
believe the Faithful to eat Christ's body in the Lords Supper, not sensibly
champing it with our teeth, but partaking it with the sense of the soul. For
that is not the Body of Christ, which offers it self to our Eyes in the
Sacrament; but that which Faith spiritually apprehends and offers to us.
Hence ensues, that if we believe, we eat and participate, if we believe not,
we receive no profit by it. Hieremy the Patriarch teaches a change of bread
into the Body of Christ, which he calls (...) that is a transmutation: which
is not sufficient to infer a Transubstantiation, because it may only signify a
mystical alteration, which the Patriarch in the same place plainly shows;
saying, that the mysteries are truly the Body and Blood of Christ, not that
these, (...) (says he) are changed into humane flesh, but we into them; for
the better things have ever the preeminence. The words of Cyril and Hieremy in
Greek are to be found with Mr. Pagit in his Christianographie Cap. 4.

They deny Purgatory fire: So Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica: Nilus p 219.
de purg. igne.
we have not received by tradition from our teachers, that there is any fire of
purgatory, nor any temporal punishment by fire, neither do we know of any such
Doctrine, taught in the Eastern Church. Castr. adver. haeres. l. 12. p. 1.8.
Alphonsus de Castro. It is one of the most known errors of the Grecians and
Armenians, that they teach there is no place of Purgatory, where Souls after
this Life are purged from their corruptions: which they have contracted in
their Bodies, before they deserve to be received into the Eternal tabernacles.

They administer the Eucharist in both kinds, of which Cyr c 17. p. 61.
C^rill the Patriarch: As the institutor speaks of his Body, so also of his
blood: which commandment ought not to be rent asunder, or mangled according to
humane arbitrament, but the institution delivered to be kept entire.

Resp. p. 129 distinct. 31. aliter.
They allow married Priests. Hier. Patr. We do permit those Priests that cannot
contain, the use of marriage.

They deny the worship of Images. Concerning which point Cyr. resp. ad inter.
4. p. 97.
Cyril speaks: we forbid not the historical use of Pictures (Painting being a
famous and commendable Art) we grant to them that will have them, the pictures
of Christ and Saints; but their adoration and worship we detest, as forbidden
by the Holy Ghost in holy Scripture; least we should, before we are aware,
adore colors instead of our Creator and Maker.

They acknowledge the sufficiency of Scripture for an entire rule of Faith and
of our Salvation Of which Damasc. de Orthodoxa fide lib. 1. c. 1.
Damascen gives this testimony, What soever is delivered unto us in the Law
and in the Prophets, by the Apostles and Evangelists, that we receive,
acknowledge and reverence, and beside these we require nothing else.

They do not forbid the layty the reading of Scriptures. As the reading of
Scripture is forbidden to no Christian Man ( says Cyril the Patriarch) so no
Man is to be kept from the reading of it: for the word is near in their mouth
and in their hearts. Therefore manifest injury is offered to any Christian Man
of what rank or condition soever he be, who is deprived or kept from reading or
hearing the Holy Scripture.

They allow no private Masses: as Ch^traeus relates: No private Masses (says
he) are celebrated among the Grecks, without other communicants, as their
liturgies and faithful relations testif^.

They have prayer in a known tongue. They use not prayer for Souls to be
delivered out of purgatory, nor the extreme unction, nor elevating and carrying
about the Sacrament, that it may be adored; nor indulgences, nor sale of
Masses. Neither is there in their Canon, any mention made of the sacrifice of
the Body and blood of Christ for the living and dead, as Chytraeus, Guagnirus
and others quoted by Pagit. c. 4.
Pagit do relate. Other differences of less account betwixt the Grecian Church
and the Roman, you may see related by Brerew. c. 15. Possev. dereb. Muscov.
page 38.
Brerewood and Possevin.

Of the same Religion with the Grecians, are the Christians of the vast and
mighty Empire of Muscovia and Russia, under their Metropolitan the Archbishop
of Mosco, nominated and appointed by the Prince, the Emperor of Russia, and
upon this nomination consecrated by two or three of his own suffragans.

To these may be added the Christians called Nestorians (for having maintained
anciently the error of Nestorius) spread over a great part of Asia. For
besides the Countries of Babylon, Ass^ria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, and Media,
wherein many of them are found; they are scattered far and wide in the East,
both northerly to Cathaia, and foutherly to India. So that beyond the river
Tigris eastward, there is no other Sect of Christians to be found (as learned
Brerewood relates) except only the Portugals, and the Converts made by them in
India. The Patriarch of the Nestorians, to whom all those of the East parts
acknowledge obedience, has his seat in the City of Musale, on the River Tigris
in Mesopotamia, or in the Patriarchal Monastery of Saint Ermes fast by Musale.
In which City, tho subject to Mahometans, it is recorded, that the Nestorians
retain yet 15. Temples, being esteemed about 40 thousand Souls. Sanders relates
the great number of suffragan Bishops and Metropolitans subject to the
Patriarch of Musale.

Next to these, we may name the Christians of Egypt called Cophti under the
Patriarch of Alexandria; to whose jurisdiction belong not only the native
Christians of Egypt, but also those about the bay of Arabia, and in the Mount
Sinai Eastward; and in Afric, as far as the greater Syrtis westward. To him
likewise are subject the Christians called Habassins spread over the wide
Empire of Aethiopia, with their Prince commonly called Prester John. For tho
they have a Patriarch of their own, whom they call in their idiome Abuna (our
Father) yet are they limited Zaga Zabo de relig. and mor. Aethiop. apud Damian.
Goes.
to choose one of the jurisdiction of Alexandria, and a Monk of Saint Anthony he
must be. Besides the confirmation and consecration of him belongs to the
Patriarch of Alexandria, and by him is he sent with Ecclesiastical Tho. a
Jesul. 7. p. 3. Tho. a Jes. lib. 7. p. 3.
charge into Habasia. The conferring of Bishopries and other Ecclesiastical
benefices (except the Patriarcship) belongs only to the King. Their Priests
and other inferior Ecclesiastical Ministers, (as also Monks) live by their
labor, as having no tithes nor any Ecclesiastical revenues to maintain them,
nor being suffered to crave alms. All which is recorded by Zaga Zabo an
Ethiopian Bishop.

The Christians of Egypt are so constant in the profession of Christianity,
that if any of them are by force circumcised by the Turks, he is marked in the
forehead or hands with the sign of the Cross, that all Men may know him to be a
Christian.

The Patriarch of Alexandria's dwelling, is now near the Church of Saint
Nicholas in Caire, which City is one of the greatest Cities in the World,
reputed to be eight and twenty miles in length, and fourteen in breadth (as
Lithgows travels p. 306.
Lithgow reports) and that of Greeks, Copates, Armenians and others, there
are about two hundred thousand Christians in that City of Caire.

Tho. a Jesu de convers. gent. lib. 7. par. 1. c. 6. p. 363.
Thomas a Jesu relates a foul mistake in Baronius: who in the end of his sixth
to me, tells, that in the time of Pope Clement the 8. an Embassage was brought
from the Church of Alexandria, to the Roman Bishop: in which the Patriarch and
all the Provinces of Egypt, and others adjoining, did acknowledge him chief and
universal Pastor of the Church; but the matter being more diligently examined,
appeared to be a mere ly and fiction of a certain Impostor Bartavis.

How great is the extent of Christianity in Aethiopia, may appear by the vast
extent of that Empire, which according to Mr. Brerewood his dimension, is equal
with Germany, France, Spain, and Italy. Others do report it to be as great as
all Europe. Apud Pagit. p. 38.
Horatius Malegueius makes the dominion of the Ethiopian Emperor, larger
then any other; excepting the Dominion of the Catholic King.

Godig. de Abass. reb. lib. 1. c. 32 p. 195.
Godignus reports, that there are in Aethiopia one hundred and twenty seven
Archbishops. Alvares c. 14.
Alvares a Portuguese Priest relates, that in Macham Talacem which is the
Church of the Holy Trinity, he saw two hundred mitred Priests together; and
sixty four Canopies carried over them. Their Churches are built round, and very
rich, with hanging of Cloth of Gold, Velvet, and Plate. They have many goodly
Monasteries: to the Monasteries of the vision of Jesus belong about 3000 Monks.

Many were the attacks of Rome upon this flourishing Christianity of Aethiopia;
to bring it under the Dominion of the Pope. Godig. p. 367.
The more famous I find recorded, is that of Andreas Oviedo, sent thither with
the title of Patriarch, in the year 1557. who coming with his letters to the
Emperor Claudius, received this answer from him, That he would never yield
obedience to the Bishop of Rome: (he gave him leave to teach the Portugals, but
forbad him to speak one word to his Abassins touching Religion) and that he
would not suffer the Roman yoke to be laid on him or his. This Emperor Claudius
dying, Adamas succeeded; who banished the said Patriarch Andreas: and this was
the issue of the Embassy, as Godignus relates.

Under the Patriarch of Jerusalem Chytr. de statu Ecclesiae p. 24.
are the Christians inhabiting Palestine, mingled with Turks and others. The
Patriarch keeps his residence in Jerusalem, where are now remaining ten
Churches of Christians. The Patriarchal Church is the Church of Saint Sepulcher
in Jerusalem, and his house is near unto it. To this Patriarch did belong the
three Palestines. Tyrius adds two Provinces more, Rubensis and Beritensis. He
relates also five Metropolitans to have belonged to this See, and about 101
Bishops. The Armenians, Georgians, Abassins, and other Christians have several
Churches in Jerusalem.

Under the Patriarch of Antioch, are the Christians, called Syrians, of the
place of their chief habitation; and Melchites, which according to the Syrian
Etymology, is as much as to say, Royalists; because their Bishops have followed
always in Faith, and in their Councils, the example and authority of the
Emperors of Constantinople. They inhabit mingled with Mahumetans, part of
Syria, Beritus, Tripolis, Alepo, and other places in Asia.

Boter. relat. univers. par. 3. lib. 2.
Boterus says, they are the most numerous sort of Christians in the East. They
live under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Damascus, by the title of
Patriarch of Antiochia. For Antiochia it self (where the name of Christians was
first heard in the World) lying at present wast, or broken into small villages,
the Patriarchall seat was translated thence to Damascus, where are reported to
be above a thousand houses of Christians.

For although the Patriarch of the Maronites and of the Jacobites, whereof the
former keeps residence in Libanus, and the latter in Mesopotomia, entitle
themselves Patriarchs of Antiochia, and by the Christians of their own Sects be
so acknowledged, yet do the Melchites, who retain the ancient Religion of
Syria, acknowledge none for Patriarch, but the Archbishop of Damascus, reputing
both the other for Schismatics, as having departed from the obedience and
communion of the true Patriarch.

And yet beside all these, a fourth there is, of the Popes designation, that
usurpeth the title of Patriarch of Antiochia. For ever si^ce the Latins
surprised Constantinople (which was about the year 1200) and held the
possession of the Eastern Empire about 70 years: all which time the Patriarchs
of Constantinople were consecrated by the Pope, as also since the holy Land and
the Provinces about it were in the hands of the Christian Princes of the West;
which began to be about the year 1100, and so continued about 80 years; during
which season, the Patriarchs of Anticchia also and of Jerusalem were of the
Popes Congregation; ever since then, I sa^, the Church of Rome has and does
still create successively, imaginary or titular Patriarchs (without
jurisdiction) of Constantinople, Antiochia, Jerusalem, and Alexandria: so loath
is the Pope to lose the remembrance of any superiority or title, that he has
once compassed.

The Georgians inhabit the Country anciently named Iberia betwixt the Euxine
and the Caspian Seas. The vulgar opinion is that they got the name of Georgians
from their devotion to Saint George, whom they honor for their Patron, and
whose image they bear in their military ensigns. Yet this seems to be a vulgar
error, whereas mention was made of the Nation of the Georgians in those parts
both by Mela lib. 1. c. 2 Plin. lib. 6. c. 13. Prateo. de haeres. Sect. Verb.
Georgiani.
Mela and Pliny before Saint George was born. Their Religion both in ceremony
and substance is that of the Grecians, who yet were never subject to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, but all their Bishops, being 18. do profess
obedience to their own Metropolitan, without any higher dependence or relation;
who yet keeps residence far off in the monastery of Saint Catherine in the
hill of Sinai.

These Christians live separately by themselves without mixture of Mahumetans
or Pagans, under their own King. They are a very warlike People, valiant in
Battle, of great strength and might, with an innumerable multitude of
Soldiers, very terrible to the Sarazens; as it is reported by Vitriacus the
Cardinal.

Neighboring with the Georgians are the Mengrelians and Circasians, anciently
called Colchi and Zychi, both of the Greek Religion, and subject to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, as converted by his Belon. observe lib. 1. c. 35,
Ministers, Cyrillus and Metrodius, to Christian Religion. The Mengrelians
inhabit Colchis, which lies near the E^xine Sea. The Mr. Herbert lib. 65.
Circassians Country extends it self on the Meotis 500 miles, and within land
200 miles. These Countries bring forth the bravest warriors reputed in the East.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Jacobites, Armenians, Maronites and Indians.
THe Jacobites had this name (as Damascen and Nicephorus do relate) of one
Jacobus surnamed Zanzalus of Syria, who living about the year 530, was in his
time a mighty enlarger of Eutyches his Sect, touching the unity of nature in
our Savior. And his followers are at this day in great numbers known under the
name of Jacobites, in Syria, Cyprus, Mesopotamia, Babylon, and Palestine; in
which Boter. relat. p. 3. lib. 2. c. de Giacobitis. Breitenbach peregrin. c. de
Jacobitis.
Regions they are esteemed to make about a hundred and sixty thousand Families:
and are besides so far extended, as they are recorded to be spread abroad in
some 40 Kingdoms.

They have a Patriarch of their own, whose Patriarchal Church is in the
Monastery of Saphran, near the City of Merdin, in the north part of
Mesopotamia. These Tho. a Jes. de convers. lib. 7. p. 1. c. 14.
Jacobites do condemn Eutyches and his error, who confounded the two natures
of Christ; and they confess two natures to be united in Christ, and one
personated nature to be made of the two natures not personated, without
mixture, or confusion.

The Armenians for traffic (to which they are exceedingly addicted) are to be
found in multitudes in most Cities of great trade, especially in those in the
Turkish Empire, having more favor among the Turks, then any other Sect of
Christians, by a patent granted to that Nation under Mahomets own hand; as some
Postel. lib. 22. de linguis. tit. de lingua Armenica.
do report. So as no Nation is more spread abroad in Merchandising then the
Armenians, except the Jews; yet the native Regions, where they are found in
greater multitude, and their Religion is most supported, are Armenia the
greater, named (since the Turks first possession of it) Turcomannia beyond
Euphrates, and Cilicia now called Carmania.

The Armenians were anciently of the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of
Constantinople; but since the time of Photius, they have departed both from the
government of that Patriarch, and from the communion of the Grecians, and ever
since they acknowledge obedience, without further or higher dependence, to two
Patriarchs of their own, whom they term Catholics, namely the one of the
greater Armenia, under whose jurisdiction are reputed to be above 150000
Families, besides very many Monasteries. Leonard. Sidon. Episc. apud Tho. a
Jes. lib. 7. page 1. cap. 19.
He keeps his residence at present by the City of Ervan in Persia, being
translated at their first reduction to the Popes obedience, thither, by
occasion of the late Wars between the Persians and the Turks; his ancient seat
having bin Seb^stia the Metropolis of Armenia the greater. The other Patriarch
of Armenia the less, the family, of whose jurisdiction are esteemed to be
about 20000, anciently kept at Meliteny Metropolis of that Province, but now is
resident in the City of Sis not far from Tarsus in Cilicia, the middle limit of
the jurisdictions of these two Patriarchs being the River Euphrates.

Possevin. Apparat. Sacr. in v. Maronitae.
The Maronites were so named, not of an Heretic called Maron, as some did
falsely write, but of a holy Man of that name; since in the book of Councils we
find mention of the Monasteries of Saint Maron. Their main habitation is in the
mountain Libanus: which tho it contain in circuit about 700 miles, and is
possessed in a manner only by the Maronites, yet of all Sects of Christians
they are the least, as being esteemed not to pass in all 12000 Houses. Their
Patriarch, who is wont to be a Monk of St. Antony, having under his
jurisdiction eight or nine Bishops, keeps his residence for the most part in
Libanus, in a Monastery of Saint Antony. Boter. relat. Pa. 3. lib. 2. c. de
Maronitis.
He professed obedience of late together with all the Maronites to the Bishop
of Rome, being the only Nation of the East, except the Indians lately brought
to the Romish communion, who acknowledge that obedience. Gregory the 13. did
found a Seminary in Rome for the training up the youth of that Nation in the
Roman Religion.

The Indian Christians commonly called of St. Thomas, because by his preaching
they are supposed to have bin converted to Christian Religion, inhabit in the
nearer part of India, near to Cape Comori, being esteemed (before the Portugals
frequented those parts) about 15000 Families. Their Archbishop formerly
acknowledged obedience to the Patriarch of Masal by the name of the Patriarch
of Babylon, as by those Christians of India he is still termed. But the
Archbishop revolting from his former Patriarch, submitted himself of late, by
the Portugals persuasion, to the Bishop of Rome, retaining notwithstanding the
ancient Religion of his Country, which was also permitted by the Pope: in so
much that in a Synod held in Goa, for that purpose, he would not suffer any
alteration to be made of their ancientrites or Religion, as Linschot. lib. 1.
cap. 15.
one that lived in those parts at that time has recorded. But that Bishop
being dead, his successor in another Synod held by the Archbishop of Goa, at
Diamper not far from Maliapur, was induced to make profession, together with
his suffragans and Priests, both of the Roman obedience and Religion.

Here the reader may note, how ready the Roman Court is to wink at any errors
in the proselytes they can purchase, provided they acknowledge the Popes
Supremacy: that being secured, all is well, the rest will come in with time, as
has happened with these Indians. If not, that wise Court will stop where it
cannot go further, and allow what they may not deny. For it is to be
considered, that these Indians at their first reduction to the Popes obedience
with permission to use their own rites and Religion, being Nestorians, held
several Articles contrary to the Roman Faith. First, That there are two Persons
in our Savior as well as two natures. That the blessed Virgin ought not to be
termed Mother of God. That Nestorius condemned in the third and fourth general
Council, and Diodorus Tarsensis, and Theodorus Mopsuestensis condemned for
Nestorianism in the fifth, were holy Men: rejecting for their sake the third
general Council held at Ephesus, and all other Councils after it, and
especially detesting Cyril of Alexandria. Tho. a Jes. de conv. Genesis lib. 7. c.
2.

They celebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist with leavened Bread. They
communicate in both kinds. They use not auricular confession. Nor confirmation.
They celebrated the Communion instead of Wine with the juice of Raisons,
softened one night in Water, and so pressed forth. They baptized not their
Infants, until they were forty days old. They used not extreme unction. Their
Priests were married, and after the Death of their first Wives had the liberty
of the second third and oftener Marriage. They had no Images of Saints in their
Churches but only the Cross.
Other particular tenets proper to each one of the forementioned societies of
Christians inhabiting the East, may be seen with Mr. Brerewood and Mr. Pagit,
in their relations of these Churches. In sum, we may say, they agree with our
reformed Churches of Europe, as well in asserting the fundamentals of Christian
Religion as in reproving the novel errors of the Roman Church, and detesting
the arrogance of it, in pretending to a Supremacy over all other Christian
Churches, and condemning all that will not submit to their pretension herein.

CHAP. XV. A reflection upon the contents of the Chapters preceding, and upon
the pride and cruelty of Romanists, for condemning and despising all Christian
societies not subject to their jurisdiction.
CErtainly if those bold and blind Zelots of the Roman Church, who can speak no
peaceable word, nor entertain any charitable thought of any man, that is not of
their communion, did reflect upon the contents of the three Chapters
preceding, and consider how many illustrious Nations, and numerous Societies
of Men, do serve God sincerely, both in the Eastern and Western Churches, many
under continual persecution and suffering for their Religion; they would abate
their pride in despising all, that be not of their way, and moderate their
fury, in condemning all to Hell fire, that will not pay subjection to their
Pope.

When the Emperor Charles the fifth reduced the City of Ghent from a revolt,
one of his Peers counseled him he should raze down to the ground that great
City. The generous Emperor, to win that Counselor to milder thoughts, brought
him to an eminent place, whence he could view the vast extent and rare beauty
of that City; which when he had viewed, and considered, he could not find in
his heart to continue in his former severe judgment, of having it ruined.
Inhumanly cruel he must be, who considering the number and splendour of Nations
and People mentioned in the preceding Chapters, serving Christ, without
dependence upon the Pope of Rome, will have them all damned to Hell.

When Scapula president of Carthage threatened the Christians with cruel usage;
Tertullian bids him bethink himself, Ad Scapulam c. 4. p. 71.
What will thou do, says he, with so many thousands of Men and Women, of every
Sex age and dignity, as will freely offer themselves? what fires, what swords,
will thou stand in need of? what is Carthage it self like to suffer, if
decimated by thee, when every one shall see there his near kindred and
neighbors; and shall see there Matrons, and men perhaps of thy own rank and
order, and the most principal persons of either the kindred or friends of those
who are thy own nearest friends? Spare them for your own sake, if not for ours.

And in his Apology speaking of the vast spreading of that party; c. 37. p. 30.
Tho (says he) we be men of quite an other way, yet have we filled all places
among you, your Cities, Islands, Castles, Corporations, Councils, nay your
Armies themselves, your Tribes, Companies, yea the Palace, the Senate and the
Courts of Justice. Certainly these expressions of Tertullian so tender and
pressing, could not choose but work upon the mind of Scapula, and win him to a
milder dealing with the Christians. I would desire N. N. and others of the
Roman Church, severe censurers of their Christian Brethren, to reflect upon the
number and quality of those whom they condemn, and endeavor to ruin, by the
notices delivered in the three last Chap. preceding: and consider with how
much propriety the words of Tertullian may be applied to them. What power will
they have need of, to subdue the rest of Christianity, alien from their
communion, so far exceeding themselves in number and forces, as above declared?
And in case they should subdue them; what fire and sword would suffice to
destroy them? And if all should attend their wishes; what heart could endure to
see such multitudes of their dear Countrymen, friends and nearest relations
perish, whether temporally, by their decrees, tending to the ruin of all
Christians, not submitting to their power; or eternally, by the cruel verdict
of Eternal damnation, they give against all dissentors?

I know some of them will say, that this severe sentence is not of their
making, but delivered by Christ, against all that will not obey his Vicar upon
Earth, the Pope of Rome. And possible it is, that some of the simpler sort may
believe it is so. But its long since I knew and proved, that none sufficiently
conversant in the principles of their own Theology, could seriously think it to
be so: but that according to their principles, its blasphemy and Heresy, to say
without restriction, and in general terms, (as commonly they do) that none may
be saved out of the communion of the Roman Church. And my Antagonist I.S. tells
us, I did not trespass therein against truth of Doctrine, but against policy or
prudence, as he calls it, whereby I put a great stop to the conversion of
Protestants, if People did think, that out of the Romish Communion any may be
saved. So as the prudence demanded from me, was to fashion my Doctrine to the
increase of the Popes Dominion, be it with truth or untruth; and pronounce
sentence of damnation against all Christians, not subject to him, tho I should
know no such sentence to be against them in the judgment of God.

I wish my good Brethren of the Roman Church did reflect upon, and acknowledge,
the great injury they do to themselves, in breeding and fomenting this
unchristian hostility, with the whole Society of Christians separated from
their communion, so numerous and illustrious, as we have seen in the preceding
Chapters; imprinting hatred toward all, in the hearts of their Children, which
forceably must beget a return of hatred, or disaffection and mistrust. How
incommodious its, to create to themselves so many Enemies; how uneasy and
disadvantagious, to bereave themselves of the free and amiable society, of so
many noble Nations and brave People, which the apprehension of Heresy makes
intractable to them?

What happened to me with a Spanish young Man that came in my company out of
Spain into England, makes me more sensible of the misery that Romanists bring
upon themselves this way. He was of his own disposition, cheerful and
sociable: but as soon as he came among the English People, his heart and
countenance fell down, and he appeared sad and melancholic. I inquiring of him
the cause of that alteration; he answered, that he looked upon all those men as
Heretics, which made their very sight odious to him, and their company
displeasing. The man did not well know, what Heresy was; and much less did he
know, whether those Men he saw were Heretics or no. He acknowledged them to be
good men, just and civil in their dealing, and adorned with noble gifts of God;
yet the prejudice he was in against them, by conceiving them to be Heretics,
made their sight and company odious to him. Would not this Man have been more
happy in conceiving a better opinion of the People? would it not make him live
with more ease and comfort among them? not to mention now that higher Emolument
and duty, of maintaining charity toward all Men.

CHAP. XVI. Inferences from the preceding Doctrine of this whole treatise
against the several objections of N. N.
HE that has not considered the frame I proposed to observe in this treatise,
and sees me go through many Chapters of it, debating with Suarez and other
Romish writers, without any mention of N. N. may think I have neglected, or
forgotten him and his Book. But if he will take notice of my purpose made in
the beginning, of cutting down by the root the whole Fabric of the said Book;
he shall find, I am still upon my intended work. The ground and foundation of
all the cries and complaint of N. N. against me, is a supposition, that I have
left the Catholic Church and Faith, by withdrawing from the communion of the
Roman Church, and embracing this of England. In the whole discourse of this
Treatise, I have proved, that the Church of England is in all propriety
Catholic; and the Faith professed in it truly Catholic and Apostolic; and all
this by rules and principles taken from the ablest of Romish Writers, for
proceeding in this inquiry: whereby it remains proved, that all the
exclamations of N. N. against me, went upon a false supposition, and
consequently are vain and groundless.

Hence I infer, first, how vain is his query, and more vain his divining
answer, about what drew me out of Gods house. It appears by what is said
hitherto, and will be further declared in the rest of this Book; that in my
change, I did not leave the house of God, but removed to the best and soundest
part of it; that no private spirit, or rash fancy moved me; but a sincere
acknowledgment of truth, by the ordinary means God has disposed for us to come
by it.

I infer secondly, how groundless and unreasonable his pretention is, that I
should have quitted the holy Doctors, Gregory, Ambrose, Augustine, and Jerome,
and all the ancient Fathers and Catholic Doctors. He does not tell how or
wherein I have deserted that noble company; neither indeed were it easy for him
to tell it. I live, and do firmly resolve to die in the same Catholic Church,
which they lived and died in; and in the profession of the same Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, which they professed. The same, and no other Faith is
professed in the Church of England; whose communion I have embraced, as has
bin sufficiently demonstrated hitherto; and I hope by the merits and grace of
our Savior Jesus, to enjoy the company of those blessed Saints in Heaven,
maugreall the censures of Rome.

Neither was I ever closer with those Holy Fathers in the Romish Church, then I
am now in the English. It is one of the perverse calumnies of our adversaries,
to give forth, that there is not due regard had of them here. I see the
contrary. I have observed diligently the ways of the Universities, and method
of Study with Learned men in England and Ireland: and I see with them far
greater application to the study and reading of holy Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, then ever I saw amongst Romanists. Whilst the most learned of these
spend their life and forces in speculative notions, only serving Schole
debates, learned Protestants employ their time more happily, in the study of
the Holy Scriptures, of Fathers, and credible Histories.

I infer thirdly, how rash and injurious is his censure, in saying, that by
embracing the confession, contained in the 39. Articles of the Church of
England, I have made my self partaker of all the Heresies, and an associate of
all the Heretics, that were from the beginning of the World to this day. Of
these he makes a great list, beginning with Lucifer, whom he will have to be
the first Heretic before Man's Creation, and from him proceeds to Lamech, the
Giants, all those that entered not into the Ark, but perished in the deluge, who
were all Heretics, says he. Then enters Cham, with the builders of Babels,
Esau, Jannes and Jambres, Corah and Dathan, Nadah and Abihu, all those strange
Kings that made war against the Children of Israel, all the false Prophets of
Baal. Of all these Heretics, he says, I am become an associate, by embracing
the confession contained in the 39 Articles of the Church of England. But is
not all this rage without any mixture of reason? Is it not a sufficient
confutation of the Man, and a foul confusion to him, to repete this raving
speech of his? In what part of the 39 Articles, or of the three Creeds we use
in the Church of England, will he find those Heresies he appropriats to us?

But he will come nearer home, and make a long narrative of errors and vices
related of Luther, Calvin, Melanchton, and others, who contributed with their
writings to the reformation of the Church. To which I say, first, that I have
but too much reason not to believe all that they say of their opposers.
Secondly, that tho some of those, who concurred to the Reformation, should have
fallen as men, into some vices or errors; the Reformation it self (which
certainly was a work of God) ought not to be undervalued for that. The sacred
College of the Apostles, first founders of the Christian Church, had in it one
as bad as Judas; shall the whole College of the Apostles, and the Religion
founded by them be disesteemed for that? Several of those renowned Fathers,
preachers, and defenders of the Gospel after the Apostles in the primitive
Church, as Origin, Tertullian, etc. through human frailty, were guilty of no
few errors; shall we therefore despise the work they did, and the healthful
part of their Doctrine? If you did tell me of some Doctrine imposed upon us as
an article of belief, and rule of manners, that were Heretical, or opposite to
the law of God, that were pertinent to work upon me: but this I am certain you
will never be able to do; and no less certain am I, that your Church is guilty
of such impositions upon its followers; as I shall demonstrate by several
instances in the second part of this treatise. But to tell me of vices and
errors of particular persons is both impertinent, and imprudent, I knowing so
much how matters go on your side. I appeal to your own knowledge by what you
have seen and heard of of the Court of Rome. And if you will conceal your
knowledge herein: I remit your self, and the Reader, not to Protestant
Historians, which happily you may suspect, but to your own most qualified, as
Platina, Onuphrius, and even Baronius. Read in them the acts and lives of
several of those your holy Fathers, and infallible oracles of Doctrine, the
Popes of Rome; see the transactions of John the thirteenth about the year 966,
or of Sylvester the secound, about the year 999. or John the 18. about the year
1003. or Benedict the 9. about the year 1033. or of Gregory the 7. about the
year 1080. or Boniface the 8. about the year 1294. or Alexander the 6. and of
his outrageous Son Caesar Borgia, about the year 1294. and you shall find them
to be such men, as no Epicurean monster storied out to the World, has outgon
them in sensuality, cruelty, tyranny, and all manner of vices. And while I have
in my memory, and before mine eyes unfeigned Histories of this kind; spare
heaping fables against some particular persons concurring to the reformation.

But who will not admire the man's disingenuity in reproaching me, and the
Church of England, with the Tenets, or madness of the Quakers, which he relates
at the end of the 16 chapter of his Book; knowing and confessing in the same
place, that they are reproved and punished by this Church; and that the author
of them James Naylour was condemned to a perpetual imprisonment, after being
whipped publicly, and his tongue bored with a burning iron. May not I, with the
same reason, reproach him and his Church, with the horrid impieties of the
Jews, Moors, and Atheists, as thick set in Spain and Italy, as Quakers among
us? But were that fair dealing, I knowing that such Sects are not approved of,
but rather punished in those Countries? Why then for shame, will N. N. tell me,
I am become of the society of Quakers, by adhearing to the Church of England,
he telling at the same time how severely they are punished amongst us? And if I
were of his temper, for pleasuring vulgar readers, with stories and rarities of
this kind, I could with more ground of truth, and therefore more sensibly
return upon him a large sum of practices, which to indifferent judgments would
appear no better then madness; yet daily used by persons and societies approved
and applauded in his Church. But I reserve my time and labor for a more
serious and becoming work: in the mean time I remit him to Sir Edwin Sandys his
Book, containing a Survey of the Western Church; where he shall see set down,
with candor and ingenuity becoming a Gentleman and a Christian, the rites and
customs he saw practiced in several societies of the Roman Church. He does not
grudg to praise them, where he finds them praise worthy, neither does he sour
his pen in relating their faults. If you will be ingenuous, you will confess he
says nothing but what you know your self to be in practice; and if long custom
and passion got by it has not blinded your judgment, you shall perceive many of
those practices to be as unreasonable and mad, as any of those you relate of
the Quakers. And if you will have a more exact and vigorous discussion of this
point, go to Dr. Stilling fleet his Book, where he speaks of the fanaticism
practiced in the Church of Rome; and you shall find in it confusion enough, and
reason to spare objecting to us the follies of Quakers.

And whereas you pretend to fright me with representing to me errors of
particular persons of the Protestant Church; if I would resolve to make a
return to you of that kind, I could make my Book swell, and the Readers heart
tremble, by relating the Heresies, Blasphemies, and execrable Doctrines, which
I have heard preached, and saw printed by persons of your Church. I will only
relate to you, for example, some few propositions of Books that came to my own
hands: the one was of a grave preacher, who prepared for the print a large
volume of Commentaries upon the Gospel of St. Mark. This book was sent by the
Provincial of his order, to be examined by me: and having read it with
attention, I voted against the printing of it, for several faults I specified
in my censure, but especially for containing some desperate blasphemous
propositions, as this following, touching St. John Evangelist. Joannis
Excellentia titulo dilecti maxima est: major est quam Redemtoris etiam in deo.
Tanta est, quanta esse Deum trinum and unum; imo propter hoc verbum caro factum
est.

For the understanding of which mad piece of Rhetoric, it is to be considered,
that there are two Sects of Nuns; the one passionatly bent to extol St. John
the Evangelist above St. John Baptist; the other preferring, with no less
animosity, the Baptist before the Evangelist. Our preacher before mentioned to
pleasure the Nuns of the Evangelist, delivers that prodigious Paradox; which in
English may be turned thus, exceeding great is the excellency of John, upon the
account of being the Beloved. It is greater then that of a Redeemer even in
God: it is so great, as to be God in trinity and unity: nay for this cause, the
word was made flesh. Go now and compare this piece of Doctrine with any of
those you related of the Protestant writers; and if it has not out gone them
all, add to it what follows.

Being advertised by the inquisitor general of Spain, at the second time he
sent me a license for reading prohibited Books, that I had not given him
account of what censureable propositions I might have lighted upon in my
readings, as he had charged me to do, in the instrument of such a License,
which he had sent me the year before; I sent to him a list of some perverse
Doctrines I saw in Books approved, and in much use among themselves (for
Protestant Books I could find none to give account of) among which were the
three propositions following prefixed for titles to so many moral discourses of
Leander de Murcia in his Commentaries on the book of Esther. The first of which
goes thus, Adeo essicax est mortis memoria ad reducendos in meliorem frugem
homines, ut non solum ipsi, sed etiam Deus op. Max. proposita ante oculos morte
in meliora contendat. The memory of Death is so powerful to reduce Men unto a
better life; that not only they, but even God Almighty himself laying death
before his eyes becomes better. The second runs thus, Etiam demon morte ante
oculos constituta contendit in meliora; even the Devil looking upon death,
mends himself. The third proposition is this, Tanta dilectione prosecutus est
filius Dei homines, vt pro ipsis quasi insanire videatur. The Son of God his
love to men has bin so great, that he seems to be mad for them. And if thus it
goes, even in Books current and approved among you, what if I did relate the
Doctrines of others censured and prohibited by your inquisitions; as you and
your party frequently do upbraid our Church, with erroneous Doctrines of
particular Men, which we do utterly detest, and our learned Men do vigorously
oppose by word and pen, in Pulpits, Books, and Schools?

CHAP. XVII. The Reformation of the Church of England vindicated from the
slanderous aspersions of N. N. and other Romanists.
IT is very usual with the Zelots of the Romish Church to make Henry the Eight
sole Author of the Reformation of the English Church, loading that Prince with
bitter invectives and odious reports, thereby to render the reformation
contemtible, to which N. N. in the 14. chapter of his Book adds a slanderous
relation of the lives and behavior of some Monks and Friars come out of
Germany, which he pretends to have bin the authors and contrivers of the 39.
Articles of the Church of England. I will not repete the many idle stories he
tells of them, more fit to divertise simple persons of his own credulity in a
Winter night at the fire, then to work on serious and knowing Men. I have
chosen for a more short and solid way, rather to justify our cause, with
positive arguments, then to follow our adversaries in sifting fopperies.

To this purpose I will lay for foundation of my present discourse, that the
whole frame of the Reformation stands upon two points: whereof the first, and
more resented at Rome, is the denying of the Popes supremacy, and the
withdrawing of the Church of England from subjection to him. The second is the
Reformation of the Liturgy and Doctrine of the said Church from errors and
corruptions introduced in it.

As for the first it is clear and evident, that neither Henry the 8. nor
Luther, nor Calvin, nor any of those strangers mentioned by N. N. were authors
or causers of the freedom of the Church of England from subjection to the Pope
of Rome; This freedom being by its own right inherent in it from the beginning
of its Christianity, however King Henry his valor and resolution broke off
effectually the Tyrannical usurpations of Rome, which long time did oppress the
English Church and Nation, notwithstanding their continual reluctance, and
complaint against those Romish extortions.

Far were those good Christians that inhabited England before the time of
Gregory the Great, from giving or owning obedience to the Bishop of Rome; and
so when Augustine came hither, about the year 590, and demanded their obedience
to the Church of Rome, the Abbot of Bangor returned him answer, Council. Spelm.
P. 108.
That they were obedient to the Church of God, to the Pope of Rome, and to
every godly Christian; to love every one in his degree in charity, to help them
in word and deed, to be the Children of God: and other obedience then this,
they did not know due to him, whom he named to be Pope, nor to be Father of
Fathers.

And if Augustine did pretend to such a subjection from England to Rome, as the
Popes of it now would have, certainly he exceeded his commission for St.
Gregory that sent him, never pretended to that supremacy which his successors
do aspire to, as we shall demonstrate in the 15 chapter of the second part of
this treatise; and how far he was from pretending England to be of his
jurisdiction, may appear by what is related of him, that being told, certain
children were de Britannica Insula, he did not know whether the Country were
Christian or Pagan.

The sili^^ and voluntary respect and obedience, which the holiness and
learning of Gregory and some other good Popes gained among the English, gave
occasion to others following of less merit, to pretend to a right to such
obedience, which being perceived by the Kings, they prohibited all appeals to
Rome, and the coming of Legates thence, and so much as the receiving of letters
without the Kings license; as may appear by Paschalis the Second his letter to
Henry the first, expostulating with him about this particular, in these words,

Sedis Apostolicae nuncii vel literae, praeter jussum regiae Majestatis, nullam
in potestate tua susceptionem aut aditum promerentur, nullus inde clamor,
nullum inde judicium ad sedem Apostolicam destinantur, etc. This happened in
an. 1114. notwithstanding the King stood upon his resolution; so as in the year
following 1119, sending his Bishops to a Council held by Callixtus the 2. at
Rhemes at their departing, he gave them instructions; not to complain of each
other, because himself would right each of them at home: that they Joh, Diacon.
l. 1. c. 21. vita Greg.
should Orderi. Vital is p. 857. Ite and Dominum Papam de part mea salutate,
and Apostolica praecepta humiliter audite; sed superfluas adinventiones regno
meo adinferre nolite.
salute the Pope from him, hear his precepts, but bring no superfluous devices
or innovations into his kingdom.

True it is, That several of our Godly Kings did permit appeals should be made
to Rome, in matters wherein our own Bishops could not agree, and directions to
be sought from thence, as from a flourishing and learned Church, not as a
superior Judicature. And when the Roman Bishops did pretend to any such
superiority, our Kings did protest against it. So Henry the fifth having
demanded of Martin the fourth some particulars, to which his Ambassadors not
finding him ready to assent; they Arthur Duc. in vita Henrici Chichly p. 56. 57.
told him, That they had orders to protest before him, that the King would use
his own right in those particulars, as things which he demanded, not out of
necessity, but for the honor and respect he was willing to show to that Sea,
that they should make a public protestation thereof before the whole College of
Cardinals. And to this purpose are sundry examples remaining on Rot. parliam.
17 Edward 3. n. 59. 25. Edw. 3. oct. purif. n. 13. 7. Hen. 4. n. 114. 13. Hen.
6. n. 38.
record; where the King at the Petition of the Commons, for redress of some
things amiss belonging to Ecclesiastic cognizance, first chooses to write to the
Pope; but on his delay, or failing to give satisfaction, does either himself by
statute redress the inconveniency, or command the Archbishop to see it don.

For certain it is, by the course of all our Chronicles and histories, that our
Kings, together with the convocation of their Bishops and Clergy, had in
themselves absolute and entire power of governing and reforming the Church of
this kingdom, without any dependency upon any foreign authority. It was never
doubted, neither could it be denied upon any warrantable ground, that they had
within their own dominions, the same power which Constantine had in the Empire,
and that our Bishops had the same which St. Peter had in the Church. For which
since the Erection of Canterbury into an Archbishopric, the Bishops of that
Sea were held, Malms. de Pontif. lib. 1. in Ansel. fol. 127.15.
Quasi alterius orbis Papae, as Urban the Second styled them, and did exercise
vices Apostolicas in Anglia; that is, they used the same power within this
Island which the Eadmer. p. 27.
Pope did in other parts. And in our writers the Archbishop of Canterbury is
frequently called Princeps Episcoporum Angliae, ib. p. 107. 33.
Pontifex summus, Gervas. Boro. ber. col. 1663. 54.
Patriacha. King Edgar asserted this power to be in himself, and in his Clergy,
in his memorable speech made to them, Apud Ailred. col. 361.16.
Ego Constantini, vos Petri gladium habetis in manibus. I bear in my hand the
sword of Constantin, and you that of Peter. And therefore as the affairs of
most concerns in the Church, had their dependence on the Emperor, and the holy
men of those times did not doubt to continue to him the style of Pontifex
maximus, as Tom. 3. an. 312. n. 106.
Baronius notes, sine ulla christianitatis labe. So Regularis Concordia etc.
Not. Seldeni ad Eadmerum. p. 146. 16.
King Edgar was solicito is of the Church of his Kingdom, veluti domini sedulus
Agricola, and pastorum pastor. And wrote himself the Vicar of Christ, and by
his Council. Spelm. a p. 444. a^ p. 476.
laws and Canons he made known, that he did not assume those titles in vain.

King Leg. Edw. Confess. c. 17. p. 142. Rex quia vicartus summi Regis est. ad
hocest constitutus, ut regnum terrenum and populum dom^ni and s^per omnia
sanctam veneretur Ecclesiam ejus, and regat, and ab injurtis defendat.
Edward the Confessor a canonized Saint, did declare the same, and practiced
accordingly; The King, says he, being vicar of the supreme King, his duty is
to govern and defend the earthly Kingdom, and the people of the Lord from
injuries, and over all to reverence govern and defend his Church. The same was
declared and practiced by Leg. Inae in pras. p. 1.
Ina, whom Baronius styles a most pious King, by Leg. fol. 11. p. 109.
Canutus acknowledged for a most bountiful benefactour of Churches, and of the
servants of God. Erga Ecclesias atque Dei servos, benignissimus largitor, as
Epist. 97. fol. 93. Canut. c
Furbertus Carnotensis relates of him and several other godly Kings of England,
whose several laws touching Ecclesiastic affairs, you may see related by
Jorvalens. c. 2. col. 761. c. 5. col. 830. c. 23. col. 921. as also the laws of
Emperors, to the same purpose in the books of Codex Theodos. de seriis, de
nuptiis etc. de s^de Catholica, de Episcopis Ecclesiis and clericis, de
monachis, de haereticit, de Apost. de Religione, de Episcopali judicio. and
cod. Jast. l. 1. Tit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and passim in co.
Theodosius and Justinian.

The Emperors did employ their Bishops and Divines, in resolving upon wholesome
decrees touching Church affairs, and these decrees they espoused themselves
for Laws; so as the transgressors of them should be subject to penalties. This
same course our Kings have taken as well in former ages as in this latter of
the Reformation of our Church. Henry the Eighth having those occasions of
discontent with Pope Clement the Seventh (which as too much known I omit to
relate,) and being urged by the States of the Kingdom to execute at last what
long time was desired, and often attemted in England, viz. to throw off the
usurped power and jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome over this Kingdom; to
proceed with due legality and consideration in so weighty a matter, he wrote to
the Universities, and great Monasteries, and Churches of the Kingdom, in the
year, 1534. and the eighteenth of May of the same year, to the University of
Oxford, requiring them like men of virtue and profound Literature, diligently
to entreat, examine, and discuss a certain question, viz. An Romanus Episcopus
habeat majorem aliquam Jurisdictionem sibi collatam in Sacra Scriptura in hoc
Regno Angliae, quam alius quivis Externus Episcopus. Whether the Bishop of Rome
had any greater jurisdiction given to him in holy Scripture over this Kingdom
of England, then any other foreign Bishop; and to return their opinion in
writing under their common Seal, according to the mere and sincere truth of the
same. To which after mature deliberation, and examination, they returned
answer; That he has no such jurisdiction in this land.

The words of the University of Oxford returning their answer to the King upon
this subject the 27. of June, of the aforesaid 1534. which I saw in the Records
of that University, are as follow, Post susceptam itaque per nos quaestionem
ante dictam, cum omni humilitate, devotione, ac debita reverentia, convocatis
undique dictae nostrae Academiae Theologis, habitoque complurium dierum spatio,
ac deliberandi tempore satis amplo, quo interim cum omni qua potuimus
diligentia, Justitiae Zelo, Religione and conscientia incorrupta,
perscrutaremur, tam Sacrae Scripturae libros, quam super cisdem approbatissimos
interpretes, and eos quidem saepe and saepius a nobis evolutos and exactissime
collatos, repetitos and examinatos, deinde and disputationibus solennibus palam
and public habitis, and celebratis, tandem in hanc sententiam unanimiter omnes
convenimus, ac concordes fuimus, viz. Romanum Episcopum majorem aliquam
jurisdictionem non habere sibi a Deo collatam in Sacra Scriptura in hoc Regno
Anglia, quam alium quemvis Externum Episcopum. We therefore, after having taken
in hand this question with all humility, devotion and due reverence, the
Divines of our University being called together from all places, and the space
of many days and time enough bein given for deliberating, whereby with all
diligence possible, zeal of Justice, Religion and upright con^^ience, we should
search as well the Books of Holy Scripture, as the most approved interpreters
of them, and they being very often turned over by us, and most exactly
conferred together, reviewed and examined; and moreover having celebrated and
held public and solemn disputes on this subject, at last we have all
unanimously agreed upon this sentence, viz. That the Bishop of Rome has not
any more Jurisdiction given to him by God in holy Scripture, in this Kingdom of
England, then any other foreign Bishop has. Having met with this religious and
learned declaration of the University of Oxford, I thought convenient to relate
it here, as well for the authority the opinion of this great University is apt
to give to the matter, as also that it may be to us an argument of the zeal and
diligence, wherewith the other Schools, Monasteries, and Churches did proceed
to deliver their opinion upon this subject.

And if it be true, what the famous Canonist Navar. cap. Cum conti gat de
rescript. remed. 1, n. ^o. qui unius Doctor^s eruditione ac animi pretate
celebr^s autoritate d^ctus secerit al quid, ex^usatur, etiam^ ^d non esset
justum, and alii contrarium tenerent.
Navar says, (and now is more commonly said and confirmed by Casuists and
Canonists) that who does any thing, following therein the opinion of one Doctor
of known learning and piety (tho others be of contrary opinion,) is excused,
tho happily what he did should not be just in it self; and if the authority of
one Doctor of learning and piety can justify a man's proceeding, shall not the
opinion of so great a number of men famous for learning and piety, that were
then in the Universities, Monasteries and Churches of England, justify the
proceedings of King Henry, in freeing his Kingdom from the slavery it was in
under the Bishop of Rome?

This indeed was to lay the axe to the root of the Romish usurpations and
corruptions in this Land. Their pretended authority in it being found and
declared not to be from God, nor grounded upon his divine word, but illegally
and fraudulently intruded upon the Nation; it follows that they were all at
their own liberty to reform their Church, by a National Synod of their own
Prelates and Clergy, under the protection and inspection of their Prince, as in
other times was don in this land, and in consequence to this the states of the
Kingdom being congregated in Stat. 26. Hen. 8. c. 1. begun Nov. 3. end Dec. 18.
1533.
Parliament an. 1533 have declared, that his Majesty, his heirs and successors
Kings of this Realm, shall have full power and authority from time to time to
visit, repress, redress all such errors, heresies, abuses, etc. which by any
manner of spiritual authority or jurisdiction may be lawfully reformed,
repressed, ordered, redressed, etc. And this was not to assume a new power, but
to renew and publish the ancient right of the Kings of this Land.

It is true that Popes in former ages, not finding means to hinder our Princes
from exercising this right of their own, would by privilege continue it unto
them. So Pope Nichelas finding our Kings to express one part of their office to
be Regere populum Domini and Ecclesiam ejus, wrote to Edward the Confessor,
Vobis and posteris ves^ris regibus Angliae committimus convocationem ejusdem
loci and omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum, and vice nostra cum consilio
Episcoporum, and Abbatum constituatis ubique quae justa sunt. We commit unto
you and your successors Kings of England the government of that place, and of
all the Churches of England, that in our name ye may by the Councils of Bishops
and Abbots order in all places what will be just. The same Pope did allow the
like privilege to the Emperor. Bar. 11. Annal. 1059. n. 23.
Nicolaus Papa hoc domino meo privilegium, quod ex paterno jure susceperat,
praebuit. Said the Emperors advocat, Pope Nicholas allowed this privilege to my
Master which himself had by his birthright. By the like art, finding the
People of England unwilling to acknowledge any Ecclesiastic power besides that
of the land, and the Archbishop of Canterbury for supreme of it under the
King, the Popes have contrived, that the Archbishop of Canterbury should
exercise that power as from them under the name of Legatus natus, or Legate by
his place of the Roman Sea.

This may seem like what they report of the great Cham of Tartary, that after
he had dined, he orders to give leave by the sound of a Trumpet to all the
Kings of the World, that they may go to dinner. But the Pope drives further in
his grants, that in time, if power should assist him, he may force upon them a
subjection to him, as if really the Princes did owe their power to him. But the
arts of Rome are too much known in England, for the people to be further
deluded by them.

And therefore a National Synod, or a Convocation of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and other Clergy of the Kingdom being celebrated at London by order of
King Henry the sixth, in the sixth year of his reign, being that of our Lord
1552. a summary of Articles was agreed upon, to remove dissentions in Religion,
and reform the Church from corruptions that crept into it, so pious and
moderate, so well grounded upon Divine Scripture, and upon the Doctrine and
practice of the Primitive Apostolic Church, that Romanists may more easily rail
and rant at, then discover any real error in them.

My adversary N. N. after highly inveighing against these Articles, and
boasting to discover Heresies in them, singles out the 22. Article which runs
thus, The Roman Doctrine of Purgatory, Indulgences, veneration and adoration as
well of Images as of relics, as also of the invocation of Saints is absurd
and vainly invented, nor is grounded upon any authority of Scripture, but is
rather repugnant to the word of God. Upon which Article, N. N. delivers this
heavy censure, that it is false, profane, and Heretical. But in the whole
discourse of the second part of this Treatise, I will demonstrate God willing,
that it is rather true, Religious, and Catholic; as also I do intend by the
help of God, to vindicate the rest of those Articles in a separat Treatise from
the cavils of Alexander White and other Romanists, whereby N. N. will find how
much he is mistaken in taking the said Alexander White's Book against the
thirty nine Articles for unanswerable, as certainly he is far mistaken in
saying resolutely, tho without having any ground for it, that the aforesaid
White has bestowed more time and deliberation in quitting those Articles, then
I have don in deserting the communion of the Roman Church. Seven years he says
Mr. White spent in deliberating upon his resolution; but certainly I have spent
many more years in deliberating upon mine. How many they were as it is not
easy to demonstrate, so it is not material to tell; men may deliberate long
and err at last in their resolution. To my reasons alleged for that resolution
which I took I appeal, and do willingly expose them to public view and
examination, that others as well as I, may judge of the weight of them.

Very foul and slanderous also has bin the mistake of our adversary, in saying
that the Authors of our 39. Articles were only some few obscare men, Priests
and Friars run out of Germany, and that by them the Church and Kingdom of
England, was governed in the Reformation of their Religion. How false their
report is, may appear by the public Records and Histories of the Land, and by
several Acts of Parliament passed with great deliberation of all the States of
the Kingdom upon the settlement of the Reformation, and of those Articles as
well in that great Synod or Convocation celebrated under Edward the sixth in
the year 1552. above mentioned, as also an other no less famous Synod held at
London ten years after, viz. 1562. wherein the said Articles were reviewed,
examined, and confirmed.

I have seen among Seldens Books kept in the Bodleian Library of Oxford, an
Authentic COpy of these Articles printed at London in the year 1563, and a
scroul of parchment annexed to it with the subscriptions (by their proper
hands) of the members of the lower house of Convocation, being all Deans, Arch
Deacons, and procurators of Clergy, which I found to be in number 104, besides
the Archbishops, and Bishops, sitting in the upper house, whose names came not
in my way to see, but I am to suppose they were all the Prelates of the Land,
as they used to meet in Convocation. And is this to shuffle up a Reformation,
and make Articles in clandest in manner, without due examination, as our
Adversary would make his Reader believe?

CHAP. XVIII. A view of N. N. his discourse upon Transubstantiation, and upon
the affinity of the Roman Church with the Grecian.
THo N. N. had declared his purpose in the beginning to deal with me not
Scholastically, but Historically: yet it seems he would not part with me
without disputing upon the point of Transubstantiation. He alleges testimonies
and Fathers, and miracles in favor of it: and pretends it to have bin a
Doctrine of more ancient standing then the Lateran Council. To all which I have
given a full answer in what I have delivered by my discourse formerly printed,
and in what will follow in the second part of this Treatise from the 18.
Chapter forward.

Only I will reflect here upon two or three very gross mistakes of N. N. in his
present discourse with me upon the point. The first is touching my belief of
this great mystery. He says resolutely (without giving any ground for his
saying, as indeed he could have none for it) that I do not believe Christ to be
really present at all in this Sacrament, why then (says he) should he dispute
with us about the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, seeing he flatly denies the
body and blood of Christ to be really and substantially present in the
Sacrament? But good Sir, where have you seen this flat denial of mine.
certainly not in my declaration (which seems to be the object of your quarrel)
not in the 39. Articles, not in any public Catechism or system of Doctrine
generally received by the Church of England: nay the Catechism approved by
authority, and commended to the use of all, being inserted into the Common
Prayer Book, delivers the Doctrine quite opposite. For to the question
proposed, touching the inward or invisible part of this Sacrament, this answer
is returned, The Body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken
and received by the faithful in the Lords Supper. And is this to deny flatly,
that the Body and blood of Christ is really present in the Sacrament, as you
impute to us? When a Jesuit in Germany broached the like calumny, in a
conserence had with some of the English nobility, waiting upon our King in that
Country, in presence of his Majesty and of a Prince Elector in that Empire;
both his Majesty and the Noblemen took offense at his Speech, as being a foul
Calumny; and therefore desired the Reverend and Learned Doctor Cousin Bishop of
Durham, to vindicate the Church of England from that a spersion; as he did
abundantly, in a very learned Tract published under the title of Historia
Transubstantiationis Papalis. Wherein he proves by the Articles, public
Catechisms, and by the testimonies of several Vide Jacobum Armac. in resp. ad
Malon. Mont. Norw. in Antidiatribis, Laud. Cantua. in resp. ad Fish. Hooker.
Polit. Eccles. l. s, Joh. Roffens. de potest. Pap. in prae fat. stat. Prime
Elis. c. 1. and 8. Elis. c. 12, 13. Elis. c. 1.
grave and learned Prelates, that all true Protestants, especially those of the
Church of England, do constantly believe and profess, that Christ our Savior
is really and substantially present in the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist;
and his Body and blood really and substantially received in it by the faithful:
and accordingly he alleges the learned Bilson B. of Wincl ester, declaring the
belief and Doctrine of the Church of England touching this point in the words
following, Eucharistiam non solum figuram esse Corporis Domini, sed etiam ipsam
veritatem, naturam, atque sul stantiam in se comprehendere. 'That the Eucharist
is not only a figure or representation of the Body of our Savior, but that it
comprehends also the very truth and nature and substance of his body.

The very same Doctrine is contained in the 28. Article of the 39. above
mentioned in these words, The Body of Christ is given or taken and eaten in the
Supper only after an Heavenly and spiritual manner. Here you have a real
giving, eating and taking; and consequently a real presence of the Body of
Christ confessed by our Church as well as by yours. Our difference is only,
touching the mode of his presence. We say that mode or manner to be spiritual;
you pretend that it is corporal: with what consequence, or coherence with the
rules of common reason, you will never be able to declare; nor how to avoid
contradiction, in saying that his flesh and blood is present in the Sacrament
after a corporal manner; and with all that none of our corporal senses is able
to give testimony of such a presence.

Neither will you find it an easier task to declare unto us what may be the
object of your adoration given to the consecrated bread. If you say it is the
person of our Savior, God and Man, really present, we adore and reverence the
same as well as you. If you pretend that your adoration does extend to more;
that must be only the accidents of the Bread and Wine appearing to the senses;
which accidents, being in your own confession mere creatures, to give unto them
the worship of Latria, cannot with any color of reason be excused from a
formal Idola^ry.

The second very gross error, I find in the discourse of N. N. upon this
subject, is, that finding me complain of the Roman Church, for forcing upon
Christians a belief of Monstrous miracles, in their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; he cries against me in Tragical terms, as if I had reviled
Gods wonders, calling miracles monstrous, and appeals to the Catholic Reader
for a severe sentence against me in these words, Numquid haec est atrox
humuncionis insultantis Christo and Ecclesiae rabies? page 126. And I appeal to
any Reader of sense, whether I may not on good ground return on him this other
quere, Annon hic est hominis frigide, id est non opportune excandescentis
inconditus clamor? p. 136. Is not this cry a fit of zeal unseasonably burni^g?
To call those miracles they pretend to intervene in the consecrated bread
Monstrous, he takes it for a contempt of Gods wonders in general. So if I say,
a Man born with 2 Heads and 3 Eyes is a Monstrous Man; that must be taken for
an affront put upon all humane kind. Sir I reverence Gods wonders, and those
many miracles wrought by his powerful hand, and I bless his holy name for all.
But those miracles you would have us believe to happen in the consecration of
the Eucharist; as that the substance of the bread vanishes a way, and the
accidents of it remain without any substance to rest upon, etc. these I deny to
be true miracles, or works of God, but a product of your erring imagination;
and if you will persist in calling them miracles, certainly they must appear
monstrous ones. For the proof whereof, you give your self a very considerable
help, by a definition, or description of a miracle, which you produce out of
Aquinas, how much to your purpost is not easy to find; but very clearly it
serves for my present purpose, of making your pretended miracles in the
Eucharist appear most properly monstrous. You tell us that Aquinas says, 1. P.
quaes. 105. A. 7.
quod nomen miraculi ab admiratione sumitur: Admiratio autem consurgit, cum
effectus sunt manifesti a causa occulta. That the word miracle comes from
admiration: and this admiration does arise, when the effect appears, and the
cause is hidden. Here we have the common and ordinary nature of a miracle
described; that a wonderful effect should appear, tho the cause should be
hidden. Now it rests to know what is the proper notion of a Monster.
Philosophers do give us this definition of it out of Aristotle, monstrum est
effectus a recta and solita secundum speciem dispositione degenerans. A Monster
is an effect degenerating from the right and common disposition of things of
that kind. So that a Man born with two Heads is called monstrous, because he
degenerats from the right and common disposition of other men. The College of
Conimb. in Arist. 2. Phy. c. 9. q. 5. Ar. 1.
Coimbra declares this to be Vulgata Monstri desinitio, the vulgar or commonly
received definition of a Monster. Now then, if the common and ordinary nature
of a miracle is, as you tell us out of Aquinas, that the miraculous effect
should be manifest and apparent, tho the cause were hidden; then a miracle
degenerating from this common course and nature of miracles, so as the effect
pretended to be miraculous should not be manifest or known to any, must be
according to these rules a monstrous Miracle, deviating and degenerating from
the common course of true Miracles. Of this kind are your imaginary Miracles of
the Eucharist; that the bread and wine should be substantially converted into
the flesh and blood of our Savior corporally present. If this were so indeed,
and therefore a real and true Miracle; this miraculous effect would appear to
the senses of men, as that true and miraculous conversion of the Water into
Wine, at the wedding in Cana of Calilee, did appear to the senses of the Men
present there; and thereby appeared to be a true Miracle, and more fit to breed
a belief in the beholders; which is the ordinary aim of Divine providence in
working Miracles; and which certainly Christ would not have obtained of the
persons then present, if he had only told them, that the water remaining with
the same color, taste and smell which it had before, was really converted into
Wine, without letting any of their senses bear testimony of such a conversion.
Of this latter kind are your imaginary Miracles, which being of your own
making, I may without offense to God, or prejudice to his true Miracles, call
them Monstrous, as degenerating from the common course of true Miracles.

The third mistake that I am to put N. N. in mind of at present, is, concerning
his pretention to affinity with the Greek and Ruthenian Church, in the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, and of other points controverted, with our reformed
Churches; for which he pleases himself, in telling us of a favorable relation
to his purpose, given by a Muskovite Priest to a French Prelate that feasted
him. But that he may see how wide is his mistake herein, and how far the
Grecians and Ruthenians are from joining issue with the Roman Church against
us, I remit him to what I have related above upon more solid and authorized
grounds in the 13. Chapter of this Treatise.

Neither indeed can I see upon what ground you can pretend to union with the
Greek Church in their tenets: if it be not, that several of your greatest
Scholemen, such as are Lomb. 1. Sent. d. 11. Sane sciendum est, quod licet in
praesentiarticulo a nobis Graeci verbo discordent, tamen sensu non differunt.
Lombard, Bona. in 1. sent. d. 11. A. 1. q. 1.
Bonaventure, Scot. 1. Sent. d. prima, q. 1.
Scotus, Aquin. 1. p. q. 36.42.
Aquinas, and others, do endeavor to excuse the Grecians in their chief error
touching the proceeding of the Holy Ghost only from the Father, and not from
the Son; saying that therein they differ from the Roman Church only in the
manner of speaking, not in the substance of Doctrine.

CHAP. XIX. N. N. His Book entitled the bleeding Iphigenia examined, his
abusive language bestowed therein upon persons of Honor, and his censure upon
the Kings Majesty reprehended.
THo this Book begins with me, and in the running Title styles it self a
pref^ce to the other greater Book designed against me; yet I have so little a
share of this preface directed to me, as I hope the discreet Reader will excuse
me if I be not so large in discussing it as some may expect. Truly the matter
and style of it is of that nature, as made me ambiguous for a time in resolving
upon any reply to it. But upon more consideration I conceived it my duty to
make the reflections following upon it.

After having bestowed some few Pages in bemoaning a supposed fall of mine from
the Catholic Faith, he falls suddenly to lament the sufferings of the Irish,
and to accuse the supposed authors of it. As to the first I have endeavored to
give satisfaction in the whole discourse of this Treatise: if he has true
charity for me, he will be glad to find, that I am not in that bad condition he
supposed. And if he will be ingenuous, and has not resolved (as it is usual with
them) to shut his eyes against all evidences, that may let him see his errors,
or entertain a charitable thought of his Christian Neighbors, he may see
clearly by what I have said hitherto, that by embracing the Communion of the
Church of England, I have not forsaken the true Catholic Faith and Church; that
I am far from being guilty of the Heresies, or associate of those Heretics he
mentions.

Now as to the second, touching the miseries of the Irish, I heartily condole
with him therein, but cannot approve of his manner of pleading for them, nor of
some Doctrines he lets fall by the way. I think it to be a more Christian duty,
and more becoming a good Pastor, to exhort people in affliction to a conformity
with Gods Holy will, and to an acknowledgment of their sins that drew his anger
upon them, with due repentance of them; then to excuse their errors, and
thereby to encourage them to provoke divine justice to further severities
against them. The former I have don on all occasions: the second I see you do
in the particulars of your Book which I am to examine now.

I will not debate with you touching the matters of fact you handle, who begun,
or were more faulty in those unhappy revolutions. I do not envy you the
occasion you had of greater knowledge in that part then I, who departed the
Country in my younger age two years before those Tragedies begun, and never
returned until some years after our Sovereigns happy Restoration. I leave to
others better furnished with notices, to examine what you say that way; But I
may judge of the style and Doctrinal part of your Book, grounding my judgment
(as I hope I shall do) upon good reasons. And first as touching the style, I am
probably persuaded, that no sober or wise man even of the party you pretend to
favor, will approve of the harsh and contemtuous language where with you speak
of persons of great honor and quality, especially of one of the great Peers of
the Realm, an Earl and son to one of the greatest Earls of this Monarchy,
Lord President of that fair and goodly Province of Munster, so styled by your
self, not to mention his personal talents, apt to make even one of lower birth
noble, and to gain him respect. All these titles and Honorable qualities, could
not induce you, to give him once any of those civilities and marks of respect,
that are due to persons of his degree and quality. And what is yet more
intolerable, not contented to abuse his person, you extend your contemtuous
Language to his whole family, linked by manifold ties of consanguinity with the
most illustrious families of England and Ireland.

I know that one of the rules of your Roman Index expurg. noviss. edit. Matrit.
1667. regul. gener. 16. advertent. 5. Todo lo que tiene sonido, ^o apariencia
de alabanza se les niegue a los que estan fuera de la yglesia. Specialmente
todos los epitetos de bueno, virtuoso y pio, nl^el titulo de Doctor O maestro
ni el de theologo. Permittese dar le titulo de Sennor o Don a quien es Sennor
temporal, y el de Padre o suegro a quien lo es, por cortezia, aunque no se le
deve.
Expurgatory is, to blot out of all Books any honorary title of wit or virtue
given to Heretics (which is to say in their Language to any Christian that is
not of their communion) a rule indeed rude enough, but I did not hear yet of
any rule given for divesting Earls and Lords of their ordinary titles, (rather
the said rules permit it of courtesy) if it be not perhaps a branch of that
grand power they give to the Pope of deposing Kings, of which N. N. may pretend
to partake so much as may enable him to degrade an Earl. Certainly this
practice of speaking with contemt to Peers and Presidents of provinces, may be
sooner learned in the Schole of Rome, then in the Schole of Christ, and of his
Apostles. When our dear Savior was brought before the president of Judea,
Pilate, and most unjustly sentenced to death by him, he uttered no bitter or
contemtuous word against him. When the great Apostle Paul was before Porcius
Festus Governor of the same Province, and abused by him, calling his excellent
speech madness, Paul answered him in mild and respectful terms, Ac. 2^.25.
I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and
soberness. Could not you likewise speak what you conceive to be truth with
soberness, without offending Governors and great men by contemtuous
expressions? Does your calling give you greater right to reprehend Princes and
Governors, then that of Christ and St. Paul did to them?

Thus matters do go in the Schole of Christ, and of his Apostles, but the Roman
Schole teaches different Lessons: a very famous one, N. N. professes to have
learned there, which is, that he honors the Pope or Bishop of Rome whom ^e
cal^s Luminare Majus the greater light, more then the King, whom he styles
Luminare minus the meaner light. This he says to be the practice of his
Catholics, which was taught to them by Pope Innocent the Third, declaring
himself to be as much above Emperors and Kings on Earth, as the sun is above
the moon in the heavens; of which and of the stout glosses of his Canonists, we
shall say more after. Part 2. l. 15.


N. N. seems to pretend to a share in this vast Superiority of the Pope over
princes. He betakes himself to a seat of Judicature, and pronounces a severe
sentence against our gracious Sovereign, his own natural Prince, That he has
not bin just and impartial in the distribution of his favors to his Subjects,
applying to his Majesty that old verse, Non erat Rex Jupiter omnibus idem, That
he was not the same King to all, That all being guilty in Ireland, (as he
supposes for this complaint) he extended his Roial bounty to one party more
then to the other. In which supposition N. N. delivers both the guilt of his
judgment, and the defense of our King. If all were guilty, all lost their right
to the Roial favors, all forfeited their possessions. Then all was at the will
and mercy of his Majesty to confer upon those he thought fit: why will you
pretend to deprive him of his liberty herein? May not his Majesty return upon
you those words of the Lord of the Vineyard spoken to the envious Laborers,
Mat. 20.15.
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? is thine eye evil
because I am good?

But this is not the only defense his Majesty has against your rash judgment.
It is very manifest, that his Majesty has showed the bowels of a loving Father
to all his Subjects, as well in Ireland as in all the rest of his Dominions,
and did procure by all the means possible to him the comfort and satisfaction
of all, as may consist with right and Justice. And to this purpose for ordering
the affairs of Ireland, he has erected in Dublin a Court of Claims, placeing
therein Justices, whom I have heard the Irish themselves commend for men of
admirable integrity and constancy, in delivering their judgment according to
the right without regard of persons. Such as could prove their Innocence in
this Court, had the benefit of it, who were many; and very many more, who would
not go through that trial, had the benefit of the Kings gracious pardon, and
Roial bounty in restoring them to their Estates and Possessions. I have heard
from a person of great Honor and truth, and of great knowledge in the matter,
that of the lands, which by rigor of Law were declared to be forfeited to the
King, his Majesty has bestowed already more then the one half upon those that
lost them. Neither are the streams of his Roial Clemency put to a stop, but
ever flowing graces and favors upon deserving persons, on all occasions
possible; tho when the pretenders are so numerous, it is impossible to content
all, and not easy for standers far off, to judge which of the several pretenders
to the same thing, ought to be preferred. Men are apt to speak eagerly, and
conceive strongly for their own interest; self love will suggest arguments for
that side, and suppress all that favor the contrary. It is for the King, that
God has placed on high, to see equally, and accordingly to judge of both sides.

You plead vigorously for the necessity of a supreme Judge in spiritual matters,
to whose decretory judgment all must stand; to resist it, or call it in
question, must be taken for a rebellion in religion, for Heresy or Schism; if
such a judge were wanting, say you, there would be no end of controversies in
religion. How far your pretention goes that way, and how well grounded, will be
seen in the second part of this Book, now to our present purpose briefly. Will
not you acknowledge in a proportionable parity, the like necessity of a supreme
Judge, for civil debates in each Kingdom or State, to whose final judgment the
parties must stand? otherwise there will be no end of quarrels, no peace among
neighbors. I will not pretend for such a Judge that Sovereign kind of
infallibility, absolutely incapable of any error, which you do pretend for your
Ecclesiastic. But such authority as Subjects ought to reverence, and stand to
his decretory sentence without further appeal, I can prove out of Gods words,
that a King has it in his Dominions, so as without breach of Loialty and
transgression of Gods will and command, a Subject may not resist the judgment
of his King, nor call it further in question; much less may he pronounce a
judgment against it. See all declared by the Heavenly Preacher, Ecclesiastes
8.4. in these words, Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may
say unto him what do thou. Certainly its no act of Loialty to question his
actions don with accord and public Legality, as in the case in hand. It is a
commenced Rebellion. The first Rebellion of men upon Earth, that of our first
Fathers against God in Paradise, whose contriver was the Devil, began with such
a question; The hellish Serpent began his conspiracy with Eve, calling in
question the Law and Government of their Prince and Master: cur praeceptit
vobis Deus, ut non comederetis ex omni ligno paradisi? Why has God said, ye
shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? Thus did the first Rebellion of man
against God begin, questioning his decree. Questions against Laws established
by a lawful Prince, thus deriving their Progeny from the Devil, should be for
that very reason abhorred by Christians. And the rather, if we consider how
destructive they must be to peace and human Society, as overthrowing the very
nature and intrinsic Constitution of a Magistracy, ordained principally to
decide quarrels, and put an end to debates, by a Legal Sentence, which if not
obeyed, but exposed to further inquiry and censure of the parties, is
fruitless; and debates will be endless.

CHAP. XX. That it is not lawful for Subjects to raise arms, and go to war
with their fellow Subjects without the consent of their Prince. The Doctrine of
killing men, and making War by way of prevention, and on pretext of Religion,
confuted.
FRom the Lesson of censuring and murmuring against Roial orders, rebuked in
the precedent Chapter, as from a corrupt root, springs this other very evil
branch, that its lawful for Subjects to war with their fellow Subjects without
the consent of their Prince, and so we find the one following the other in N.
N. his Preface. Neither could we expect less from the antecedent premised. If
Subjects will not submit to the Determination of their Prince in their debates,
they must appeal to their Swords. And our Antagonist tells us Magisterially,
its the common opinion of Divines, that they may do it: for which he quotes in
the Margin 2^. 2ae. q. 40. art. 1. Bannes ibi. dub. 4.
Aquinas and Bannes. But Aquinas in the place quoted by him, delivers the quite
contrary Doctrine, affirming and proving with strong reasons, that no war is
just that is not made by the authority of the Prince, and relating for his
opinion these grave words of St. Augustine, Ordo naturalis Mortalium paci
accommodatus hoc poscit, ut suscipiendi belli autoritas atque consilium penes
principem sit. That the natural course accommodated to the peace of men
requires, that the authority and resolution of making a war should belong to
the Prince.

I could not but expect that Ba^^es 22. 2a. q. 40. Art. 1. dub. 4.
Bannes a sworn Disciple of Aquinas should be of the same opinion: sure he
would not deliver for a comment upon his Masters Text, the contrary Doctrine to
it. And so I found it, he delivering upon the present Subject these three
conclusions. The First, that it is a mortal sin to make war against any kind of
Enemies without the consent of the Prince. And he adds this to be the common
opinion of all: and it is to be noted, that he speaks even in case the war
should be against the Turks. His Second conclusion is, that Soldiers plundering
or burning Towns by their own private authority, are obliged to repair the
damage they have don. The Third conclusion of Bannes goes thus, such as fight
in a war made without the authority of the Prince, are obliged to make a
restitution for all the damages that resulted from such a war to their own
Republic or Country.

Now if such as make a war even against Turks, (as Bannes says and proves)
without the authority of their Prince, do sin mortally, and are obliged to a
restitution for all the damages don to friends and foes, those who began that
bloody war in Ireland against their fellow Subjects, what account will they
give to God for the destruction of so many thousands of men, women, and
children on both sides, the devastation of that sair Land, and the burning and
desolation of so many goodly towns and houses? Let the counselors of that
blind and furious war, (no less damnable then the actors,) reflect upon the
heavy judgment that hangs over them for it, and let N. N. consider better what
he writes: let him not be so easily wrought upon by hot headed and shallow
brained informers, to deliver in public as a Doctrine of Divines, what the
Divines he names do condemn and detest, as all men of sense and conscience must
needs do. For certainly to say, that Subjects may go to war without the consent
of their Prince, let who will say it, is a perserse and seditious Doctrine,
destructive to Loialty and public peace, a fierce error often practiced in
Ireland to the great damage of it, and which therefore ought to be reprehended
sharply, rather then renewed or countenanced by good teachers.

But our Antagonist tells us he speaks of a defensive war, and brings a heap of
Testimonies to prove such a war to be lawful, and to declare how far it may
extend. But the main point is, what he supposes, without giving a sufficient
proof of it, that the Engagement of the party he pleads for, was only
defensive. He allows that the Irish were the first aggressors, but this
objection, says he, is easily answered, as thus. It is a common Doctrine of
the Divines, that it is lawful to prevent an evil that cannot be otherwise
avoided then by preventing it. E. G. I. see you take your Pistol in your hand,
cocking it to shoot at me, in that case it is lawful for me to discharge my
Pistol and kill you, otherwise I should be killed by you, and relates several
Testimonies of Tannerus, Becanus, and others, to prove such a prevention to be
lawful. But to evince that to have bin the case of the Irish at the beginning of
those tumults, (this being the point wherein the consistence and whole strength
of his argument was to appear) it is strange how jejune and weak stuff he
brings up. They were boulted up in an Island, says he, there was no door open
for them, but by preventing the Presbyterians bloody design; if this they had
not don, there had bin an end of them all. Hoar I see words but no substance or
ground to build upon a serious conclusion to his purpose. What bloody designs
were those he speaks of? how far discovered? how near at hand to be executed?
If he knew it, why does he not declare it, being the very foundation of his
defense, and precisely necessary to make his allegations appear pertinent? What
Pistols were laid to the breast of those that begun in the North, what Canons
were charged, what armies were marching against them, so as without killing
those that lived peaceably about them, they could not save their own lives? Yet
if they were not in such a straight as this, the Testimonies you alledg of
Divines are misapplied by you, and come very short of proving what you pretend,
as appears by the example you relate of one cocking his Pistol to shoot at you,
and to prevent him you shoot first at him.

I have heard of some report spread among the Irish, of a design of a Massacre
upon them, and that this report was represented to the state by some Lords of
the Pale about Dublin, who being called to assist at the Council, to consult
with them, concerning the state wherein the Kingdom was then, and the safety of
it, they answered, that having received advertisement, that a member of the
Council had uttered at the Council board some speeches tending to execute upon
those of their religion a general Massacre, they could not wait on their
Lordships, but rather must stand upon their guard till they were secured from
perils. Thus I find it written by a credible Sanderson in the History of King
Charles the first ad ann. 1641. Page 451.
Historian of those times, who adds, that to this Letter written by those Lords
to the Council of the 7. of December 1641. The state gave answer by
Proclamation, with all satisfaction to the Lords, to remove all
misunderstandings, and clear the member of the Council aspersed from any such
pretended speeches, or any intention thereto, and pray the Lords to attend the
board on the 17. day after. But all this it seem was not sufficient to clear
them from their apprehension of danger.

Now if this passed so indeed, to say that a mere apprehension of danger from
our Neighbor without any certainty of it, is a sufficient warrant to make war
against him, if it be a community, or kill him if he be a Particular (as our
Antagonist seems to pretend) is a Doctrine of dreadful consequences both to
Societies and particular persons? It is but too much experienced how rash and
heady a thing the apprehension of Men is; how ready are false reports to fly;
and if an apprehension or report without certain ground be taken for a
sufficient cause to kill a Man, or to wage war, who can have security of his
life, or how long shall peace and quiet last among us?

In this discourse I do not intend to favor either of the parties mentioned in
that debate handled by N. N. I profess not to be a competent judge of those
quarrels, I only attend the pernicious Doctrines I see assumed to maintain the
interest of one side, with intention to rebuke the same as universally false
and destructive to the public peace and quiet. Neither in truth can I
understand which of both parties may fear more prejudice from the Doctrine I am
reprehending. I see complaints and jealousies upon both sides, which of both
has more reason for it, as I am not apt to determine, so I do conceive that N.
N. (as also any other) may be uncertain to which of the parties he does prepare
ruin, by allowing subjects upon suspicion of danger from their fellow
subjects, to go to war with them, without the consent of their Prince. If both
do complain and fear, why may not either party, as well as the other fall upon
his fellow subjects, when opportunity will assist him, in conformity with that
Doctrine?

Truly I cannot but wonder how any one living under a Prince or state that has
several Kingdoms Provinces or Societies to govern, should dare to publish so
pernicious a Doctrine as this I am reprehending. If those of Navar and Arragon,
of Sicily and Sardinia, of Brabant and Flanders should renew old quarrels, or
stir up new ones, and run to war about them, without the consent of their
common Prince, how long would the King of Spain be able to keep peace in his
Dominions? If his Ministers did take notice of this Doctrine, and the
consequences of it, certainly they would have all Books containing it, banished
out of their territories.

But all this is sanctified with N. N. by telling us that the war was for
Religion: and since the law of God and nature do permit a Man to kill an other
that pretends to take away his life; with the same or more reason, he may kill
one that means to take away his Religion, which ought to be more precious and
dear to him then his life. Good God, whether has the perverseness of men
arrived, to canonize Murders and the most barbarous cruelties with the sacred
name of Religion? This language came not from Heaven. Christ, nor any of his
Apostles did never teach it, the Church instructed by them did not practice it.
Lactantius sets before us the maxims and practice of Christians in those times
by these noble words, Defendenda Religio est non occidendo sed moriendo, non
saevitia sed patientia, non scelere sed fide. Religion is to be defended, not
by killing but by dying for it, not by cruelty but by patience, not by mischief
but by Faith. Thus St. Peter and St. Paul and the rest of the Apostles; thus
did the brave Theban Legion defend their Religion, tho able to defend it with
Sword (as is testified by Tertullian) if the Spirit and Doctrine of Christ then
steering the Church had permitted it.

A particular person to defend his life, say you, may kill by way of prevention
an unjust aggressor that pretends to take it from him; to this purpose you
quote Divines and Civilians, and from thence) you infer two consequences, the
first, that likewise a community or society may war against and destroy another
society, from whom it fears the like destruction; the second consequence is,
that a private person or a Society may also by way of prevention set upon and
kill another whom he suspects does intend to take his religion from him. You
abuse foully the Doctrine above mentioned of Divines and Civilians by
misapplying it; both your consequences do not only contain a perverse Doctrine
against right Divinity and Christian discipline, as now declared, but also do
trespass against the rules of Logic. The former because it is not so easy to
surprise a whole society largely dispersed, as it is to surprise one particular
person. Evidences requisite to qualify a prudent fear, such as may justify a
preventing onset, may not so easily be found against a society: the threatening
words or purpose of one particular or more in a society, gives not so much
assurance of the purpose or intention of the whole society, as the words of a
particular may give of his intention. Besides the killing of one particular is
not so criminal and heinous, nor so much exposed to an oppression of innocents,
as the killing and destroying of a whole society is: therefore its no lawful
consequence, a particular person may killby way of prevention another that he
fear will kill him, ergo, a society or great party may likewise by way of
prevention destroy another from whom it fears the like destruction.

Your second consequence above mentioned, that if one to defend his life may
kill an other that pretends to take it from him, he may likewise kill him or
them, that intend to take his Religion from him, this consequence also I say,
besides the perverse Doctrine it contains, is a faulty piece of Logic: it is
not so easy to take his Religion from a man as his corporal life. Your Religion
may not be taken from you by a surprise, or when you are a sleep, or against
your will, as your corporal life may be. Wherefore the same prevention cannot
be necessary or lawful for the preservation of both. Any that has true
Religion in him, due love to God, and a sincere and serious desire of his own
happiness, must take the loss of his corporal life for his Religion, to be the
greatest gain he can make, it being the greatest security he can have of
gaining life and glory everlasting for his Soul and body, as our Savior has
declared. And is it not a desirable exchange to leave a painful short and
wretched life, for a glorious blessed and everlasting one? Much he has in him
of Earth, and little of Christian Spirit, who would not wish to be dissolved,
if he were sure to be after his dissolution with Christ. The only reason that
can justify a fear to die and part with this miserable life, is the uncertainty
of what may be our doom in the other, and the hopes of securing a good one by
further living: but when a security is given to pass by death to a life
everlasting (as Christ gives to such as die for God and his holy Faith) what
Christian consideration can justify a fear to such a death, so far as to kill
those that intend to bring us to it?

Truly N. N. I have so much of kindness and true friendship left in me for you,
as made me sorry, and not a little troubled to see such pernicious Doctrines as
these, contained in your book. I took you for a Man better principled, and if I
had perceived any such errors in your conversation at the time of our
acquaintance in Spain, I would have refuted them, and showed my dislike to
them, as freely as I do now. I am willing to imagine, that non ex tuo haec
dicis, that it is not your own deliberate sentiment, but imposed upon you by
some of those fiery emissaries of Rome, who will not stick to go through
streams of blood to extend the Popes power, and their own earthly advantages
with it, under the color of Catholic Faith. But by what is said hitherto, and
will be further confirmed in the discourse following, it will easily appear to
the unbyassed Reader, that it is no want of true Catholic Faith in the Church
of England, nor any true zeal for it in the Roman Court, makes them disturb
thus the peace of these Kingdoms, obstinately endeavoring the ruin of them.

And if the Irish be not quite given over to the Spirit of delusion, they will
look upon all bloody suggestions of this kind, as proceeding from him that was
the first author of rebellion in Heaven, and upon earth, and a Murderer from
the beginning Joh. 8.44.
, and they will accordingly reject and detest them not only for Romans 13.5.
conscience (which ought to be the principal motive) but also for wrath,
remembering the sad effects of Gods wrath against them in each one of their
several rebellions whether for Religion or for any other cause.

CHAP. XXI. A Conclusion of my Discourse with N. N. with a friendly Admonition
to him.
SR. if the severe Decree of your Church prohibiting to the common sort the
reading of Controversial writings, does not comprehend you also, I hope you
will bestow an attentive reading upon this Book for our old friendships sake,
but more for the love of Truth: and if you have not made a firm inflexible
resolution of not yielding to any evidences, be they never so clear, that may
justify the way I took, or discover the errors of that which you are in, I may
expect that by reading this Treatise, you shall find that I am not in that
deplorable condition by my change which you seem to imagine. That by it I have
not forsaken the whole house of God, as you say, but removed to the soundest
and safest part of it; that I have not deserted the Society of the holy Fathers
of the Church, nor am become an associat of Heretics, having come to a Church
where I find as much veneration and study of those Fathers, and as much
aversion to the Heresies you mention, as ever I saw among you.

And if you read further the second Part now to follow of this same Book, you
shall find that I did not forsake the Communion of the Roman Church without
grave and urgent reasons forcing me to it. Those reasons I have laid open in my
first Sermon preached at Dublin and printed; great labor and study has bin
employed in answering them: yet if you bring indifference with you to read my
reply to that answer, you shall find that my reasons alleged do still remain
in their force, and that the errors I refuted are further discovered, and
cleared by occasion of the defense made of them. But if you resolve either not
to read my Book, or bring to the reading of it a firm purpose of not yielding
to any reason that may oppose those sentiments you are prepossest with, then my
labor is lost as to you: but I hope not so as to others more rationally
disposed. The word of God is a grain of seed, and brings forth its fruit in
time differently according to the different disposition of the subjects it
meets with: but especially I hope that my endeavors will avail me with God; in
whose presence I write with sincerity what I understand to be conformable to
his holy Word and Will, and with a constant desire in all these scrutinies to
satisfy my own conscience principally of the righteousness of the way I took,
and to help others also to the knowledge of the same truth.

When St. Paul was brought before King Agrippa, and the Governor of Judaea,
Porcius Festus, to give account of himself and his Religion, he gave it so
full, that Agrippa said, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian: To which
the great Apostle replied, I would to God that not only thou, but all that hear
me were such as I am, except these bonds, Act. XXVI. 29. If you read with
indifferency and attention, the account I give of my resolution, and of the
Religion I embraced, I am persuaded (whatsoever your outward expression may be)
it will work upon your mind a motion like that of Agrippa. And if you ask
whether I would have you do what I did in this point, I say freely (as St. Paul
did say to Agrippa) that I would to God that both you and your brethren did
take the like resolution; but that it may be with less difficulty and
reluctance then I had, and with less crosses and dangers for doing it.

You tell me I am old; and I have many reasons to believe it by my long
continued infirmity of body, but I remember the time, when you called me a
young man, and your self an old man: then I being now old, you must be very
old; and therefore both of us ought to measure our resolutions and doctrine
with the rules of Religion, and the interest of Eternity, rather then with
those of earthly policy and temporal Advantages, in which we can have but a
little share, and a short enjoyment. How then come you to speak to me of the
loss of Friends, and of infamy got by my change? If it has bin for the best in
the presence of God, and I am certainly persuaded it was, I have got by it the
grace and favor of God, and given joy to his Angels; and this applause is to be
preferred before that of the earthly friends you speak of. I am much afraid
that the fear of temporal shame and damages is too strong with you, and many
others of your party to keep you from following truth, and from searching after
it with due care: I found it to be so in my self (I confess my weakness herein
with sorrow, humbly craving pardon of God for it.) The fear of shame and loss
among men, more then any superior consideration, made me struggle along time
against the inward callings of God from my former errors, and to use all means
possible to silence the cries of conscience; but the more I labored and
studied to allay them, the more force they got; and when I saw clearly by a
strict inquiry, that they were indeed from God, I yielded to them,
notwithstanding my natural reluctancies, and the heap of shames, crosses, and
dangers which I saw in the way, looking upon Jesus the Author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross despising
the shame, Heb. XII. 2.

In the life and doctrine of Christ we shall find Lessons of this kind, but
never in the dictats of nature. How would you imagine it should be a natural
inclination, that a man in his declining Age, should change a state of quiet,
honor, and plenty of all things necessary for humane life, into another of
troubles, crosses, affronts, no certainty of a competent livelihood, and a
certain and continual danger of losing his life. This was my condition at my
change of Religion, and I may better declare it to you then to many others. You
can remember in what degree of honor, applause and commodity I was where you
knew me, plentifully assisted with all things necessary, without any care or
trouble in procuring them. Of temporal blessings I could desire no more.
Neither would I at any time, tho I had a choice of fortune given to me.

To this condition I might at that time have returned with some special
assurances of good reception, when I came over to the Protestant Church,
without any bargain made or promise had of a livelihood, relying solely upon
Divine providence, that is never wanting, to such as truly confide in it; and
with certain knowledge that I was to suffer crosses, calumnies, curses,
affronts, false testimonies and conspiracies against my life and credit, of all
which I found a plentiful store as I expected: and you tell me that my change
was a work of Nature not of grace, one of your very ill grounded assertions. I
pray consult the case with your own natural inclination, and be ingenuous. Do
but imagine your self a little while making such a change as I did, and
undergoing for it the like danger and damages, (as probably you should, if the
case did possibly happen,) certain I am that your nature would represent to you
such horrors in the case, that if all the Angels in Heaven did come down
furnished with the most divine reasons to persuade you to it, you would take
them all for so many Devils, and their reasons for absolute Madness.

Thus much I can tell you of your own nature: but what grace may work upon you,
God the author of it only can tell: and whilst you do not feel this motion upon
you so strong as to forsake errors (tho known) upon the hard terms now
mentioned, I pray spare your ill grounded severe censures against others, that
God moves to undergo those difficulties for the truths sake. Moderate your
inconsiderate Zeal, and if you will govern it well, read unpassionately what is
written here, and is to follow in this Book, whereby you shall perceive how far
mistaken you are in many things about your self and others. And whereas you
acknowledge your self to be near the end of this mortal life (as a man of your
age must needs be) leave to your Friends and Brethren that Legacy, which your
good Savior Jesus left, and with repeated earnestness commended to his
Disciples, saying Joh. 14.27.
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Endeavor first to make
peace with God by due acknowledgment and repentance of your sins and errors,
and then endeavor to sow peace in the hearts of your hearers. Make it your
business to quench, rather then to blow up the fire of dissentions and
animosities: have a real pity for your poor Country bleeding and groaning
under wounds received in barbarous wars and broiles, stirred up by blind fiery
Zelots. Pour into those wounds the sweet oil of peace; breed in the people by
all the means you may, charity with their Neighbors and Loialty to their
Sovereign: thus will they recover those blessings, which the bitter Spirit of
hatred, envy, revenge, and ambition has robbed them off in former times; and
thus will you and other inspirers of peace and charity, compass that great
blessing reserved for peace makers, that they shall be called the Children of
God Math. 5.9.
. And now the God of peace be with you Romans 15.33.
whilst I turn my face to a scold, and after to a Sophister, to vindicate truth
from the assaults of both.

CHAP. XXII. A check to I. E. his scandalous Libel, and a vindication of the
Church of England from his false and slanderous report of it.
ALL that saw I. E. his scolding Libel, agree in saying it deserves no answer:
But none will deny it deserves a check. And what check can be so sensible to
the Author (if he has any sense in him) as to lay before his eyes a piece of
his own work? St. Jerome in the beginning of his Book against Jovinian, to
render the man ridiculous, produces a parcel of his franne phrases, and cries
at them with his wonted sharp eloquence, S. Jer. l. 1. adversus Joviniamum,
initio.
Rogo quae surt haec portenta verborum, quod descripti^nis dedecus? nonne vel
per febrem somniare eum putes, vel arreptum morbo phrenetico Hippocratis
vinculis alligandum? Tell me I pray you what monstrous words are those, what
shameful contexture of speech? would not you think the man to be dreaming in a
fever, or raving in a phrensy fit to be put into the shackels of Hippocrates?
The words of Jovinian related by St. Jerome are indeed ridiculous and absurd;
but if we compare them with those of our Libeller, I. E. we shall find this
latter to have outdon Jovinian by very great odds. he says he will vindicate
the Roman Church, from the most mysterious and foul aspersions and railings of
the ignorant overweaning, and overbiassed sciolist Sectaries, (not to mention
some words thereabout worse then ridiculous) he will seasonably control and
give a check to the disingenuity, spiteful malice, veneme, and brawny-fac'd
impudence of that renowned wight, vile Apostate, and professed Enemy to Christ,
Andrew Sall, to dash back all his shameless affronts, and thundering balling
strains of profound, and wonderful non sense etc. He will not have men to trust
the Conduct of such Mountebanks, and runnagate vagrant Apostates. If St. Jerome
did see this rich piece of Rhetoric, would he not cry out, Rogo quae sunt haec
portenta verborum, quod descriptionis dedecus? Certainly when the man spoke of
shallow Mountebanks, impostors, and runagate vagrant Apostates, that could bear
no fruit, whilst united to the stock, he had his imagination placed upon some
of those his running friars, that in their travels of a year or two, will view
London, Brussels, Prague, Cracovia, Stockolme, Paris, Maarid, Rome, Florence,
Jerusalem, Grand Cair, and more Courts or places of fame if to be found, and
will return as wise as they went, but commonly worse, laden with Fables, and
furnished with the most corrupt customs of all the places they ran over. To
men of this kind, his description of runnagate, vagrant, shallow Mountebanks,
etc. may seem more suitable then to one who in 26 years for his residency in
Spain, never went out of the Province of Castile where he entered first, nor
took so much liberty, as to view Madrid, or the famo^r Escurial not far from
him, when others made long voiages to see them; having spent the aforesaid
twenty six years thus, (as is known to many.) Two years, retired to exercise of
devotion, seven years in learning Philosophy and Divinity, and the 17 remnant
in public teaching without intermission; First humanity, Poetry, Oratory,
History, Cosmography in the Colleges of Numacia and Villagarcia; Then
Philosophy, Logic, Physic, Metaphysic, etc. in the College of Pamplona; and
Divinity, scholastic, Moral, Polemic or Controversial in the Colleges of
Pamplona, Palencia, Tudela, and Salamanca, joining with these functions of
continual teaching (which in those parts are exceedingly laborious) the
practice of very frequent preaching, together with a constant and eager study
of holy scripture, counsels, Fathers, and History Ecclesiastic, in which kind
of study I had always my chief delight, when duty and employments enjoined
upon me, forced me to the study of those other faculties. And is this to be a
vagrant person, that could bear no fruit united to the stock? what fruit would
be man have me bear?

But what if we refer him to himself few pages after saying (still excessive)
that before I was vir Apostolicus, a most resplendent star in the firmament of
the true Church etc. now plunged in all the contrary vices, and cries, page 27.
quomodo obscuratum est aurum, mutatus est color optimus? how is the Gold
become dim, how is the most fine gold changed? Truly I am to return the same
question upon him, How came this change, or Thren. 4.
how came he to know it? For I feel no other change in me but to the better; to
a quiet of conscience, and full satisfaction that I am in the right way of
worshipping God. But I find in his own words an answer to all, he says I was
before vir Apostolicus, now Apostata vilis dictus, a vile Apostate, not really,
but called so: and by whom? by a party, which I prove by demonstrative reasons
(not railing at random as I. E.) that they have apostatized from the true faith
and Doctrine of Christ in several points, as evidenced both in my former
discourse printed, and in the second part of this treatise at large: wherefore
to be called Apostate by them, is to me the same, as if I were called a Theif
or highway Robber, by one that is such himself, I knowing my self to be an
Alien from those practices; or as if I were called an Infidel by a Turk or
Pagan. If I was induced to make a blind vow of blind obedience to the Pope of
Rome, and his Ministers, I made a former vow of Religious obedience to God and
his holy Laws in my baptism: if I find the latter vow made to the Pope not to
consist with the compliance of the former made to God, (as I found clearly not
to consist) then must I stand to my former vow made to God, and rescind the
latter made to the Pope.

If this Libeller were contented to rail at me, his guilt had bin less, but he
extends his insolent soul language to the whole Protestant Church, belching out
streams against it, I know not which more, of brutish ignorance, or hellish
malice, in most notorious calumnies. Page 30
You deserted a Church (says he) in which only is Faith, Religion, Priests,
Sacrifice, Altars, Sacraments, and real remission not only of original sin,
but also of actual mortal sins, all which is excluded and exploded and quite
abolished by your Protestant Sect. And all this he bables out boldly without
giving one word of reason for all or any part of it: but I have proved with
clear demonstrative reasons from the beginning of this Treatise, that in the
Protestant Church we have and do profess the same true Catholic faith and
Religion, which Jesus Christ and his Apostles taught, and was professed by the
Church first called Catholie: That we have a right Hierarchy, and due
ordination of Bishops Priests and Deacons; and therefore a due administration
of Sacraments and remission of sins both original by Baptism, and actual by
contrition, and also by absolution upon confession, not only allowed, but
commended and enjoined to our people, and practiced by many; if neglected by
others, its their fault not of our Church; and of the horror some have to this
practice, we may well say your Church to be the cause, by its intolerable
tyranny over consciences, as well in the reservation of cases, to be absolved
only by Prelates, or by the Pope, as in the difficulties daily added touching
the mode of Confessions, and circumstances to be declared in them, which deters
many even from the right use of it, and is thought to be occasion of more loss
then gain of souls among you.

He tells me, 63. Page
that I know in my conscience that the Protestant Sect does place all
happiness, in the pleasures, honors, liberty, and contentments of the body,
and obstructs all means and ways to virtue, to Sanctity, Piety, Mortification
etc. and does stifle the fear of a living and dreadful God, and all this
likewise without any proof of it. Was there ever seen a more desperate
insolency? false prophet, who do pretend to dive into the inward of my
conscience, known only to God and to my self. I will declare to the glory of
God, and edification of the Christian people, miserably deluded by such Slaves
of fury and lies, what I know in my conscience to be true, That in the
Protestant Church I saw more practice of solid virtue, piety, and devotion, and
of the fear of God, more apt means used to purchase those virtues (both by the
doctrine of our Church, and by the ordinances of our state) then ever I saw
among the Romanists.

Since my coming to the Protestant Church, my constant habitation has bin in
Trinity College of Dublin, where I see more practice of sobriety, devotion, and
piety then ever I saw in a College of so many young men on the Romish side.
Three times a day they go all to prayers to the chapel at six in the morning,
ten at noon, and four in the evening, with admirable reverence and attention;
their Prayers, most grave and pious for all purposes, and for all sorts of
persons, they say kneeling, the Psalms standing, and the sacred Lectures they
hear sitting reverently and bareheaded, with a respect due to the Lessons used
by them, sacred indeed as taken out of those blessed fountains of Living waters
of the old and new Testament, not out of the broaken Cisterns of Romantic
Legends, all being read in a voice audible, and language intelligible, and
thereby suitable to the edification and instruction of all the people present.

The same order and style I see observed in the Palaces of Princes and
Prelates, and in the houses of Gentlemen and godly persons, all the family
being called to pray together in the Chapel or other decent room of the house,
after the manner now declared. When I come to the Royal Castle or palace of
Dublin, there I see the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (to whom a judicious French
Georg Fournier in geograph. li. i. cujus praecipua inter omnes qui n Europasunt
Pro reges eminent authoritas.
writer gives the Chief place among all the Viceroyes of Europe) with all his
flourishing family, and many Nobles attending on his Excellency, break off
discourses and business, tho weighty and serious, and answer the found of a
Bell calling upon all at set hours to prayers in the Chapel, to which they
assist with singular piety and gravity. If I look upon the people flocking to
their public Churches on holy days, the very silence and modesty of their
carriage in the streets gives me a Testimony of their inward good disposition:
and when they are come to the Church, each one retires to his respective seat,
all being decently severed to avoid confusion and disorders. Divine Office is
performed in a most grave and decent manner, all fitted to the benefit and
spiritual food of souls, so as if any Hymm or Psalm be sung, with more
exquisite music, the Chanter or some other of the Quire admonishes the people
what Psalm or verse is to be sung, that seeing it in their Books they may be
furnished with the sense, that thereby the music may work better on their minds
to devotion; so great a care is taken, that in all we pay to God rationabile
obsequium a rational service with sense and feeling of what we do.

What if I consider the admirable devotion and reverence wherewith they go to
receive the sacred Communion, far greater then ever I saw with Papists, tho
pretending to believe something more, (they know not themselves what) about the
presence of our Savior in that Sacrament, then Protestants do. A spectacle of
this kind, certainly grateful to God and to his Angels, which I saw in Christ's
Church of Dublin on Resurrection Sunday last year, sticks fast in my memory
with joy. The most Reverend the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, Chancellor of
Ireland, having performed the Communion office with singular decency and good
order, he took himself first reverently the sacred Communion and gave it to the
Minister of the Altar, then to the Lord Leiutenant, to the Peers and the Roial
Council, and to a numerous concourse, all receiving it with singular devotion,
having for associates in giving it the most Reverend the Archbishop of Armagh
Primate of all Ireland, the Right Reverend the Bishop of Mead the chief of the
Bishops of Ireland, after the Metropolitans, and three dignitaries of the
Church, Doctors in Divinity, to administer the Cup, each one making a Godly
brief exhortation to the receiver for a due receiving of it, the Lord
Archbishop having read at the Communion Table a grave and pious Homily,
exhorting to a right preparation for receiving that venerable Sacrament, as is
usually don in all Churches, upon such an occasion.

Go now Mr. I. E. and compare these practices of piety, and devotion with your
number of Ave Marias ran over Beads of stick or glass sitting or walking, and
mixing with them several talks to the people about you, with your Mass mumbled
over in have, and the people thronging to have a sight of the Priest; and a
touch of the holy water, without understanding a word of what is saying. This
is your ordinary course of devotion, and spiritual assistance given to your
people (if some particular persons will not provide otherwise for themselves)
And you speak to me of your deiform intentions of ravishing devotions, etc. I
saw much of those devotions among your Extatics, and in them much of delusion,
cheat, and vanity, I wish I may never see more of them.

What shall I say of the preaching used in the Protestant Church truly
Apostolic and godly, all delivering doctrinam sanam and irreprehensibilem,
sound and blameless doctrine. I may say with truth, that I never saw a
Protestant preacher, yet giving a Sermon, that was undecent or unbecoming that
place: not so with you. There would I see frequently shewers of nonsens madness
and blasphemies preached; one to magnify his order will make his Friar a
Cherubin, another to out go him will make his a Seraphin, and another thinking
that but a small purchase will set up his Saint higher then Jesus Christ and
the holy Trinity, with other desperate essaies, like those I produced above,
chap. 26. This lofty style certainly you missed in me when you tell your
reader, that tho I was a professor of Divinity, yet not of any solid intensive
learning; Page 56. In Epist. de dica^.
and in all the Doctors of the Protestant Church, when you style them ignorant
Sciolists. Good Lord, who knows them and knows you (as any may by your goodly
Book) what will he judge of your presumtion?

Finally, will you tell me, what purchase did you expect to make by your
defamatory Libel? to get the credit of an eminent Scold? I confeses you deserve
it, and the highest chair appointed for persons of that quality. And as for me
you have confirmed me in the esteem of the election I made, and in the
acknowledgment of the great mercy of God, in drawing me out of a Congregation
where the spirit of fury and untruth animating all your Libel is countenanced.
If we are to believe you (and shall we?) you had the boldness to present it to
a most illustrious person, whom I forbear to name for very reverence, fearing
an offense even in mentioning that so durty a piece of Paper should be put into
such hands. You tell us moreover, that it was published by the approbation of
your Superiors. If it be so, certainly God has turned the counsel of your
Ahitophels into foolishness Let any man that has not lost his wits judge,
whether it be tolerable that men, who profess to be poor and humble, should
speak so scornfully and contemtuously of so great and illustrious a part of
Christianity, as we have seen the Protestant Church to be? whether it be
prudence in persons complaining that they are persecuted for their Religion,
and under the lash of a Protestant Government, to cock and insult upon their
masters, with barbarous abusive language, and most gross and manifest
calumnies? Mr. I. E. knows that in two visits he was pleased to bestow on me,
after he had honored me with his famous Libel, excusing the harsh Language of
it, I told him my discontent was not for any injury don to me, but for the
prejudice I conceived such undiscreet writings would bring upon his poor
Countrymen and mine of the Romish Communion, of whose welfare I could not omit
to be solicitous, and grieve for the harm they have received often by the means
of blind Zelots.

Truly I was much pleased with the knowledge he seemed to have of my temper
very alien from spite or malice, and of the spirit of the Protestant Church, in
coming so freely to me after such heavy affronts published by him against both.
I do admire and honor the singular patience and Christian modesty of the
English Government, in not being to severe as Romanists are (where they can
command) in punishing such proceedings, and if Mr. I. E. and his council were
wise, they should rather honor, then abuse this modesty of their Masters.

When I consider the different procedure of the Protestant Church, and of the
Romish, with their desertors, I am strongly confirmed in the choice I made. If
any person departs from the Protestant Church to the Romish, they neither curse
nor rail, nor plot against his life or credit: they only commiserate his fall,
and pray for him, that God may convert him. Herein appears the spirit of
Christ, his meekness and charity. But when any comes from the Romish Church to
the Protestant, he may be sure to have curses, calumnies, affronts,
conspiracies against his life and repute follow him while he lives. A strong
point of policy, apt indeed, to terrify weak minds, that they dare not desert
their quarrel; but a policy dictated not by that wisdom that is from above,
peaceable, gentle, full of mercy, etc. Jam. 3.17. but from that other called by
the same Apostle, earthly sensual, devilish. v. 15. Learned, grave and civil
discourses about Religion, such as those of Isaac Casaubon with Cardinal Peron,
and Fronto-Ducaeus, of Peter Wading with Simon Episcopius and the like, I shall
always, honor, and willingly entertain, but with scoulds I do not love to
spend my time. And so I leave you to God Mr. I. E. to direct you, while I enter
into Lists with an other pretending to subtilty in reasoning the case with me.
Which is to be the second part of this Book.

FINIS.
TRUE CATHOLIC AND APOSTOLIC FAITH maintained in the CHVRCH of ENGLAND.

THE SECOND PART.

TRUE CATHOLIC and APOSTOLIC FAITH Maintained in the CHURCH of ENGLAND. PART.
II.
Being A Survey of Mr. I. S. his Book, Entitled, The unerring unerreable
Church.

CHAP. I. An Anatomy of Mr. I. S. his Genius and drifts, appearing in his
dedicatory Epistle to my Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
THE dissections of Anatomy discover imperfections and diseases in the vitals,
and other exterior parts of the body, which a fair skin or cunning dress hides
from the eyes of a common beholder. In like manner, a Scholastic examen will
lay open the faults and corruptions both in the essential and ornamental parts
of a discourse, which upon a transient view appear plausible and commendable.
Unto a mind clouded with passion and prejudice, and the favor of an espoused,
or the dislikes of an adverse party, the writing of Mr. I. S. may appear
without blemish or fault; but an incision being made, the flesh and the skin
being cut off, it will be found void of truth in the proposal, of force and
form in the argumentation, sincerity in the design, and lastly modesty and
ingenuity in the style and terms, which are the several requisites that can
make a writing in any degree worth the reading.

This kind of Anatomy I will now take in hand, and by no other art then plain
incision, shall with truth and perspicuity discover the fallacies and gross
errors of the before mentioned Author, who delivers boldly his judgment upon
what he does not understand; or if he were not really ignorant, yet delivers
unsincerely, and misrepresents those things of which he treats: all which I
shall demonstrate in the following Chapters.

After several attacks made by I. E. N. N. and others upon my small Book, upon
my self, and the Church of England, comes up confidently to complete the
victory Mr. I. S. as Scipio Africanus to the Seige of Numantia, to amend the
errors of the preceding warriors. And to appear a Scipio indeed in his present
adventure, he promises himself so to beset and straighten us, as to make us
burn our selves, as the Numantines did, to prevent their falling into the hands
of the Roman Conqueror.

To compass this magnificent design, he proposes to the Earl of Essex Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, my good Lord and Patron, in the dedicatory Epistle of
his book to his Excellency, that I should be burned for a crime he calls a
Blasphemy, wherein all the learned men of the Church of England are involved
with me, viz. to say, that the Roman Church, as now it stands, is not a secure
way to Salvation. And the executioner of this severe sentence passed upon us by
Mr. I. S. must not be the Inquisitor of Rome or Spain, but our own Kings Prime
Minister and Lieutenant in the Kingdom of Ireland.

He allow's me so much wit, as to know that I could not justify my separation
from the Church of Rome, if I did hope to be saved in it, whereas believing I
may, to forsake it, were a formal schism: thus much of wit he does very
injuriously deny to all other learned Protestants, saying, that all allow the
Roman Church to be a secure way to Salvation, which is to say, they are all
confessedly Schismatics.

The inference is but too clear from his Positions, confusedly delivered, if
thus ordered, All men that separate from the Roman Church, knowing and allowing
it to be a safe way to Salvation, are formally and confessedly Schismatics; all
Learned men of the Church of England do acknowledge and allow the Church of Rome
to be a safe way to Salvation: Therefore all of them are confessedly and
formally Schismatics. This Thesis Mr. I. S. presents to the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland to win his favor.

To clear the ground of all this discourse, and see how bold and blind was the
attemt of Mr. I. S. his charging me with Blasphemy, see the occasion given to
him for it, that in the page 226 of my book (according to the first Edition of
it at Dublin) rebuking their ordinary vaunt wherewith they delude the simple,
saying that Protestants do allow Papists may be saved, but Papists do not allow
that Protestants may be saved, etc. I delivered these words following, but in
neither do they say truth, for no Learned Protestant does allow the Popish
Religion in general and absolutely speaking to be a secure way to Salvation,
for all do agree in affirming that many of their Tenets and practices are
inconsistent with Salvation, tho ignorance may happ^ly excuse many of the
simple sort, but not such as know their error, or with due care and inquiry may
know it. On the other side, etc.

This has netled the poor man to rage. Happily he found himself to be of those
who know, or with due enquiry may know the damnable errors of the Roman Church.
Now I desire the judicious Reader to consider, with what propriety of terms Mr.
I. S. calls it a Blasphemy in me, to relate this sentiment of Learned
Protestants. Tho I were mistaken, to call such a mistake Blasphemy, is
extravagant language.

Three kinds of Blasphemy I find mentioned by Aquinas and other Schole-men,

1. To appropriate to God something unbeseeming,

2. To deprive him of a perfection due to him,

3. To attribute to a creature any of Gods properties. To which of these
classes will Mr. I. S. reduce my mistake, if it be not so what I relate of
learned Protestants? That one of those who sit in the Marketplaces selling
roots, should call it a Blasphemy in another of her trade, to say, that her
Turnips came out of Flanders, not being so, may be a cause of laughing; but
that one pretending to learning, and a disputant in divinity should ramble at
this rate, I confess plainly it seems to me intolerable, and a sad task to
dispute with a person of so irregular a style.

But if what I related of learned Protestants be so indeed, which way comes it
to be a Blasphemy to tell truth? Now to know whether it be so, let any that
ever heard learned Protestants deliver their opinion upon that subject, or did
read their writings, tell whether he knew any of them say, that the Popish
Religion in general, and absolutely speaking, is a sure way to Salvation, or
whether they could say it in consequence to their assertions, ever accusing the
Church of Rome of Idolatry, superstition, impiety, etc. crimes certainly
inconsistent with Salvation, if Ignorance did not excuse, or penitence heal the
malady. The Testimony of Learned Chillingworth part. 1. c. 2. n. 17.
Chillingworth, well versed in the Doctrine of both parties, may serve for many
to this purpose, who relating, that Franciscus a sancta Clara, and the Jesuit
his Antagonist, among other Learned Romanists, do assure that ignorance and
repentance may excuse a Protestant from Damnation he dying in his error; adds
these words, and this is all the charity which by your own confession also the
most favorable Protestants allow to Papists. Here we have witnesses of both
sides affirming, that Protestants do not allow Salvation to Papists, if
ignorance or repentance will not protect them: how then comes it to be so great
a Paradox in me to tell they say so; a greater Paradox certainly to say it
should be blasphemy to tell it.

CHAP. II. A Vindication of several Saints and worthy souls, our Ancestors,
from the sentence of Damnation passed upon them by I. S.
TO render me odious to my Lord Lieutenant, to my own kindred, and to all good
men, he pretends that I adjudg unto Hell his Excellencies Ancestors, my own
Ancestors, St. Bernard, Aquinas, and other holy men. The ground he alleges for
fathering this severe sentence upon me, is, that I should say, that in the
Popish religion none may be saved, and which is more intolerable, that there is
no Salvation in the Catholic Church. All men that know my Principles and Temper
in writing and speaking, will admire the impudence of this man, imputing to me
such desperate rude Positions; That none may be saved in the Romish, or Popish
Religion, I never said with that generality, but with a limitation, leaving a
gate to Salvation for innumerable good souls, and for the holy and renowned men
he mentions, as I shall now declare.

To declare for damned all the adverse parties of Christians without
distinction, is a rashness I ever abhorred, and constantly opposed in the
Romanists, when I was on their side, and which I would not imitate against my
present adversaries; much less did I, or could I say, that there is no
Salvation in the Catholic Church, out of which I expect no Salvation for my
self or others.

I have said indeed, and proved with reasons which I. S. will never solve, that
the Roman Church, according to the present profession and practice of it, is
not a safe way to Salvation, generally and absolutely speaking; that many of
the Tenets and Practices of it, are inconsistent with Salvation, in such, as
understanding the error of them, do continue to embrace them. This I have said,
and will maintain at all times, by the help of God, and truth; but how
different this is from saying, that in the Roman Church a man may not be saved,
and that there is no Salvation in the Catholic Church, any man of common sense
may easily conceive; and withal judge, how unpleasing a work it is, to spend
precious time in debating with a man of so confused brains and ill digested
expressions. Now therefore, the foundation laid for the censure of Damnation
passed against those Saints and renowned men not being from me, but from the
fancy or fiction of I. S. it remains that he is the Author of that malignant
Censure: my work will be to vindicate the persons injured from that cruel
sentence, by showing that it is not a consequence of my opinion above
mentioned, owned and confirmed by many thousands of Learned and pious men.

The stress of his Argument, and where he hopes to be more successful is, what
concerns Thomas of Aquin. He says, that the Sanctuary of ignorance which we
allow to others for escaping Damnation can not avail him, being well versed in
Scripture, and an eminent Master in most Sciences; and so he conceives his
Damnation unavoidable in consequence to my forementioned position, and the
common sense of all the reformed Churches; and thence proceeds to sound a
Triumph as to a manifest victory. But if Mr. I. S. his Logic makes a
Demonstration to him of this consequence, it does not to me, nor will to any
ordinary Logician, that understands the terms and state of the Question. If he
does not know how to save Aquinas, and several other good learned men of the
Roman Church, from damnation, in the opinion of so many thousands of Learn^d
men of the Reformed Churches, I can and will teach him. I am not of those fiery
spirits, reproved by the Royal piety of King James, who affirm, that in the
Popish Religion none can be saved, as Mr. I. S. does falsely and maliciously to
his own knowledge impose upon me. I incline with my study and wishes, and more
willingly deliver my opinion for the Salvation then for the Damnation of men,
when by the least probability induced thereunto.

And first for Aquinas and other learned men of his time, I thus plead; The
errors and foul practices of the Roman Church were not so many then, as now:
they increase daily. They have not bin so known, and cleared in the Crucible of
public opposition; none dared to check them; and so they kept credit. The
impostures, fallacies and absurdities of Mr. I. S. his book, will not be so
well known to his proselytes possessed with prejudices, and to others that see
it alone, as to indifferent persons, that will conferr it with my exceptions
against it; so it is with those erroneous tenets that began to be in use in
Aquinas his time, or somewhat before, and were not opposed.

Secondly, for many learned men even of our own time, which seems more
difficult, I say invincible ignorance may be pleaded. For which I advertise,
that invincible Ignorance (according to the common use of Schools and our
present purpose) is not that which by no means absolutely possible may be
avoided, but such as one may not remedy by means obvious to him according to
his state and condition In this sense Shepherds and the like in Spain and
^taly, that want instruction for knowing the Creed or Ten Commandments, are
commonly excused upon the account of invincible Ignorance, and the fault laid
upon their fathers, masters, or curates. In like manner I say many professors
of philosophy and divinity in Spain and Italy, may be invincibly ignorant of
the malice contained in the erroneous Principles they profess, having sucked
them in their tender years, as divine verities proceeding from a living reputed
Infallible Authority. They never heard them controuled or examined, no books
written against them were permitted to come in their sight. They were taught,
it was a sin to doubt of the truth of their tenets; ergo those men wanted the
ordinary means of instruction, and consequently may have the refuge of
invincible Ignorance.

All this I know to be so by my own experience. Having lived in Spain many
years, and having had, for several of them, license from the Inquisitor general
to read all manner of prohibited books, the prohibition was so severe, that I
could never find one book of a Protestant to read. And even in Ireland, where
more liberty may be expected, there is a severe prohibition of reading books
opposing the Romish tenets; which appeared particularly touching that small
book I published. For offering it to be read by a Romish priest, Vicar General
of a famous Church in that kingdom, that he might see I did not without
consideration and reason what I did, he desired to be excused from reading it,
fearing it would raise in him doubts which he could not solve: and this
injunction being so severe upon persons of that degree, must be more
indispensable upon the vulgar.

Means of instruction for knowing their errors being thus carefully prohibited
to them of the Romish Communion in all times and places, we may favorably
conceive, that many of them both learned and unlearned may have the excuse of
invincible Ignorance, the sin lying upon the Statists, that for temporal ends
do debar them from the means of healthful knowledge.

One touch more in favor of the learned. Very many of them having bestowed the
flower of their age in studies of Humanity, Philosophy, and Divinity
speculative, are taken up, and often kept all their life time teaching those
faculties, without ever reflecting upon, or having means to know the errors of
their Church in the points controverted. They take them upon the credit of
their instructors, for infallible verities, being continually beaten into their
ears, with horror and execration against the opposite doctrine. And how great
the power of education and prejudice is, let the Dominicans and Jesuits
testify. How fierce and eagerly does each one act and opine for the Schole he
was educated in, and against the opposite?

By this it appears how vain the Triumph of I. S. is, as if in my opinion all
learned men dying in the communion of the Church of Rome were damned to hell.
We have seen that impious sentence to be a product of his fancy, no consequence
of any doctrine of mine. More rash and wicked was his attemt in casting the
like sentence of Damnation upon those glorious Saints and great Doctors of the
Church, St. Augustine, St. Jerome, St Chrysostom. What have they to do with his
errors, to be damned for them? Strong opposers, no Patrons of them were they;
as partly I have already, and after will more fully declare.

It appears likewise by this discourse, how ridiculous his charge upon me is,
of contradiction and speaking against my conscience in calling Thomas Aquinas a
Saint. I have declared how that does consist with, and contradicts not what I
have delivered, touching the unsecurity of Salvation in the Communion of the
Roman Church. He pretends to render me guilty in the Tribunal of the English
Inquisition for calling Aquinas a Saint; but the inquisition of England is not
so rude as that of Rome in denying common civility to men, and the honorary
Titles custom does allow them. He may as well accuse the compilers of the
London Gazets for giving to the Pope the title of Holiness, and will have as
much thanks for it, as for his present impeachment of me for calling Aquinas a
Saint. We do not take it for a certain proof of holiness to be canonized in the
Church of Rome. Many of their own more learned writers deny it to be unerreable
therein. It is not merit only gets that honor there. And tho we know all this
to be so, we do not grudg to call those Saints we find by custom to be called
so.

And by all that is said hitherto, we may see and wonder how rare the boldness
of this man is, to term it Blasphemy in me to relate the common opinion of all
learned Protestants, or to consent to it; and to propose to have us all burned
for it, by sentence of our own chief Governor: to pretend for this wicked
attemt, the Authority of our Sovereign King James of glorious memory, whose
Decrees and sentiments herein I do most willingly obey, and consent unto: to
impose upon me an opinion I never uttered by word, or writing, nor ever
harbored in my thought, that there is no Salvation in the Catholic Church; that
her errors are inconsistent with Salvation; to clip my words, and force them
against my will and well declared meaning to his malicious purposes.

And notwithstanding these enormous excesses and absurdities of his speech, his
presumtion is so blind, that he concludes his Dedicatory Epistle, saying, that
tho his Treatise contained nothing else but this check he gives to me, it must
be grateful to his Excellency. If this address were made to a weak or dull
person, it were yet criminal enough; but presented to so deep a judgment and
well known wisdom as that of my Lord Lieutenant, pardon me sacred laws of
modesty, if I say its a very insolent boldness. But now to our chief case in
Debate.

CHAP. III. Mr. S. his cold defense of the Infallibility of his Church examined.
BOTH in my Declaration and in my printed Sermon or discourse against the
errors of the Roman Church, I signified, that the only anchor left to keep me
in the communion of it, after a strong apprehension of its erroneous Tenets,
was the opinion of Infallibility granted to that Church, and the Head of it;
But that anchor being cut off, and a clear discovery made of the fallacy of
their pretended Infallibility, I set open my eyes and heart to receive the
light which God sent me in his holy Writ, to discover their pernicious errors,
and declare for his truth against them.

My adversary, preceiving this to be the hinge all the Fabric go's on, and that
if I were persuaded to that Infallibility, I would blind my eyes and follow,
without any further dispute, the conduct of such a Guide, goes about to set up
the said Infallibility with all his power, and so entitles his book, The
unerring unerreable Church. But his way to compass his design is very odd,
which is, yielding to my first and main attack upon it, that is the uncertainty
of such an Infallibility to assist them, which I proveed by the disconformity
of their Authors in asserting it, and the weakness of the grounds they produce
for it. But Mr. I. S. in the page 167. gives me leave to believe what I please
therein; Its no article of faith, says he, that the Pope is infallible. If he
misliked that doctrine, he might have denied it, and remain a Catholic. A
Catholic I may remain, and do, but not of their communion, that Prop failing
for those structures, which I saw clearly to be ruinous without it.

It is an intolerable cavil to say I should speak of the Pope alone, or of the
Roman Diocese, to delude the Reader with impertinent Digressions, as often he
does, I having clearly expressed my meaning to be, that neither the Pope alone,
nor in a Council (such as that of Trent,) nor the Congregation under his
obedience are infallible. To say the said Congregation should be the Church
Universal, (which I allow according to St. Paul's Expression, to be the pillar
and ground of truth) is an arrogant begging of a conclusion which will never be
allowed to them, all Christian Churches that differ from them, which are far
the greater part of Christendom, crying against their blind presumtion in
appropriateing unto themselves the name of the Catholic Church.

That the Church truly Universal, composed of all believers in Christ, whether
diffusive, or representative in a Council truly Oecumenicall and free, such as
were the first four General Councils, (and such as was not the Council of
Trent) is to have the assistance of the holy Ghost, so that tho it be not
properly infallible, yet it shall not err in things fundamental to men's
Salvation, I do piously believe, and of my meaning therein I gave him no
occasion to doubt.

Therefore if he will speak to the purpose, granting it is not an Article of
faith, that the Pope is infallible in the sense I denied infallibility to him,
that is to say, in a Council of those depending upon him, or out of it, it
fallows they have no certainty for their Tenets relying upon the Popes
Infallibility; which being no article of faith, cannot be certain in it self,
nor consequently give certainty to things depending upon it. He only allow's
Infallibility to the Pope jointly with a general Council. Herein he gratifies
the Jansenists, who may by this plead for indemnity, notwithstanding the
definitions of Innocent the Tenth and Alexander the Seventh against them; which
being not confirmed or autorized by a general Council in conjunction with the
Pope, cannot pretend to Infallibility in Mr. I. S. his opinion, who hereby must
incense against himself all the party adverse to the Jansenists, which will
prove too hard for him.

But he says all Catholics do agree in the Infallibility of the Pope and a
general Council. Therefore Aquinas, Turrecremata and Alphonsus a Castro are in
his opinion no Catholics, of whom Can. l. 4. De lo. c. 4. Aquin in 4 d. 6. qu.
1. art. 7. in 3. qu. 2. ad 3. Turrecrem. l. 2. sum. Ecclesiae c. 91. Alphons. a
Cast. de just. Haer. pun. l. c. 5. gloss. interlin. in illud Math. 16. portae
infer. etc.
Canus relates, that the Church, even Pope and Council together, may err
materially in their opinion, as I mentioned in the 30. page of my discourse,
which if he did consider and examine, he would not so peremtorily assert, that
all Catholics do agree in the Infallibility of Pope and Council jointly.

Neither indeed does Mr. S. himself s^em to be very strong in the belief of
this Infallibility, for in the comfort he gives his brethren on this account,
extolling magnificently their happiness herein above Protestants, he so orders
the matter, that their comfort must not be grounded upon the real existence of
that Infallibility; but upon a strong apprehension or belief of it, tho not
extant. It is a comfort, says he, to an unacquainted Traveller, to be guided
by one whom he firmly believes to be acquainted with the way, tho really your
guide were not acquainted with the way; if you c^^tainly believe that he is,
and cannot stray etc. This is such another comfort as the grand Turk gives to
his men, that dying in his quarrel they go immediately to Paradise; tho it be
not so, its a comfort to think it is. A sad comfort for the unhappy souls lost,
but commodious for the Turk, to get by these means people to sight desperately
and dye for him.

Thus it is with the Church, or Court of Rome. To believe they are infallible
is a satisfaction to the people, and very important for the aut^rity and
grandeur of that Court; whether it be so indeed, is not material. The
understanding of this mystery we are to owe to Mr. S. his ingenuity. Poor man,
he has not been well acquainted with the intrigues of that Court: they do not
love to have arcana imperii, the mysteries of their government discovered. He
will certainly fall short of his expected remuneration for his writing; and if
a Cap be deputed to him for it, sure I am it will not be that of a Cardinal.

CHAP. IV. That Protestants have a greater security for the truth of their
doctrine then Papists have. Mr. I. S. his ridiculous exposition and impious
contradicting of St. Paul's Text, in favor of Scripture, rebuked.
OUR Adversary triumphs upon the aforesaid comfort of Papists, in apprehending
their Guide to be Infallible, tho he be not so indeed; which comfort he says
the Protestants cannot have, being guided by a Church, which they believe is
not so well assured of the way but they may err. God forbid Protestants should
not have a better warrant for the truth of their Doctrine, then that he gives
to Papists. They have the infallible word of God, delivering all their
doctrine, and clearly containing all that is necessary to Salvation, and a
perfect life, as appears evidently by what I delivered in the discourse which
Mr. I. S. go's about to oppose, and will be further evidenced, by showing how
vain and weak the opposition is. They have besides, in the general tradition of
the Church, a full and sufficient certainty that the books, commonly received
for Canonical, are the true word of God, and therefore are certain of Gods
infallible authority, assisting in favor of the verities contained in those
books: which kind of certainty tho only moral, touching the existence of Gods
revelation in favor of those verities, joined with an absolute and undoubted
Certainty, that whatsoever God reveals is infallible verity, makes up all the
certainty that a pious and prudent believer ought to expect in matters of
divine faith.

Mr. I. S. talks of a kind of certainty requisite for Divine faith, which I
doubt much, whether he, or any of his party, ever had for all those articles
they pretend to be of faith. He tells us (and takes it upon credit of his
instructors, without much examination, as often he does in other matters) that
for all acts of belief touching revealed truths, an absolute certainty is
requisite, clearing the believer from all manner of doubt. If you speak of an
objective certainty, relating to the mystery revealed, all true believers have
it, being fully assured, that God cannot reveal an untruth: but if you speak of
a subjective certainty, excluding all manner of doubts as well touching the
truth of Divine revelation if extant, as of the existence of it, I do
vehemently suspect, that both you and your instructors do speak against your
sense and experience, especially touching points controverted, and not
explicitly contained in Scripture; such as is Transubstantiation for example,
that mystery which Scotus, Ockam, Cajetan, and others of your ablest Schole men
could never find in scripture, nor agreeable to the rules of common reason. I
appeal to your breast for judging, whether you have touching this point that
degree of certainty excluding all manner of doubt, which you pretend to be
necessary for all acts of belief touching revealed truths.

Mr. I. S. must not expect from me, that I should take notice off, and pursue
all the impertinencies he runs upon in his book; my intention being only to
clear the truth in our main concern, and therefore to follow him as far as I
find him speak pertinently to the points I proposed, for discovering their
grosser errors, which forced me to a separation from their communion.

In the first Chapter of his book, he enlarges upon points we allow, and know
upon firmer grounds then his proofs for them, That God is to be adored; That he
has revealed himself what manner of worship he requires; That this worship is
true religion; That the same is but one; That God has afforded sufficient
means to know which is the true saving Religion; That divine faith must be
grounded upon an infallible authority, fully assuring us of the truth of its
proposals. The controversy is, what authority this is, whether of the Scripture
as we believe, or of the Pope and Council, as he pretends.

For a visible Judge to ascertain us of Divine verities, I once argued, that it
became Divine wisdom and goodness, to provide us such to determine our
controversies, which otherwise would be endless. It was replied, that we ought
to be wary in censuring Gods wisdom, if this or that seeming to us convenient,
were not don in the government of the world. I acknowledged force in the reply,
and did further it with an instance, that we may as well say, that it belongs
to the power and goodness of God, not to permit his holy Laws to be
transgressed by vile creatures: and as we do not judge it a failure in his
goodness to permit sins, so ought we not to waver in the opinion of his
goodness, if he has not appointed us a visible Judge for our direction, having
given us the Holy Scriptures, which abound with all light and heavenly doctrine
to such as are not willfuly obstinate.

Mr. I. S. not accustomed to approve any thing in his opponents, calls this my
acknowledgment weakness, and to my instance, says, it becomes the goodness of
God to permit sins, and the scandals of Popes, for the exercise of their
liberty. But if this stout disputant were as provident as he is confident in
running upon engagements, he might hate fores^en a ready reply to his
objection, that liberty is no less necessary to heresy, then to other sins,
being an essential requisite to all moral actions good or bad. Neither is the
permission of heresy less conve^ien^, whether for the exercise of liberty, or
for other reasons, which made the Apostle say, that there must be here sies
among men, 1 Cor. 11.2^. neither does his pretended infallibility of his Church
h^nder heresies, and endless controversies among them.

But where I prove, that the word of God is able to furnish us with all
necessary instruction, out of St Paul, 2 Timothy 3. saying, that holy Scriptures
are able to make us wise unto Salvation, that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished to all good works; this is the gloss of our Antagonist;
But I infer the contrary: whereas Scriptures, tho replenished they be with
heavenly light, are not sufficient to ^eclare unto us what we ought to believe,
we might waver in our opinion of Gods good^ess, if he did not appoint an
infallible living Judge to instruct us. Is this to interpret St. Paul, or
clearly to oppose and contradict him? St. Paul says, that the Scriptures are
able to make us wise unto Salvation, and I. S. says, that they are not
sufficient to declare unto us what we ought to believe; which is clearly to
say, that they are not able to make us wise unto Salvation: for certainly
without due belief we can not be saved. This interpretation is like to another
attributed by a Friar to Lyra, being convinced, that the proposition he denied
was in Scripture, he replied it was true, the Text said so, but Nicolas de Lyra
said the contrary. So it is in our case. St. Paul says that the Scripture is
able to make us wise unto Salvation; but Mr. I. S. says the contrary: which of
them ought we to believe?

I should expect from the subtilty of our Sophister to tax me with giving my
conclusion for reason of it self: such is the identity in sense of my assertion
with S. Paul's Text alleged for proof of it. That Holy Scripture is sufficient
to instruct us for Salvation and a good life, is what S. Paul says, and what I
say, no more nor less; but it is for slow wits to fetch out of a Text only what
is contained in it: Sublime understandings must find in it more then the Author
did mean, nay, the contrary of his words and meaning. It is not for them to
submit to that rule of Canonists, that it is not a right way of interpreting a
Text to mend it. Mr. S. mends the Text of S. Paul asserting the contrary of it,
and from the contrary assertion by him substituted, he inferrs a contrary
consequence to that I inferred from S. Paul's assertion. I infer thus, Whereas
Scripture is sufficient to our full instruction, we ought not to waver in our
opinion of Gods goodness, if he did not appoint an infallible living Judge to
direct us. But Mr. S. thinking that a small d^scovery, thus resolves; But I
infer the contrary, Whereas Scriptures, tho replenisht with heavenly light, are
not sufficient to declare unto us what we ought to believe, we might waver in
our Opinion of Gods Goodness, if he did not appoint an infallible living Judge
for to instruct us. I leave the judicious Reader to reflect upon the stock of
insolences heaped up in these lines, to give the he flatly to S. Paul, and
pronounce a sentence against the goodness of God, if he did not what Mr. I. S.
thinks sit to be don.

But see how our admirable Doctor teaches S. Paul to mend his error, that
where he said Scripture is able to make us wise to Salvation, he did not say it
of Scripture alone, but in conjunction with those Auxiliaries, Mr. I. S. is
pleased to appoint. As if one to magnify his strength, did say he could carry
two hundred weight, and being on a trial found unable to do it, to verify his
saying, should alledg, that that he did not mean he could carry so much alone,
but he and a Horse with him. Such quibbles as these are more becoming Mr. S.
then S. Paul; and so he may keep them for himself, and not father them upon the
great Apostle.

Further he proceeds to oppose St Paul, saying, that when he wrote that Epistle
to Timothy, the whole Canon of Scripture was not completed; and only the whole
Canon, and no part of it, can be sufficient means for our instruction:
therefore the Scripture that S. Paul spoke of, cannot be a sufficient means for
instructing us to Salvation. Herein our Sophister is twice impious, first, in
taxing the great Apostles assertion with untruth: next, that the Oracle of God,
delivered to men in each time for their instruction to Salvation, should not be
complete and sufficient.

By this it appears well how much a stranger this man is to the common Doctrine
of Divines, who affirm, that in the Apostles Creed are contained all necessary
verities to be believed for Salvation; and in the Ten Comman^ments, all duties
to be performed of necessity to the same end. And may not the Creed, and Ten
Commandments be known without a knowledge of the whole Canon of Scripture? His
boldness is prodigious, in asserting extravagances, without exhibiting any
proof but his bare ipse dixit, Pythagoras-wise.

Finding me say I was not fit for P^thagoras his Schole, where ipse dixit was
the rule, and men will not give reason for what they teach; he opposes, that if
I am to expect reason for what I believe, I am not fit for Christ's Schole, nor
learning from Scripture, which affords nothing but a bare ipse dixit. But if
the Man had any ingenuity in him, he would spare this Objection, seeing it
prevented in the 18. page of my discourse; where I acknowledge with thanksgiving
to God, that I never doubted of the Truth of Holy Scriptures, nor of the Creed
proposed to us by the Catholic Apostolic Church, and dictated by God Almighty,
worthy to be believed without examen; not so Pythagoras, nor the Pope.

CHAP. V. Mr. S. his prolixe excursion about the Popes Authority requisite to
know which is the true Scripture, declared to be Impertinent; and the state of
the Question cleared from the confusion he puts upon it.
OUR Adversary finding the Popes Infallibility to be an expression odious and
ridi^ulous to all knowing men, and whereof even the sober part of Vid. Cress.
in exomologesi cap 4. Sect. 3.
Romanists grow ashamed, endeavors to serve us up the same Dish under another
dress, calling it the Authority of the Church Universal. And if therein he did
speak properly, or sincerely, he would have less opposition from us. But if you
do enquire what he means by Church Universal, he tells you it is the
Congregation Subject to the Pope of Rome, excluding all other men, and
particularly the Church of England from being any part of that his Universal
Church. The said Congregation subject to the Pope, whether diffusive or
representative in a general Council depending upon the Pope, and confirmed by
him; he pretends to be Infallible. And whatever I allege against the
Infallibility of the Roman Church, he thinks to elude by pretending I speak of
the particular Diocese of Rome; a gross misunderstanding, or willful
misrepresentation of my meaning, for which I never gave any ground in my
writing or discourses. He is to know I speak in proper terms, as used among
Learned men speaking upon this Subject, taking the Roman Church for the party
following the Popes faction wheresoever extant, whether congregated or
dispersed, prescinding from his Altercations with the rest, or any they have
among themselves; for both he and the rest agreeing in making that
Infallibility depending ultimately upon the Popes Authority, we may well
represent their assertion, as opposite to the sentiment of all other Christians
under the notion of the Popes infallibility. That all is bottomed upon the
Popes Authority, Bellarmin declares, saying totam firmitatem conciliorum
legitimorum esse a Pontifice, non-partim a Pontifice, partim a concilio. lib.
4. de Romans Pon. c. 3. sect. at contra.


The terms and state of the Question being thus cleared, it follows to declare
how impertinent his prolixe excursion and vain ostentation is, in telling us
the diversity of Opinions that were in different times about Canonical
Scripture, and the difficulty of ascertaining us which is the true one. This is
an old device of those of his faction, to decline the main controversy in hand,
wherein they still betray the weakness of their Cause. They and he should
remember, the points controverted are among parties that agree in reverencing
the Bible for the infallible Word of God. And if he thinks the part of it
received for Canonical, by common consent, will not suffice for ending our
Controversies, we admit willingly St. Augustins rule for clearing the
difficulties touching particular Books, the Authority of the Church, and the
Tradition of it, as described by Lirinensis, Quod semper, quod ubique, quod
apud omnes. What was in all time, in all places, and by all Christians
delivered, that we take for a true Apostolic Tradition, and to it we resolve to
stand or fall, as well for discerning Canonical Scripture, as for understanding
the true meaning of it.

If Mr. S. did take Church and Tradi^ion in the sense that the Holy Fathers
did, and the Learned Men of the Church of England do, he would find in us all
due reverence to those sacred Fountains of Christian verities. But to call
Church Universal the faction adhering to the Pope of Rome, in opposition to the
rest of Christians, is a presumtion like that of the Turk, in calling himself
King of Kings, and Emperor of all the World; such as are Vassals to him may
revere that calling; others do laugh at it. But we do not find the Turk to have
pla^'d the sool so far, as to take that his assumed title as granted by other
Princes independing upon him, or to alledg it for ground of his pretentions
with them. This is Mr. S. his folly, in taking for granted in his debates with
us, that the Romish faction is the Catholic Universal Church. So great an
Intruder upon disputes, should learn that rule of Disputants, Quod gratis
dicitur gratis negatur, what is barely said without proof, is sufficiently
refuted with a bare denial.

This alone, well considered, will suffice to overthrow man Chapters of Mr. S.
his Book. What makes him spend time in telling us of the difficulty of finding
out which is true Scripture, the rule truly infallible of our belief, when he
sees us thus ascertained of it? why does he trouble us with speaking of a
Criterion or beam of light pretended by Fanatics, confessing at the same time
that to be exploded by Protestants? is it to make his Book swell?

But finding he cannot hide Scripture from us, he will have us to be beholden
to the Pope for the true meaning of it: he musters up a store of Arguments
objected by Pagans, Arians and Sabellians against the Mystery of the Trinity:
and would have us leave the points present for answering them; let him go to
the Fathers that propose the Arguments, they will deliver the anwier. The
Councils truly Ecumenical of the Prmitive Church, and universal Tradition do
secure us of the right meaning of Scripture, touching those points. Where comes
here a need of the Pope and his faction to ascertain us?

He finds a special mystery in the point of Purgatory, that either we for
diminishing, or they for adding to the Words of God, are in a damnable error,
deserving to be blotted out of the Book of life, Apoc. xx. 9. The danger is
clearly on their side, no mention of Purgatory being in he written Word of God,
as shall after appear.

In the fourth Chapter he is very prolixe in telling us the Church is a Body,
and must have accordingly a Head and Members subject to it. We allow all,
provided Christ be the Head, and all others, both Pastors and flock, Members
subject to him, as it was in the Apostles times; each one of them preached
Christ, none himself for Head. There is no memory of any pretense in St. Peter
over St. Andrew in Achaia, or over St. Thomas in the Indies, or over any other
of the Apostles in their respective Provinces, no dependence of them upon him.

What he adds of Obedience due from the Flock to the Pastors is right, speaking
of each Flock in regard of their ordinary lawful Pastors: right also, that in
difficulties emergent of greater moment, a National Synod should be
congregated; as that he mentions in the United Provinces in Dordrecht. Right,
likewise what the Synod of Delpht resolved, that, tho the former Synod was
fallible, there was no obligation of conscience in obeying the decrees of it,
as there is in all Subjects to obey the orders of a lawful Superior, received
for such. And the Arminians having submitted to that Synod, and acknowledged it
to be lawfully congregated, may well be declared obliged to submit to the
Decrees of it, so far as not to disturb the public peace by illegal
oppositions? But all this comes very short of Mr. S. his purpose, since the
Reformed Churches never submitted to the Council of Trent, nor did acknowledge
it for a lawful free Ecumenical Council; and how could they think it to be
such, when the party accused, the Pope and his Court, was to be the judge and
supreme Arbiter of the cause? His resistance to a true lawful free Council, is
the cause of all the combustion and confusion we have in Christendom.

He takes for an advantage against Scripture, that I said, the reading of it
made me doubt of the truth of those Articles the Roman Church pressed upon my
belief, as if it were not able to ascertain me: But I thank God and the light
of his holy Word, which made me doubt of what your Party would have me swallow
without doubt or examen, and from the doubt brought me to a certainty of your
corruptions, and of the truth of the Primitive truly Catholic, and of
Apostolical Faith professed in the Church of England: such a certainty, as
renders my mind quiet and satisfied, that I have the guidance of Gods Word for
the belief proposed to me, and consequently a sufficient and full assurance of
the truth of it.

CHAP. VI. Mr. I. S. his defense of the Popes pretended Infallibility, from the
censure of Blasphemy, declared to be weak and impertinent. His particular
opinion censured for heretical by his own party.
LOW goes the cause with our Adversary, when he pretends to a milder sentence
against their error, in attributing Infallibility to the Pope. He will not have
it called Blasphemy; we may rest contented with finding it an error of any
degree; by that alone the whole structure of their tenets against us falls
down: but being mention was made of Blasphemy in their assertion, we will show
how faint a defense Mr. I. S. prepares against that censure. It is a wonder
that one so prodigal of the like censure as we have seen him to be, in the
first Chapter of this Treatise, tearming it a Blasphemy in me, to say that the
Learned men of the Church of England denied the Roman Church, as now it stands,
to be a safe way to salvation: and in the eighth Chapter of his Book, saying,
that Protestants may not without Blasphemy alledg Scripture for their tenets:
should take so great a scandal at saying it is a Blasphemy to make the Pope
Infallible; especially when the saying is grounded upon principles of their own
Authors. But it is no great wonder that Mr. I. S. opposing this censure should
not go the right way to it, nor heed the form or force of my Argument, for that
is his constant custom.

The Argument was ad hominem, grounded upon premises taken out of Authors of
his own party: the first was, that it is a Blasphemy to attribute to a creature
any of Gods properties; so Aquinas 1. p. q. 16. art. 3. ad tertiam. The second
Premise was, that Infallibility is a property of God not communicable to any
man, so the the same Aquinas, 2a. 2a. q. 13. art. 1. These two Premises being
granted, the conclusion is evident, that it is a Blasphemy to attribute
Infallibility to the Pope: which conclusion being contained in the two
Premises, the truth of it is to stand or fall with Aquinas his Authority. If Mr.
I. S. were formal in arguing, his way to answer this Argument were, to examine
whether Aquinas delivered the said Premises ascribed to him, and so come
directly to my conclusion, that in principles of their own Divines, it is a
Blasphemy to make the Pope Infallible.

But what do we mention Aquinas, and formal disputing to Mr. I. S? he does not
seem to be acquainted with that kind of reading or dealing: he will not be tied
to their strict rules of reasoning. Now let us follow him in his own way, and
see how he argues being set at liberty. He taxes me with ignorance, for not
knowing that God may lend his Attributes to men, and the Attribute of
Infallibility being but passed over in a grace, and lent to the Pope of Rome,
it must not be a Blasphemy to ascribe it to him.

First I enquire of this Magisterial man, whether Infallibility be an Attribute
of God incommunicable to a mutable man, as Aquinas seems to say? and being so,
whether it be not likely it may not be lent to another, as his Omnipotency
cannot, both representing an unlimited perfection? for as Omnipotency includes
a relation to infinite effects produceable, so the Infallibility ascribed to
the Pope for determining without error all questions possible to occur about
Religion, seems to argue an unlimited perfection, the said questions being
endless, the heavenly Preacher declaring, that God having made man upright, he
has entangled himself in infinite questions: which the Latin Vulgar Translation
delivers thus: Hoc inveni quod fecerit Deus hominem rectum; and ipse se
infinitis miscuit quaestionibus. And in the 12. Chapter and 12. v. he says, That
of many Books there is no end. The questions determinable being thus unlimited,
the faculty relating to them for an unerring determination must be likewise
unlimited, and consequently of infinite perfection. Will he allow so much to
the Pope? He challenges me often, and defies all my Divinity to answer his
Arguments; will he give me leave to challenge once all his Sophistry for a
direct and formal solution of this Query? And whilst he finds it,

I enquire, secondly, Whether it be granted and allowed that God has lent his
Infallibility to the Pope of Rome, to determine without error all questions
possible occurring about Religion? whether I have not denv'd resolutely the
said grant to be made; and confuted the foundations they pretend for it, to his
knowledge? being so, whether it be a proper kind of arguing to take for a
Principle against us, the Conclusion in debate? whether it be not a damnable
arrogance, to parallel his Pope with the holy Evangelists and Apostles, which
all Christians do acknowledge and reverence for unerring Oracles of God to
declare his holy Will to us? whether it be not insolence to say, that our
censures upon Romanists for attributing Infallibility to the Pope, should
reflect upon the sacred Organs of the Holy Ghost, speaking to us by their
mouth, as Mr. I. S. does most impiously pretend?

And being I signified the censure of Blasphemy upon their pretense to
Infallibility to be of their own Authors, not of my making, as not concerned
for aggravating their crime, so much as to show they are absolutely in an
error, I will further declare, how bitter they are in censuring one another in
this particular. How little is Mr. I. S. assisted by his brethren for his
singular way to escape?

In the College of Clermont at Paris the twelfth day of December, of the year
1661. was defended this Thesis as a Catholic assertion against the heresy of
the tenth Age; Christum nos ita caput Ecclesiae agnoscimus, ut illius regimen,
dum in calos al i^t, primum Petro, tum deinde successer thus commisern, and
candem quam habebat ipse Infallibilitatem concesseris quoties ex cathedra
loquerentur. Datur crgo in Ecclesia R. controversiarum sidei infallibilis
judex, ctiam extra concilium generale, tum in quaestionibus juris, ^nm facti.
Unde post Innocentii X. and Alexandri VII. constitutiones fide divina credi
potest librum cui titulus, Augustinus Jansenii esse haereticum, and quin^ue
propositiones ex co decerptas esse Jansenii and in sensa Jansenii damnatas.
We acknowledge Christ to be so the Head of the Church, that during his absence
in heaven he has delegated the government thereof, first to Peter, and then to
his Successors: and does grant unto them the very same Infallibility which
himself had, as often as they shall speak e e Cathedra. There is therefore in
the Church of Rome an infallible Judge of Controversies of Faith, even without a
General Council, as well in questions appertaining to right, as in matters of
fact. Therefore since the Constitutions of Innocent the X. and Alexander the
VII. we may believe with a divine Faith, that the Book entitled, The Augustine
of Jansenius is heretical, and the five Propositions which are gathered out of
it, to be Jansenius's, and, in the sense of Jansenius, condemned.

Here we have a great authorized College of his own, declare against Mr. I. S.
that the Pope even out of a General Conncil is Infallible; that he has the
very same Infallibility which Christ himself had: and if he slights the
Authority of this College (which may not be safe for him, if he be the man some
say pretends to have the honor of being Author of this Book) with more
consideration he may find the common opinion of the chief Scholemen of his
communion to be against him; such as are Aquin 2.2. q. 1. ar. 10. Cajet. op. de
authorit. Pont. and Council. cap. 9. Suar. d. 5. sect. 8. Ban. in com. brevi
dub. conclu. 3. Valen. d. 1. q 1. punct. 7. sect. 39. and 40. Mald. dub. 5.
Turri. disp. 16. dub. 1. Can. lib. 6. de locis Theolog. c. 7.8. Bellar. lib. 4.
de R. P. c. 2.
Aqui^as, Cajetanus, Suarez, Bannez, Valentia, Malderus, Turrianus, Canus,
Bellarmin, and many others; whereof Suarez, Bannez and Valentia declare Mr.
I.S. his opinion to be heretical, and branded for such in the Bull of Leo the
Tenth, condemning for an error of Luther this Proposition, Si Papa cum magna
part Ecclesiae sic vel sic sentiret, nec etiam erraret, adhuc non est
peccatum, aut haeresis, contrarium sentire, praesertim in re non necessaria ad
salutem; donec fuerit per Concilium Universal alterum reprobatum, alterum
approbatum: and by Sixtus IV. in a Council of fifty two Doctors celebrated at
Complutum in the year 1479. Alphonsus Carillo Arch - bishop of Toledo, being
President in it against Petrus Oxoniensis; among whose Propositions, condemned
for erroneous, this was the seventh, Ecclesia Vrbis Romanae errare potest. Here
we have our poor Antagonist his peculiar way of defending the Romish quarrel,
declared for heretical by Popes, and the common opinion of Popish Doctors.

Now let us see another party of them censure the foresaid position of the
Clermont College for a horrid impiety, and a species of Idolatry: for Idolatry,
say they, does not consist merely in giving to man the name of God, but
infinitely more when we attribute to him those qualities which are peculiar to
God, and when we render him those honors which are alone due to the Deity. Now
this entire submission of our Spirit, and of all our intellectuals comprehended
in the Act of our Faith, is no other then that adoration which we pay to the
prime Verity it self; and therefore whosoever he be that renders it to the word
of a man (whatever rank he may hold in the Church) who ever says that he
believes with a faith Divine, that which he would not believe, but because a
man has affirmed it, does constitute man in the place of God, transfers to the
creature that which is alone due to the Creator, and makes (as far as in him
lies) a kind of Idol of the Vicar of Jesus Christ. And a little after they
declare it to be a formal Blasphemy in these words. But were it possible to
offer a greater affront to the prime Minister of Jesus Christ, then to conceive
they do him honor by a Blasphemy, so injurious to Jesus Christ, that he should
suffer them to equal him with his Master, by ascribing to him the same
Infallibility which he alone possesses? and that men should render that Supreme
Cultus of a Divine Faith to his words, which is only due to the word of God?
Thus the party opposite of the Parisian Doctors in their Declaration against
the forementioned Thesis of Clermont College, presented to all the Bishops of
France, extant in the hands of many both in French and English.

And if their reason exhibited for their censure be considered well, we shall
find it to comprehend Mr. I. S. his opinion, no less then that of the Clermont
Jesuits, since both the one and the other do bottom the pretended Infallibility
of their Church upon the Popes Authority, whether in a Council, or out of it;
and so the reason of the Parisian Divines does conclude in either case, that it
is a Blasphemy injurious to Jesus Christ, to ascribe to the Pope that
Infallibility which Christ alone possesses, and that men should render that
Supreme Cultus of Divine Faith to the words of the Pope, which is only due to
the word of God.

The allegations of our Adversary for obedience due to the Church as to Christ,
and of promises made of the assistance of the Holy Ghost to the Apostles, and
the Church governed by them, will appear very impertinent to his purpose in
favor of the Pope and his faction, when we come to examine the Texts alleged,
for which I will assign the Chapter following.

In the mean time we may conclude from what is said in this Chapter, That, to
ascribe Infallibility to the Pope, is Blasphemy in the opinion even of Popish
Doctors, and Mr. I. S. his pecular way of defending that tenet declared for
heretical by Doctors of his own party, which was my present undertaking. To
which may be added the opinion of Mr. Tabul. Suff. cap. 19.20.21.
Thomas White of the same Communion, whose whole Book, called his Tabulae
suffragiales, is purposely designed against this doctrine of the Popes personal
Infallibility, affirming it to be not heretical, but Archiheretical: and that
the propagating of this doctrine is in its kind a most grievous sin: so weary
men of Learning and Parts begin to grow of this intolerable Arrogance of the
Roman Church or Court, and of their Flatterers.

CHAP. VII. Our Adversaries corruption of Scripture detected.
OUR Adversary certainly never looked into the Bible for the Texts he alleges
for the Infallibility of his Church, but snatched them out of some of his old
Controvertists, whose custom is to clip and cut Scripture to their own
pretenses, without regard of their true meaning. Or if he has seen them with
their contexts, he has bin strangely dull, in not perceiving the right sense of
them very obvious to any ordinary good understanding; or malicious in
misrepresenting the meaning of them. This is especially seen in his Allegation
of these words, Joh. XV. 26. When the Paraclete will come, whom I will send
from my Father, the spirit of truth, he will give testimony of me, and ye will
give testimony. This he will have us take for a certain testimony of the Holy
Ghosts assistance promised to his Church. If he did see the half verse
immediately following, which he left out, or his Tutors cut off, he would find,
that these words were spoken to the Apostles, with circumstances making them
impossible to be applied to his Church. The verse restored to its integrity
says thus, And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have bin with me from
the beginning. What man in his senses would think those words appliable to the
Council of Trent? Were the Fathers of that Council with Christ from the the
beginning? was the Holy Ghost not yet descended?

He confirms further his opinion out of Acts the XV. 28. where the Council of
the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, deciding the controversy concerning
Circumcision, delivers their opinion thus: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost,
and to us, signifying that the Holy Ghost did assist them: and that grounded on
the words aforesaid of our Savior, Joh. XV. 26. When the Paraclete will come,
he shall give testimony of me, and you shall give testimony of me. If that be
the ground of the Apostles Phrase, we have seen before to whom that promise was
given, whether to the Apostles alone, or the Bishops of Rome to be for ever. We
have seen that the Text in its integrity cannot be applied to the latter: But
Mr. I. S. of his own authority declares that promise was made by Christ, not
only to the Apostles, but to the Roman Church for ever.

And to make this latter Text sound something like to his purpose, he patches it
up with a piece of a verse fetched out of Matthew. XXVIII. Until the consummation
of the world. This usual art of theirs, of cutting from the Texts what is
against their purpose, and patching them with other words far fetched, that may
have a gloss or appearance of their pretention, may be practiced with more
safety in conversation, or in a Sermon to a vulgar Auditory, then in a serious
debate by print exposed to a strict examen. This is a cheat like that used in
Italy, with rotten Apples, to set them out for sound. They cut off the rotten
pieces, and glue together the sound fragments, to an appearance of a fair
Apple; but being handled more close, it falls in pieces and discovers the
cheat. This abominable Legerdemain is too often seen in their Pulpits,
fathering upon the Gospel forsooth most execrable Blasphemies, extolling their
several new Saints (to whom they would gain devotion, and by that devotion money
to their Coffers) above the Apostles, above the Angels, above Christ, and all
that is in heaven, to the perpetual scandal of the discreet part of their own
flock, and edification of none. All is sanctified with them, by repeting at the
end of every desperate discourse, some words of the Gospel, as a burden of the
song, tho with no relation in its sense to their purpose. This is the art Mr.
I. S. uses with the testimony related of Acts XV. touching the assistance of
the Holy Ghost in the Council at Jerusalem, grounded as he confesses upon the
aforesaid Text of John XV. 26. declared to relate only to the Apostles then
present; and Mr. I. S. of his own head will have it extended to the Roman
Church for ever; and his Interpretation must be taken for Canonical Scripture,
by closing it up with this fragment of the twentieth verse of Matthew the
XXVIII. Until the consummation of the world.

The Text he corrupts and cuts off, Matthew. XXVIII. contains a promise of Christ
to the Apostles and Church founded, and Faith preached by them, that he will
assist them for ever, saying, I am with you all the days, until the
consummation of the world. St. Hierom better then Mr. I. S. will tell us the
meaning of these words, glossing thus upon them: qui usque ad consummationem
seculi cum discipulis se futurum esse promittit, and illos ostendit semper esse
victuros, and se nunquam a credentibus recessurum. In these words our Savior
promises to his Disciples life everlasting, and to the Church founded by them,
and to all true believers in him, his perpetual assistance. This assistance of
Christ to his own true Church, following the steps and doctrine of the
Apostles, we believe with joy, but cannot approve the Arrogance of Mr. I. S.
and his brethren, in appropriating all such promises to their own Faction, and
perpetually taking for granted in his Debates with us, that to be the only
Church favored by such gracious promises, being indeed but a very corrupt
Member of the Church Universal, to whom these promises were made; a thing which
we do not say barely, but prove evidently.

Another example of their skill in clipping and corrupting Scripture, he
fetches out of the same Storehouse, upon the words of John XIV. 16. I will
pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, the spirit of truth,
that will abide with you for ever, who will lead you unto all truth. I
discovered their abuse of this Text by restoring it to its integrity, which
according to their own Bible goes in these words: If ye love me keep my
commandments, and I will ask my Father, and he shall give you another
Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth, whom
the world cannot receive. By the first words we see this to be a conditional
promise, limited to such as love God and keep his Commandments: by the latter
words, worldly and sinful men are expressly excluded from receiving that
gracious assistance of the Spirit of truth: for which meaning of these words I
related the Gloss interlineal and ordinary.

This discourse our Adversary opposes thus, that after the former clause, if
you love me keep my commandments, there is a punctum, and then follows a
distinct verse, and I will ask my Father, and he will give you another
Paraclete, etc. which makes an absolute sense independent from the former. This
is indeed a subtilty well becoming a Sophister; as if a punctum may not be
interposed betwixt several clauses of one discourse tending to the same end; or
betwixt premises, and a conclusion deduced from them: as if the copulative
particle and did not signify a conjunction of both clauses, and an influence of
the one upon the other; as if all that were not cleared by the words I quoted
in the Margin of the Gloss interlineal, Mundus, i. e. remanens amator mundi,
cum quo nunquam est amor Dei; and of the Gloss ordinary, non habent spirituales
oculos quibus Spiritum Sanctum videant mundi amatores. Here we see both Glosses
denying the effect of that glorious promise to profane worldlings, and
consequently the promise made only to lovers of God, and keepers of his holy
Commandments. If our Adversary were ingenuous, he would spare his silly
subtilties, seeing them obstructed by this stating of the case.

CHAP. VIII. Mr. I. S. his horrible impiety against the sacred Apostles, and
malicious imposing on the Church of England reprehended.
ANother grand Argument he has, which he says resolutely I can never answer,
is this, that if the foresaid promise, John XIV. 16. was conditional, as
abovementioned, it follows, we cannot be sure the Gospel is infallible,
whereas no Text of Scripture (says he, page 89.) tells us that the Evangelists
were in the state of Grace when they wrote the Gospel, nor nothing else gives
us assurance of it. My first answer to this so unanswerable Argument is, that
if this man had delivered this expression in Spain, and were accused to the
Inquisition, his body would suffer for it, if his intellect were not reduced to
acknowledge and repent the horrid impiety of it. And I am certainly persuaded,
that there is no Christian that has any sense of piety in him, whether
Protestant or Papist, but will cry out with horror against the insolent impiety
of this man, in speaking so irreverently of those sacred Organs of the Holy
Ghost, and blessed Disciples of Christ, confirmed by him in grace, as is the
common apprehension and expression of Christians, and replenished with the Holy
Ghost, Act. 2.4. for whose perseverance in grace our Savior prayed so
fervently to his heavenly Father, as we see in John the XVII. 11. Holy Father
keep through thine own name those thou have given me. Upon which words
Maldonate delivers this Gloss: Non rogat Christus ut nunc a peccatis
liberentur, sed ut jam liberati in eo statu quo erant conserventur, ne quis ab
ea decedat gratia, quam consecutus suo erat beneficio, quemadmodum Judae
contigerat. That our Savior prayed for their perseverance in grace, that none
of them should fall from it as Judas did. And will this rash man say, that the
prayer of our Savior was not heard, nor his request granted by his heavenly
Father, in favor of his beloved Disciples? If he will not be so profligately
impious, how dares he say, that no Text of Scripture tells us, that the
Evangelists were in the state of Grace when they wrote the Gospel, nor nothing
else gives us assurance of it? If his Book did contain no other crime then this
unchristian expression, any true disciple of Christ, and believer of his
Gospel, ought to judge the said Book more worth the burning then the reading.

He is not yet contented with the damnable expression forementioned, but must
raise his censure against the truth of the Gospel of Christ to a higher degree,
p. 89. saying, that not only we are not sure of the Infallibility of the
Gospel, but that we are assured it is not infallible; and this horrible
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and the Gospel dictated by him, he must
father upon the Protestant Church; but upon a ground so much of his own making,
that any dispassionate man, and not blind, may see the whole assertion to be
his own, and a product of his inclination, which appears here, and in many
other places, of destroying the foundations of all Christian Belief. The ground
he gives for this latter most damnable Blasphemy is, That the common doctrine
of the Protestant Church is, That it is impossible to keep Gods Commandments;
therefore says he, The Evangelists when they wrote did not keep Gods
Commandments, and consequently they could not have the Paraclete to lead them
into truth. I never yet heard any Protestant deliver such a desperate
proposition as this he fathers upon them, which thus delivered categorically,
without further declaration or limitation, were to say, it were impossible for
any man to be saved; our Savior often declaring, that the only way to life
everlasting is to keep Gods Commands. It were also to give the lie to our
Redeemer, saying, that his yoke is easy, and his burden light, Mat. XI. 30. and
that his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John V. 3. If he knows any Protestant
Writer to have delivered that position in that latitude; why does not he tell
me who he is, and where he says it, that I may judge accordingly of the Author
and of the Doctrine? Must I take it upon his credit, having so many experiences
of the untruth of his relations? That he must not expect from me. I suppose he
found this doctrine, which he says to be common in the Protestant Church,
where he found me saying, that there is no Salvation in the Catholic Church, as
he does most impudently impose upon me in his Dedicatory Epistle to my Lord
Lieutenant. This is their ordinary way of begetting in their Proselytes an
abhorrence to their opposers, viz. impostures and calumnies. Of their calumny
in this particular learned Le Blane complains, and declares thus in the behalf
of Protestants, cum Scriptura dicimus and docemus fideles Dei mandata per
Christi gratiam servare, etc. Thesi ^6. and 27. de observant. Leg. We say and
teach with the Scripture, that the faithful do keep the Commandments of God by
the grace of Christ.

Let not our Sophister think to appease my just indignation against him, or to
escape the censure I pass upon him of a blasphemous contemner of the Gospel of
Christ, and the sacred Writers of it, the blessed Evangelists, by saying, he
does not assert himself the foresaid affronts he puts on the Gospel and the
Evangelists, but that he infers them from positions of the Protestant Church.
The whole doctrine and belief of the Protestant Church, is contained in the
Canonical Scripture, and in the thirty nine Articles of the Church of England.
We are not in that confusion and uncertainty, touching the object of our
belief, as he and his party are, betwixt so many Articles daily coined, one
overthrowing the other. In what place of Canonical Scripture, or of the
foresaid thirty nine Articles, did he find this proposition, which he says is
the common doctrine of the Church of England, That it is impossible to keep
Gods Commandments? which being all the ground he shows for this blasphemous
Assertion, that we are assured the Evangelists, when they wrote the Gospel,
were not in the love of God and observance of his Commandments, and by that
assured the Gospel is not infallible; the said ground, I say, not being to be
found in any place of the forementioned Rule and Canon of our Belief: I
conclude the Assertion pretended to flow from it, to be of his own invention,
and his own sentiment. Let this therefore be known to be his Tenet and
Assertion, to his eternal infamy, That we are sure the Evangelists, when they
wrote the Gospel, were not in the state of Grace: that we are sure the Gospel
is not infallible. One that is found with a stolen horse, is to be taken for the
thief, till he prove that he has received it lawfully from another: We find
that execrable Blasphemy in the mouth of I. S. Let him be taken and punished
for Author of it (if any just inquisition find him) since he can find no other
Author for it.

But all his Sophistry will not afford him even the least color of excuse, for
the former part of his Assertion, for which he will not be beholden to any
other, but delivers it for a document of his own, That no Text of Scripture
tells us, that the Evangelists were in the state of Grace when they wrote the
Gospel, nor any thing else gives us assurance of it. Ask of any boy in Spain or
Flanders but meanly catechized, whether he was not taught by his Curate and
Parents, that the Apostles, by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, were
confirmed in grace, wherewith we are assured they never lost it after. And in
case our Adversary should gain by some pictures or medals the votes of the boys
in his favor; other Doctors we have which he shall not so easily gain to his
side, who affirm that the sacred Apostles, after receiving the Holy Ghost, were
so confirmed and strengthened in grace, that no humane power or temtation could
make them fail in their fidelity to God. S. Augustine for one thus delivers his
opinion, Homil. 9. de Missione Spiritus Sancti. Ante adventum vero Spiritus
Sancti sub ipso crucis dominicae tempore, alii ex discipulis effugantur, alii
unius Ancillae voce terrentur, and metu corda trepida penetrante dominum suum
negare coguntur. Post illustrationem vero Spiritus Sancti and Confirmationem,
custodiis excruciati, verberibus afflicti, ibant gaudentes, quia digni essent
pro Christi nomine contumeliam pati. That the Apostles, so frail before, as to
run from their Master and deny him, at the instance of a girl, after being
confirmed in grace, by receiving the Holy Ghost, were so constant in suffering
prisons and scourgings, that they rejoiced for being worthy of suffering for
Christ. The same doctrine of the Apostles, being confirmed in grace, by the
coming of the Holy Ghost upon them, so as they were by Gods special protection
preserved from falling from it all their life, tho otherwise peccable, is
delivered by other Tertullian contra Praxed. c. 34. Leo Magnus Ser. 2. de
Pentecost. Gregor. Papa, Homil. 30. in Evang. Chrysostom Homil. 4. in acta
Apost. Bernard. Ser. in Fest. Pentecostes. Aquinas qu. 24. de Veritate art. 9.
ad 2. Justinianus disput. 1. ex praeviis in Paulum, c. 5. nu. 7. Corn. a Lap.
ad versum 3. c. 2. Actor.
Fathers and Scholemen. All this force of testimonies of Scripture, Fathers,
and Divines, being in favor of the sacred Apostles, to have bin confirmed in
grace, and preserved in it all their life, how comes our Adversary to say, we
have no assurance of their being in the state of Grace, when they wrote the
Gospel? Did they not write it after the Holy Ghost descended upon them? Which
shall we admire most, his ignorance, or impiety?

Truly he has given such testimony of both, in this his undertaking, rebuked in
this Chapter, that we might very well bid him farewell here, and leave him as
unworthy of any further reply. But whereas he may meet with readers so short
sighted, as not to take notice of absurdities and guilts even of this size, we
will continue yet helping them to find out gross errors and crimes in his
writing.

CHAP. IX. Our Adversaries pretention to prescription, and miracles in favor of
the Infallibility of their Church rejected: his imposing on me, and on the
Church of England, discovered further.
OUR Sophister finding but little right by Scripture, or reason, for the
pretended Infallibility of his Church, appeals to the title of Prescription,
that they have bin long time in possession of this prerogative, and ought not
to be disturbed now in the use of it. Here he prepares a defense for thieves
and robbers. If they have our goods long time in their possession, we must
leave them to such possessors, and not disturb them in the use of them. The
Turk is hereby justified in his possession of the holy Land, and other
Dominions of Christian Princes he has robbed. The attempt of the said Princes
in dispossessing this Robber, is unjust, according to Mr. I. S. his Logic. In
it he could not find this rule of Law, Quae ab initio sunt male constituta,
tempore non convalescunt, That what was unlawful in the beginning, grows not by
continuance lawful: nor this other, Non debet quis commodum reportare ex
crimine, none ought to find an advantage in a guilt for his defense. An unjust
usurper by a continuance of his usurpation, is rendered rather more guilty then
excusable. We have shown by evident proofs, that the pretention of the Roman
Church to Infallibility was, and is still an unjust usurpation, a robbery of a
privilege belonging unto God and his holy Scripture, communicated to the
Apostles, founders of Christian Religion, and to the Church truly Catholic and
Universal, sticking to the Doctrine and Belief which Christ and his Apostles
left to us, not to that factious party devoted to the Pope of Rome, which Mr.
I. S. would have us take for the only Church, committing in all his discourses
a perpetual Solecism against the laws of a Disputant, which is, to take for
granted the subject of the Debate, which is constantly denied to them. But his
Logic will not take notice of these niceties.

Now therefore to accuse us that we disturb them in the possession of their
Infallibility, is like the complaint of a certain Gentleman against a Merchant,
calling on him for an old debt. He ranted and swore he was a troublesome
companion, for importuning for the payment of a debt of so many years, as if it
were but of yesterday; his delay in paying, was an increase of his guilt. The
retaining of another man's goods, as well as the taking them away against his
will, is robbery. Thus it is in our case: the pretention of the Roman Faction
to Infallibility, was a robbery from the beginning, an imposing upon man kind,
as I have proved; and the continuance of it is an increase of their guilt: why
will Mr. I. S. make this increase of their guilt an excuse of it? Besides, to
say, that his Church was in all Ages in peaceable possession of this
prerogative of Infallibility, as he does, page 76. is a wide mistake, and as he
asserts it without proof, he must be contented with a bare denial for an
answer, while we leave him to look after any pertinent testimony of the Fathers
of the first three hundred, nay for a thousand years for his purpose; which he
shall never find.

In the seventh Chapter of his Book, p. 102. he falls abruptly upon the old
armory of miracles in favor of his Church. Of this I could not but wonder,
having seen him, p. 81. engage his whole Logic against the power of Miracles,
for breeding in men a saving divine Faith; for said he, Either they are only
probable, or evident; if probable only, they are not proportionable to give us
that certainty required for divine Faith, if evident absolutely, they can be no
motive of Faith which is of its own nature obscure. In which piece of Logic he
gives a clear testimony of his Impiety and Ignorance; Impiety in pretending to
weaken that strong foundation of Christian Belief, taken from the glory of
Miracles, for which I remit him to what he alleges himself from the foresaid
p. 102. Ignorance, in pretending that an obscure Conclusion may not be deduced
from an evident Premise. To prove notum per ignotius, a Conclusion clear by a
Premise or Medium more obscure, is a known fault in arguing; but to prove by an
evident Medium a Conclusion obscure, is a fault of arguing never heard of yet
before Mr. I. S. his Logic. By this Canon he makes the belief of Martha to be
indiscreet, who seeing the resurrection of her brother, and other Miracles our
Savior wrought, concluded, I believe that thou art Christ the son of God. The
miracle was evident, but the generation of Christ from his heavenly Father,
obscure; And who shall declare his generation? Esa. III. 8. Having thus helped
him against himself, for rendering Miracles a congruous way to find out true
Religion, I gladly accept the challenge to a trial of our Religion by them. Our
Religion, or the object of our necessary Belief, is only what is contained in
the word of God by Canonical Scripture. In favor of this Belief, we have all
the Miracles written in the Old and New Testament. Their Religion as opposite
to ours, and differing from us, are those Articles in debate, introduced by the
Roman Church, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Worship of Images, etc. Will he
for shame pretend the stock of Romanies produced by them for these Innovations,
fit to be compared with the store of glorious Miracles which we have in the
behalf of our divine, truly infallible Belief, contained in holy Scripture?
While we show his new Belief to be contrary to this divine Faith, confirmed
with Miracles of infallible truth, as we do, let him keep to himself his
new-coin'd wonders, and remember that God is not contrary to himself, in
putting his Seal to contrary Laws. And if he must believe some of the wonders
he proposes, let Lessius and others help him to understand what to make of
those miracles or wonders which Valerius Maximus, Titus Livius, and other Roman
Historians do relate to have bin wrought in favor of their Temples, and
heathenish Superstitions: and let him not expect from me, that I should bestow
time in examining the truth or false-hood of all his impertinent Allegations.

In the same seventh Chapter from p. 126. he fastens on me two notorious
calumnies; first, that having left the Roman Church, I fixed upon no other to
be of; the second, that I said none may be saved in the Roman Church. The
falsehood of the first is seen by my public declaration for the Church of
England; the untruth of the other I declared in the second Chapter of this
Treatise, whereby all his verbosity upon this subject, appears a fret of his
Malice, without any real ground, without shame to tax me often with, and repete
with his frivolous exclamations, without showing where or when I did say, what
indeed I never said or wrote, That there is no salvation in the Roman Catholic
Religion. With the same confidence, and the like untruth, he repetes, That it
is the constant doctrine of the Church of England, that the Romish Religion is
a saving Religion, or a safe way to salvation; which is what we deny them.

Let the Reader reflect upon what I said in the foresaid second Chapter of this
Treatise, and see the confusion of this man's brains, in not understanding or
delivering distinctly our sentiments, according to our own expressions; or the
corruption of his mind, in deceiving wilfully his Reader, especially that he
himself, p. 133. alleges Doctor Stillingfleet, comparing both Churches, the
Romish to a leaky Ship, wherein a man may be saved, but with great danger and
difficulties: and the Protestant to a sound Ship, wherein one may be saved
without hazard. This is the utmost of courtesy or charity that may be, and is
extended to them? Is this to say the Romish Church is a safe way to salsation?
Is it safe to venture in a leaky Ship upon a stormy Sea? But what says he to
the streams of learned Authors of the Protestant Church, which Dr.
Stillingfleet relates, and of the very learned Book he wrote himself, proving
with irresistible Arguments, that the Romish Church in several of her present
Tenets and Practices, is guilty of Idolatry? Is Idolatry of those pious
opinions which matter not for salvation? And let Mr. I.S. know, that I
considered long, and examined thoroughly the doctrine of the Church of England,
before I declared for it, and he may spare his labor of catechizing me in the
Tenets of it.

CHAP. X. A check to Mr. I. S. his insolent Thesis prefixed for title to the
eighth Chapter of his Book: That the Protestant Church is not the Church of
Christ, nor any part of it. That they cannot without Blasphemy alledg Scripture
for their Tenets. And his own Argument retorted to prove, that the Roman Church
is not the Church of Christ.
UNder so pregnant and big promising a title as this; That the Protestant
Church is not the Church of Christ, nor any part of it, that they cannot
without Blasphemy alledg Scripture for their Tenets, etc. and that in a Book
presented to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland the Earl of Essex; under so
magnificent a title, I say, exposed to the view of so great and judicious a
person, who would not expect a very exquisite discourse to go through so stout
an undertaking? And, behold Reader, what Mr. I. S. presents to his Excellency
for that purpose.

For a Foundation of his discourse, he will have us premise, that Protestants
do allow Papists not to err in points Fundamental to Salvation, that our
differences with them are about points not Fundamental. He does not seem to
regard or know which be these points called Fundamental, or not Fundamental;
which is a bad beginning to be clear and exact in the present Engagement. But
he is to suppose with Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Potter, and other learned Writers
of both Churches, See Chillingworth his Answer to the Book entitled, Charity
maintained, etc. c. 4. And Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Fundamentals, c. 2.
Stillingfleet in his Rational Account, Part. 1. cap. 2. B. Laud, p. 42.
following therein the common opinion of Fathers, and Scholemen, that the
points Fundamental, or of necessary belief to Salvation, and to the
constitution of a true Christian Church, are those contained in the Apostles
Creed; which is a system or summary of Articles, which those sacred Founders of
Christianity thought fit and sufficient to be proposed to all men, where the
Gospel was preached, and necessary to be explicitly believed. So as the Council
of Trent calls it Fundamentum firmum and unicum, Sess. 3. not the firm alone,
but the only Foundation. Points not Fundamental, or inferior truths, are all
other divine Verities contained in the Word of God, whether written in
Canonical Scripture, or delivered to us by Apostolical Universal Tradition,
implicitly contained in the Creed, where we profess to believe in God, and in
the Catholic Church; and explicitly to be believed when we should be
ascertained that they are contained in those Oracles of God; called inferior
truths, not that they are of less certainty, and objective Infallibility in
themselves, then the other called Fundamental; but because the explicit
knowledge of them is not so necessary or obvious to all men, and consequently
are more capable of inculpable ignorance of them, and errors about them in many
men. And because the Roman Church does agree with us in the explicit confession
of this Creed, it is said not to err in Fundamental points, tho found guilty of
pernicious errors touching other points not Fundamental. And with this
Supposition, I am confident my Antagonist will not quarrel, if you take him
here, before he sees my reflections upon his unwary Argument.

Upon the foresaid Foundation, Mr. I. S. builds this Thesis, That the
Protestant Church, as it is condistinct from the Popish Church, is not the
Church of Christ, because, says he, it does not teach the doctrine of Christ,
and no Church can be called of Christ further then it teaches his doctrine.

That Protestancy, or the doctrine of Protestants as opposite to the Popish, is
not the doctrine of Christ, he undertakes to prove with this Syllogism, No
fallible doctrine is the doctrine of Christ: but Protestancy is altogether
fallible doctrine; Therefore Protestancy, as it is properly the doctrine of the
Protestant Church, is not the doctrine of Christ. This Syllogism he chalks out
to us in a different Character, for remarkable, as indeed it is, and for
unanswerable, for it is in Ferio, says he, page 142. The Major Proposition we
allow willingly; the Minor, to wit, that Protestancy is altogether fallible
doctrine, he says, is manifest by virtue of this other no less remarkable
Syllogism, Protestancy, or the doctrine wherein Protestants do differ from
Papists, is altogether of points not Fundamental: but the doctrine of points
not Fundamental, or inferior truths, is fallible doctrine: therefore
Protestancy is but fallible doctrine, and therefore no doctrine of Christ.

He concludes with these words, I confess ingenuously, I think this Argument
cannot be solidly answered. If his confession herein be ingenuous indeed, let
him take in return this other ingenuous confession from me, that I think
seriously he is a very weak man. If he be sensible himself of the fallacy and
falsehood of his Argument, he is unworthy in beguiling his Reader, and unwise
in exposing it to a polemical strict debate: and thinking we should want a
solid Answer to so silly a Sophism, not to give it yet a more severe check,
happily he has that poor excuse in his favor, that he knows not what he says.

To see whether my Answer be solid, let us examine how solid his Argument is.
The stress of it lies in his latter Syllogism, whose major Proposition is, That
Protestancy, or the doctrine wherein Protestants do differ from Papists, is
altogether of Points not Fundamental. This we allow him to take for granted.
Let us proceed to the Minor, But the doctrine of Points not Fundamental, or
inferior Truths, says he, is fallible doctrine. Stop here Sir, and if Justice
were don to you, a perpetual stop should be put to your tongue, for
blasphemons, from speaking any more. It is a formal Blasphemy, and a horrid one
to say, that the doctrine of Points not Fundamental, or inferior Truths in
general is fallible doctrine. It is to say, that the Word of God is fallible.
Remember what is premised a little before, and supposed by your self in many
places of your present discourse, that the Points called not Fundamental, are
all those other divine Verities contained in the Word of God, whether written
in Canonical Scripture, or delivered to us by Apostolical Tradition, besides
the Points contained in the Creed; of equal objective certainty and truth with
the other Points. They are of a size, as you speak, all being the Word of God,
tho not in the same degree of necessity to be explicitly believed by all men.
Therefore to say that the doctrine of Points not Fundamental is fallible, is to
say, that the Word of God is fallible, which, without Controversy, is a formal
Blasphemy. Poor Logician, is this your Argument in Ferio, for which you thought
a solid Answer could not be found? For a Syllogism in Feri^ to be concluding,
the Premises must be allowed; and will you have us allow your Premises, when
one of them is found to be a formal Blasphemy?

But it seems this horrible Blasphemy did not fall from him unawares; it was
with deliberation. He goes to prove it, and see how. The Church can err, and is
fallible in Points not Fundamental, therefore these Points are fallible. This
is another goodly piece of Logic, which proves that Points Fundamental are
likewise fallible. Men can err, and have erred in Points Fundamental, therefore
these also are fallible in your Dialect. This is not to distinguish Subjective
fallibility, from the Objective; to pass the imperfections of the faculty upon
the object. Mr. I. S. looks upon the Sun with squint, or dim eyes, therefore
the Sun is dim or squint. The Pope can err, and is fallible in declaring the
Word of God, therefore the Word of God is fallible. Your brethren of Clermont
College, who defended in their Theses, mentioned chap. 6. that the Pope has
the same Infallibility which Christ had, may think that consequence legal, The
Pope is fallible about the Word of God, therefore the Word of God is fallible,
because the Pope has the very same Infallibility which Christ the very Word of
God has. But we that a low no such Equality of truth to men, cannot take
fallibility in the Word of God, for a consequence of man's fallibility about it.

From the foresaid Position, you proceed to the second grand Thesis prefixed to
your Chapter, That Protestants cannot without Blasphemy alledg Scripture for
their Tenets. This is sure a rare show of your wit, a product of your own
invention never heard of before. I confess to have never heard the like: and
thus you go to prove it. Protestancy, or the points wherein Protestants do
differ from Papists, is but a parcel of fallible doctrine, but no fallible
doctrine can without Blasphemy be sought for in Scripture; therefore
Protestants cannot without Blasphemy alledg Scripture for their Tenets. Make of
the Major what you please for the present: what desperate Proposition is that
of the Minor, That no fallible doctrine may without Blasphemy be sought for in
Scripture? By this all the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, all Divines that
alledg Scripture for their several opinions, which they do not pretend to be
infallible, nor more then probable opinions, are guilty of Blasphemy in your
esteem.

But that this so much solemnized Argument may not be altogether useless, I
will retort it upon your self with more force and less cavil; proving by it,
that your Church is not the Church of Christ. And thus I argue for it in your
own terms. No Church is any further the Church of Christ, then as it teaches
the doctrine of Christ; but the Roman Church, as condistinct from the Reformed
Protestant Church, or in as much as it differs from it, does not teach the
doctrine of Christ; therefore the Roman Church as condistinct from the Reformed
Protestant Church, is not the Church of Christ. The Minor Proposition, That the
Roman Church, as condistinct from the Protestant Church, does not teach the
doctrine of Christ, I prove thus: The doctrine which the Roman Church, as
condistinct from the Protestant, and opposite to it does teach, is, Popes
Infallibility, and Supremacy over all the Christian Church, Transubstantiation,
Worship of Images, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Indulgences, half
Communion, Liturgy in an unknown tongue, prohibiting the people to read holy
Scripture, etc. all which I have declared in my former discourse, not to be the
doctrine of Christ, but all contrary to it, and in this present Treatise will
more fully declare the same: Therefore the Roman Church as condistinct from the
Protestant, and opposite to it, does not teach the doctrine of Christ, and
consequently is not the Church of Christ.

CHAP. XI. A Refutation of several other Attemts of Mr. I. S. in that eighth
Chapter.
YOU are prolix in pretending that Protestants have not unity of Faith with
Papists. God forbid they should agree in all with them: spare bragging that
they claim kindred with you. It is a great piece of courtesy and charity in
Protestants to admit kindred with you, or allow you to be a part, tho infected
and corrupted, of the Catholic Church: a courtesy, I say, in some thing like
that of Bellarmin, in admitting even the most scandalously wicked of men,
Epicures in manners, and Atheists in belief to the Communion of his Church,
provided they do but exteriourly own the Romish Religion, and Obedience to the
Pope, tho but for temporal ends. His kindness to his Lord the Pope, and zeal
for his grandeur, makes him extend thus his courtesy. Our love to our Lord
Christ makes us admit kindred with you, and to take you for Members of the
Church Universal, in as much as you confess with us, tho but verbally, the
chief Articles of his doctrine contained in the Creed.

You proceed to exhort Protestants to an examen of their Belief, whether they
be in the right. I wish your party did comply so well herein with their duty,
or were permitted to do it, as Protestants do, and are allowed. Here they
inquire, dispute, and read carefully Books for and against their Tenets. They
are permitted to do it, and encouraged in it by their Instructors. You will not
allow your people to read, dispute, or doubt at all of your Tenets.

You say Protestants are obliged in conscience to doubt of their Religion:
while you tell your own people, they are obliged in conscience not to doubt of
theirs. How came your Church by this Prerogative? because it is unerring, and
unerrable, as the Title of your Book says, but the Book does not prove, as we
are showing. Why are Protestants obliged to doubt of their Religion? because it
is new, say you. This was the Argument of Pagans, to stop the preaching of the
Gospel; more improperly, and with less ground used by you. Our Religion is the
Ancient, and yours the New, as we prove. Where was our Religion, say you,
before Luther? A question which for one too old should be cast away. We answer,
where yours never was; in the Word of God, and in the true Records of Primitive
Christianity.

You conclude your heterogeneous Chapter, and your first part of your Book,
with mentioning the Treatise or Paper I penned some years ago, in favor of the
Salvation of Protestants against your vulgar Teachers, damning all to hell for
Heretics, without reserve or distinction. You say the doctrine I delivered was
true; but it was indiscretion to declare it in Ireland, whither I was sent to
convert Protestants. The case was with Papists, who concerned for the Salvation
of their Relations and Friends of the Protestant Communion, enquired, whether
such believing sincerely they were in the right, never convinced of the
contrary, and living religiously in the fear of God, and in the observation of
his Commandments, might be saved. I answered they might, and were not Heretics,
but Members of the Catholic Church, a dignity received in their Baptism, and
not to be lost otherwise, then by formal Heresy or Infidelity, whereof they
were not guilty by the foresaid Supposition. You say all is true, but it is not
discretion to declare truth it self, when there is no obligation of declaring
it. Well, but was there not an obligation upon me, when questioned to answer
according to truth? No, say you, for if the Inquirers were Papists, they needed
not to be instructed in that truth; it is no Fundamental Truth. If Protestants;
they were not obliged to know it for the same reason, and that the answer was
an encouragement to them to remain as they were. A pretty subtilty. We have
declared before, how touching Points not Fundamental, there may be pernicious
errors. Such is that opposite to the Truth we now speak of: an error subversive
of Christian charity, and public peace; a seed of those Animosities, Rebellion,
and Combustions which made this Land unhappy. And ought not a sincere
Instructor, and faithful Minister of the Word of God, to oppose this error? No,
say you, because it was to encourage Protestants to remain as they were, and
not to come under the Popes Obedience. There is the ground of your dislike of
me.

Thus indeed stood the case: and this was one of my chief reasons to be
dissatisfied of your way, That the rule of my doctrine among you must not be
truth, but the interest of the Bishop of Rome, and the increase of his
Dominion, whether by right or wrong. This point of policy or discretion, as you
call it, I refused openly to learn from you, choosing rather to be of the
Children of Light, tho with less prudence in your opinion, then of the Children
of this World, by that elevated point of prudence you would teach me, of
prostituting truth and honesty to the Popes pleasure and interest.

CHAP. VII. Mr. I. S. his Answers to my Objections, against the Popes
Infallibility refuted: his defense of Bellarmin, of the Council of Constance,
and of Costerus, declared to be weak and vain.
OUR Adversary foreseeing what small assistance he could have from Scripture
and reason to maintain his Tenets, emploies his main forces in setting up their
ordinary great engine of the Popes Infallibility: and having bestowed the far
greater part of his Book upon that subject, turns to it again, beginning the
second part of his said Book with reflections upon some of my Arguments against
their pretention: and wanting, it seems, materials to bring his Book to the
intended bulk, repotes much of what he said before: wherein I will not imitate
him by repeting my replies, my desire being to abbreviate, as far as may
consist with a full satisfaction to all his Objections.

He pretends to cast a mist over the case, turning the usual term of Popes
Infallibility, to Infallibility of the Church, and by Church he means
fraudulently not the Church Universal truly Catholic and Apostolic, (to which I
allow all the privileges and assistances of the Holy Ghost promised to it in
Scripture, tho he signifies that he doubts of my meaning herein) but his own
particular Church; I do not mean the Diocese of Rome (as he does wilfully
impose upon me, happily to gain time, or draw us from the point) but the
Congregation subject to the Pope wheresoever extant. Defenders of a bad cause
do love such confusion and obscurities, as Foxes holes, and thickets; but we
must keep him to the Light, and to the ordinary use of terms, taking for Popes
Infallibility the same which he, or any of his Communion attributes to their
Church depending upon the Pope, as is declared above in the beginning of the
fifth Chapter.

I said I admired that Bellarmin should make it an Argument of the Popes
Infallibility, that the high Priest did bear in his Breast Plate two Hebrew
words, signifying Doctrine and Truth. I questioned whether he believed all
those high Priests, even Caiphas condemning Christ, to be infallible in their
judgments. Mr. I. S. to relieve Bellarmin, endeavors to autorize the
Affirmative, and to that of Caiphas sa^es nothing, and so gives us leave to
think that he held him also infallible, according to that rule, qui tacet
consentire videtur. By which we have this further notice of Mr. I. S. his
singular doctrine, that he finds Caiphas infallible in his judgment passed
against the life of our Savior, and taxes me with ignorance for not knowing so
much.

I accused them of making the Pope Arbiter and supreme Judge over Gods Laws. So
Bellarmin, lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 5. sticks not to say, That if the Pope
did command Vices, and prohibit Virtues, the Church would be obliged to believe
Vice to be good, and Virtue bad. And the Council of Constance commanded the
Decrees of Popes to be preferred before the Institutions of Christ, since
having confessed that our Savior did ordain the Communion under both kinds to
the Laity, and that the Apostles did practice it, they command it should be
given for the future but in one kind, alleging for reason, that the precedent
Popes and Church did practice it so. Which is to extol the Decrees of Popes,
above them of Christ. As, if the Laws of England were not to be understood or
practiced in Ireland, but according to the will and declaration of the King of
France, certainly the King of France would be deemed of more power in Ireland,
then the King of England, and the People more his subjects.

To that of Bellarmin you say, he spoke of Vices and Virtues when there is a
doubt of their being such; for example, if there should arise a doubt of
Usury's being a Vice, and in that case the Pope should command Usury to be
practiced, we should be obliged to practice Usury. Herein Sir you allow us all
that we pretended, and you confess what we condemned in Bellarmin. I could
alledg many Texts of Scripture, supposing and affirming Usury to be a Vice. But
you spare me that labor, presupposing, that Usury of it self is a Vice of its
nature bad, (Per se malum,) and that you all know it to be such; and
notwithstanding that knowledge, and Gods declaration in Scripture, you say if
the Pope should command Usury to be practiced, we should be obliged to practice
it. And so it is indeed with you both in Usury and other Vices. We know all
that Rebellion is a sin, and soodious to God, that in Scripture it is compared
to Witchcraft and Idolatry, 1 Samuel xv. 23. But if the Pope should command you
to rebel against your King for Religions sake (forsooth,) then would you be
obliged to rebel against him; because (say you, with Bellarmin) in dubious
Cases the Church is obliged to obey the Pope. Men are apt to doubt of their
duties, and the Devil is ready to stir such doubts in them. Thus he wrought the
first Rebellion in Paradise, Cur praecepit vobis Deus, etc. Why has God said
ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? And if the Pope comes out
declaring, that it is lawful and religious to rebel, you must practice
accordingly: tho Scripture and reason makes you know, that Rebellion is an
heinous vice. This is the great power of the Pope you teach, to metamorphose
vice into virtues, and virtues to vices. It is a common boast of your stout
Bigots to say, that if the Pope did prohibit them to say the Lords Prayer, Our
Father, etc. they would not say it, tho Christ did order them to pray so.

To that of the Council of Constarce, you say, it is false, that they alleged
no other reason for prohibiting the Cup to the Laity, then the Decrees of
precedent Popes. You affirm, they alleged also for reason, the example of
Christ and his Apostles, who gave it in one kind: whereby it appears you did
not read the Council. Read the thirteenth Session of it, where this matter is
handled, and there you shall find no montion of Christ and his Apostles, to
have given the Sacrament in one kind; but the contrary is supposed, as appears
by these words of the Decree, Quod licet in Primitiva Ecclesia hujusmodi
Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie, postea a conficientibus
sub utraque, and a Laicis tantummodo sub specie panis suscipiatur. That tho the
Sacrament of Communion in the Primitive Church was received by the faithful
under both kinds, for the future it is to be received by the Priests
consecrating under both kinds, and by the Laity only under the Species of
Bread. It is therefore from your self you say, that Christ and the Apostles did
administer it to the Laity under one kind, and the Council does not pretend to
know so much, only alleges the custom formerly introduced, saying, Vnde cum
hujusmodi consuetudo ab Ecclesia and Sanctis patribus rationabiliter introducta
and diutissime observata sit, habenda est pro lege. That this custom being
reasonably introduced, and long time observed by the Church and holy Fathers,
it is to be taken for a Law. Here you see no mention made of Christ or the
Apostles to have don so, as you say. Upon what ground, you do not tell us; you
will have it taken upon your credit.

By saying that I may flatter the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, by telling him,
he has more power in this Kingdom then the King his Master, in whose place and
name he acts, because I accused you of giving more power to the Pope then to
God, by these privileges of giving to divine Law what sense he pleases, and
overthrowing the Ordinances of Christ to set up his own; by this your
expression, I say, you are twice criminal in a heinous degree. First, for
imagining it should be a way to flatter my Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to say,
he had more power in Ireland then the Kings Majesty, which he could not hear
without horror and indignation. Secondly, for the falsehood of your supposition
to frame your parity. When or where did the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland say,
that notwithstanding the King of England did ordain this, or that, for the
Government of Ireland, himself would order the contrary; as your pretended
Vicar of Christ said in the Council of Constance now mentioned, that
notwithstanding Christ did order the Communion to be given in both kinds to the
Laity, he did order himself the contrary? And all this senseless and groundless
extravagancy you run upon, only to find occasion of talking to us of a halter,
after your wonted grave and modest s^^le. But being convinced of a false
accusation, you deserve, by the law of retaliation, the punishment due to the
crime you do so falsely impose upon us. Certainly that of the ducking-stool will
appear in all good judgments both due and necessary to so foul a mouth.

Another Example. I produced of your extolling Papal Laws above the Divine, in
the case of Costerus, saying, Its a greater sin in a Priest to marry, then to
keep a Concubine, the former being but a transgression of a Papal Law, the
second of a Divine. You answer, p. 173. that tho it be but a Papal Law, that
Priests should vow chastity, yet the vow being made, it is a trangression of
Divine Law to violate it. Consult your Casuists Sir, and you shall find them
all say, that a vow made in any matter opposite to Gods orders, is null or
invalid. There is an order of God intimated by St. Paul to the unmarried, that
if they cannot contain, let them marry, 1 Cor 7.9. Possible it is, that a
Priest should find by experience, that he cannot contain. This you will not
deny. Then the vow appears to be null, because by it was promised a thing
contrary to that order of God intimated by St. Paul: and consequently the
obligation of it cease; only the Popes Law prohibiting Priests to marry
urges. To it is opposite that other intimated to the unmarried: if they cannot
contain, let them marry. Which of these Laws or Orders must be observed? If you
say the Popes Law, as Costerus does; then follows the Conclusion, that you
prefer the Popes Laws to those of God. You may exclaim at this; but you see the
Premises containing in them the Conclusion, is inbred undenied doctrine among
you.

CHAP. XIII. Our Adversary his foul and greater Circle committed, pretending to
rid his claim to infallibility from the censure of a Circle. His many
absurdities, and great ignorance in the pursuit of this attempt discovered. A
better resolution of Faith proposed according to Protestant Principles.
I accused our Adversaries of a Circle committed in their pretense to
Infallibility, because they prove it by Scripture, and the Infallibility of
Scripture they prove by the infallibility of their Church, which is to go still
round in a Circle. Mr. I. S. to wind himself out of this Circle, presents to us
a resolution of his Faith, containing in it a greater Circle, or many Circles
together. Having premised some trivial notions to ching the obscurity of Faith,
and evidence of credibility required to the assent of it, he falls on extolling
the power and aptness of Miracles to beget such credibility, reducing all to
the advantage of the Roman Church, authorized with Miracles, as he pretends:
and from page 180. he enters into his resolution of Faith thus. You ask why I
believe the Trinity? I answer because God has revealed it. You ask why I
believe that God revealed it? I answer, because the Church by which God speaks
tells us so. You ask why I believe that God speaks by the Church? I must not
answer because the Scripture says it; neither must I answer, that I believe God
to speak by the Church, because she works Miracles.

Here I am to doubt whether this be the same man that spoke to us a little
before, p. 177. and more at large, p. 102. extolling the force of Miracles to
beget an evidence of Credibility in the proposer of divine Verities; or another
of his Auxiliaries, that came in his place to carry on the work, without regard
to what the former said. But whoever he be, let us see how he disputes against
Miracles: If the Miracles be absolutely evident, says he, they can be no motive
of Faith, which is of its own nature obscure: and if they be but morally
evident Miracles, they can not be the motive, because the motive of Faith must
be infallible. How blind is the attemt of this Man against Miracles? how
destructive of his own purpose? How absurd and ridiculous his argument against
Miracles, I have declared above in Chap. 9. whither I remitt the Reader. Now
let us see this mysterious work of our Adversary go on. Having excluded
Miracles from ascertaining us of the credibility of the Church proposing
doctrines to us, he tells us how we must answer that question, Why I believe
that God speaks by the Church: and it must be thus, because the Church, by
which God speaks, says that God speaks by her, and I am obliged to believe be
speaks by her, because he does credit her with so many Miracles, and
supernatural marks, which makes it evidently credible, that he does speak by
her. If it be the same Man that wrote the whole page, it cannot but appear a
wonder, that having employed his skill a few lines before, in weakening the
force of Miracles to ground the infallibility of the Church on, he should now
take up the same Miracles for his ultimate reason of beleiving in the Church.
As a nice Man, who throwing away the paring of his apple, and checking his
companion for eating his without paring, fell immediately after upon eating the
paring he threw away.

To cast a patch upon this foul breach of coherence in reasoning, our Adversary
shuffles in a distinction betwixt the motive of our act of Faith, and the
motive of our obligation of beleiving, which indeed is nothing else at the
present then Culicem excoriare, to flay a flea, after much ado to do nothing.
The present question immediately proposed is, why am I to believe that God
speaks by the Church? the only reason he gives for beleiving in the Church, is
Miracles. What needs that distinction of motive to my belief, and motive to my
acknowledgment of obligation to believe? the same reason that makes me believe,
intimates to me my obligation of beleiving. The primitive Christians who heard
the Apostles preach, and saw their Miracles, knew nothing of these
distinctions. Seeing those Servants of God confirm their doctrine with Miracles,
they believed God spoke by them, and for the same reason or motive thought
themselves obliged to believe them. If we have the same Faith that the
primitive Christians of Jerusalem and Antioch had, as Mr. I. S. says, p. 183.
why shall not we go the same way to believe as they did?

But our Adversary is upon a design of imposing upon us a Faith which the
Apostles did not teach, which he discovers clearly (tho happily not so much to
his own knowledge) p. 184. in those remarkable words: The chief and last motive,
whereupon our Faith must rest, is the Word of God speaking to us by the Church.
The Church, I say, by which God actually in this present Age speaks unto us;
for we do not believe because God did speak in the first, second or third Age
by the Church, etc. Here you see, Reader, a plain Confession of the great guilt
of the Roman Church, deserving the most severe resentment of all true
Christians, that glorious, truly Catholic, Apostolic and holy Church of the
primitive Ages excluded from the office of being Mistress of our belief, and
the Church of this corrupt Age, governed by the most corrupt Court in the World
(if we are to believe them that are best acquainted with it) that of Rome,
substituted in her place: And as this is proposed by our Adversary without any
proof, so it ought to be rejected by all true Christians with indignation.

Only I will reflect upon the inconsequence of the Man, and how far he is from
his purpose of ridding himself from a Circle in resolving his Faith. All that
great Labyrinth he works from p. 176. to p. 184. in order to declare his
procedure to each act of Faith, and able to puzzle the best understanding, will
certainly be requisite in his opinion to proceed to this last act of Faith,
which he will have to be the guide of all others, that the Roman Church of this
Age is infallible in teaching what we ought to believe. This being, as he says,
an act of divine Faith, I mean, that the Pope with a General Council, such as
that of Trent, is infallible in proposing matters of Faith, how shall he go
about to resolve his Faith upon this particular point? Certainly thus,
according to his former discourse: I believe that the present Church governed
by the Pope of Rome in the Council of Trent is infallible, and God speaks by
her, because the Church by which God speaks, says, that God speaks by her, and
I am obliged to believe that God speaks by her, because he credits her by so
many Miracles, and supernatural marks, which makes it evidently credible that
he does speak by her. These are Mr. I. S. his own words, and his Confession of
Faith set down in the 181. page of his Book. And while the Reader reckons how
many Circles he committs here, endeavoring to rid himself of one, I ask of him
where be those Miracles wrought by the Fathers of the Council of Trent, and
the Popes moderating in it, to breed in me an evidence of credibility that God
spoke by their mouth, as the Christians of Jerusalem and Antioch saw the
Apostles work for believing that God spoke by them; being he says I must take
the objects of Faith upon credit of the present Church, and that credit must be
grounded upon Miracles and supernatural marks appearing for it? Will he have
us prefer his forged Miracles in favor of his newcoin'd-Faith, to those
wrought by the Apostles in confirmation of the Faith preached by them? Turn,
Reader, to what I said to this purpose in the 9. Chapter of this Treatise.

The more I consider this resolution of Mr. I. S. his Faith, the less I find in
it of resolution, and the more Circles and obscurities. Now I enquire of him
further, why does he exclude the Church of the first, second, and third Age
from the office of declaring Gods will and word to us? He answers, because the
declarations of that ancient Church are known to us only by tradition, and
tradition, says he, is not the motive, but the Rule of our belief. All this he
must say of the Council of Trent, or the Church represented in it of this Age;
that alone, and not the Pope out of it, must be in his doctrine our infallible
Teacher. Now further, Is not the doctrine of the Council of Trent proposed to us
as a Rule of our Faith of equal value and authority with the written word of
God, both proceeding from the Holy Ghost? they say it is: Is not moreover that
doctrine known to us only by tradition? certainly it is. I have no notice of
it, nor can I have but by relation of others, and they of no more credit with
me, but rather of far less, then those Venerable Writers that relate to us the
doctrine of the primitive Church. Are there not Controversies daily, and
endless about the sense and meaning of the Council of Trent, as well as about
the more ancient Councils? witness the dismal broyls betwixt Jesuists,
Jansenists, and Dominicans. Where is now Mr. I. S. his living infallible Judge?
The Council of Trent, and the Popes governing it, are dead and gone. The Pope
now living, or any Council he can congregate, less than a general one, is not
an infallible Judge. Who then will ascertain him? will he have a general
Council congregated for the resolution of his Faith in every doubt that comes
into his head?

How shall we be sure that Pope Innocent and Alexander did not err in their
definition of the great debate with the Jansenists? Their definition not being
in a general Council cannot be to us a warrant of security in Mr. I. S. his
opinion. The Jansenists will triumph at this: and will that please them at
Rome, and Paris? while Mr. I. S. agrees with them upon this particular, I ask
further. Tho a General Council were congregated now to that effect, such as
that of Trent, to ascertain us of the Articles defined against Jansenius, how
shall I be sure that God speaks by such a Council, or the Church represented in
it? thus in Mr. I. S. his dialect: because the Church by which God speaks says
that God speaks by her, because he does credit her by so many Miracles and
supernatural marks, which makes it evidently credible, that he does speak by
her. Well, and where be those Miracles and supernatural marks assisting this
Council present, to ascertain us that God speaks by it? are you sure to find
them at hand when the Council is joined? likely you are upon the experience of
coining Miracles, when occasion requires it.

By this, Reader, you may see how little Mr. I. S. has don, after so much ado,
to resolve his Faith without a Circle. How rash his assurance was, that
Protestants will never resolve theirs without such a fault, I will now show
briefly. The Faith of Protestants is that contained in Canonical Scripture, as
he often supposes; my Faith touching each point of those contained in
Scripture, I resolve thus. I believe the Son of God was made Man, because I
find it written in the holy Scripture. I believe what is written in the holy
Scripture, because it is the infallible Word of God. And I believe it is the
Word of God because the Apostles preaching it did confirm it with such Miracles
and Wonders as only God could work. And finally that the Apostles did deliver
the Doctrine contained in Scripture, and did confirm it with Miracles, I
believe in force of universal tradition, according to that celebrated notion of
it, delivered by Vincentius Lyrinensis, quod ubique, quod semper, quod apud
omnes est creditum; what was always, in all places, and by all Christians
received and believed, is to be taken for Universal and Apostolical Tradition.
This common consent of Christians making up universal Tradition we have in what
is unanimously delivered by the ancient Fathers, and declared in the first
general Councils of those more holy and sincere primitive times. Thither I go
to take up my belief, as to streams immediately proceeding from the Fountain of
Grace, with more pleasure and satisfaction, then to the muddy Waters of
doctrine delivered by the Church of Rome of this corrupt Age, past through so
many hands defiled with ambition, avarice, and other earthly passions repugnant
to sincerity: of which we have too much assurance.

CHAP. XIV. A Reflection upon the perverse Doctrine contained in the resolution
of Faith proposed to us by Mr. I. S. and the pernicious and most dangerous
consequences of it.
IT is a Providence of God, and the great force of truth, that our Adversaries
should forget themselves sometimes, and discover their wicked intentions,
covered under sacred pretexts. All their Novelties they frequently set forth
under the venerable cloak of Antiquity. It is a glory of humility, says S.
Bernard, that Pride should wear a cloak of it, to be in esteem: Gloriosa res
humilitas qua se vestire solet Superbia ne evilescat; and so it is a glory of
Antiquity that Novellers should pretend credit to their inventions, by casting
on them a color of Antiquity. It is very frequent with the Romanists to use
this stratagem, to cloak their new Decrees with the venerable name of ancient
Canons, to call their Church, ancient Church, tho composed of Novelties, where
it opposes the Reformed. Mr. I. S. has bin pleased to unmask his Church herein
to us, declaring that the ultimate ground, and motive of their belief, and
their Proselytes, must not be the Testimony of that sacred primitive Church
governed by Christ himself, and his blessed Apostles; but the Testimony of the
present Church of Rome, infected with the corruptions which the World knows,
and both friends and foes do see and cry against with universal scan^al.

Besides the perverseness of this Doctrine, obvious to every one that will not
blind himself wilfully, taking from our sig^t and view the sweet and
comfortable face of primitive Christianity, and willing us only to attend the
foul and abominable practices of the Roman Court, calling it self Church, and
even the Catholic, Universal, and only Church, to the offense and scandal of
all sincere and knowing Men; Besides the perversity of this Doctrine, the
dangerous consequences of it are much to be considered; for preventing the
growth of this destructive Seed.

First, it follows hence that as there is no end of Disputes and
Controversies among Men (nor any is like to be,) so there will be no end of
coining new Articles of Faith, all tending to the increase of power and
splendour of the Pope and his Court, tho at the expenses of disturbance, and
destructions to Men, Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms, as often happened. This to
be their aim, under the pretense of exalting and propagating the Faith of
Christ, appears by the next attemt of Mr. I. S. in favor of the Popes
supremacy, to be examined in the Chapter next following.

Having established the Pope, and his present Church (as he conceives) in the
possession of infallible Judges in matters of Faith, the next point he takes in
hand to establish, as the chiefest of his concern, is the Popes supremacy, and
absolute power over all Christians, directly forfooth spirituals, but
effectively in their temporal concerns; as many powerful Princes, Kingdoms and
provinces have experienced to their woe. These two great Prerogatives of
absolute power over all Christians, and of infallibility in his Decrees, such
as none may oppose or mutter against, being established in the Pope, what
security can people or Princes have of their Liberties or Possessions, if
liable to be censured Heretics, if they do not receive and submit to any thing
the Pope will be pleased to decree and declare for an article of Faith, and
being thus censured, to have their Liberties and Lands seized upon, and taken
from them, by any that will have force to do it?

Next we are to consider the dangerous consequences of this Doctrine in the
daily extent of the Popes power and authority, by his Emissaries and flatterers.
Hitherto they were contented to assert his infallibility in matters of Right,
now of late they extend it to matters of Fact, as appears in the famous Thesis
of the Parisian Jesuits, declared above in the ninth Chapter. And tho another
party opposed that assertion of theirs, as mentioned in the place aforesaid,
all men know how little success any may expect to have in the Roman Judicature,
against such as will engage in exalting and extending the power and authority
of the Pope, and so the Jesuits have not only obtained a censure of heresy and
blasphemy, etc. against the Doctrine of Cornelius Jansenius, where the debate
was in matter of right, but another arising touching the fact; whether
Jansenius did indeed deliver such a Doctrine. They obtained wise from the
succeeding Pope Alexander the 7th a Bull and Decree no less peremtory, touching
the fact, declaring the said Propositions censured by his Predecessor to be
really contained in Jansenius his Book, and, (which is more wonderful he should
know) in the sense intended by Jansenius. The foresaid sworn defenders and
exalters of the Popes authority have defended publicly, that we are to believe
with divine Faith, the said declaration of the Popes against Jansenius, as well
in matter of right as fact, to be infallible, by these notable words, Fide
divina credi potest librum cui titulus Augustinus Jansenii esse haereticum, and
quinque Propositiones ex eo decerptas esse Jansenii, and in sensu Jansenii
damnatas: that the Book entitled the Augustine of Jansenius is heretical, and
the five Propositions which are gathered out of it, are Jansenius's, and in the
sense of Jansenius condemned. And there is no reason but we may expect a
command of believing the Popes infallibility in this latter kind in matter of
fact, as formerly intimated in matters of right.

And if this be established, that the Pope is infallible also in matters of
fact: and if he be pleased to declare that any of us in particular is an
heretic, or has delivered an heretical Proposition, Woe be to him so declared
a heretic by the Pope. All Christians, subject to the Pope, must take him for
an heretic, and proceed against him accordingly with all those severities
inflicted by Canons against Heretics. Mr. I. S. accuses me to the Lord
Licutenant of Ireland that I should have said, that there is no salvation in
the Catholic hurch: a proposition, in my own opinion, heretical and blasphemous
taken in its proper literal and right sense (not to take notice of some crooked
improper sense, which Mr. I. S. may pretend, and may render my discourse
obscure.) This testimony so evidently false he imposes upon me, my Book being
extant in the hands of many hundred men, and my self living to declare the
false-hood of it yet his confidence is such, that having no evidence, nor as
much as attemted, to prove the truth of his accusation, he will have my Lord
Lieutenant to proceed to the utmost severity against me, commanding me to be
burned for blasphemous. Ill may he expect from his Excellency so unjust and
rash a judgment: but how far he may speed in Rome with the same accusation, tho
false, I may not know. Of their integrity, proceeding to judgment without
hearing the parties, I can have no assurance. If they declare me for Author of
the Proposition imposed upon me by Mr. I. S. That in the Catholic Church there
is no salvation, and consequently guilty of heresy and blasphemy, and all must
take their declaration therein for infallible, according to that increase of
infallibility in matters of fact ascribed of late to the Pope by his prime
Favorites: what mischief may not I expect from all those who think it a special
service of God to destroy Hereties?

But my particular concern is not of so great a force to declare the enormity
or danger of this consequence. He accuses the whole Church of Protestants of
heresy and blasphemy in a high degree, saying its their common doctrine, that
it is impossible to keep Gods Commandments: which proposition in its literal
full sense is certainly heretical and blasphemous, for derogatory of Gods
justice and goodness, and diametrically opposite to the doctrine of Christ, as
I have declared in the 8th Chapter; where also I have showed how falsely such a
doctrine is imposed upon the whole Church of England. But if our Adversary gets
a definition of the Pope that we are in effect guilty of that error, in what
condition shall we stand with our neighbors? our innocence in the case will not
avail. What if Mr. I. S. or other like him, would accuse some great Christian
Prince of heresy, tho with as little truth as we have seen his accusation of
me, and of the Church of England, now mentioned to have proceeded? But if the
malice of neighbors, hunting after the Lands of such a Prince, and of his
Subjects disposed to rebel against him, should join to accuse him of heretical
pravity, and the Pope thereby should proceed to deliver his infallible
judgment, touching such a Prince, to be an heretic in effect, in what miserable
condition must that Prince be for credit and interest, to be taken by all men
for an undoubted heretic? his Subjects absolved from their Allegiance to him,
and his Lands exposed to the prey of any stronger hand autorized by the Pope,
according to the procedure of that Court, whereof many dismal Tragedies are to
be seen in the Chronicles of England, Germany, Navarre, and other Kingdoms of
Europe.

To establish this power in the Pope of Rome, so destructive to the peace and
safety of Christian people and Princes, being the aim of Mr. I. S. his tedious
and intricate discourses, in favor of his pretended unerring, unerrable Church,
and that declared by himself, he may expect the time, when all Christian people
are perfectly blind and mad, to have his doctrine received. And now having seen
how unsuccessful he has bin in setting up the grand Engine of the Popes
infallibility, or infallibility of the Church governed by the Pope (by which
name of either he pleases to term it) to put us to silence as to further
debates, as truly he had need, accordingly he appears ill furnished to enter
into them. We will now proceed to see how ill armed he is to encounter upon the
particular points I proposed for motive of my discontent with the Roman Church.

CHAP. XV. Mr. I. S. his defense of the Popes Supremacy declared to be vain.
Their pretense to a Monarchical power over all Christians, whether in Spiritual
or Temporal, proved to be unjust and tyrannical.
OUR Adversary will have us take for an Article of Faith, the Supreme power of
the Pope over all Christians in Spiritual affairs. Whether he has the like
supreme power over Princes in temporal concerns, he leaves to our discretion to
believe what we please, the case being disputable. And indeed it is a courtesy
in Mr. I. S. to permit us this liberty even touching temporal affairs, and
beyond commission from the Court of Rome, as may appear by what we are to say
in this Chapter.

But what he allows him of Supremacy in Spiritual government over all other
Bishops, and over all Christians, is certainly more then his right; more then
Christ gave him, and more then S. Peter had, whose Successor the Pope pretends
to be. He will never find any mention in History Ecclesiastic, of any claim S.
Peter should pretend to have of power over S. James in Jerusalem; S. Andrew in
Achaia over Thomas in the Indies, or over any other of the Apostles in their
respective Provinces, no dependence of them upon him. None of those more worthy
first Bishops of Rome (for five hundred years) did ever pretend to any such
Supremacy, if we are to believe one of the best of them, St. Gregory the Great,
in his many Epistles written against the Ambition of John Patriarch of
Constantinople, pretending to such a calling of Universal Bishop.

Neither did he therein act for himself as he does formally protest, to obviate
the malice of those who would cast that aspersion upon his proceeding herein,
Gregorius lib. 4. Regist. Ep. 36.
In damnando generalitatis nomine, says he, nostrum specialiter aliquid non
amamus. Neither indeed, could the reasons he alleges against the Ambition of
John of Constantinople, consist with a pretention to such a Prerogative, in
favor of his own See, namely, Jactantiam sumsit, ita ut Universa sibi tentet
adscribere, and omnia quae soli uni capiti cohaerent, videlicet Christo, per
elationem pompatici sermonis, ejusdem Christi sibi studeat membra subjugare,
and cum fortasse in errore perit, qui Universalis di^^tur, nullus jam Episcopus
remansisse in statu veritatis invenitur. ibid.
that it is to rob Christ of his privilege of being Head of the Universal
Church; that if the whole Church were subject to, and depending upon one man,
he falling into Heresy, all the Church would fall with him.

How foul an Aspersion Papists do cast upon this good Pope Gregory the Great,
saying, he would claim to himself the calling he reprehended in John of
Constantinople, may appear by these words of his foresaid Epistle 36. written
to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, and to Athanasius Bishop of Antioch, saying,
Vnt per Sanctam Chalcedonensem Synodum Pontifici sedis Apostolica, cui Deo
disponente deservio, hec Universitatis nomen oblatum est. Sed nullus unquam
decessorum meorum hoc tam profano vocabulo uti consensit, quia videlicet si
unus Patriarcha Vniversalis dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen ceteris derogatur. Sed
absit absit hoc a Christiani mente, id sibi velle quempiam arripere, unde
fratrum suorum honorem imminuere ex quantulacunque part videatur.
The name of Universal Bishop, was by the holy Council of Chalcedon offered
only to the Bishop of the Sea Apostolic, in which, by Gods providence I do
serve, but none of my Predecessors did consent to use this profane calling. For
if one Patriarch or Bishop be called Universal, the name of a Bishop is taken
from the rest. But far be this, far be it from the mind of a Christian, that
any should assume to himself any thing, which may seem to diminish in the least
the honor of his brethren. How can this consist with saying, that Gregory did
claim to himself that calling which he reprehended in John of Constantinople,
since he declares that his Predecessors did refuse that calling, and alleges
reasons which prove that none ought to admit it.

The same St. Gregory is the first Author I find to have accused of
Anti-Christianism, the pretention of the Pope to Supremacy over all Christians,
in the person of the foresaid John Patriarch of Constantinople; of whose
ambitious pretention to the like Supremacy, he writes thus to the Empress
Constantina: Sed in hac ejus superbia quid aliud nisi propinqua jam Antichristi
esse tempora designatur? quia illum videlicet imitatur, qui spretis in sociali
gaudio Angelorum legionibus ad culmen conatus est singularitatis erumpere,
dicens, etc. Lib. 4. Ep. 34.
And what may we understand by this kind of pride, but that the time of
Antichrist is near? since he imitates him who despising the social joy of
Angels, did endevor to rise up to the top of singularity, saying, I will ascend
into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God: I will sit also
upon the Mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North, I will ascend
above the height of the Clouds, I will be like the most high. This singularity
of the Bishops of Rome, in despising a fair and brotherly society with other
Bishops, and pretending a Supremacy over all, and an Equality with God in
several of his privileges, gave occasion to such, as in after Ages called them
Antichrists.

Certainly this Ambition of being head of the Universal Church, a privilege
granted in Scripture only to Christ, the boldness of preferring his own laws to
the Laws of Christ, whereof we gave several instances, have great affinity with
the qualities of Antichrist described in Scripture. And St. Gregory his
prediction, that the usurpation of this Supremacy would be a calamity to the
Church, is found to be too true. All the Combustions and dismal Contentions
that afflicted this Kingdom for a whole Age, did proceed from the Popes
pretention to Supremacy. It is not the intrinsic quality of speculative
doctrines of Faith controverted, it is not the alterations of Ceremonies or
Language in divine Service did minister fuel to this fatal fire; all these
things would be easily agreed upon, if we did allow but Supremacy to the Pope,
or he did quit his pretention to it. Of this we have certainty by what Sir
Roger Twisden affirms out of warrantable Histories and Relations, that Pope
Paulus IV. finding his fierceness could not avail with Queen Elizabeth, offered
Tortura torti page 148.
to let things stand as they were, the Queen acknowledging his Primacy, and the
Reformation from him. It is not the loss of Souls, but the loss of Peter Pence,
and command did trouble him, and made him and his Successors bring so much
trouble on us all.

His Successor Pius IV. continued the same proffer to the Queen, by Letters
written the fifth of May 1560. and sent by Vincentius Parpalia: and gave
assurance of it to a noble Man of England, that he would comply with her
request to the utmost of his power, provided she would allow his Primacy: In
ejus gratiam, quaecunque possim praeterea facturus, dum illa ad nostram
Ecclesiam se recipiat, and debitum mihi primatus titulum mihireddat. And surely
he that can dispense with the Laws of God, and alter them, as we saw the Popes
do, may better dispense with, and alter what other Popes did decree against the
Reformation. Priests may marry, the people may drink consecrated Wine at
Communion, they may pray in English, etc. if they did but allow his Primacy,
and with it his pence to the Pope. Here lies Petra scandali, the stumbling
block, and lapis offensionis. Ambition and Avarice cloaked with Religion did
profane the Church, and put the World in confusion. See the Fact here alleged,
and proof of it in Twisd. c. 19. p. 177.
Sir Roger Twisden his historical Vindication of the Church of England, chap.
IX. Where he adds, that himself relating this passage to an Italian Gentleman
versed in public Affairs, had this reply from him, If this were heard in Rome
among religious men, it would never gain credit: but with such as have in their
hands the Maneggi della Corte, the management of Affairs, it may be held true.
Such as understand the mystery of the Roman Court do know, that Ambition and
Interest is the primum mobile and Soul that animates all their motions. So true
we find Gregory his prediction to be, that the usurpation of this Supremacy
would be a calamity to the Church.

I am to take notice here of another reason St. Gregory gives, why the former
good Bishops of Rome his Predecessors would not accept of this proud calling,
St. Greg. lib. 4. Ep. 60.76.
Nullus eorum unquam hoc singularitatis vocabulum assumpsit, nec uti consensit,
ne dum privatum aliquid daretur uni, honor debito Sacer dotes privarentur
Vniversi. No one of the ancient Bishops of Rome (for six hundred years) took
upon him the calling of Supreme or Universal Bishop, nor permitted it should be
given to them, least the singularity given to one, should deprive the Clergy of
due honor. And this indeed was the consequence of the Popes immoderate Ambition
in this kind. To it we may attribute the too much contemt fallen upon the
Clergy in general in this corrupt Age. The extravagant boundless ambition of
the Bishops of Rome, mak's men fearful to allow even decent and due Authority to
the Clergy; least they should improve it to the prejudice of Christian people
and Princes, as now we shall see some Popes did.

This proud calling, which St. Gregory called Blasphemous and Antichristian,
his Successor Boniface the Third, took upon himself, b^ the assistance of the
Emperor Phocas, who being offended with Ciriac Patriarch of Constantinople, for
sheltering from his fury the Empress Corstantina relict of Maurice, and the
immunit of his Church which they made their Sa^ctuar, transferred upon Boniface
the Title of Universal Bishop ( Baron. an. 606.) which dignity and cal^ing the
following Popes did advance so far, that ^nnocent the Third compares the Papal
Dignity and Regal to the Sun and Moon; so that the Papal Dignity does exceed
the Regal on earth, as much as the Sun exceeds the Moon in the Heavens. Ad
firmamentum coeli, id est, Vniversalis Ecclesia, secit Deus duo luminaria
magna, hoc est, duas instituit potestates, Pontificalem and Regalem, etc. ut
quanta inter Solemn and Lunam, tanta inter Pontifices and Peges differentia
cognoscatur. Innocent. Ter. Ep. ad Imp. Constantin. decret. lib. 1. de
Majoritate and Obedientia, tit. 33. cap. solit.
And least you may not understand how much the Pope is made greater then Kings
by this comparison, The Gloss furnishes you with this singular Declaration of
it, saying, Igitur cum serra sit septies major Luna, Sol autem octies major
Terra, restat ergo ut Pentificalis dignitas quadragesies septies sit major
Regali dignitate. Gloss. in decret. praed.
That since the Earth is seven times greater then the Moon, and the Sun eight
times greater then the Earth, it must needs follow, that the Popes power is
forty seven times greater then that of Kings. I leave the ingenious Reader to
consider the heap of absurdities contained in this Gloss, as suitable to that
Text of it; the trespasses against Latin, Arithmetic and Astronony contained
in it, and much more against truth; for the Regal Dignity being Solo Deo minor
(as Tertul. ad Scap.
Tertullian says) it cannot be a Moon to any other Sun.

But all this (says Mr. I. S.) is to be understood of a Spiritual power;
that is the pretext, but that Spiritual power must be assisted by the Temporal;
and where the word will not do, the sword must follow. So the same Innocent the
Third declared in the third Lateran Council, and acted accordingly with King
John of England, as other Popes did with several Emperors and Kings, mentioned
in the 45. page of my discourse, devesting them of their Kingdoms and
Dominions, and absolving their Subjects from their Allegiance to them.

Mr. I. S. says the Lateran Council did not assume the power of deposing
Princes, but finding it a probable Opinion among Divines, grounded their Fact
upon that Opinion, and issued their Decree of that Punishment against such
Princes. In a good condition the World stands, if it is to be governed by such
Councils. If any Opinion found probable among Divines, may be a sufficient
ground to a conciliary Definition or Decree: what desperate Definitions and
Decrees may we not expect from their Councils, when we see so many desperate
Opinions come forth daily among their Divines, and all taken for probable, if
countenanced by one Author, or two reputed to be Learned?

CHAP. XVI. How falsely Mr. I. S. affirms that the Irish did not suffer by the
Popes prohibiting to subscribe to the Remonstrance of Fidelity proposed to them.
I Bemoaned the misery of the Irish, prohibited severely by the Pope, to
subscribe a Remonstrance of Fidelity proposed to them, wherein they were to
disclaim the Popes power of deposing Kings, tho they should suffer never so
many penalties and suspicions for it. This Mr. I. S. calls a Fiction with his
Ordinary confidence, not regarding to be openly convicted of untruth. Whether
the Irish did not undergo suspicions and disfavors for refusing to subscribe to
the said Remonstrance, let themselves tell. Whether such as subscribed were not
persecuted by the Pope and his Emissaries, with censures and manifold
vexations, let two copious Volumes published upon the subject declare, the one
in Latin by Richard Caron, the other in English by Peter Walsh, largely
relating, and learnedly refuting the unjust procedure of the Pope and his
Emissaries upon this subject. I received my self from Cardinal Rospigliosi,
then Internuncius in Brussels, a Copy of Cardinal Francis Barberini his Letter
to him, intimating the Popes will and command, that the Irish should not
subscribe to the said Remonstrance, and the censure of the Theological Faculty
of Lovain, declaring the said Remonstrance to be repugnant to the truth of
Catholic Religion; and therefore unlawful and abominable, such as no man may
subscribe to without Sacriledg. And being questioned what part of the
Remonstrance merited so grave a Censure, they answered, it was Vid. Caron in
Rem. Hibern. contra Lovaniens. part. 1. cap. 5. p. 19.
the denial of a power in the Pope, of making war by himself, or by others,
against our King, for usurping the Primacy due to the Pope, and retaining
unjustly the Lands of the British Church. In which case, say they, it may not
be lawful for Catholics to oppose the Pope making war, or favor the King
usurping the Popes rights. Thus the warlike Theologians of Flanders do beat to
arms, and denounce war against opposers of their Church, which according to the
rules of Mahomet must be defended with the sword, when words will not do. And
must not all this administer an occasion of Jealousy to our King? All will not
make Mr. I.S. believe, that the practices of the Pope and his Emissaries herein
did occasion any sufferings to the Irish.

Its remarkable what the foresaid Caron supra cap. 4. p. 15.
Author relates, that Cardinal Francis Barbarini being questioned by one of his
acquaintance, why the English and Irish Papists may not disclaim that doctrine
of King deposing power in the Pope, as the French do; he answered, it is not
the fashion with the French to consult them of Rome in such cases. But the
Irish and English consulting them, were to expect they would resolve in Rome
what was more agreeable to their pretended right. I like of the Cardinals noble
dealing in delivering the truth of the matter; but whether it be a noble
proceeding of them in Rome, to aggravate the miseries of the English and Irish
suffering for their sake, let Ovid tell, At Lupus and turpes instant
morientibus Vrsae,
Et quaecunque minor nobilitate fer a est.
That it is for Bears and Wolves, and such like ignoble Brutes, to insult over
those that are down, and kill the dying. It behooves men to be stiff with the
Pope: for if they stoop, he will throw them quite down.

CHAP. XVII. The complaint of Papists against our King, for the Oath of
Supremacy he demands from his Subjects, declared to be unjust.
Mr. I. S. sleighting that of the Remonstrance, would have me condole the
sufferances of the Irish, for not taking the Oath of Supremacy to the King of
England as Head of the Church, which he says to be a cruelty against Souls, to
demand from them. I do condole heartily the sufferings of the Irish for that, I
mean their folly and blindness, in suffering themselves to be deluded by the
Arts of Rome, believing rebellion to be Religion; and Catholic Piety, to pass
the Obedience due to their natural Prince by Gods command to a forreigner, that
has no other right over them, then what by craft and cruelty he has usurped,
as is declared in the Chapter preceding.

All this will be made clear to such as will consider, that our Princes pretend
not to any other Supremacy or power over their Subjects, then such as the godly
Kings of Israel had in their time over the Jews, and the Christian Emperors in
the Primitive Church over their respective Subjects; as is declared in the
thirty seventh Article, and seventh Canon of the Church of England, and as
indeed our Princes do execute, practicing even less power in Church Affairs,
then the Kings of Israel, and Christian Emperors did. Do but read the second of
Kings, commonly called the fourth, in the 23. Chapter, and see how forward the
godly King Josiah was in reforming the Church, both Clergy and Laity, reading
himself to them the Book of the Covenant, deposing unworthy Priests, and
substituting lawful ones. The same you may see practiced by Hezekias in the
second Book of Chronicles, chap. XXIX. and the Text approving his proceeding in
all this particular; saying, He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, according to all his Father had don. If you do but confer the proceeding
of these two good Kings related in the forementioned places, with the behavior
of our Princes in the several Convocations of their Clergy and people for the
Reformation of the Church in these Kingdoms; you shall find them not to have
taken so much of the work upon them in their own persons, as those Kings of
Israel did; but commended to Prelates and Divines the Examination of Points
belonging to Religion, and Government of the Church, holding themselves the
sword and stern of Government to keep peace at home, and defend them from
foreign Enemies.

Neither did our Savior diminish, but rather confirm this supreme power of
Princes over their Subjects. We have his will herein intimated to us by St.
Paul, Romans XIII. 1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers: where by
higher Powers, St. Augustine and the other Ancient Fathers do understand the
secular power of Princes, and the context it self is clear enough for that
interpretation, as Salmeron confesses: Salmer. disp. 4. in Romans 13.
Patres Veteres, and praecipue Augustinus Ep. 54. Apostolum interpretantur de
potestate seculari tantum loqui, quod and ipse textus subindicat. And that to
this power, not only Seculars, but all sorts of Ecclesiastical persons are
subject, S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. Hom. 23. in Romans Etiamsi Apostolus sis; si
Evangelista, si Propheta, sive quis tandem fueris.
declares: Omnibus ista imperantur, and Sacerdotibus and Monachis, etc. This is
a command said upon all Men, whether they be Priests or Monks, whether
Apostles, Evangelists, or Prophets, or whoever they be: and S. Bernard Bernard.
Ep. 42. ad Henric. Archiep. Senonens. Siomnis anima and vestra; quis vos
excepit ab Vniversitate? etc.
considers well that the very words of the text do declare so much: If every
Soul be subject unto the higher power, says he, (writing to an Archbishop)
yours also must be likewise subject. Who has exemted you from the general
Rule? etc.

Neither is it less certain by the practice of the Church, both old and
Christian, and by the authority of Fathers, that it belongs to Princes to
protect and have an eye over their people in matters of Religion; to procure
the integrity and reformation of it, when decayed. As for the old Law, the
cases proposed above of Hezekiah and Josiah do assure us, that this has bin
the practice of the best Kings of those times. And if you consult the acts of
Constantine the great, of Arcadius and Honorius, of Theodosius the elder,
Justinian, Charles the great, and others the best of Christian Emperors, and
greatest supporters of the Churches honor; you shall find them intervening
frequently, and moderating the greatest consultation touching Religion, and the
good conduct of Church affairs.

It was a wonder to S. Augustine, that any should doubt it should be the duty of
an Emperor or Prince to do so. Aug. l. 1. in Epist. contra Ep. Parm, c. 9.
An forte de Religione fas non est dicat Imperator, vel quos miserit Imperator?
What, does it not belong to the Emperor, or to him he employs, to deliver his
opinion touching Religion? and elsewhere he says, that to be the chief care and
charge of the Emperor, of which he is to give account to God; Aug. Ep. 50.162.
ad Imperatoris curam de qua rationem Deo redditurus est, res illa maxim
pertinebat.

All this being so, that it is the duty of our Princes to govern all the states
and affairs of this Kingdom, and the dut^ of Subjects to obey them in all, and
that for conscience, as S. Paul declares, Romans 13.5. That you must needs be
subject not only for wrath but also for Conscience sake: how can I omit to
condole the misery of my Countrymen, and others so deluded by the arts of
Rome, as to take it for a breach of Conscience, what S. Paul declares to be a
duty of Conscience; I mean an acknowledgment of their Princes Supreme Authority
over all his Subjects, and their obligation of obeying him accordingly?
Especially when I see what S. Bernard saw and lamented, that it is not the
welfare of Souls, nor the zeal of their Salvation, makes the Court of Rome to
put this horror into the hearts of Men against their dutyful obedience and
subjection to their Princes: Non quod valde Romani curant quo fine res
terminetur, sed quia valde diligunt munera, sequuntur retributiones, not that
the Ministers of Rome do regard much the end or purpose of Controversies
raised, so they obtain their own end of increasing their own interest and
power. I wish with all my heart, with S. Bernard, that these corruptions of
Rome were not so public and known to all the World. Bernard. Ep. 42. ad
Archiep. Senonens.
Vtinam nobis relinquerent Moderni Noae, unde a nobis possint aliquatenus
operiri: nunc vero cernente Orb, mundi fabulam soli tacebimus? I wish these
modern Noah's did leave unto us some possibility of covering their shame, but
all the World beholding it, shall we alone conceal it?

This being so, consider Mr. I. S. how blind is your zeal, or great your
malice, in saying it should be a cruelty in our Princes to demand from their
subjects an acknowledgment of his supreme power over them; and in them a
blasphemy to acknowledge it. And to make us believe it is so, you produce the
authority of Calvin. When I alledg Vasquez or Suarez his doctrine to you, if it
be not to your liking, you tell me, they have bin mistaken as well as I: so
much I say to you at present of Calvin, that, if he be of your mind in this
particular, he is mistaken, and in a foul error as well as you. Calvin and
Luther have no more authority in the Church of England, then Suarez and Vasquez
among you, and I observe you are as singularly impertinent, as unreasonable,
wheresoever you speak to me of Luther and Calvin: it is not their writings,
which I never saw, brought me to the Church of England, nor conserves me in it:
The Scripture, Fathers, and the History of the Church did work both upon me. Of
them you are to speak to me, as I do to you.

Many a thousand poor simple Souls in these Kingdoms, misled by the Pope, and
his busy Emissaries, do cry against the Oath of Supremacy, without knowing, or
examining what it means, or what is their Princes meaning in demanding it:
crying up the Popes Supremacy, much like those 200. seduced by Absalon to
follow him out of Jerusalem, to rebel against the King his Father, when they
thought they did service to the King. And with Absalon went two hundred men out
of Jerusalem that were called: and they went in their simplicity, and they knew
not any thing. 2. Sam. 15.11. So it is with many seduced by the art and
activity of Rome, to den^ due submission to their lawful Prince, and give it to
a Foreign usurper; under pretext of following a pretended Vicar of God, to
rebel against God; S. Paul declaring that whosoever resists the power,
resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. A conclusion he does very legally infer from a verity he
had immediately before premised, That the powers that be are ordained of God.
Romans 13.1.2. We are to believe in Charity that many have the excuse of those
200. seduced by Absalon: That they went in their simplicity, and they knew not
any thing. But the corruptions and impostures of Rome being so universally
known, even in S. Bernards time (as declared above) and much more now, we may
fear justly that too many do err with knowledge, or for want of due inquiry: and
so resisting lawful power, they may receive to themselves damnation. Of which
latter sort Mr. I. S. may seriously fear himself to be one, if he be so
conversant in the doctrine of both Churches, Protestant and Popish, and in that
of primitive Christianity, as he pretends to be. This I commend to his mature
consideration, while I pursue him in his engagement about Transubstantiation.

CHAP. XVIII. Our Adversarys Essay in favor of Transubstantiation examined.
His Challenge for solving two Syllogisms answered.
MR. I. S. I do generally find you unexact, and much unlike a Scholar in your
Arguments, but more when you boast most, and stand in defiances. Now you defy
all my Divinity to answer two Syllogisms, you would have us believe to be of
your own invention. But a piece of my Logic will make both appear Paralogisms
unworthy of any answer, no formal Syllogisms. The first grounded upon Luke.
22.19. Eat, this is my Body which is given for you, runs thus; He gave to them
what he gave for them; But what he gave for them, was not a sigure, but his
real and true Body; therefore what he gave to them was not a figure, but his
real and true body. In this Syllogism nothing is new but the form you give it,
and that guilty of several vices against the rules of Logic. I say nothing is
new in your argument, nor any sense or force added to it, by passing the case
from Christ giving the last Supper, to Christ suffering upon the Cross. All
your Syllogism may be formed in the former case as in the latter, thus; What
Christ gave to his Disciples at the last Supper was the same Body they saw
speaking to them, and giving them the bread; The body they saw speaking to
them, and giving them the Supper was a real body not a figurative; Ergo. Tho
you had all the eyes of Argus, you will never discover any sense or force in
your new invented Syllogism, that is not in this so trivial and often answered.

But being you conceive some excellency in the form of our Syllogism, I will
let you see some perfections of it. First its guilty of that gross vice in
arguing Petitio principii, or a begging of the question. In your major
proposition you take for granted that which is constantly denied to you, that
he gave to them really, and not only figuratively, his flesh which he gave for
them. If you will not take it so, but indeterminatly, touching the mode of
giving his Body to them, whether real or figurative; then you fall into another
no less notorious vice in arguing, called mutatio suppositi, to change the
Supposition. In the major proposition our Saviors Body supposes indeterminatly
with you, prescinding from the mode. In the Minor it supposes determinatly,
affixing it to a real or corporal mode. Hence appears a third vice in your
Syllogism of arguing in four terms: taking up in the Minor a term which was not
in the Major, to wit, the mode of giving his Body corporally: and thence you
proceed to join or identify in the conclusion terms which you did not show
identified in any medium, neglecting herein that prime rule of reasoning, Quae
sunt eadem uni tertio sunt eadem inter se. To argue right and according to this
rule, and without the Vices now discovered in your Syllogism, you should have
formed it thus: He gave to them what he gave for them, both in mode and
substance; what he gave for them was his Body not figurative, but real;
Therefore he gave it to them really.

Thus your Argument would carry the shape of a legal Syllogism, and your next
work was to be the proving of the major proposition; That Christ gave to the
Disciples what he gave for them, both in mode and substance; that which you
will never be able to do. You say the text makes no distinction betwixt what he
gave to them, and what he gave for them. But men's eyes did. They saw given for
them upon the Cross a real organic human body; such they did not see given to
them at the Supper. You say further, not only falsely but blasphemously, that
if we say what he gave to them was but figurative, we must say also that what
he gave for them was only figurative, and so fetch from Hell again the heresy
of Marcion, that what suffered for us was but a fantastical body. You are too
ready in fetching heresies from Hell, and destroying the foundations of
Christianity upon very light or no occasion given to you for it. But we are not
so ready to believe you, or let your raw inferences run without a check. S.
John that saw our Savior upon the Cross, the same person he knew so well, how
could he imagine it was a Phantasm, and not a real Body? to Hell you must go for
men that would abuse their senses so. And thence certainly came your Paradox of
imposing upon our senses, and playing the Marcion under other terms, pretending
its but a Phantasm of bread, not a real one, what our senses do assure us to be
true bread in the Eucharist. And by this overthrowing the main Pillar of
Christian Belief grounded upon the glory of Miracles proposed to us by the
testimony of our senses: and being taught to misbelieve them, a Gate is open
for new Marcionists, to say, the resurrection of Lazarus, and other wonders our
Savior and his Apostles wrought in confirmation of their doctrine, were but
Phantasms, praestigiae sensuum, some Art of Legerdemain deluding our senses.

Finally, by this your Illustration of your Syllogism, you render it a formal
Paralogism, according to Aristotle his notion of this kind of spurious
Syllogism; which is, (says he, 1. top. c. 1.) When you assume for eviaent what
is false and impossible. And you assume for as clear and evident, that Christ
was corporally present in the bread he gave at the last Supper, as it was clear
and evident to the beholders of both, that he was corporally upon the Cross. I
have proved with Arguments, which you did not yet, nor ever will solve, this
your assumtion to be both false and impossible. And while you do not, let it be
concluded that your Syllogism you magnify so much, is a mere Paralogism.

But for such as may not so readily dive into this Logical scrutiny of your
Sophistic Syllogism, or Paralogism, and to undeceive your self so much wedded
to your ill digested conceptions, I will let you see the fallacy and weakness
of your Argument in another of the very same form, grounded upon words of our
Savior also, Joh. XV. 1. I am the true Vine; upon which words you may argue
thus. Christ by his own declaration is a true Vine; but a true Vine is neither
God nor man: therefore Christ by his own declaration is neither God nor man.
This Syllogism has the very same form which yours has, and is grounded upon
as Canonical Scripture as yours is: no defect can be imagined in it, which
appears not in yours. If you do not think it concluding, expect not to have us
believe yours to be concluding; and brag not so much of your Syllogisms for
unanswerable, until you answer this.

The second Syllogism you pray to be answered, is upon those words of the Jews,
Joh. VI. 52. How can this Man give us his flesh to eat? An Argument I proposed
my self more clearly in fewer words, and answered very clearly in the page 63.
of my discourse, which if you did consider with ingenuity, you might have
spared us the labor of seeing your work about it. But the force lies in the
form you give it, which is this, A damnal le Vnbeleiver is he who denies a
truth sufficiently proposed to him to be revealed by God: the Jews in this
occasion were damnable Vnbeleivers, and what they denied was a fleshly eating
of his real body, as the Papists believe it. Thus you, p. 189. of your Book.

In this Syllogism I could reckon up as many vices as I did in your former: but
I am tired, and may fear to tire my Reader with often minceing your raw
Arguments; to condemn it in the judgment of any good Logician is sufficient to
show it. Surely it has nothing of a formal S^llogism, but that it seems to
consist of three propositions. And at this rate you may make a horse of a
stool, because both have four feet. But even herein I do your Syllogism favor,
in allowing, it should seem to consist of three Propositions, for in truth it
has four, and in them four terms, one of its notorious vices. That which takes
place of a minor has two Propositions in it; The Jews in this occasion were
damnable Vnbeleivers, and what they denied was a fleshly eating of his real
Body, as Papists do believe it. Where we see two distinct Propositions; the
second abruptly intruded without any connection or affinity with the medium
placed in the major. And thence you pass to your third, or rather fourth
Proposition, bearing by Ergo or therefore, the mark of a Conclusion, but no
more. For a Conclusion, indeed ought to be a verity contained in the Premises;
in neither of your Premises is your Conclusion contained, nor in both. What
only seems to have some affinity with the Conclusion, is that second part of
your Minor, That what the Jews denied, was a Fleshly eating of his real Body,
as the Papists do believe: but tho this be so, its far from fetching in the
Conclusion, That Christ did sufficiently propose unto them a fleshly eating of
his real Body; as Papists do believe it. For tho they denied a fleshly eating,
it was not that only what they denied. They denied also a Spiritual eating:
they denied a Fleshly eating, but impertinently to the proposal of Christ. They
denied what was not demanded of them, by a mistake of his meaning, which our
Savior corrected immediately, by saying, Joh. VI. 63. The words he spoke to
them were Spirit and Life.

You alledg that I acknowledged the Jews to have understood Christ of a
Corporal and Fleshly eating, as Papists do. But you conceal fraudulently, how I
said, and proved that they misunderstood him, and Christ did tax them with a
misunderstanding, as now mentioned. Where is now in all this, any even
probable ground for your Conclusion, which you pretend to have found out
clearly in the foresaid place of St. John; that Christ in that occasion did
sufficiently propose to them a Fleshly eating of his real Body, as Papists do
believe it; that only in denying such eating, they were damnable Unbelievers?
You affirm decretorially, without giving any reason for it, that the words of
our Savior, The Flesh profits nothing, its the Spirit that quickens, etc.
was not a check to the Jews, for understanding him of a Fleshly eating; but to
us for judging of this Mystery by the senses of the Flesh, and by natural
reason. Sir, we are ready by the help of divine Grace, to captivate our seases
and reason to the Obedience of Faith in God, wheresoever we find him declare
his Will to us, without any further examen. But such captivity of our
understanding we do upon good grounds deny to your Decrees, as undue to them.
In what the Church of England believes, touching the holy Eucharist, there is a
large compass for divine Faith to be exercised. Its no work of nature by sense
or reason, to understand or believe so strange an Union, tho Spiritual (as the
Gospel tells us, and we believe) 'twixt Christ and the faithful Receiver of
this Sacrament; such streams of divine Grace, such feeding of Souls to life
everlasting. To this we willingly pay a captivity of our understanding, because
we find it clearly declared in the Word of God, tho never surpassing so much
the reach of our natural Understanding. From niceties touching the mode we do
religiously abstain, being God was not pleased to declare it: according to that
grave and religious expression of King James, Quod legit Ecclesia Anglicana,
pie credit; quod non legit pari pietate non inquirit. What the Church of
England reads, that it does piously believe; what it does not read, with equal
Piety omits to pry into.

CHAP. XIX. Several Answers to my Arguments, against Transubstantiation refuted.
TO all my Reasons touching the absurdity of the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and the repugnance of it with all humane reason, Mr. I. S.
gives an easy Answer, that in matters of Faith we must renounce Reason. He
should first prove that this is a point of Faith, a doctrine contained in the
Word of God. His endeavors for it we have seen and declared to be vain in the
precedent Chapter; then it being an Article of their making, he may not expect
from us more subjection of our Intellects, then his reason will gain; and he
confessing Reason does not assist him, I take it for a confession that he is
cast in the suit.

I urged, that there was no necessity of forcing men to believe so hard a
doctrine, neither for the effect of the Sacrament, nor for the verification of
our Saviors words in the Institution of it. Mr. I. S. confesses the first, but
denies the second upon a very trivial, and no less weak Argument, which I will
show, rather proves against him then for him. He says, that allowing the word
Body is equivocal, and indifferent to be taken for a real or figurative Body;
yet put in a Proposition, its determined to signify that of which only the
Predicate can be verified; but only of Christ's real Body, can it be verified
that it was given for us: therefore this Proposition, [This is my Body which is
given for you] is to be understood of Christ's real Body. Here we have one
Proposition made of two, and the Predicate of the former made the Subject of
the latter, to frame a designed fallacy. The former Proposition, which is the
proper Subject of our debate, is this, Hoc est Corpus meum, this is my Bod. The
Subject of this Proposition, is the Bread Christ had in his hands, and gave his
Disciples to eat. The Predicate is our Saviors Body; and the question is how
to understand the words of the Predicate, so as they may be agreeable to the
Subject. The words of the Predicate are indifferent to be taken for a real or
figurative Body, and to be determined according to the quality of the Subject;
that so the Identity of both, requisite for a true Proposition, may be seen,
according to the rule above mentioned by Mr. I.S. all which proves that the
word Body is to be taken rather in a figurative sense then in a real; otherwise
it could not be agreeable to the Subject, which was Bread real and visible, and
called such before and after Consecration, both by Christ and St. Paul.

Now take notice Reader, of the egregious fallacy of our Adversary. The
foresaid complex Proposition he assumes to work upon, [This is my Body which is
given for you,] is composed of two Propositions, the one is hat now declared,
relating to what Christ had in his hand, [This is my Body.] The other relating
to Christ's Body of which, as subject of the second Proposition, another
Predicate is affirmed, that it was given for us upon the Cross, [which was
given for you.] Mr. I. S. to do his own work, confounds these two Propositions,
and makes the Predicate of the former Proposition a Subject to the latter: and
instead of fitting the said Predicate of the former Proposition to the Subject
of it (as he should do, being to speak to the purpose) he talks of fitting it
to the Predicate of the second Proposition, about which is no question; for
none doubts whether it was the real Body of Christ that was given for us upon
the Cross. I allow you the benefit of the same rule alleged for the second
Proposition, [Christs Body was given for us,] that the indifferency of the word
Body, which is the Subject, may be determined by the quality of the Predicate,
and so taken for a real Body, because 'twas a real Body which was given for us
upon the Cross. Why will not you allow us the benefit of the same rule for the
former Proposition, [This is my Body,] which is the proper Subject of this
Debate, that the indifferency of the word Body in the Predicate be determined
by the quality of the Subject, which was the Bread Christ had in his hand, and
of which, with more propriety and less violence may be affirmed, that its a
figurative Body of Christ, then his living Body?

But if the rules of your Logic must be so extravagant as to demand, that when
a discrepancy appears betwixt the Predicate and Subject of a Proposition
supposed to be true, its the Subject must be altered or fashioned to a
conformity with the Predicate, not the Predicate to conform with the Subject:
what will you make of these two Propositions of our Savior, I am the true
Vine, Joh. XV. 1. I am the bread of life, Joh. VI. 48. In which two
Propositions a great discrepancy appears betwixt the Predicate and Subject. The
person of Christ speaking, is the Subject in both Propositions, Wine and Bread
the Predicate. Will you have the person of Christ to be altered and converted
to a Vine, and to Bread, to verify those Propositions; I hope you will not be
so blasphemous. And why? Because Christ was seen to be a Man, not a Vine, or
Bread: and so was the Bread in his hands seen and felt to be true Bread, no
humane Body.

I objected, that the Council of Trent, Sess. 13. Can. 2. accursing such as
affirm Bread and Wine to remain in the Eucharist after Consecration, does
oppose St. Paul, calling the consecrated Element Bread. You say he called it
Bread, not because it was such then, but because it was Bread before; as in
Scripture we read, The blind do see, the lame do walk: not that they were blind
and lame when they did see and walk, but because they were such before. I
answer, that in these latter cases an Ampliation of the term was necessary,
because the senses did assure that those men were not then blind or lame; but
not so in St. Paul's case; the senses did see and feel what he called Bread, to
be such indeed.

I produced several clear and express testimonies of the most ancient and
renowned Fathers of the Church, delivering our doctrine, that the Elements in
the Eucharist do not change their nature, but are Types and Symbols of the Body
of Christ abiding still in their proper substance. To all which Mr. I. S.
answers, that the Eucharist is indeed a Type and Representation of Christ's
Body, but Christ himself is there both representing and represented: as a King
that would act a part in a Tragedy of his own Victories, he would be the thing
represented, and the representation. Truly I wonder how this old Simile kept
credit so long time among Romish Catechists, but more that it should be brought
to a serious dispute. I wonder they should not apprehend a great indecency in
the parity; if a Tragedy were made of the late Seige of Maestricht, wherein the
King of France was in person active; would not a judicious man think it
unbecoming the majesty of so great a Prince, to go himself about all the Cities
of the Country, acting a part in such a Tragedy, to represent his own Chivalry?
Why will not they think it indecent, that the King of Glory, Christ, should act
personally and corporally in all corners of the World, where the Eucharist is
celebrated, being able to do all intended by it in a more intelligible way, and
with more decency.

But all this while our Adversary slips the main Point intended by the
testimony of the Fathers, that the Elements of Bread and Wine remain in their
own nature unchanged after Consecration; whereby they seem to lie under the
curse of the Council of Trent now mentioned. To which testimonies I will add
another out of Dionysius Syrus, writing upon the first Chapter of S. John. v.
14. and the word was made Flesh. His words translated by a most Dr Lofius.
learned and honorable person out of the Syriac Language into English, are
these.

Object. The Heretics demand how was the word made Flesh, being not changed?

Sol. Even as he appeared to the Prophets in Similitudes without being changed,
and as he was before he was made, so was he when he was made, without change.
And as the Amianton or Salamander is united with the fire, without being
changed; as the Bread is made the Body of Christ, and the waters of Baptism are
made Spiritual, without being changed from their nature: so the word was made
Flesh, without being changed from what it was as God; that is to say, he took
Flesh without being changed.

From the same hand I had notice that the Ethiopic Liturgy printed at Rome, dn.
Dom. 1548. uses these words in the Celebration of the Sacrament, This Bread is
my Body; which determination of the Particle hoc, to Bread, disfavoring the
doctrine of Transubstantion, the Translator of the Liturgy played the falsary
in translating that passage, by the words, Hoc est Corpus meum.

To all these and the like Testimonies, Mr. I.S. says, they are not so clearly
for us, but that Bellarmin, and others of his side do find ways to give them
another sense, and therefore we needed an infallible living Judge to determine
the sense of the Fathers, as well as of Scripture; and that Judge being to be
the Bishop of Rome, he may be sure of a favorable sentence, if the cause be
devolved thither.

But what if we find a Pope clearly delivering our Opinion twelve hundred years
ago, and saying, The Sacramental Elements after Consecration, do not cease to
be the substance and nature of Bread and Wine; as we have found Pope Gelasius
do, whose words I related, page 56. of my sormer Discourse? Will he find a way
to decline such a sentence? Were the Popes Infallible in that time? Certain I
am, they did not pretend to be so. But Mr. I.S. answers, that Bellarmin says,
that Gelasius was no Pope but a Monk. Bellarmi^ does cast a thick cloud upon
History to prove so much, or at least to render the matter obscure; and so does
Baronius. But this latter fearing not to carry on that design, or (as he says,
to) war with more gallantry and contemt of his Adversaries, will afford them
the Arms they pretend, and allow Gelasius the Pope should be Author of those
words: And what then? Why Gelasius, by the words substance of Bread and Wine,
did mean the Accidents or Species of Bread and Wine, which do remain, and are
to us the means of knowing the substance; and may not be called properly
Accidents in this Case, because there is no substance left for them to rest
upon, as the nature and common notion of an Accident does require. And having
delivered this most strange and never heard of complication of contradictory
expressions, to make of Accidents a substance, and with all, no substance of
Bread to remain; he sounds lowdly a triumph over his Adversaries, that he has
whipped them like boys with their own arms; and although it be allowed gratis, that
the foresaid testimony should be of Pope Gelasius, yet it serves nothing to
their purpose. I could enlarge more upon the Absurdities of Baronius his
discourse upon that subject, and the injury he does to Gelasius in fathering
upon him so ridiculous a paradox: but I think sufficient for the present to let
the Reader see how solid and serious, I should say how childish and ridiculous
even great Men appear, when engaged in a bad cause. I am apt to think that some
will hardly believe so great a Man as Cardinal Baronius should deliver so
eminent nonsense as we have now related. Read him in his fifth Tome of his
Annals, An. Dom. 406. Gelasii Papae, an. 5. from the first number to the
twentieth.

And conclude Reader from this passage, what little hopes we may have of peace,
and end of Controversy among Christians, by allowing the Pope to be infallible,
when the most clear and plain words of a Pope are subject to an Interpretation
of them so cross, and diametrically opposite to the meaning of them according
to common use. As to understand Scripture, a Popes Declaration is pretended to
be necessary; so to understand each Pope his Declaration, another infallible
Judge is to be looked after without end.

CHAP. XX. Ancient Schoolmen declare Transubstantiation cannot be proved out
of Scripture, and that it was not an Article of Faith before the Lateran
Council. Mr. I. S. his great boast of finding in my Check to their worship of
the Host, a prejudice to the Hierarchy of the Church of England, declared to be
void of sense and ground.
MR. I. S. with his usual confidence says it is most false what I imputed to
Scotus, Ocham, Cajetan, and other Schoolmen, that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is not contained in the Canon of Scripture, nor was an
Article of Faith before the Lateran Council. He allows Cajetan was of that
opinion, and was censored for it; he erred therein, says he, and what then? but
he denies resolutely that Scotus should be of such an opinion. Then Bellarmin
did him an injur in relating the contrary of him in these words, One thing,
says he, Scotus adds, which is not to be approved, that before the Lateran
Council, Transustantiation was no Article of Faith. And a little before, he
tells us, that Scotus said there is no place in Scripture that proves clearly
Transubstantiation to be admitted, if the authority of the Church did not
intervene: where Bellarmin adds Scotus his saying not to be improbable; for tho
the Scripture himself alleged may seem clear to the purpose, yet even that
Vnum taemen addit Scotus, qu^d minime probandum est; ante ^ateranense consilium
non fuisse dogina Fides Transidistantia^^enem.
may be doubted; whereas most learned and acute Men, such as Scotus chiefly
was, did hold the contrary. These are the express words of Bellarmin, lib. 3.
de Euchar. c. 23. Here you have Bellarmin declaring clearly against Mr. I. S.
that Scotus said that Transubstantiation was not an Article of Faith before the
Lateran Council, and that both Scotus and other most learned and acute men were
of opinion that the doctrine of Transubstantiation is not clearly contained in
Scripture.

And truly, tho I had not seen Scotus his writing upon the point, I am apt to
believe that Mr. I. S. should be mistaken rather then Bellarmin, but I have
read over Scotus his discourse upon this subject, not only in the printed
Editions, but in the ancient MS. kept in Merton Coll. in Oxon. whereof he was a
Fellow, with no small admiration and compassion, to see so noble and excellent
a wit forced to opine or seem to opine against his proper sentiment, as he does
protest himself to do, to comply with Pope Innocent and the Lateran Council.
Having stated the question of Transubstantiation, related the opinion of
Aquinas and others for it, and confuted most vigorously their arguments out of
Scripture and reason for it, as not convincing; at last yields to the opinion
of Innocent in these words, Teneo igitur istam opinionem ibi positam ab
Innocentio, quod substantia panis non maneat, sed quod transubstantiatur in
Corpus Christi, non propter rations praedictas, quia non cogunt. For which
opinion to say something, being forced to follow it, he alleges two
conveniences. The first, that if the substance of bread did remain under the
Accidents of it, a man taking the Body and Blood of our Savior under such
Accidents would not be fasting; and so may not celebrate twice in one day:
which is against that Canon de consecrat. distinct. prima in nocte. The second
convenience is, that the Church prays, as appears in the Canon of the Mass, the
bread and wine may be made the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, but
prays not for a thing impossible, therefore it is to be said that the substance
of bread ceases to be there, and is converted into the Body of Christ.

Whoever knew the subtilty and exactness of Scotus his reasoning, may easily
perceive that he spoke against his own sentiment when he alleged such weak
Arguments, as those two now mentioned; and so, not to forfeit the credit of his
subtilty, turns to protest with his accustomed ingenuity, that he followed this
opinion only for the Authority of the Church, concluding thus: and hoc
principaliter teneo propter Authoritatem Ecclesiae, etc. and the same his
Scholiasts declares of him upon the foresaid words, saying, Tenet Doctor
tertiam sententiam, nempe panem converti in Corpus Christi, quia sic Ecclesia
tenet. Edit. Lugdun. an. 1639.
Vid. Scot. in 4. did. 10. q. 3. Scotus holds the bread to be converted into
the Body of Christ, because the Church declared it so in the Lateran Council,
not for any Authority of Scripture or reason which could move him to it. The
same I may easily prove of other learned Schoolmen. By this you may see Mr. I.
S. his rashness in saying I did most falsely impose upon Scotus what both
Bellarmin and himself declares to be his proper opinion.

Of the same opinion with Scotus was Durandus, in 4. Sent. did. 11. q. 1.
sect. propter 3. where he declares, that the opinion affirming the substance of
Bread to remain after Consecration, was more convenient to obviate
difficulties, rendering the Mystery more hard to be believed, but that the
contrary is to be held for the declaration of the Church. Cajetan said, that
only the said declaration could make the words of our Savior alleged for
Transubstantiation, appear convincing to that purpose. And Suarez tells us, his
saying was commanded by Pope Pius the V. to be expunged.

An old Copy of Ocham I found in Dublin Library, was more fortunate in escaping
their blurs. In his 5th quodlibet q. 30. he relates three opinions touching the
Bread in the Eucharist. The first saying, that the Bread which was before, is
the Body of Christ after Consecration; of which opinion he delivers this
censure, Prima est irrationalis, that it is an unreasonable opinion. The second
opinion, says he, is, that the substance of Bread and Wine ceases to be, and
only the Accidents do remain, and under them begins to be the Body of Christ:
Of this opinion he says, Est communis opinio, quam ten^o propter
determinationem Ecclcsiae, and non prop^^r aliam rationem. That to this opinion
he consems for the declaration of the Church, in favor of it, and not for any
reason assisting it. The third opinion related by him is, that the substance of
Bread and Wine remains after Consecration; and of this he says, Tertia opinio
esset multum rationabilis, nisi esset determinatio Ecclesiae in contrarium.
That this opinion were very rational, if the determination of the Church were
not contrary to it. So that it is not any reason, nor any ground they saw for
it in Scripture, made these and many other very Learned men consent to the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, but only a blind Obedience to Innocents Decree
in the Lateran Council. Bellarmin wishes we should all have this submission to
the Authority of the Church; and I wish with all my heart, that both we and he,
and his party, and all Christians, should have due submission to the Church
truly Catholic, Primitive and Apostolic, declaring to us the Word of God by
Canonical Scripture, and Universal Tradition; in which Fountains of Truth
neither Transubstantiation will be found, nor any of their Errors which I
pointed out for motives of my forsaking their Communion.

Neither is I. S. more fortunate in his attemt of putting a terror upon me, as
if I had shocked the Hierarchy of the Church of England, by saying its rashness
to give divine Adoration to a Wafer, wherein they cannot be sure Christ to be
Present; this depending according to their own Principles, upon the Priests
intention to Consecrate, his due Ordination, and of the Bishop that gave him
Orders, his intention and due Ordination, and so upward of endless requisites
impossible to be certainly known. And what has all this to do with shocking the
Hierarchy of the the Church of England? When I saw the man begin with so great
a clap, and sounding already a triumph, I expected the story of the Nags-head,
or some other of their old Engines against the Legality of the Protestant
Clergy should come down: but all he brings is that we do also allow some things
to be essentially requisite for the validity of a Sacrament, the defect of
which nullifies the Sacrament. As for Baptism, water is requisite, and the form
of words, I baptize you in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. The Minister may vitiate this form, and utter somewhat in lieu of
it, or omit some words of it, or add some other that would destroy the form.
The same may happen in the Ordination of a Minister or Bishop, and there is no
certainty that no error of these should have happened in any one of the whole
train of our Ordainers, and if it was wanting in any, all the Ordinations
derived from him are null. Therefore we can have no Assurance of our Hierarchy.

I leave the Judicious Reader to see what singular exploit this man has done
herein against the Church of England? his reasons alleged of doubting the
Legality of its Ministers, does prove so much for rendering doubtful the
Legality of the Roman Clergy, by his own confession: but much more for what I
am to add: first, that we do not make the effects of Sacraments to depend so
much upon the intention and quality of the Ministers, as Papists do. We
entertain a better opinion of Gods goodness, that he will not have pious Souls
lose the fruit of their sincere Endeavors; and will supply to that effect the
defect of the Minister: secondly, that their practice of muttering the words in
a Language unknown to the People, and in a voice not audible, (especially in
the consecration of the Eucharist) is more subject to errors and fraud then the
way of our Church, where the Minister is to pronounce loudly and intelligibly
the words of the form.

But chiefly touching the subject of our present discourse (from which our
Adversary seems willing to divert) I mean the use and Adoration of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, who run more hazard the Papists or we? In case a
defect should happen touching the consecration we enjoy the fruit of a
spiritual Communion, and are not at the loss that Papists are in the like case,
who make the main fruit depend upon the real and corporal presence of Christ in
the host. We run no danger of Idolatry, material or formal, giving the worship
of Divinity to a thing that is not God; as Papists do, giving that kind of
worship to any host reputed to be duly consecrated, which if it happens not to
be so indeed, their act of worship is at least a material Idolatry in their own
confession: and to expose themselves to a known danger of committing such kind
of Idolatry cannot choose but be criminal, as it is generally reputed to be a
sin for one to expose himself to a danger of committing a sin. The parity of
one honoring his Father, not knowing certainly him to be his true Father, is
impertinent and undecent. A bad opinion he must have of his Mother, who doubts
his reputed Father to be such in truth. But what if he were in a material
error, it is not a sin, but a duty to pay respect unto him that adopts or owns
him for a Son.

I will conclude this matter with letting Mr. I. S. see his rashness, in
pretending I was rash in saying its intolerable boldness in some of his fellows
to say, there is the same reason for the adoration of the host, as for adoring
Christ's Divinity. And he pretends I should seem thereby not to understand their
doctrine. Sir, I am not to enter with you in comparison which of us understands
better the Doctrine of both Churches: what I see evidently is, that either you
do ignorantly misunderstand, or maliciously misrepresent the state of the
Question; that wanting an answer to my Arguments in their proper terms, you may
fashion them so, as your impertinent Discourses may seem to strike at
something, which is properly hostem tibi fingere quem ferias, to create your
self an Adversary, such as you may triumph over, that is, not to fit your
answer to my Arguments, but my Arguments to that you will have us take for an
answer; being what you have to say. This is very usual with you, as in many
occasions I have declared from the beginning of this Discourse, and will
further declare in others to the end of it, but in the present you appear
notoriously guilty of this foul play.

I do neither ignore or doubt, that if your doctrine of Christ's personal
presence in the consecrated host were true, there is as much reason to adore
such an host, as to adore Christ himself; both being the same thing in such a
supposition. This is the Mystery you pretend I should not understand, but this
is not the state of the Question with me. What I did, and do again, call
intolerable boldness, is to say, that (the matter standing, as now it does,
doubtful and controverted) there is as much reason for adoring the host
consecrated, as there is for adoring Christ his person: since for adoring
Christ we have several express commands laid upon us in Scripture, which I
related out of Heb. 1.6. Philip. 2.10. Jo. 5.23. but no intimation given of
adoring Christ in the Sacramental bread, supposing him corporally present there.

But if you go to the object of both worships, Christ living in the World, and
your host consecrated: to say that there is as much ground for believing your
doctrine of Divinity existent in the latter as in the former, I said, and say
still, its intolerable boldness, and a great injury to Christian Religion, to
make those two things of equal certainty, whereof I was contented to make
Bellarmin Bellarm. de Christo. lib. 1. c. 4.
Judge; who being to prove the Divinity of Christ, goes through six Classes of
Arguments out of Scripture with uncontrollable strength: but being to prove
Transubstantiation out of Scripture, his only Argument is out of those words of
Matthew. 28. Take, eat, this is my Body. Which place how unable it is in the
opinion of the gravest Schoolmen, and of Bellarmin himself, to make clear the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, we have seen from the beginning of this
Chapter. Is it not therefore intolerable boldness to say, there is as much
reason to assert that Christ is in the host really and corporally, as there is
for saying that Christ is God?

CHAP. XXI. Mr. I. S. his weak defense of their half Communion confuted.
HE will have the Precept of Communion run parallel with that of Baptism,
wherewith I am well contented. Both are commanded by Christ: Baptism thus, If
one be not born again by the Water and the Spirit, he shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. VI. 53. And the Communion thus, If ye do not eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall not have life in you.
The essential requisites of Baptism are water and a set form of words. In this
no alteration may consist with the validity of the Sacrament: not so of the
mode or circumstances, whether it be with immersion or sprinkling. Herein
alterations may be, and were admitted by the Church. Even so in the Sacrament
of the Eucharist, the essence of it consists in eating the Flesh, and drinking
the Blood of our Savior. This may not be altered, but the mode or
circumstances, whether it be kneeling or standing, whether in leavened or
unleavened Bread, whether white or red Wine; touching these Accidents there may
be alterations without prejudice to the substance of the Sacrament, but not
touching the essential parts of Flesh and Blood: in this much we agree on both
sides.

Now what are we to understand by Flesh, what by Blood our Savior did not
leave obscure, so as we may err in so weighty a matter, wherein the life of our
Souls does consist, but made it clear and visible to us. He took Bread in his
hands, and of it, he said, this is my Body; he took likewise Wine in his hand,
saying, this is my Blood. The way therefore to take his Body and Blood, is to
take consecrated Bread and Wine in remembrance of him. This is the way Christ
did establish the taking of this blessed Sacrament, this the Apostles and
Primitive Church did practice, and this way all true Christians ought to walk.

Mr. I. S. censures it as a pusillanimity in me to be surprised at that famous
non obstante of the Council of Constance, that notwithstanding Christ did
institute this Sacrament in both kinds, and in the Primitive Church they
administered it so, yet the Council thought convenient to ordain the contrary: I
should have a strong stomach to swallow without chawing or examining what our
Lord God the Pope orders, as the Glossist calls him. He is Vice-god upon earth,
as all of them style him, and of such privilege that the commands of God must
oblige no further then he pleases. If he tells us that virtue is vice, and vice
virtue, we are to believe him. Yet Mr. I.S. will reason the case with us. He
might have spared that labor, for I declared it was sufficient to my purpose to
know they will pretend reason for inverting Christ's Institutions. But how well
beseeming the gravity of a Council, are the reasons he alleges, grounded upon
principles of nigardliness and nicety. To spare expenses of wine, and hinder
the inconveniency of clean people to drink out of the same Cup with the
unclean. Is there not so much plenty of Wine now in the World, as was in the
Primitive Church, and the Communion less frequent? Were not clean people then
in the World? Shall a groundless fear of annoying the body over-weigh a certain
danger of losing the Soul. Christ having declared, that if we do not eat his
Flesh and drink his Blood, we shall not have life in us. Is it fair that such
frivolous reasons as these should suffice for a Pope to alter the Institutions
of Christ, and no reason, be it ever so evident, should excuse opposing a Popes
Decree?

But Mr. I. S. tells us, that in these words of our Savior, Joh. VI. If ye do
not eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you shall not have
life in you. The Particle [and] must be taken disjunctively for [or,] not
cop^latively. So as the command must be understood of eating his Flesh, or
drinking his Blood; because in the Hebrew Language, wherein our Savior spoke,
the Particle and is capable of such a sense. Bellarmin and Suarez said so. I
see they did, and thereby I see that a bad cause will make i^s Patrons run to
narrow shifts. At this rate you may pretend to comply with the precept of
loving God and your Neighbor, by loving either, tho you do not love both. And
so of the precept of honoring your Father and Mother, that you observe i^ by
honoring one, tho you deny that duty to the other: because the Particle and in
those Precepts, is capable of a disjunctive sense, and may be construed or.

Moreover, this Argument would prove more then the Council, or Bellarmin, or
Suarez himself would have. That there is no command of drinking the Blood of
our Savior. So the Council, and Romish Writers, commonly do pretend, that
Christ's living Body being corporally present in the consecrated Bread, and a
living Body containing Flesh and Blood, by taking the Bread we take both Flesh
and Blood. But the supposition of this Argument, that Christ is corporally
present in the Sacrament, being pretended, and even proved clearly in our
Opinion to be false, its in vain to persuade us with an Argument upon that
Principle. Besides, tho that Supposition were true, its not easy to understand
how, by swallowing an Animal consisting of flesh and blood, without separating
both, one may be said properly to drink blood. All these Absurdities may be
excused by following literally the words and and practice of our Savior,
administering the Sacrament as he did in both kinds.

Here I am to admire again the good heart and confidence of Mr. I. S. in
telling us that we have a positive example of Christ himself, that once gave
the Communion in the Accidents of Bread alone to his Disciples, in the way
toward Emaus, page 217. How come you to be so positive in affirming that of
Christ with his Disciples in Emaus, should have bin a Communion rather then a
common Supper Suarez in 3. p. Dis. 71. Sec. 1. says, the Opinion of many
Learned Authors denying it to have bin a Communion, seems to him more probable.
And Maldonate supposes many good writers to be of the same Opinion. But
besides, tho it were a Communion, what is your ground for saying he should not
have given the Cup in it? That only Bread is mentioned; that the Disciples told
he was known of them in breaking of Bread. But it is very frequent in Scripture
to express a Dinner or Supper, where both meat and drink is taken, by this term
of eating Bread, and the Disciples might have found sufficient signs of knowing
Christ by his way of breaking the Bread, without mentioning more of his actions.

Furthermore, Suarez in 3. p. Dis. 42. Sec. 1. declares it to be the Opinion of
all Divines, and his own, that the Species of Bread and Wine are the Essential
Constitutes of this Sacrament, Dico 30 Species consecratas esse Eucharistiae
Sacramentum, seu ad ejus constitutionem intrinsece and essentialiter pertinere.
That the consecrated Species do belong essentially to the Constitution of this
Sacrament. How then could he give the Sacrament without the Species of Bread
and Wine, if they be essential Constitutes of it. But Suarez, say you in his
Disp. 71. says, that the whole Essence of the Sacrament consists in either
kind; and therein (say I) contradicts his former doctrine, as also that of
Gelasius Gelas. Papa. in cap. comperimus de Consecratione did. 2.
quoted by himself, Quidam sumt a corporis Christi portione a Calice sacri
cruoris abstinent, qui proculdubio aut integra Sacramenta suscipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur, quia divisio unius ejusdemque Mysterii sine grandi
sacrilegio provenire non potest. Some taking the Body of Christ, do abstain
from the Cup of his sacred Blood, who truly should either take all the
Sacrament, or leave all; since being but one Mystery, it may not be divided
without great Sacriledg. They pretend this should be understood of Priests
only, that they should take the Communion under both kinds; but without showing
any sufficient ground for it. We have no notice of Priests taking it under one
kind, to whom Gelasius his declaration should be directed, and our Savior did
provide in this Sacrament a Spiritual food, not only for Priests, but for all
the faithful, and his words, which are the ground of our Assertion, did extend
to all.

Mr. I. S. pretends that my Argument against Transubstantiation, [That neither
for the effects of of the Sacraments, neither for verifying the words of the
Institution, such a conversion of substances should be necessary,] comes
pertinently to his purpose here. That the Communion under both kinds is not
needful, either for the effects of the Sacrament, or for verifying the words of
Christ in the Institution of it. But the Difference is wide, first as to the
effects, Mr. I. S. himself confesses, page 201. that Christ might, were he
pleased, have given us the effects of the Sacraments with a figurative presence
only. Secondly, as to the tenor of our Saviors words in the Institution of
it, many of their own more learned and exact Scholemen do affirm, that the said
words do not convince for Transubstantiation, in force of their proper sense,
as we have seen in the precedent Chapter. And Bellarm. lib. 3. de Euchar. c. 23.
Bellarmin consesses, saying, it was the sentiment of most learned and acute
Men. Both these things are wanting for making the like Argument serve our
Adversary: for we have proved hitherto, that neither for the effect of the
Sacrament, nor for verifying the words of our Savior in the Institution of it,
the half Communion may suffice. Certainly he has no such confession from us to
his purpose, as we have from him, and from his brethren to ours.

CHAP. XXII. The Roman Worship of Images, declared to be sinful.
Mr. I. S. is very tedious, and no less impertinent, in telling us its not a
sin to make Images absolutely, because God made man to his own Image, and
Protestants do make Images of the King and Queen, etc. but he might spare this
labor, I having declared that it is not only lawful, but commendable to make
Images, and good use of them to several purposes. The sin is to adore and
worship them, that being directly opposite to Gods Commandment set down in the
twentieth Chapter of Exodus, in these words, Thou shall not make to thee any
graven Image, etc. thou shall not bow down thy self to them; of which sin the
Roman Church is guilty, by ordering honor and reverence to be given to Images.
In what degree, Azorius with several others of their Divines, do tells us,
saying, the same honor is to be given to them which is due to the Prototype,
and consequently the honor of Latria to the Image of God and Christ, the honor
of Dulia to the Images of other Saints. So Azorius says, (and not I, as Mr. I.
S. falsifies) in these words, Constans est Theologorum sententia Imaginem codem
honor and cultu honorari and coli, quo colitur id cujus est Imago. It is the
constant opinion of Divines, that the Image is to be honored and worshipped, in
the same manner as the thing whereof it is an Image. Mr. I. S. says
resolutely, Azorius has no such words: but if he did read attentively, the
place I quoted of Azorius, Tom. 1. Inst. Moral. lib. 9. c. 6.. Tota haec
controversia, he would find those formal words in him, and others immediately
following, wherein he attributes the same opinion to the Council of Trent,
Sessione 25. in decret. Fdei de sacris Imaginibus, and to the seventh Synod.

Vasquez lib. 2. de Adoratione, disp. 6. cap. 2. gives this further Account of
the mode of worshipping Images in the Roman Church, Catholica veritas est
Imaginibus deferendam esse adorationem, h. e. signa servitutis and
submissionis, amplexu, luminaribus, oblatione suffituum, capitis nudatione,
etc. That it is a Catholic verity, that worship is to be given to Images, that
is to say, expressions of Service and Submission, by embraces, light burning,
offering of Incense, uncovering the head. Azorius quotes for the same opinion,
Aquinas, Bonaventure, Alensis, Cajetan, and several other ancient and modern
Schole-men. Mr. I. S. will not have us believe all these Doctors in this their
Declaration, touching the Romish worship of Images. But who are you good Mr. I.
S. Quidam nescio quis, nec puto nomen habet, one I know not who, and as I see
nameless, that we must believe you, rather then so many famous Doctors now
mentioned.

Give to your worship of Images what name you please, to worship them at all,
is a formal transgression of the divine Precept above mentioned, and therefore
a grievous fin. You would fain prove out of Scripture that God ordered Images
to be adored, which is to pretend that God should contradict himself, and so it
appears in the ill success of your attempt upon finding your doctrine in
Scripture. Your first discovery in Scripture is, that God commanded the Brazen
Serpent to be put up to be adored, say you. Gods command touching that matter
is set down, Numb. XXIV. 8. in these words, Make thee a fiery Serpent, and set
it upon a Pole, and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when
he looks upon it shall live. Here is no mention of adoring that Serpent: you
say that looking upon it, was to be with inward reverence and veneration,
wherein adoration or worship does properly consist. Then when we look upon a
Church with reverence, as being the house of God, we adore it, the same when we
look upon the Bible, when a dutiful child looks reverently upon his Father, all
is adored.

Likely the Israelites in time came to be of your opinion, and to adore the
Serpent: but how well was that taken at their hands, you may see in the second
of Kings XVIII. 4. That the godly King Ezechias, brake in pieces the brazen
Serpent that Moses had made, for unto those days the Children of Israel did
burn Ineense to it. While they only looked upon it, according to Gods
Ordinance, it was beneficial to them, but when their devotion grew to a
worship, it provoked Gods Indignation declared in that action of Ezechias,
which the sacred Writer approves in these words, And he did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord.

Your second discovery is, Josue VII. 6. where only we find that Josue,
together with the Elders of Israel, fell upon their faces before the Ark, and
prayed to God; and that you take for an adoration of the Ark. So whenever you
pray before an Altar or a Bible, you adore the Altar and the Bible. The third
Instance, to which you say Protestants will never answer, is, that the Lords
Supper is a representation of Christ's Passion, and a figure of his Body, and is
religiously worshipped by them, if they do what St. Paul requires, 1 Cor. XI.
28. And what does St. Paul require in that place? This, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. That
Protestants should never answer this Argument is no wonder, what answer can be
where no question is: and questionless there is no sign, or the least
insinuation of Adoration to be paid unto the Communion Bread in the place you
quote. It is a work of your fancy, no discovery of common sense, to imagine
worship given by Gods Ordinance to the Serpent, to the Ark, or to the Communion
Bread, in the places you relate. You are to give me leave to tell you, that
your Argument is so frivolous, as requires no more serious answer, then to put
you in mind of a Spanish Proverb, Quien Vaccas ha perdido cencerrosse le
antexan, who has lost his Oxen, Bells do ring in his cars. His vehement desire
of finding his Oxen, makes him think every noise of a bough, or leaf of a tree
stirred be the wind, to be the sound of the Bells his Oxen bare: so your strong
fancy for Image Worship, makes you conceive it, even where no shape nor sound
of it appears.

You confess Images were little used in the Primitive Church, nay, were
absolutely prohibited in the Council of Eliberis; but that was, say you, to
avoid the scandal of Pagans, and the relapse of those converted from Paganism.
And are there not Pagans yet in the world? Is not a conversion of them still
procured? What consequence is it to decry their adoration of stocks and stones,
and when they come to your Churches to see you perform to Images all those acts
of worship which they used to their Idols, by genuflexion, thurification, etc.
To speak to them of your distinction of terminative and relative worship will
be insignificant; as in it self its vain, for the reasen I proposed, page 70.
of my former discourse, to which you give no answer.

I alleged Nicephorus, saying, It is an absurd thing to make Images of the
Trinity; and yet they do it in the Roman Church. You say, that what Nicephorus
and others do hold absurd, is to paint Images of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as they are in their proper substance and nature. Nor do the Catholics
use it as you falsely criminate them, say you to me: but herein certainly you do
most falsely criminate me in saying, I should impose such a thing upon them.
Where have I said that Papists do paint the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as
they are in their proper substarce and nature? Or how could any man in his
senses conceive Images of that kind could be drawn with material colors? To
attemt the drawing of any shape of them, is what Nicephorus called absurd, and
Damascen. l. 4. c. 15. ante medium.
Damascen madness and impiety, Insiplentiae summae est and impictatis sigurare
quod est divinum. Of this madness, Cajetan more ingenuous then you, confesses
your Church to be guilty; who after having said, that in the old Law, certainly
Images of God were prohibited, and for the same reason were reprehended as
unlawful by several Doctors among Christians, since in both occasions they may
engender in men a false conception of Gods nature; yet he concludes in these
words, In oppositum autem est usus Ecclesiae, admittens Trinitatis Imagines,
representantes non solum silium incarnatum sed Patrem and Spiritum Sanctum.
That contrary to the said reasons and authority of Damascen, the Church uses to
admit Images of the Trinity, representing not only the Son Incarnate, but also
the Father and Holy Ghost. To which I add of my knowledge, that they use not
only a Picture of the Trinity as you describe, in the forms of an old Man, our
Savior, and a Dove; but in the form of one Man with three heads, or three
faces in one head, both undecent and horrible to look upon. And thus much for
the matter of fact of your painting the Holy Trinity. Now I will pass to to see
how able you are to defend your practice herein, from the guilt of Idolatry.

CHAP. XXIII. Mr. I. S. his defense of the Romish Worship of Images from the
guilt of Idolatry confuted. The miserable condition of the Vulgar, and unhappy
exgagement of the Learned among Romanists, touching the Worship of Images
discovered.
YOU pretend, tho it be Idolatry, to adore an Image as a God, yet not so, to
adore God in an Image. To which, I say first, that very many of your best
Authors, such as are Alensis, Albert, Bonaventure, Abulensis, Soto, and others
related and followed by Vascuez, in 3. p. disp. 104. c. 2. do affirm, that God,
did not only forbid in the second Commandment that which was unlawful by the
Law of Nature, as the worship of an image for God, but the worshipping the true
God by any Similitude.

You will not be engaged in defending the coherence of their doctrine herein,
with saying, that the same Precept of not adoring God by an Image, should not
oblige Christians; neither indeed is it easy to find the coherence of it.
Certainly you will never find that God did dispense in the foresaid Law with
Christians: neither can any reason be imagined why such a practice should be
lawful in one time, and not in another? Why Jews should be further from
Idolatry then Christians? This to have bin the sin of the Jews in the worship
of the golden Calf, which was so offensive to God, I mean, that they did adore
it as an Image of God, and not believing it was a real God, is most apparent by
the words of the Context, These be thy Gods, Oh Israel, which brought thee up
out of the Land of Egypt, Exodus XXXII. 4. Who can believe that men not
altogether destitute of common sense, would seriously judge that Images made
before themselves of their own gold, should be a real God? In what sense or
reason could they say it was he that brought them out of the Land of Egypt,
which was don long before that Calf was made? If you say that Aaron declared
that Calf to be a God, saying, These are thy Gods, or, this is thy God, as you
have in the ninth of Nehemiah, the plural being taken for the singular in the
former place by a Hebraism: I answer, it was a tropical Expression, as you are
wont to say, where Images are of the Apostles, This is St. Peter, and this is
St. Paul, meaning the Images of St. Peter, or St. Paul. And as you say, in your
Processions of holy Friday, of the Cross you bear in your hand, and raise up to
be adored by the people, bowing upon their knees, Ecce lignum crucis in quo
salus mundi pependit, Behold the timber of the Cross upon which was fixed the
Savior of the world. Surely you are not so senseless as to think these words
should be verified in a literal sense, of the Cross you bear in your hand, but
rather in a tropical, relating to the Cross whereon our Savior was really
fixed. In the like sense you are to conceive Aaron did speak of the golden
Calf, (if you will not make him quite senseless) when he said, This is thy God,
oh Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, which is to say, This
is a Type or Image of thy God who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: and
under that notion the people did adore it. And all this while I hope you will
not pretend to absolve them from the guilt of Idolatry, for which they were so
severely punished by God; as we read in the 32. chapter of Ex^dus. Therefore
Idolatry is not only to adore an Image as God, but also to adore God in an
Image.

If we will give credit to Pagans, touching their belief, they will tell us,
they were never so blind as to think the Statues they adored were Gods, Nemo
unquam tam fatuus fuit, says Cicero, qui saxum and lapidem Jovem esse
credidit. None ever was so void of sense as to say that a stone should be
Jupiter. Neither could such a belief consist with what is generally supposed by
them, that their Gods are in heaven. So the Inhabitants of Lystra, when they
saw Paul and Barnabas heal one that was a Creeple from his birth, said, The
Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men, Act. XIV. 11. And if even
Pagans thought it a stupidity unbecoming men of common sense, to conceive a
stock or stone to be a God, less ought we to imagine, that the Israelites with
so much advantage of instruction should be so brutish. Their guilt therefore
was not to believe the golden Calf was a God, but to attempt the worshipping of
God by an Image, which is your guilt.

You conclude that to worship the Image of Christ and his Saints, cannot be
called Idolatry. For an Idol (say you) is a representation of a Deity that has
no being, but Christ and his Saints ^ave a being, etc. If you speak of the
subject of Idolatrous worship tending to something created, it is true that it
looks upon a Deity that has no being. But if you believe S. Paul, the real
object of their worship was the true God which he preached, Whom you ignorantly
worship, him declare I unto you. Acts 17.23. and notwithstanding he rebuked
them for Idolaters; therefore Idolatry is not only a worship dedicated to false
Gods, but also a worship of the true God by a way prohibited.

But how will this your discourse reach to save from Idolatry the worship given
to Images of Saints, that have in them no Divinity real or apprehended? Is it
because they have a being opposite to a Chimera or nothing? then the adorers of
Mars and Apollo in their Statues, (and so of other Idols) were no Idolaters.
Those Statues or Idols were representations of men (whether living or dead, is
not material) not Chimerical, but such as had a real being. Read the origin of
Idolatry described in the 14. Chapter of Wisdom from the 12. verse: you shall
find it begun by making Images of men absent or dead to honor their memory.
Besides your supposition is clear contrary to what Gods Commandment against the
worship of Images supposes, Thou shall not make unto the any graven Image, or
any lik^ness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth
beneath, etc. Exodus 20.4. Images of things are prohibited to be worshipped, and
of things really being in the Heaven or upon Earth.

But as you hope to be saved, will you lay aside prejudices and subtilties a
while, and speak once sincerely: what it it that makes you so eager for the
worship of Images? is it any divine precept that moves or forces to it? we
never heard you talk of any such precept, and there is at least a very probable
assurance of a precept of God extant, prohibiting under terrible penalty such a
worship. There is moreover a certain danger of occasioning, in the ruder sort,
a downright gross Idolatry, by an absolute direct worship of the Images you set
up to be worshipped, without those distinctions and precisions wherewith you
pretend to justify your practice. Of which Ludovicus Vives gives this
testimony; Vives in Comm. ad August. de Civitate Dei I. 8. c. ultimo.
Divos divasque non aliter venerantur quam Deum ipsum, nec video in multis quod
discrimen sit inter eorum opinionem de Sanctis, and id quod Gentiles pu tabant
de Diis suis. They worship holy Men and Women no otherwise then God himself;
neither do I see in many things wherein their opinion touching Saints differs
from that of Pagans, concerning their Gods. Polydor Virgil speaks to the same
purpose in these words, Multi su^t saltem rudiores qui ligneas, saxeas,
marmoreas, aeneas, item in parietibus pictas Imagines colunt, non ut figuras,
sed perinde quasi ipsae sensum aliquem habeant, quique eis magis fidunt quam
Christo ipsi, aut aliis Divis quibus dicati fuerunt. In the Church of Rome
there are many who worship Images of stocks, stones, brass, or painted on
Walls, not as figures, but even as if they had some sense in them, and who put
more trust in them then in Christ himself, or in the Saints to whom they are
dedicated.

This being so, what prudence can it be to expose your own Salvation and the
Salvation of others unto a certain danger, by practicing a worship at least
very probably prohibited by God under pain of damnation? This is the unhappy
condition you are in, and our great advantage of you in our debates, that if
you are in an error, as very probably you seem to be, you are liable to
damnation: not so we, tho you should be in the right; for on our part there is
no transgression of any divine precept, and consequently no fear of damnation
in not worshipping an Image. In the same case you are in your worship of the
Eucharist. If Christ be not there after the manner you pretend, you are
damnable Idolaters, as many of your own Authors do, and any that is rational
must needs, confess. But on whatsoever side the truth be in that controversy,
our practice is free from danger of sinning by not paying the worship of Latria
to the Eucharist, whereas no precept of God forces us to give it such worship.
This with the like advantages, which we have of you in all other points
controverted, made me choose the way of the Church of England as surer to
salvation then yours.

What profit do you expect by the worship of Images? I understand what profit
may be in the use of devout Images (if separated from the worship) that they
may be a Book to the ruder sort, for raising their minds unto heavenly things.
But this benefit is not so great, nor the hope of getting Heaven this way so
warrantable: as the danger of losing it by unlawful worship, as imminent. While
the use of Images was harmless and beneficial, it was justly retained. It were
insolence in a member of any Church or Congregation, to oppose a custom or use
introduced in it, while indifferent and not opposite to a higher Law. But if
that use did run to an abuse and transgression of Gods Commandments, then it is
to be reformed or rejected. This is what happened in the case of the brazen
Serpent, as before related. And this is the case of the Reformed Churches with
Images. While and where pious and innocent use was made of them, they permitted
them, and so they do yet. But when they saw the abuse of unlawful worship given
to them, they removed them from the eyes of the Vulgar, apt to commit those
abuses in places of worship.

Now we have seen how far this kind of abuse has grown with your people both
Learned and Vulgar. As for the latter, reflect upon what we have related out of
Vives and Polydor. Add to it the testimony of George Cassander, a man renowned
for his calm and even temper as well as for his learning, and who by both might
have contributed to the peace and unity of Christian Churches, if the
unflexible pride of the Court of Rome would suffer any limit to be put to its
Ambition. Of the worship of Images he speaks thus, Manifestius est quam ut
multis verbis explicari d^be^t, Imaginum and Simulachrorum cultum multum
invaluisse, and affectioni seu potius superstitioni populi plus satis indultum
esse, ita ut ad summam adorationem quae vel a Paganis suis Simulachris exhiberi
consuevit, etc. It is more clear then needs Cassander consult. art. 21. cap. de
Imagine.
many words to declare it, that the worship of Images and Statues is gone too
far, and too much liberty given to the devotion or rather superstition of the
people, so as it came to the very height of worship, which even Pagans do give
to their Idols.

And truly it is a deplorable thing what Hierom L Lamas Hierom. I. Lam. Sum. p.
3. c. 3. Et adeo gens affecta est truneis (...) desa (...) Imaginibu^, ut, me
test, quoties Episcopi decenti res pon^^^ jubent, vereres saas petent
^^rantes, etc.
, as an eyewitness of it relates to have happened among the people of
Asturias, Cantabria, and Gallicia, no small Provinces of Spain, viz. that they
were so addicted to their worm ea^en and deformed Images, that when the Bishops
commanded new and handsomer Images to be set up in their rooms, the poor people
cried for their old; would not look up to their new, as if they did not
represent the same thing; or really, as we may probably guess of their
blindness, that they did conceive some peculiar numen or divine virtue to dwell
in those old stumps of their former acquaintance, which the do not expect to
find in those new and neater Images. And thus goes the matter with the vulgar
sort of the people.

But in my opinion it goes even far worse with the more learned of you. And
certainly such were Aquinas, Alexander Alensis, Bonaventure, Albertus ^^agaus,
C^jetan, Capreolus, and others quoted by Azor. tom. 1. inst. moral c. 6. Sect.
2. Hac sententia est communi Theologorum censensu recepta.
A^orius, where he says it to be the opinion received by the common consent of
Divines, Tha^ the Ima^e of Christ is to be adored with the worship of Latria,
even the very same wherewith Christ himself is to be worshipped. And so
respectively of the Images of other Saints, that they are to be worshipped with
the same kind of worship that is due to the Prototype. Neither indeed do they
say herein more then the Council of Trent does teach them to say. For, in the
Decree above mentioned touching the worship of Images, it gives such a reason
of it, as declares the said worship to be measured by the quality of the
Prototype. Quoniam honos qui iis exhibetur refertur ad prototypa, quae illae
repraesentant; ita ut per Imagines, quas osculamur and coram quibus caput
aperimus, and procumbimus, Christum adoremus, and sanctos, quorum illae
similitudinem gerunt, veneremur. The honor which we give to Images, says the
Council, is related to the Prototypes, which they do represent; so as that by
the Images which we kiss, and before which we uncover our head, and bow down,
we adore Christ, and worship the Saints, whose likeness they bear. Whence
follows what the forementioned Divines said, That the worship of Images being
to be measured by the Quality of their Prototypes, the worship of Latria is due
to the Image of Christ; that being the worship which is due to himself. And by
your denial of this to be the doctrine of your Church Mr. I. S. you will more
easily persuade us that you begin to grow ashamed of your doctrine, as well you
may, then that you understand the Tenets of the Roman Church better then
Azorius did, or those other Divines of greatest eminency among you, by him
quoted.

This being so, consider the miserable condition of your doctrine, how well you
can desend it from the infamous note of Idolatry. If you believe the best
Interpreters touching the proper signification of the word Idolum, you shall
find them say it signifies no more then Imago. So that an Image adored or
worshipped is in propriety of speech an Idol worshipped; and consequently a
worship of Latria given to an Image, or Id^l, (for they are the same) is in all
propriety of speech Idololatria. Therefore according to the doctrine of the
Council of Trent, and your Divines forementioned, by the worship of Latria
given by you to the Image of Christ you commit formal Idolatry. I wish with all
my heart you did not, and that no Argument of mine nor of any other could prove
you guilty of this horrid crime.

By this you see how the Council of Trent, and the most eminent of your
Schole-men do countenance the stupid error of the vulgar among ^ou, and even
exceed it. It is plain they deliver in formal terms what I am certain would be
a horror to the meaner Capacities, if these did apprehend the sinful absurdity
of it. And your pretensi^n to more prudence in not terming your worship Latria
does not heal the wound, nor so much as cover it from any clear sighted-eies.
The real guilt consists in worshipping Images against the Ordinance of God;
give that worship what name you please.

If I do say your people do pray to Images of wood or stone, and therein do
practice that great folly, of which the Wise man accuses the Idolater, that he
is not ashamed to speak to that which has no life. For health he calls upon
that which is weak, for life prays to that which is dead. Wisdom. 13.17. if I
do say moreover that your Church teaches them to do so: certainly you will say
it is a great calumny. But then tell me, I pray, whose words are these you
speak to the Cross in the procession of good Friday?

O Crux! ave spes unica,
Hoc Passionis tempore,
Auge piis justitiam,
Reisque dona veniam.
Hail o Cross! our only hope, in this time of Passion, give increase of grace
to the godly, and pardon to sinners. If you tell me these are the words of the
Church (which you will not deny) but spoken to Christ, not to the Cross,
Azorius gainsays you; for he declares that by those words the Church speaks to
the Cross, Ecclesia cum Crucem veneratur and colit, eam salutat and alloquitur
cum ait, O Crux ave, etc. The Church (says he) adoring the Cross salutes it,
and speaks to it, saying, Hail o Cross, etc. And is not this to speak to that
which has no life? etc. Thus your people do, and which is worse, thus your
Church teaches them to do. And thus we see your Church and People do what all
Idolaters do to their Idols.

CHAP. XXIV. Our Adversaries reply to my exceptions against their Invocation of
Saints, declared to be impertinent.
Mr. I.S. is so exact a Disputant, that he takes it for a sufficient answer to
my Arguments, if he does but mention the subject of them, and say something of
what his notes or stock of knowledge does afford him, without taking the trouble
of examining, whether what he says be to the purpose of my Arguments or no.
This is usual with him, but very conspicuous in the present case of their
Invocation of Saints. I begun accusing their excesses in calling the Virgin
Mary their life and hope, their Redeemeress and Savioress. This I said to be
contrary to St. Peter's declaration, That there is no salvation in any other
besides Jesus Christ, and that there is no other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved, Act. IV. 12. To this Mr. I. S. says, it proves
we must not ask the Saints on earth to pray for us, which is to prove too much.
I hope Mr. I. S. himself will not be so desperate as to call his Colleague,
whose prayers he desires, his Life and Hope, his Savior and Redeemer. But how
comes it to prove we must not desire at all the prayers of Saints upon earth?

Two excesses of Papists in their Invocation of Saints I took in hand to
reprehend. To speak of all, the brevity which my business then did confine me
to, would not permit. The one is to call the Virgin Mary Savioress, etc. the
other, to dedicate more Churches, and address more prayers to Saints then to
Christ. Both which excesses I convinced of error by those passages of
Scripture, which declare Christ our Lord to be our only Savior, and that he is
more willing and able to help us then any other Saint, and that he invites us
to come to himself for remedy of all our needs. Your way to answer this, were
either to purge your Church of those excesses, or to prove that the Scriptures
which I alleged did not evince those practices of yours to be excesses. You do
neither, but in lieu thereof, you speak only of desiring the prayers of Saints
who live yet upon earth: whereby you alter the state and terms of the question.
I spoke of praying to Saints who are no more on earth, and fitted my Texts to
the Confutation of that practice. You speak of desiring those who are not yet
departed this life, to pray for us: which are far different things. And so we
find the latter practiced in the Gospel, but not the former. But you must say
something, and tho not to the purpose, it must be called an Answer.

I related some desperate expressions of your Preachers over-valuing Saints.
And you, confessing they were mad, in so much, fall into exclamations against
me for leaving the Roman Church, because I saw some mad men in it. And thence
you fall to your wonted immodest railleries, without regarding how far you go
from truth and the purpose. Where did you find me say, that for the madness of
those Friars only, I forsook the Roman Church? Did not I alledg many other very
grave causes of my resolution therein? Did I say this was a cause at all for me
to leave that Church? I only reflected upon it as on very bad Fruit that
declares the corruption of the Tree. And in case it should be in some measure a
cause, how come you to imagine or think to persuade others it should be the
only cause? A thief that was hanged for stealing a purse, wherein were twenty
pounds and six pence, because you heard in the process of his cause mention
made of six pence, were it ingenuous or just to exclaim at the Judges, as if
they did condemn a man to be hanged for stealing six pence?

I confess, your disingenuity herein is hateful to me; but if you think it
should not be so, pray then answer me to these two Questions: If a Villain did
come by night and cut down a score or two of those fair Trees that grace the
Walks of the Roial Park of St. James in Westminster, would you think it too
much severity that such a Villain should be whipped about the streets for so
great an Insolence? But if after this check he should run about the City and
Country with a little branch of one of those Trees in his hand, exclaiming
against the cruelty of the Judges, as if they had ordered him to be whipped about
the streets of London for cutting that little branch only; would not you think
him worthy to be whipped again for his notorious calumny? Behold your case: I
expressed many grievous faults of the Roman Church which occasioned my
withdrawing from her, Idolatry, Superstition, cruelty in the conduct of Souls,
impiety in preferring her own laws to those of God: rashness, and even madness
in her worship and Invocation of Saints: and among others, related the frantic
expressions of a Friar in extolling his Saint, as one of the Branches
proceeding from that vitiated Tree. Of this Branch you lay hold, and cry that I
have left the Communion of the Roman Church only, because I saw in it a mad
Friar. Give me leave to tell you, that this kind of arguing deserves no better
than whipping in the Schools.

And having answered my Arguments upon this Subject, say you, and having given
no Answer to them, say I, as now I have shown: you provoke me to a trial of
your Scholastic skill, touching the knowledge that Saints in heaven have of our
affairs here, and how far they are concerned for them; a thing whereof even
your ablest Schole-men could never yet give a clear account. Whoever shall
please to read their Writings on this Subject, will see a Theater of confusion.
The most that ever could be cleared of what they alledg, and you can pick out
of them, is that God can, and sometimes did reveal unto Saints in heaven some
earthly concerns: but that all the Saints in heaven should know all our
thoughts, and all our particular concerns, could never be said upon any
probable ground, much less with certain^. And yet a certain knowledge of it were
requisite to save your practice from the note of blindness and solly, in having
such frequent recourse to them by mental and vocal prayers for all your
particular concerns. I say moreover, that tho you were certain they did see all
our peculiar concerns, and were willing to be concerned for us; yet you fall
very short of giving a formal answer to my exception, taken against your more
frequent recourse to them, then to Christ for Intercession, and dedicating more
Temples to their names, then to the name of God and Christ. How can this
consist with our Christian acknowledgment of Christ to be our only Mediator and
Advocate? And if you deny so much to him, I hope you will not doubt he is at
least our chief Mediator and Advocate: and being so, how come you to have less
recourse unto him then to inferior Saints? which was that I charged upon your
practice. To which you gave no answer, because you saw no rational or Christian
answer could be given: and so finding it an easier work to fall upon your
accustomed scurrilous Sarcasms, you returned them for answer.

Only to that of building more Churches, and offering prayers and devotions to
your supposed Saints, then unto Christ, because you would seem to say something,
tho nothing indeed to the purpose, You say at last, that the honor you give to
the Saints, you give it to God in them, or to them for God. But who can
understand this to be a good way to please God? If an earthly King would have
the Prince his Son and Heir, to be Solicitor General to him in favor of his
Subjects, and that all Roial graces and favors should pass unto them by the
hands of his Son; Can any man rationally imagine it would be pleasing to such a
King, that his Subjects neglecting their Applications to the Prince, should
make all, or the most frequent to inferior Servants of the Court? Apply this
example, and if you do not see by it the unreasonableness of that practice of
yours, I think we may conclude that passion and prejudice has blinded you so
far as not to see the light of noonday.

Add to all this that many of your supposed Saints possibly may not be Saints
indeed, but wretched Souls damned in Hell. Whereof your own Histories do afford
no few instances, and the possibility of the Case is evident: for most of your
Saints were Canonized or called Saints by Vulgar opinion; not by that more
exact scrutiny, which in latter Ages was ordained to prevent the Invocation of
Impostors and Cheats for Saints through Vulgar error. It is manifest that such
wicked men are solicitous, and not seldom successful in getting the credit of
Saints with the Vulgar. That Is the business of hypocrites; when true Saints
make it theirs to hide their virtues, and please only the eyes of God.

And even now, after so many solemnities and scrutinies ordained to proceed to
a Canonization, the matter still remains uncertain. Many of your learned
Schole-men deny the Pope to be infallible therein. He may be misinformed, and
why not? May not Cheats intervene, and Bribes work in such Informations as in
others? A Town or Society that will be engaged to get one of their Members
Canonized for Saint, and thereby obtain considerable Emoluments of credit and
interest to their body, may possibly use those indirect means which other
solicitations of men tending to the like purchase are capable of.

All this being so, how can you defend at least from blindness and imprudence,
your practice of more frequent recourse to your supposed Saints, then to the
supreme undoubted Saint of Saints Jesus Christ? Not to treat at present how
much this doctrine of the Invocation of Saints is in it self injurious to God,
by giving that worship to Creatures which belongs only to himself; as may
appear by all those places of Scripture which appropriate our Invocation to God
only, in regard of his incommunicable Attributes of Omniscience, infinite
goodness, and power: nor how dishonorable it is to Christ, both in regard of
his infinite merit, and office of Mediator.

And finally, the silence of such a practice in the first and better Ages of
the Church, so as Cardinal Perron confesses, that in the Authors who lived
nearer the Apostles times, in the three first Centuries no footsteps can be
found of the Invocation of Saints: this silence, I say, is a sufficient
Argument of the unlawfulness of this practice, and how unsuitable it is to the
spirit of the Apostles. Origin is not only silent of such a practice, but
directly protests against it in several places, assirming that Prayers and
Supplications are to be directed only to God by Jesus Christ. For being
inquired by Celsus, what opinion Christians had of Angels; he answers, That tho
the Scripture sometime calls them Gods, it is not with intention that we ought
to worship them, For all ^raiers and Supplications, says he, and Intercession
and Thanksgiving are to be sent up to the Lord of all by the high Priest, who
is above all Angels, being the living word of God. And reflecting often upon
the unreasonableness of making addresses to Angels, by reason of the little
knowledge we have of their condition; he adds, That even such a knowledge, if we
were furnished with it, Origin contra Celsum lib. 5. p. 233. Edit. Cantab.
would not permit us to presume to pray unto any other but God the Lord of of
all, who is abundantly sufficient for all by our Savior the Son of God. And
after he declares how Angels and Saints may assist us, and pray for us to God
if we be in the favor of God, and do endeavor to please him, We must endeavor
to please God only, says he, who is over all, and pray that he may be
propitious to us, procuring his good will with piety and all kind of virtue.
And reflecting upon Celsus his proposal of worshipping Demons or Angels, he
adds these remarkable words, Lib. 8. page 120.
But if he will yet have us to procure the good will of any other after him,
that is God over all, let him consider that as when the body is moved, the
motion of the shadow does follow it; so in like manner, having God favorable to
us, who is over all, it follows that we shall have all his friends, both
Angels, and Souls, and Spirits favorable to us; for they have a sympathy with
them that are thought worthy to find favor with God....... so as we may be bold
to say, that when men, who with a resolution propose to themselves the best
things, do pray unto God, many thousands of the sacred powers pray together
with them uncalled upon. Here and in other such Testimonies of Origin, and
others of his time, we find mention of Angels and Saints, to pray for men, and
to help them by Gods appointment, but we find no mention at all of such a thing
as an Invocation of them. He says they pray together with us, when we pray to
God himself, and that not because we prayed first to them to pray with us, but
uncalled upon. Here we have the Spirit of that Church truly Catholic and
Apostolic declared to us, that we are to make our Addresses of Prayers and
Invocations to God alone, and thereby win the assistance and prayers of
heavenly Spirits in our favor. For as all the world shall fight with him
against the unwise sinners, so all the Court of Heaven will assist their King
in favoring his Saints and Servants.

CHAP. XXV. A great stock of Faults and Absurdities discovered in Mr. I. S. his
defense of Purgatory.
SIR, as you show your special study to be to sour your Pen with all manner of
sawciness, even without occasion given to you, and starting often from the
point and purpose for to pleasure your self in the Sea of bitterness: so it is
my no small care (and certainly a harder task then to answer your Arguments) to
refrain my Pen from pouring upon you continual showers of heavy Censures,
whether reflecting upon your boldness, in asserting manifest untruths; or upon
your rudeness or malice, in misunderstanding or mis-representing the state and
terms of the Question in every point of my Discourse you pretend to answer; or
shunning shamefully or childishly the point and purpose, and proposing another
of your own instead of answering, as Schole-boies do with riddles or hard
questions, as they call them, when they want an answer to one of them, they
return for answer another of that kind of Questions. Of all these faults I
could easily convince you guilty in every point you handled from the beginning
of your Book to the end: I have abstained from doing it in formal reflections
(tho in my replies faced with your Proposals, the discreet Reader may easily
see your foresaid faults really contained) out of my aversion to offensive
expressions, and because I fear to offend my friends and Patrons on this side,
as you hope to please yours by bitter Language. But when you tell palpable
untruths, shall I desert the defense of truth not to make you a liar? when you
clearly abandon the question proposed, and misrepresent the case, or
misunderstand it, shall I desist in my serious and close enquiry of the truth,
not to discover your ignorance and weakness? So much complacency you are not to
expect from me; and by showing you are guilty of all these faults in your reply
to my discourse upon the point of Purgatory, you will perceive I have bin
indulgent to you, in not enlarging upon a formal discovery of them in all the
points hitherto treated upon among us. Now to the proof of so much.

I begun my Discourse upon the point of Purgatory, with the method and order
that exact Disputants are wont to observe in handling seriously any subject;
First examining what we are to understand under the notion of Purgatory.
Seeondly whether such a thing be really extant. As to the first, I told how I
did not find the more learned Men of the Roman Church so confident as the
Vulgar, in taking for Purgatory a determinate place in the bowels of the Earth,
with those frightful qualities their Legends do specify; being contented to
conclude from some places of Scripture by conjecture, that after this life
there must be some place to expiate sins, without determining whether that
place be over, or under, or in the Earth, or whether the pain be heat, or cold,
or darkness, or tempest, etc. This you call raillery; but it is not my humor to
rally in so serious matters: they are the terms wherewith the more grave and
modest Writers of your own party do express the matter. And such is the
unhappiness of your engagement, that hardly your doctrine can be mentioned in
terms that may not make it ridiculous. All this you say is to no purpose, for
the question is not where Purgatory is, or what is the condition of People
there, but whether there be any such thing as Purgatory? I would fain know what
purpose is that you say this Discourse is not pertinent to? I am confident it
is the purpose of fitting my questions to your answers, when you want answers
fitting my questions. You saw your shame discovered in deluding the vulgar with
Romantic Notions, for which your learned Men could not discover any serious or
solid ground; and not finding your self with stock to answer that charge, you
must put it off, and say, it is not to the purpose. You are much a stranger to
Disputes and Books, if you do not know that there are questions touching the
essence, quality and situation of Purgatory, as well as touching the existence
of it. You never knew what is good Logic, and in it an orderly procedure to a
demonstration, if you did not learn that the Question, Quid sit, ought to
precede in some measure the Question, An sit. That to know whether a thing be
existent, we must have a knowledge of the quality of such a thing, at least as
far as the understanding of the word, and some knowledge of the thing signified
by it. If you send one to the Market to know whether a Camel be there, you must
prepare him with some notion of the thing, whereby he may distinguish it from a
Cow, or a Goat; otherwise how can he bring you a report of the existence of a
Camel in that place. It may happen to him, as to the other Countryman, who
hearing a report in his Village of a Monkey which the Bishop of the neighboring
City had, and desirous to see it, having met with an Ass coming out of the
Bishops house, he cried out to his companions they should behold the Bishops
Monkey. If he had bin informed before what the word Monkey did signify, he
would not have fallen into this ridiculous error. To prevent such mistakes, good
Scholars do premise some notion of the Question quid sit, what is the thing
they look for, before they enter into the Question An sit, whether such a thing
be extant.

To this purpose I premised a brief discourse touching the quality and notion
of Purgatory, and thence proceeded immediately to examine the grounds exhibited
by the Roman Church for the existence of it: But Mr. I. S. not finding himself
furnished to encounter me this way, takes another, telling us what is of Faith,
and what is not touching Purgatory, and then proposes a stock of Arguments in
favor of it, which he will have us take for his own, tho very trivial; and
falls a quarrelling with other Protestants, I know not what, without any
mention or regard in the mean time of answering my Arguments, according to the
foresaid rule of young Schoolboys, to propose one question for answer to
another.

But finding the Arguments he produces to be weak for his purpose, he tells us
that tho the testimony be and others do allege in favor of Purgatory be not
convincing, yet their doctrine must stand, because they are many years in
possession of it, and so must hold while we do not beat them out of it by
positive proofs, and thence expostulates with me that in all my discourse
touching Purgatory, I bring no text of Scripture that says there is no such
thing.

Sure there is no man of common sense that understands the English Tongue, now
so enriched with Latin and Schole-terms passed into common discourses, but will
perceive the strange halluemation of this man in his expression now proposed.
It is not for Doctors and Masters in Universities alone, among Englishmen to
understand the propriety of these terms, affirmative and negative, and the
different duties of him that stands upon the negative, and of the other that
stands upon the affirmative in a debate, that it is the latter ought to produce
positive proofs of what he affirms, and his Adversary complies with showing
that such proofs are not convincing. To understand this much, I say, I need not
appeal to great Doctors, any man of common understanding may be a competent
judge in it. What kind of people then, did Mr. I. S. pretend to persuade, that I
did not comply with the duties of a formal Disputant in refuting the assertors
of Purgatory, by showing the Testimonies produced by them were not convincing?
My purpose was not to prove the existence of any thing, but the nonexistence
of a thing which they call Purgatory. To pretend that a nonexistence of a
thing must be proved by positive arguments, is to pretend that a nonentity or
nothing should be painted with colors.

He tells us we are Actors, and they defendants in this Controversy, that it is
our part to exhibit proofs. But herein he does not tell truth. For they are
Actors and Imposers upon us of Articles to which they will force our belief. It
is their duty to prove that such an Article is contained in the Word of God.
And while they do not, we are in possession of our liberty, of which they
pretend to rob us, by forcing upon us the belief of Purgatory. He tells us they
are a long time in possession of this doctrine. Be it so, may not a possessor
be questioned about the title and right of his possession, and dispossessed if
his titles be not found justified? This is the case betwixt us and them. We
pretend their titles for imposing upon men the belief of Purgatory to be
invalid and fictitious, they must show the contrary or forfeit their possession.

The case thus standing, you are not to expect Mr. I. S. to put me off by
stratagems of Schole-Boys, in returning for answer impertinent questions; I
must keep you to the point, for I desire in earnest to find out the truth. The
point is, whether the Testimonies of Scripture alleged by your Church, for
asserting Purgatory, be convincing? I said the chief place alleged by it of
the old Testament is the case of Judas Maccabeus, sending money to Jerusalem
that Sacrifices should be made for his Soldiers defunct. Herein you say I am
mistaken, you have other Testimonies more convincing of your own discovery. But
will you dare to prefer your own judgment to the judgment of your Church, which
in her Anniversary Mass for the dead, of all Testimonies of the old Testament,
makes choice of the foresaid place of Judas Maccabeus, proposing it for Epistle
to be read to the People in that Mass? Will you have us say that your Church
made choice of that text beyond others to be read in the Anniversary Mass of
Souls, because in it is made mention of a weighty sum of money to be given for
the dead, and with offerings of this kind your Clergy is much pleased, and so
do strike on that string too much in their Funeral Sermons, exhorting to money
offerings for the dead, to the no small offense and heavy censure of such of
your People as dare speak their sense. By what I see of your temper, I am sure
you would say so if you were in my place and case. And while you make your
atonement with your Church for undervaluing her judgment in the preference of
that text, forbear at last tergiversations, and stand to a trial of the
pertinency of the said text reputed for chief to prove the Existence of
Purgatory.

I said that tho the Book, relating the foresaid case, were Canonical, and of
certain Authority (which is not allowed) yet it was no concluding argument to
prove the Existence of Purgatory, since Prayers for the Dead may be made, and
were made to different purposes, then that of drawing them out of Purgatory;
and if that be so, it is not a good consequence, Judas Maccabeus ordered
Prayers to be made for his Soldiers defunct; therefore it was to draw them out
of Purgatory. That Prayers may be made for the dead to a different purpose,
then to draw them out of Purgatory, I proved first out of a doctrine received
among Romish Doctors, that God being present to all the spaces of Eternity, may
see now and listen to Prayers that will be made in any Age after, and
foreseeing that godly persons shall pray in the future for the assistance of
his Grace to one dying now, may yield it accordingly. If this go well, said I,
prayers may be commendable and very important for the dead, tho no Purgatory
were in nature, being conducent to a greater emolument of dying penitently, and
thereby escaping the everlasting fire of Hell.

I have added, that if the case related of Maccabeus be true, it is more likely
the prayers made for the slain, should have proceeded in the manner aforesaid,
then for bringing them out of Purgatory, since in the same place is related
that those men were found to have committed a mortal sin, (which is not
pretended to be pardoned in Purgatory) under the Coats of every one that was
slain, says the Text, Maccab. XII. 42. They found things consecrated to the
Idols of the Jamnites, which is forbidden to the Jews by the Law. And the
following Context declares that sin to have bin heinous, for as much as it drew
upon them Gods vengeance, saying, that every man saw that this was the cause
wherefore they were slain.

Mr. I. S. is pleased to approve of that subtilty of Schole-men, alleged for
ground of this reply, that Prayers in the future may avail Souls dying before,
to obtain a good death; the only thing I did suspect may not meet with general
applause, and which indeed, if certain and accordingly apprehended and believed
by men, would make Prayers for the dead to appear more useful and important
then ever the doctrine of Purgatory could make them yet appear to serious
judgments.

But my good Antagonist allowing the same doctrine to be very good, tells me it
is not to the purpose. None is more apt to call one a thief, then he that is a
thief himself; and none so ready to say his opponent speaks not to the purpose,
as one that never speaks to the purpose himself. Of this latter sort, I dare
make good Mr. I. S. to be in all his encounters upon my discourse, if it were
worth my while; in the mean time I appeal to the Reader of common sense, to
judge betwixt him and me at present, which of us both does speak to the purpose,
he in saying that my discourse now related, is not to the purpose of proving
the case of Judas Maccabeus, does not evince the existence of Purgatory; or I,
in ordering thus my Argument to that purpose. The Prayers supposed to be made
by the Maccabees might have bin, and probably were made to a different purpose,
then that of drawing the Souls of their defunct from Purgatory, therefore the
case of such Prayers to have bin made, does not evince the existence of
Purgatory. The Antecedent of this Argument, as also the proof and declaration
of it is allowed and commended by my Adversary. To enlarge upon declaring the
legality of the consequence, is to mistrust the understanding of the discreet
Reader, and to misspend my time, which I do not resolve to do.

But shall we see how my subtle Adversary go's about to prove I did not speak
to the purpose in my former discourse? For allow, says he, those Prayers made
for the slain, might have had that effect in this passage, etc. a penitent
death; yet still returns the conclusion pretended by Bellarmin, that the
passage proves it was the belief and practice of the people of God, and praised
by Scripture to pray for the expiation of the sins of the dead. Good Sir, this
is to draw breath a little, but not to escape a deadly blow given to your cause
in this occasion. I take up your own words and make them serve my purpose thus;
Tho that passage proves it was the belief and practice of the people of God,
and praised by Scripture to pray for the expiation of sins of the the dead, yet
still returns my Conclusion, that those Prayers might have bin made for the
expiations of sins committed by the dead in life, and to be pardoned at their
death; not of sins remaining after their death, and bringing them to Purgatory,
which was Bellarmins purpose and yours.

The Texts he alleges out of St. Dennis and Isidorus for praying for the dead,
are capable of the same construction I gave to the prayers of the Maccabees.
This Answer he might have expected from me if he were in charity, with more
ground then the other, he supposes rashly I should give, that the Ancient
Fathers erred. I did not learn in the Church of England to respect them less. I
see here far greater reading and regard of them then I saw among you. I know no
Gehinus, or others of those you mention, that ascribes to them more errors then
Aquinas, Scotus, Suarez, Maldonate, and other your greatest Schole-men and
Scripturians: they alledg them frequently for contradictory opinions; and the
one side must be in an error. You betray too much of a vulgar temper, in
admiring it should be said, that any of the Ancient Fathers has erred. They
confess themselves to have don it: it was far from their modesty and sincerity
to deny it.

CHAP. XXVI. The Argument for Purgatory taken from the 12th of S. Matthew. v. 32.
solved.
THE chief testimony out of the New Testament, alleged in favor of Purgatory,
is that of Matthew. XII. 32. where our Savior says, that a sin against the Holy
Ghost shall not be pardoned in this world, nor in the world to come, therefore,
say they, some sins are pardoned in the other world. I denied the consequence,
because out of a Negative a Positive does not follow, as out of this Premise,
Joseph knew not his wife until she had brought forth her first born son. This
consequence follows not in opinion of good Christians, therefore he knew her
after. Mr. I. S. answers, this consequence follows according to the letter of
the Text: but the Authority of the Church obliges to believe it was not so;
that is to say, the Church declares against the Text. If you were not tied to
this other engagement, you would deem such a saying to be a dis-respect to your
Church: but hard undertaking puts people to hard shifts.

Bellarmin was contented to infer the existence of Purgatory out of the
foresaid Text of St. Matthew according to the Laws of Prudence, tho not
according to the rules of Logic. But Mr. I. S. as more stout, will pretend it
to be evident according to rules of Faith and Logic. The Text goes thus, He
that will speak a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him, but he
that will speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither
in this world nor in the future: out of which words he argues thus, The Text
denies to a blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, what it grants to a blasphemy
against the Son of Man, but what it denies to the former is remission in this
life and the other; therefore what it grants to the latter, is remission in
this life and the other. I answer, that the major Proposition is false, for
more is denied to the sin against the Holy Ghost, then allowed to the sin
against the Son of Man: for to the former is expressly denied pardon relating to
both worlds, and to the latter pardon is promised only indeterminate, and so
may be verified with pardoning in one life, tho not in the other. And tho Major
and Minor were true, the Consequence does not follow, according to rules of
Logic, which declare, that where all the Premises are particulars (such are
those of that Syllogism) the Conclusion is not convincent, as in this
Syllogism, A man speaks, Peter is a man, therefore Peter speaks.

Mr. I. S. produces another Argument upon the same Text of a strange
contexture. Its evident, says he, out of this Text, that as blasphemy against
the Spirit is unpardonable, so all other sins are pardonable; but a blasphemy
against the Spirit is unpardonable in this world, and in the future: therefore
other sins are pardonable in both. The Major of this Syllogism is false; first,
since it will have an adequate parit^ in both cases relating to the places of
pardon, for which there is no ground in the Text, as declared above, touching
the Major of the former Syllogism. Secondly, for saying that all other sins are
pardonable, for which neither is there any ground in the Text; since from a
particular Premise an Universal Conclusion may not be deduced: from saying,
that a sin against the Holy Ghost is not pardonable, it follows not by any rule
of Faith or Logic, that all other sins are pardonable: for tho that occasion
did require to speak only of a sin against the Holy Ghost, possible it is, that
another sin may likewise be unpardonable: And I can depose, that I saw defended
in a famous public Dispute, wherein I had a share my self, that a sin
essentially unpardonable is possible, and that distinct from a sin against the
Holy Ghost.

But to make the matter clearer by an example, I will let you see the frame and
force of your Syllogism in another of the same Contexture, thus; As the King
punishes Rebels, so he favoreth his loial Subjects: he denies to every Rebel
places of trust and honor in all his Dominions; therefore he allows to every
loial Subject places of trust and honor in all his Domimons. If you do not
think this consequence to be legal, give us leave to think the same of your
former consequence, for they are both of the same frame. But while you do not
show your doctrine of Purgatory to be built upon firmer grounds then such
subtilties as these; think not to force it upon us, nor that for being
possessors of it many years, as you say, we will judge you therefore to be bonae
fidei possessores, or that you possess it with a good conscience.

And whereas the forementioned Text, Matthew. XII. 32. is in so great repute
with you for the present purpose, that you say with Bellarmin, its the only
Text wherewith St. Bernard did prove Purgatory. I will declare further by a
special doctrine of a great Father of the Church, how inconsequent is the
existence of Purgatory to the verity of that Text. The good reception you gave
to a subtilty of Schole men, I produced for sol^ing your Argument out of the
Book of Maccabees, in the Chapter precedent, does encourage me to hope you may
give the like reception to another subtilty of a learned and ancient Father of
the Church, for answering this other Argument out of Matthew. XII. In the 9th
Chapter of the Book of Joshua, we find that the Inhabitants of Gibeon hearing
of victorious Joshua his approach, and the rigor he used with the conquered
places near them, came into him as if they had bin Ambassadors sent from
foreign Countries to solicit his amity: they came in old clothes, with
clouted shoes upon their feet, their bread moldy, and wine bottles old and
rent, as if all did signify the tediousness of the journey which they
under-went; and by this meens obtained from Joshua and the Princes of Israel, a
promise of safety and freedom. But after three days march the Israelites found
those Gibeonites that seigned to have come from a foreign Country to be
Inhabitants of that Land they were in, complained to Josua of the fraud put
upon them: but he, not to infringe the oath he made, would not consent to
destroy them, but punished their cheat with a note of infamy, ordaining they
should be hewers of wood, and drawers of water to all the Congregation. Upon
which passage Origin delivers this Gloss, that Joshua being a type of our
Savior Christ, and Palestine the promised Land, a Symbol of Heavenly bliss: to
let people live in that Land with a note of infamy, signifies that some may
enter with some blemish into the joies of Heaven. His words are remarkable, as
follows, Origin hom. in Josuam.
In domo patris mei mansiones multae sunt, Joh. XIV. 2. and multae differentiae
eorum quae ad salutem veniunt, unde and Gabaunitas arbitror portiunculam
quandam little esse qui salvandi sunt, sed non sine nota alicujus infamiae. In
my Fathers house are many mansions, Joh. XIV. 2. many are the differences of
them that come to be saved; wherefore I conceive the Gibeonites to be a parcel
of those who are to be saved, but not without some note of infamy. And a little
after he added these words, Sunt enim in Ecclesia credentes quidam and
acquiescentes divinis praeceptis, erga servos Dei officiosi and religiosi, and
ad ornatum Ecclesiae vel ministorii satis promti, sed in conversatione propria
impuri, obscoeni and vitiis involuti, nec omnino deponentes veterem hominem cum
actibus suis: Istis crgo Christus Jesus salutem concedit, sed quandam infamiae
notam non evadunt. There are in the Church some believers and honorers of his
Servants, and ready to contribute toward the decency of his Service in the
Church: but in their private life impure and liable to vices, not putting off
altogether the old man with his works. To these therefore Christ Jesus allows
Salvation, but they shun not a certain note of infamy. According to this
doctrine of Origin, some may depart this life in state of Salvation, and be
received in Heavenly bliss, tho with some blemishes of smaller guilt, not
inconsistent with Gods amity, but occasioning a decrease in their degree of
Glory; and therefore capable of a pardon of such blemishes or imperfections
even in Heaven; if so, your Text mentioning a pardon of sins in the other life
does not evince the existence of Purgatory.

If you say that Origin has erred herein, as I conceive you will, then first
think it not a scandal to say that some one or other of the ancient Fathers
should err. Secondly, acknowledge therein a fault of your Church, in making
choice of the foresaid words of Origin for Gloss ordinary of the
abovementioned passage of Joshua with the Gibeonites, and conclude from all,
that this subtilty which clearly solveth your strongest Argument for Purgatory
out of the New Testament, is no invention of mine; but a doctrine of a very
learned Father of the ancient Church approved and received by yours modern with
so public a qualification, as to take it for an ordinary Gloss upon the
forementioned passage of Scripture.

CHAP. XXVII. The attemt of our Adversary to make the doctrine of Purgatory an
Article of the Apostles Creed, declared to be vain.
Mr. I. S. makes sure account he found Purgatory in the Apostles Creed, where
it is said, He descended into Hell. And what if you are told those words were
not in the Apostles Creed from the beginning, and that the first time and place
they were used in it, was in the Church of Aquilcia some four hundred years
after Christ; that they are not expressed in those Creeds which were made by
the Councils, as larger Interpretations of the Apostles Creed; not in the
Nicene or Constantinopolitan, not in that of Ephesus or Chalcedon, not in those
confessions made at Sardica, Antioch, Seleucia, Syrmium: not in the Creed
expounded by St. Austin, de fide and Symbolo. And Ruffin. in Expositione
Symboli.
R^ffinus says, that in his time it was neither in the Roman or Oriental
Creeds. Sciendum sane est, quod in Ecclesiae Romanae Symbolo non habetur
additum descendit ad inferna: sed neque in Orientis Ecclesiis habetur hic
sermo. It is certain, says he, that the Article of the descent into Hell was
not in the Roman, or any of the Oriental Creeds. It is not mentioned in several
Confessions of Faith delivered by particular persons. Not in that of Eusebius
Caesariensis presented to the Council of Nice, nor in that of Marcellus Bishop
of Ancyra delivered to Pope Julius, nor in that of Acatius Bishop of Caesarea,
delivered to the Senate of Seleucia, nor in others, mentioned by the learned
Bishop of Chester Dr. Pearson, in that his grave and judicious exposition of
the Creed writing upon the fifth Article of it. I am persuaded this will appear
strange unto you, and tho sufficient to weaken the force of your Argument
grounded upon the foresaid words of the Creed, my Answer will not rely upon it.
I allow the said words to belong to the Catholic Creed long time received in
the Church, and embraced by that of England.

But I deny your inference from those words of the Creed in favor of your
doctrine of Purgatory to be pertinent. He descended into Hell: I believe he
did. But not into the Hell of the damned, say you, for all Christians abhor the
Blasphemy of Calvin, that says Christ's Soul suffered the pains of the damned.
What then? therefore he descended into Purgatory. I am sure the more learned
and pious men of your Communion will abhor this consequence. I never heard any
of them say that descent of Christ should have bin to Purgatory. First, because
under the notion of Hell they never understood Purgatory. Secondly, if you mean
he should descend thither suffering the pains of that place, its no less
blasphemous then that you call Blasphemy in Calvin; for if we believe your
Authors, the pains of Purgatory are the same with those of Hell, and inflicted
by the same Ministers of divine Justice, that punish the damned souls in hell.
If you say he descended thither triumphant and glorious without suffering the
pains of that place, to purposes of divine Providence not manifested to us; you
may say without any Blasphemy, he descended the same manner into the Hell of
the damned triumphant and victorious, without prejudice to his glory and honor,
as the Divinity of Christ is there still without prejudice to his glory: why
may not his Soul be there for a short time with the same immunity, and to the
same purpose of triumphing over Hell and his Enemies? And the words of the
Creed being capable of this Exposition more literal and obvious, what need is
there of your new Invention of Purgatory unknown to Primitive Christianity, for
the right understanding of that Article of our Creed?

CHAP. XXVIII. How weak is the foundation of the grand Engine of Indulgences in
the Roman Church.
WHEN first I came to examine the grounds of the doctrine of Indulgence used in
the Roman Church, I confess I was astonished to see how little ground they
could show in the Fountains of divine Faith for this mystery of the Romish
belief, of so great noise and so much use among them. I thought it a strong
negative argument against such a dectrine, not to be contained in the Word of
God; that two so great Champions of the Roman Church, Cajetan and Suarez, both
employed by public authority to defend this doctrine, should not meet with any
convincing testimony of it in divine Scripture, as both do confess plainly.
Both do examine the two chief Testimonies alleged for this doctrine: the first
out of John 20.23. Whose soever sins you remitt, they are remitted to them. The
second out of Matthew. 18.18. Whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.
And both do acknowledge them not to convince the doctrine of Indulgences as now
practiced in the Roman Church. Cajetan, tom. 1. opusc. tract. 8. q. 4. says the
foresaid testimonies are without doubt to be understood of a remission to be
given by way of Sacraments, not of the remission of pains in the other life, as
the Pope does practice in the giving of Indulgences, and finally gives for the
only reason the Authority of the Church, and of Pope Leo, then governing, which
he tells us must suffice, tho no other reason should appear, by these
remarkable words, Absque hasitatione aliqua etiamsi nulla adesset ratio
fatendum est dicti Thesauri dispensationem non solum per Sacramenta, quoad
merita Christi, sed aliter quam per Sacramenta, qnoad merita Christi and
Sanctorum commissam esse Praelatis Ecclesiae, and praecipue Papae, and hoc
tanto magis fatendum est quanto per Leonem decimum determinatum est. We are to
believe without staggering (tho no reason appear for it) that the dispensing of
the Treasure of the Church not only by way of Sacraments as to the merits of
Christ, but otherwise then by Sacraments, as to the merits of Christ's and the
Saints, is committed to the Prelates of the Church, and especially to the Pope.
And this is so much the more to be confessed, because it is so determined by
Leo X. A very special reason to convince Luther, and the rest of the World,
that do not believe the Pope to be Infallible.

Suarez, tom. 4. in 3. partem. disp. 49. sect. 1. delivers his opinion of the
foresaid Testimonies of Scripture to be insufficient to prove the doctrine of
Indulgences. Of that of Joh. 20. he says the same that Cajetan, above
mentioned. Of the other touching the power of binding and loosing, Matthew.
18.18. he says the literal sense of those words to be the power of binding by
Laws and Censures, and of absolving from Censures and dispensing in Laws. And
finally in the number 17. of the same Section, he concludes, there is no place
in the Gospel whence the giving of this power may be concluded, if it be not,
Joh. 21.16. where our Savior said to S. Peter, feed my Sheep, in which words
Suarez does pretend the power Universal, and Supremacy over all the Church to
have bin given to S. Peter, and under that Universality the power of
Indulgences to have bin given to him. But as S. Peter did never receive such an
Universal power over the Church, as the Bishops of Rome do now usurp, so did he
never pretend it, nor ever troubled Thomas in India, or Andrew in Achaia, or
James in Jerusalem, or any other of his Fellow-Apostles, and Bishops, in their
respective Provinces, about a power over them or a dependence of them upon him,
all and ea^h one of them complying faithfully with their Ministry, without
incroaching one upon the other, nor staining the repute of Christian holiness
with the profane spirit of Ambition, which in Rome did grow to the confusion
and distraction of Christendom.

But tho such a Supremacy would have bin granted to the Pope, and to the
succeeding Bishops of Rome, far must Suarez go for a consequence of the
doctrine of Indulgences to be inferred from such a grant. If the power of
dispensing those immense Treasures of the merits of Christ and all Saints was
given to S. Peter in those words of our Savior, commending to him the feeding
of his Sheep, how came he, and the other succeeding Bishops of Rome for so many
Ages, to neglect the use of this power to the benefit of Souls, and great
advantage of the Roman Church, as now is practiced?

Suarez did easily perceive the weakness of his argument from this testimony,
and so betook himself in the second Section following to the common refuge of
the use and authority of the Church. That there is such a use, says he, is not
denied; we see it: that it is not an abuse but a lawful use is proved, first,
by the authority of the Council of Trent last Session, where is added that this
use has bin approved by the authority of sacred Councils, for which purpose are
wont to be related, the Council of Nice, Can. 11. of Carthage, 4.75. of
Neooaesarea, chapter 3. of Laodicea, Can 1.2. but in these Councils, says Suarez,
we only find that it was lawful for Bishops to remit some of the public
Penitences enjoined by Canons for diverse crimes: but that such a remission
should be extended to a pardon of penalties due in the Tribunal of God, may not
be inferred from those Councils.

Another main argument for the Antiquity of Indulgences they fet^h out of 2.
Cor. 2.10. where S. Paul remits a part of the penalty due to an incestuous
Person whom he had formerly punished, saving: To whom you forgave any thing, I
forgive also: for if I forgive an^ thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes
forgave I it in the person of Christ.

From these latter words, in the person of Christ, they pretend to infer that
the practice of Indulgences now used in the Roman Church had its beginning from
Christ, and that S. Paul did practice it in the occalion now mentioned by
authority received from Christ. This Argument Suarez proposes in the above
mentioned second Section, number. 3. but from the following fourth Number to the
11. he does most vigorously prove the inefficaciousness of that argument. That
the remission given by S. Paul to that incestuous man, did only relate to an
exterior penalty due by course or Canon of Ecclesiastical Government, not to
penalties of the other life depending from Divine Justice, that the words in
the person of Christ only proves it to be an act of Jurisdiction, or power
received from Christ, which may be sufficiently verified by a remission of an
exterior temporal penalty due by the common course of Ecclesiastical human
power: and finally concludes that there is no warrantable history or testimony
extant, by which it may be convinced, that the practice of Indulgences now used
in the Roman Church was known before the times of Gregory the great, of whom he
says is reported, that he gave a Plena^y Indulgence: tho even of this, says
Suarez, I find no written History, but a public report in Rome, and other
places.

And finally, what Suarez says with resolution, is only that this practice is
now in use in the Church, so as they are reputed heretics who reprehend such a
custom, and it is impossible that the Universal Church should err herein; for
it were, says he, an intolerable moral error in practice. If the Universal
Church, indeed, did practice now, and always from the beginning and in all
places this custom, according to the rules of Apostolic lawful Tradition
delivered by Lyrinensis and S. Augustine, l. 4. de Baptismo, cap. 24. we would
look upon this argument as of force. But Suarez himself does acknowledge and
confess, that this practice is neither so ancient nor Universal. And therefore
it may not be taken for Apostolic tradition, but ranked among the modern
Institutions of the present Romish Church, to stand or fall with the authority
of it; which we have sufficiently proved not to be infallible. And by this
(Reader) you may see, how rashly Mr. I. S. says I did most falsely aver, that
Suarez is not so certain, whether the power of absolving given to the Church
did extend to the profuse grant of Indulgences practiced at present by the
Roman Church. Let the Learned Reader reflect upon Suarez his discourse upon
this subject in the place forementioned, and he shall find how far he is from
any certainty that this doctrine is grounded upon Scripture and primitive
Antiquity, but shall find that he only believes it, as Scotus did that of
Transubstantiation, Non propter rations quae non cogunt, not in force of
arguments alleged for it, which are not convincing, but for the authority of
his Church.

And mark, Reader, that so great men as Cajetan and Suarez, being employed by
public authority in defending this doctrine, after bestowing all their Learning,
and no small labor in procuring to establish it, we find them confess they have
nothing to say seriously for it, but what the Collier for his Faith, viz. that
he believed as the Church believes. And here also they mistake the true notion
of the Church and authority of it; a mistake, in truth, more tolerable in a
Collier, then in men of the Learning and repute of Cajetan and Suarez. But such
is the condition of their cause, that it could not be defended better; and such
was their engagement, that they must defend it by right or wrong. I conceive my
Antagonist complaining that I have neglected him in this Chapter, and I confess
freely I delight more in dealing with people of that Learning and ingenuity I
see in Cajetan and Suarez, then with Mr. I. S. but being we are debtors to all,
I will give a turn to him also upon this subject, and it will be in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XXIX. The unhappy success of Mr. I. S. his great boast of skill in
History, touching the Antiquity of Indulgences discovered.
IN the 90th page of my former Discourse, speaking of the Antiquity of
Indulgences, I mentioned, that the first notice I had of the grants of them,
after the manner now used, is that of Gregory the VII. given to those of his
party who would fight against the Emperor Henry III. (by error of the Printer
IV.) in the year 1084. which Baronius relates from his Penitentiary, in which
was promised remission of all their sins, to such as would venture their lives
in that holy War, for which I quoted Baronius his Annals upon the foresaid year
1084. number. 15. Here Mr. I. S. enters in triumph, and declares, that if I have
no more skill in Divinity, or moral Theology, then I seem to have in History, I
am but a fresh water Scholar: as for Controversy, says he, my Treatise shows
well what I know of it. Be it so Sir, let me have truth on my side, as I hope
will appear by this Treatise, and make you much of your skill: in the mean
while let us examine, how much it is in the present point of History wherein
you pretend to be most Magisterial. First, you mistake most absurdly the state
of the Question, as is usual with you, and where I speak of Indulgences given
by Gregory the Seventh, to those of his party who would fight against the
Emperor Henry the Third, you report such Indulgences to be given by the said
Gregory to Henry, to encourage him and the Christians to war against the
Saracens. Whoever did read the History of that Gregory, and his fierce
persecution of the said Emperor to the end of his life, even as his own
Historians, Platina and Baronius more biassed to him, do report; will more
easily believe, that Gregory should favor the Turk against Henry, then uphold
Henry against any Adversary. If ever you had any tincture of the History of
Pope Hildebrand or Gregory the Seventh, how could you fall into so ridiculous
an equivocation, as to conceive him granting Indulgences in favor of the
Emperor Henry III. If you did read my Discourse speaking expressly of an
Indulgence granted to those that would fight again the Emperor, how come you to
pervert the narrative so absurdly, as if I should have spoken of an Indulgence
given in favor of that Emperor.

You say that the Indulgence I speak of, nor any other to any such purpose, was
not granted by Gregory the Seventh, but by Urban the Second. Read the place I
quoted of Baronius upon the year 1084. numb. 15, there you shall find Gregory
the Seventh employing Anselm Bishop of Luca, to publish Indulgences for all
those that would fight in his quarrel against the Emperor Henry the Third. And
continuing your strange equivocations you speak of Indulgences given by Urban
the Second to the same Henry the Third, but it was not to him he gave them, but
to Alexius Emperor of Constantinople, as Baronius relates at the year 1095.
numb. 3. You speak of Indulgences granted by Leo the Third, anno 847. but it
was not Leo the Third, but Leo the Fourth that reigned then, and when Suarez
finds not him, nor any other, giving Indulgences of so ancient date, sure I am,
you never found them upon any warrantable account.

To one notice of Indulgences I will help you out of Baronius, preceding that I
mentioned of Gregory the Seventh, given to them that would fight against the
Emperor Henry the Third, in the same year 1084. which I allow you to take for
the genuine origin of your present practice of Indulgences, given by profane
Cardinals Creatures of Pope, Guibert called Clement the Third Competitor of
Gregory the Seventh; of which kind of Cardinals Baronius in the foresaid year,
numb. 9. gives this account, Erant enim cives Romani Vxorati, sive
Concubinarii, barbati and Mitrati, peregrinis oratoribus, praecipue vero
multitudini rusticanae Longobardorum mentientes, asserentes se Cardinales
Presbyteros esse, quique oblationibus receptis Indulgentiam and remissionem
omnium peccatorum usu nefari^ impudenter praestabant: hi and occasion
custodiendae Ecclesiae consurgentes intempestae noctis silentio intra and citra
candem Ecclesiam impune homicidia, rapinas, varia stupra and diversa latrocinia
exercebant. There were, says he, Roman Citizens, either married or retaining
Concubines, shaven and wearing Mitres, imposing upon foreign Ambassadors, but
especially upon the rude multitude of Longobards, that they were Presbyter
Cardinals, and who receiving offerings did impudently bestow Indulgences and
remission of all sins: these under pretext of defending the Church, rising in
the deep silence of the night, did commit within and about the Church, without
hindrance, horrible murders, robberies, and diverse sorts of whoredoms and
luxuries. Who were better Popes or better men, Guibert and his Cardinals, or
Hildebrand and his, as I do not know, so I will not dispute: but conclude, that
such Indulgences as these were given in Rome, by relation of their own hired
Historian; and let the Reader see how unhappy Mr. I. S. has bin in his
pretended triumph over me touching this point of History.

CHAP. XXX. Of the strange and absurd terms used in the grants of Indulgences,
and the immoderate profuseness wherewith, and slight causes for which they are
granted.
TRuly if we do consider the absurd language used in the trade of Indulgences,
and the vast boundless profuseness in the grant of them for very slight causes,
of all which their most learned Defenders do confess not to be able to give a
rational account, we may with some grounds suspect, that some such
Lay-cardinals mentioned in the precedent Chapter out of Baronius, granting
Indulgences in Rome, should have bin the Authors and Inventors of the present
practice of Indulgences, and terms of it used in the Roman Church.

First they divide Indulgences into total and partial. A total Indulgence is a
full remission of all the temporal pains due to the man's sins committed. A
partial Indulgence is a remission of a part of the penalties, according to the
will of the person granting it. A total Indulgence is subdivided again into
plena, plenior and plenissima, a plenary or full, more full, and most full.
Here the wits of the Learned are strained to find sense in these words, how one
Indulgence that is plenary can be capable of these degrees of increase in
regard of the same person. If by any plenary Indulgence, he has a total
remission of all the penalties due to his sins, how can he have a more total or
full remission of them? Suarez, disp. 1. De effectu Indulgent. Sect. 4. finding
no ground for these degrees, would fain give some sense to them by a parity of
the Virgin Mary, full of grace by the coming of the Angel, more full by the
coming of her Son, and most full in her death: but finding himself weary of
such bare conjectures, resolves that according to the present state there is no
substantial difference, as to the effect in those gradations of plenary
Indulgences, whatsoever was the meaning of those terms with the first Authors
of them, whereof at present there is no clear knowledge, and relates Sotus
saying, that Preachers of Indulgences have introduced those gradations by way
of exaggeration.

Partial Indulgences are likewise subdivided into quadragena, septena, carena,
and the like. Quadragena they call an Indulgence of forty days, septena, of
seven years, carena, composed of both the former, containing seven years and
forty days. And now enters a very perplex difficulty that turns the brains of
their ablest Divines, what to understand by these years and days of remission,
whether so many years and days of the pains of Purgatory to be remitted, as
Viguerius did conceive, or so much time of penance enjoined by Canons for sins:
and tho this latter be the more received and common opinion, and approved by
Suarez in the place now mentioned, yet he finds so many difficulties for a
congruous sense of so many thousand years allowed by Indulgences, so little
consistence in reasons alleged by several Authors, that he resolves, its a
matter obscure and unknown to us, and that we must rest upon the judgment of
the Church which knows the meaning of those measures, concluding thus, Breviter
vero assero, de re nobis incerta Authors hos disputare, Ecclesiam vero uti
illa mensura quae sibi nota est. I say briefly, that these Authors do quarrel
about a thing unknown to us, and that the Church uses herein that measure which
is known to it self, remitting those pains of Purgatory, which may be
proportionable to the penalties of this life enjoined by Canons; and so leaves
us as wise as we were before, for understanding what sense so many thousands of
years can have, whether relating to the pains of Purgatory, or to penalties
enjoined by Canons. But this Language is used and received in the Roman Church,
and therefore we must stand to it, let it mean what it will, be it sense or
nonsense; and that is all the account that Suarez can give us of it after the
trial of his own wit, and examining the discourses of others, being to speak in
earnest.

Now to the cause of giving Indulgences, Mr. I. S. gives us occasion to say
something, since he boasts, that Indulgences are not granted so slightly as
Protestant Ministers would make their flock believe. Its true that Cajetan
teaches, Opusc. de Indulgent. cap. 8. that great Indulgences ought not to be
given for small causes, and that there ought to be a proportion betwixt the
quality of the Indulgence, and the work performed to obtain it. But how can
this consist with what Cajetan tells there? that a plenary Indulgence is given
to every one that stands in the Yard of St. Peter's Church, when the Pope gives
his blessing to the people there on Easter day. Here he recurs to a mystery,
that tho to stand in that place be of its own nature of no great consideration,
yet relating to the purpose of representing the Members of the Church united
under one head, its of great weight, and proportioned to the Indulgence
received. But what mystery shall we find to render decent that famous
Indulgence granted by Innocent III. to all such as would marry public Harlots?
as Spondanus relates in the year 1198.

Who would not think that so many loud and learned cries made against the
abuses of Indulgences in the Roman Church for more then a hundred years, and
the scandal and contemt of them grown among the sober and judicious men even of
their own party, would not be a means to moderate at least the boundless
profuseness of those grants, feeding continually the hopes of sinners for a
remission of all their crimes, and encouraging them to persevere in their
wicked ways? But that is the unhappiness of that Church, and the dismal symptom
of a disease being mortal, that it grows worse with remedies, and hates a cure.
Setting aside numberless instances of their most absurd prodigalities in this
kind, whereof many Books are replenished, I will only set down here a Copy of
Indulgences granted by the present Pope Clement the Tenth, upon the occasion of
Canon zing certain new Saints of late, in which you may see a full Idea of the
Romish corruptions in this kind.

Formula Indulgentiarum cum quibus S. D. N. Clemens Papa X. Coronas, Rosaria,
Cruces, sacrasque Imagines, and numismata Medallias vulgo nuncupata benedicir,
per occasionem Canonizationis SS. Confessorum Cajetani, Francisci Borgiae,
Philippi Benitii, Ludovici Bertrandi, and Sanctae Rosae Virginis Peruanae.
QVicunque saltem semel in hebdomada Coronam Domini, vel Beatissimae Virginis,
aut Rosarium, ejusve tertiam partem, aut Officium divinum vel parvum
Beatissimae Virginis, vel defunctorum, vel septem Psalmos poenitentiales, vel
graduales recitare, aut detentos in carcere visitare, aut pauperibus subvenire,
aut saltem horae quadrante mentali orationi vacare consueverit, si confessus
Sacerdoti ab Ordinario approbato sanctissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum sumserit
in quolibet ex diebus infra scriptis, piasque ad Deum preces fuderit pro
haeresium extirpatione, fideique Catholicae propagatione, aliisque sanctae
Ecclesiae necessitatibus, plenariam suorum peccatorum Indulgentiam corsequetur:
nimirum die Festo Nativitatis Domini nostri Jesu Christi, Circumcisionis,
Epiphaniae, Resurrectionis, Ascensionis, Pentecostes, Sanctissimae Trinitatis,
Corporis Christi, and die Conceptionis, Nativitatis, Praesentationis,
Visitationis, Annunciationis, Purificationis, and Assumtionis beatissimae
Virginis, tum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, Sanctorum modo
Canonizatorum, omnium Sanctorum, dedicationis propriae Ecclesiae and ejusdem
Patroni vel tituli.

Quisquis in vigilia cujuslibet istorum sanctorum jejunaverit, and confessus in
ipsius Festo Sanctissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum sumserit, oraveritque Deum,
ut supra dictum est, toties Indulgentiam plenariam consequetur. Quicunque
Missam celebrarit, vel confessus, and sacra Communione refectus interfuerit
Missae ad Altar, in quo Imago aut corpus aut reliquiae cujuslibet praedictorum
quinque Sanctorum asservantur, pieque Deum oraverint, at dictum est, die uno
quem voluerit cujuslibet Mensis plenariam Indulgentiam lucretur.

Quisquis vero poenitens peccata commissa emendare firmiter proposuerit, and
eadem die visitaverit septem Ecclesias quaslibet, and ubi tot Ecclesiae non
reperiuntur, quotquot ibi sint, and si unica tantum Ecclesia sit in loco, omnia
ipsius altaria, and pro haeresium extirpatione, etc. pie Deum oraverit semel in
anno, fruatur Indulgentiis concessis septem urbis Ecclesias visitantibus.

Quicunque devote cogitaverit de aliquo sanctissimae passionis D. N. Jesu
Christi mysterio, and in ejusdem passionis honorem septies terram deosculatus
fuerit eo die, lucretur Indulgentias concessas ascendentibus Romae per scalam
sanctam; hoc autem semel in singulis annis.

Quisquis praedictorum quinque sanctorum imitatione vel peccata sua vere
detestabitur, cum firm proposito non peccandi de cetero, vel actum aliquem
virtutis exercebit, toties lucretur Indulgentiam septem annorum and totidem
quadragena.

Quisquis leget aliquod libri caput de vita corundem Sanctorum, aut invisitet
eorum altar, vel imaginem venerabitur, and eraverit pro felici statu Sancta
matris Ecclesiae peccatorumque conver sione, singulis vicibus percipiet
Indulgentiam ce tum dierum.

Eandem pariter consequatur qui aliquid pauperibus tribuet, vel eosdem
instruet, aut por alios instrui curabit in iis quae pertinent ad fidem bonosque
mores.

Quisquis in Sanctissimae Eucharistiae cultu vel Beatissimae Virginis se
exercebit, meditans illius mysterii dignitatem, quantaque ex eo ad nos
beneficia manant, aut commiserans ejusdem Beatae Virginis dolores, quibus in
passione and morte filii affecta fuit, vel alia qualibet ratione Sanctissimum
Sacramentum venerabitur, and pro necessitatibus Ecclesiae orabit; toties
Indulgentiam centum dierum consequatur.

Quilibet in urbe commorans, vel ab ea ultra viginti milliaria non absens, si
legitime impeditus non interfuerit Benedictioni qua Romanus Pontifex in Festo
Paschatis, and Ascensionis solemniter benedicere consuevit; confessus autem
Sacrosancta Communione reficiatur, and pias ad Deum preces pro haeresium
extirpatione, etc. fuderit, Indulgentiis fruatur quibus praesentes fruuntur;
eadem vero si adimpleverint longius ab urbe distantes, easdem Indulgentias
etiamsi legitime non impediti consequantur.

Omnes supradictae Indulgentiae fidelibus defunctis applicari possunt per modum
suffragii.

Pro iisdem percipiendis satis est privatim habere apud se aliquam coronam vel
crucem, etc. cum praedictis Indulgentiis a Sanctitate sua benedictam, and quae
superius praescripta sint adimplere, licet illa etiam alio nomine impleri forte
debuerint.

Quisquis in articulo mortis se totum Deo commendans praedictos Sanctos vel ex
iis unum invocar it, ore, si potuerit, sin minus saltem cord, confessus
sacraque Communione refectus si potuerit, alioquia saltem contritus, plenariam
omnium peccatorum Indulgentiam consequetur.

In distribuendis hujusmodi Coronis, Crucibus, earumque usu, sanctissimus
servari jubet decretum. Fell. record. Alexandri VII. editum sub die sexto
Februarii. 1657, nimirum ut Coronae, Cruces, Rosaria, Numismata, quae vulgo
Medalliae nuncupantun, and sacrae Imagines cum praefatis Indulgentiis
benedictae non transeant personam ilionum quibus a sanctitate sua concessae
sunt, aut quibus ab his prima vice distribuentur, neque commodari aut precario
dari possunt, alioquin Indulgentiis jam concessis, and aliquatre ex praedictis
deperdita, pro ea subrogari altera nullo modo potest quacunque concessione, aut
privilegio in contrarium non obstante, Prohibet Sanctitas sua hanc Indulgentiam
imprimi extra Vrbem.

MICHAEL ANGELUS RICCIUS Secret.
Romae ex Typographia^ Rev. Camerae Apost. 1671.
Thus Englished.

A Form of Indulgences, wherewith our holy Father Pope Clement X. did bless
Crowns, Rosaries, Crosses, sacred Images and Medals, by occasion of Canonizing
the holy Confesso^s, Cajetan, Francis Borgia, Philippus Benitius, Lewis
Bertrand, and Sancta Rosa, a Peruvian Virgin.
Whosoever shall accustom, at least once a week, to say the Crown of our Lord,
or of the Blessed Virgin, or her Rosary, or the third part of it, or the Divine
Office, or the little Office of the Blessed Virgin, or of the Dead, or the
seven Penitential Psalms, or the Gradual Psalms, or to visit Prisoners, or
relieve the Poor, or spend at least a quarter of an hour in mental prayer; if
he confesses to a Priest approved by the Ordinary, and receive the holy
Communion in any of the days below mentioned, and shall pray to God for
extirpation of Heresies, the Propagation of Catholic Faith, and for other
necessities of the Roman Church, shall obtain a Plenary Indulgence of all his
sins; viz. in the day of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, his
Circumcision, ^piphany, Resurrection, and Ascension, the day of Pentecost, holy
Trinity, and Corpus Christi; and the day of the Conception, Nativity,
Presentation, Visitation, Annunciation, Purification and Assumtion of the
blessed Virgin; the day of the Nativity of S. John Baptist, of the holy
Apostles Peter and Paul, of the five Saints now canonized, of all Saints, of
the Dedication of his proper Church, and of the Patron or Title of it.

Whosoever shall confess and receive in the Vigil of any of the foresaid
Saints, and shall pray to God as aforesaid, shall obtain Plenary Indulgence as
often as he does it.

Whosoever shall say Mass, or having confessed and received, shall hear Mass at
an Altar, in which the Image, or Body, or Relic of any of the foresaid five
Saints are kept, and shall pray to God, as aforesaid, in any one day which he
pleases of every Month, gains a Plenary Indulgence.

Whosoever, being truly penitent, will propose firmly to forsake his sins
committed, and in the same day will visit any seven Churches, or, where so many
Churches are not to be found, shall visit those that be; and if there be but
one Church in the place, shall visit all the Altars of it, and pray to God for
the extirpation of Heresies once a year, shall enjoy the Indulgences allowed to
such as visit the seven Churches at Rome.

Whosoever shall think devoutly of any Mystery of the Passion of our Savior,
and in honor of the said Passion shall kiss seven times the ground, will in
that day obtain the Indulgences allowed to such as go up the holy Stairs in
Rome; but this once in every year.

Whosoever in imitation of the foresaid five Saints, either shall truly detest
his sins with a firm purpose of sinning no more, or shall exercise some act of
Virtue, shall so many times obtain an Indulgence of seven years, and so many
quadragena's or forty days Indulgence.

Whosoever shall read any Chapter of the life of the said Saints, or shall
visit their Altar, or worship their Image, and pray for the happy state of our
holy Mother the Church, and for the Conversion of sinners, shall at every time
obtain Indulgence of 100. days.

The same Indulgence shall any obtain who will give an^ Alms to the Poor, or
shall instruct them by himself or by another in things belonging to Faith and
good manners.

Whosoever shall exercise himself in the worship of the holy Eucharist, or of
the blessed Virgin, meditating upon the dignity of that mystery, and the
benefits redounding from it to us, or commiserating the griefs of the said
blessed Virgin wherewith she was possessed at the Passion and Death of her Son,
or in any other manner shall reverence the blessed Sacrament, and pray for the
necessity of the Church, shall obtain Indulgence of 100 days as often as he
does it.

Any dwelling in Rome, or not distant from it above twenty miles, if he has a
lawful impediment not to be present at the solemn blessing, which the Roman
Pope is wont to give in the Festivity of Easter and Ascension, but shall
confess and receive, and pray for the extirpation of Heresies, etc. shall enjoy
the Indulgences which the people present will enjoy; but such as are further
distant from Rome, shall enjoy the same Indulgences performing the said duties,
tho they have no lawful impediment for absence.

All the Indulgences aforesaid may be applied to the faithful deceased by way
of Suffrages.

For to gain the said Indulgences it is enough to have privately with you any
Crown or Cross, etc. blessed by his Holliness with the foresaid Indulgences,
and to fulfill the duties before mentioned, even tho happily you may be obliged
to perform them upon another account.

Whosoever in the point of death commending himself to God, shall invoke the
foresaid Saints, or any of them with his mouth, if he can, having confessed and
received the Communion, if he may; otherwise having at least contrition, shall
obtain a plenary Indulgence of all his sins.

In the distribution of the said Crowns, Crosses, etc. and in the use of them,
his Holiness commands to observe the Decree of Alexander VII. issued the 6. day
of February 1657. viz. that Crowns, Crosses, Rosaries, Medals, and sacred
Images blessed with the foresaid Indulgences, may not pass the persons of those
to whom his Holiness gave them, or such as from them received those things the
first time, and that they may not be lent or be bestowed; otherwise to lose the
Indulgences: and any of them being lost, no other may be subrogated for it by
any means, notwithstanding any allowance or privilege to the contrary.

His Holiness prohibits this form of Indulgences to be printed out of Rome.

MICHAEL ANGELUS RICCIUS Secret.
Rome, out of the Print of the Reverend Apostolical Chamber. 1671.
I leave the judicious Reader to gloss upon this grant and the profuseness of
it, whether it be a rare or difficult thing to gain a plenary Indulgence where
grants of this kind are frequent. They will tell us it will promote Piety to
have such encouragement to Penitence prayers and deeds of Charity. But let them
consider whether it may not rather be an occasion of continuing in vices, and a
wicked life, if by a verbal Confession and an imperfect kind of contrition, or
displeasure with sins for penalties following them, apt to be conceived by the
most wicked livers, a security is given of remission of all sins, tho never so
grievous and repeated, and of the eternal pains due to them: and likewise all
the temporal penalties following them, are remitted by a plenary Indulgence, so
easy to be obtained as we have seen. Who will not perceive that encouragement
is given hereby to persevere in vices, whatsoever other purposes they may have
who grant them? And if this be well considered, Mr. I. S. will cease to admire,
that Protestant Doctors should accuse the Roman Church of facilitating by these
means the way to sinning.

CHAP. XXXI. The dismal unhappiness of the Romish people in having their
Liturgy in a Tongue unknown to them.
EX ore tuo te judico serve nequam, thus begins Mr. I. S. his answer to my
discourse upon this subject, wherein I lamented the misery of the Romish
People, in having their Liturgy in a tongue unknown to them; and thus also
shall my reply to him begin, which certainly will be to put the Saddle on the
right Horse. What is it Sr that I have said which may be a judgment against my
self in this case? That the purpose of nature by speaking is to communicate the
sense of him that speaks to the hearer, which cannot be obtained if the hearer
perceives not the meaning of the words he speaks. This say you proves against
my self; for in the Liturgy or public Service of the Church we speak to God,
and not to the Congregation, and God can understand us, tho we do not our
selves. But stay Sr, is not the Liturgy, or public Service of the Church as
well with you, as with us, composed of an exchange of speech betwixt God and
his People, they speaking to him in Prayers and Thanksgivings, he speaking to
them by the Lessons of sacred Scripture, by the Epistles, Gospels and Psalms?
Is it not necessary for both these purposes, that the People should understand
what they say to God by Prayer, and what he says to them by Exhortation? And
for the first, wherein you think your pretension to be obtained, for praying, I
say; is not Prayer a rational and voluntary Elevation of the mind, helped by
the expressions and sense of the Prayer read or said? Is not this elevation of
the mind mainly advanced by understanding the word of the Prayer read or said?
whoever heard a Psalm sung with solemn Music, may well tell how different a
feeling and elevation of mind he has when he sees or knows the words sung and
the meaning of them, then when he hears the same Psalm without understanding
the words or sense of them.

Your comparison of a Polander presenting a Petition in English to the King of
England, which himself does not understand, does aggravate your crime, and
publish the misery of the People abused by you. Would not that Polander wish to
know the English tongue for acting in his own cause, and to be sure he was not
abused by a Notary, who possibly might have framed a Petition for him to the
King for hanging his Father or Mother for Traitors. If the King did understand
the Polish Language as well as the English, were it not a madness in the said
Polander to have his Petition penned in a Tongue he does not understand with
the foresaid disadvantages, being able to do it in his own Tongue with the
contrary advantages? What madness then is it in your People to frame their
Prayers in a Tongue unknown to them, to speak like Parrots, without feeling or
knowing what they say, and exposed to the danger of being abused by a knave,
teaching them, or reading before them blasphemous words, in which they are to
join with him b^ their Amen? And in case the Prayer be good that is read before
them, what proportion can it have with elevating the minds of the People to a
conjunction in sense with the Minister, if they do not understand what he says?
And thus ill it go's with you, even for the act of praying in your Liturgy,
which you allow to be an elevation of the mind to God. Even in this point I
have your own judgment against you, and so may return your text upon you,
saying, Ex ore tuo te judico serve nequam.

But what of the second part of the Liturgy above mentioned, containing a
speech of God to the People by the Epistles, Gospels, Psalms, and other sacred
Lectures directed to the Spiritual direction and food of their Souls? can this
end be compassed without sense and feeling in the People of what is said to
them? You confess that S. Paul 1. Cor. 14. prohibits preaching to the People in
a Tongue unknown to them: and are not those sacred Lectures a kind of
preaching, exhortation, and instruction of the People, and the best that can
be, as proceeding immediately from God himself? Then you act against the
Apostles order, by your own confession, proposing such exhortations to the
People in a Tongue unknown to them, and so your text returns upon you here in
full measure, Ex ore tuo te judico serve nequam. It is a discredit to a cause
so clear to make more delay upon it: but let the World cry against the tyranny
you use this way with Souls in depriving them of their Spiritual food. What you
say of submitting your judgment herein to the Church, is idle and absurd, when
our present business is to rebuke the abuses and corruptions of your Church,
the causes of our dislike of it.

CHAP. XXXXII. The cruelty of the Roman Church in prohibiting the reading of
Scripture to the people, and their common pretense of Sects and Divisions
arising among Protestants refuted.
FRom the page 101. of my former Discourse, I declared the cruelty used with
the faithful people in prohibiting them the reading of Scripture, which is the
food of their Souls; how contrary that is to the doctrine of Scripture it self,
often inviting us to the reading of it, and to the doctrine and practice of the
Fathers, and people of the Primitive Church.

To all which Mr. I. S. replies, that the fruit we have in the Protestant
Church of permitting the people to read the Bible, is the variety of Sects
sprung from the reading of it. But this you may tell better to others, then to
me that know now matters go on both sides, and am certain that there are more
divisions in several Societies of your Communion both in Doctrine and in
Ceremonies, then in the Protestant Church. He that knows the differences of
opinions betwixt Jesuists and Dominicans, each one condemning the other of
heresy, and doctrines destructive of good life, and of the merits of Christ,
and the great difference in Rites and Ceremonies used among them, will clearly
see they differ more in all the one from the other, then the Orthodox
Protestants do from any other Congregation of Christians in the Reformed
Church. Their differences are not in matters so fundamental and necessary to
Salvation and a good Life, as those of the dissenting Romish Societies. Their
censures of one another are not so heavy; yea the very stating of their
Questions on both sides do declare so much; both supposing, they are touching
things indifferent; the Dissenters or Non-conformists, pretending that the
points in Debate, being only Ceremonial and indifferent, not essential to
Salvation or good life, ought not to be forced upon them: The Orthodox
alleging that very thing to render Dissenters criminal, that the things
ordered being of their own nature indifferent, and not opposite to Gods Law,
there is a necessity upon them of obeying lawful Authority ordering such matters.

So much we may say in relation to Rites and Ceremonies, that there is not near
so great a diversity in them used by Orthodox Protestants, and other
Congregations dissenting; as there is in the Ceremonies and Rites used in
Colleges of Jesuits, and Convents of Dominicans, Carmelites, Franciscans,
Carthusians, and other very many Societies differing both in Habit, Diet, Rites
and Ceremonies one from the other. All these differences both of Doctrine and
Rites the Pope can wink at, provided they agree in paying obedience to him, and
advancing his quarrel. The great Union required by the Church of England makes
meaner dissentions appear more sensible, and greater would the Dissentions and
Errors be, if the light of holy Scriptures were removed; for St. Hierome says,
that infinite evils do arise from ignorance of Scripture: from hence, says he,
most part of Heresies have come; and so they are of their own nature, and well
used not a cause of Dissentions and Errors, but a cure of them. And therefore
the Roman Church being resolved not to be cured of her corruptions, decreed the
Scriptures to be removed from the eyes of the people; as appears by the Council
of Bishops mentioned by Dr. Stillingfleet, and by other grave Writers, of whose
Authority you doubt. And what need we the Authority of that Council for a thing
that we see with our eyes, and ordered by the Council of Trent, by Pius IV.
Clement the VIII. and Alexander the VII. in the places alleged in the page
100. of my former Discourse.

CHAP. XXXIII. Mr. I S. his Engagement, touching the Immaculate Conception of
the Virgin Mary, and the practice of Confession confuted.
FOR instance of the cruelty of the Romish Church, in pressing upon the belief
of the faithful things uncertain and repugnant to their judgment, I made a
brief mention of the opinion about the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin
Mary; how they make people swear to defend it, and debar from offices and
preferment such as will not take such oaths. And Mr. I. S. must enter into a
formal dispute upon the point. The testimony of S. Paul (saying, Romans v. that
all men sinned in Adam, and consequently the Virgin Mary with the rest) he
values nothing. It is a general rule, says he, capable of exception; but gives
us no testimony to prove the Virgin was excepted from that rule. He admits that
Christ was Universal Redeemer, and died for all men, but thinks it not a
consequence that the Virgin should have bin redeemed, or drawn, but only
preserved from sin, and so the consequence of St. Paul was not legal, saying, 2
Cor. v. 14. If one died for all, then were all dead; or if if it be legal, sure
the Virgin was dead by Original sin as the rest, or else all were not dead.

You say it is not unlawful in a community to require certain conditions from
such as will be members of it, and so may require of them engagement to defend
the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary. To demand conditions not
including a disturbance of conscience, nor occasioning dissimilations may be
lawful; not so to require conditions contrary to a man's conscience and
judgment, which was our case. You say the Oath of Supremacy, in opinion of
Papists, is an heresy, why then is it required from me? I answer, it is only
folly or malice can make it appear such, as I have declared in the 18. Chapter,
and the Law is not to be regulated by such passions.

I gave likewise a short touch to the cruelty used with consciences in the
practice of Consession, as well in the manner of its exercise, as the frequent
reservation of cases. And here Mr. I.S. must enter again into the deep of the
dispute, whether Confession ought to be admitted, which was not the case; in as
much as the Church of England does not only admit, but commend and enjoin the
practice of Confession in necessary occasions, tho not the unnecessary and
pernicious superstructures of the Roman Church, touching the mode prescribed,
and the reservation of cases, occasioning lamentable perplexities, and
desperate melancholies of Souls, whereof I could declare miserable instances,
if certain due considerations did not make me supersede enlarging upon this
kind of matter.

Only I will reflect upon a new addition of rigo^ brought in by Mr. I. S. of
which he will have St. Augustine to be Author, that the quality of the sin, the
place, time, continuance, and diversity of persons must be specified. This
makes me doubt and wonder what kind of person my Antagonist is, whether ever he
was bred among learned men of the Roman Church, or did read their Books; for
certainly any of them that has but the least tincture of moral Theology, will
think strange of this paradox, That the place and time of sins are to be
declared, as also the diversity of persons, being of the same kind or species.
But of these kind of lapses Mr. I. S. his Theology makes no scruple; if ^e were
better acquainted with the practice of Doctors in the Roman Church, he would
not fetch up doctrines of Fathers opposite to the present practice of that
Church. If he did but sit certain hours of the day from St. Lukes to May Day,
or thereabouts, in the Halls of Divinity of the Colleges of Palentia and
Tudela, where he says no Divinity was ever taught, he would learn, that it is
not the duty of a Penitent to specify in his Confession the time, place and
diversity of persons, wherein and wherewith his sins were committed; and they
would tell him, that if St. Augustine said the contrary, it was one of his
errors, and a doctrine now out of date. But Mr. I. S. is of a stronger stomach,
can swallow by the gross, and cares not so much for chawing or mincing
distinctions of doctrines.

CHAP. XXXIV. A reflection upon the many falsities, impertinences, absurdities,
and hallucinations of Mr. I. S. his Book, which may justify a resolution of
not misspending time in returning any further reply to such writings: and a
conclusion of the whole Treatise, exhorting him to a consideration of his
miserable condition in deceiving himself and others with vanity.
Mr. I. S. concludes his Book as he began, and did proceed in it, pouring out a
shower of falsities, non sense, impertinences, and hallucinations, of which I
will give some testimonies here, whereby the Reader may see, with how much
reason I may resolve not to spend precious time in further answering to, or
taking notice of such faulty writings. The very first words of his Dedicatory
Epistle to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, contains a heap of the said faults
and falsities. He calls his Book A Vindication of both Churches, which a viper
has endeavored to bite, etc. he may better call it an affront of both
Churches: of the Protestant, for the rude injuries offered to her, of the
Popish for having no better defense of her cause to exhibit. With what truth or
propriety can he say, that I endeavored to bite both Churches? As for the
Protestant, I gave sufficient testimony of my endeavors to make the world know,
that in her is professed the true Primitive, Catholic, Apostolic Faith, and
therefore is the surest way to Salvation; and as for the Roman Church, from
which I received the belief of a Christian, if the matter be well considered, I
will make good I have not bin a Viper, but a dutiful and truly loving Child,
and more dutiful and true then Mr. I. S. If a Mother infected with a pestilent
canker had two sons, of which the one knowing the remedy would apply it, tho
with reluctance and displeasure of the infected Mother; and the other not to
displease his Mother, would feed the sickness with lenitives or soothing,
pleasing the Mother, but feastering her wound, and hastening her ruin; which
of both do you think were the more truly dutiful and loving Child? Certainly
the former, who would apply a healing hand to the Mother tho against her will.
This is the difference betwixt you and me. I saw that Mother (at whose breast I
did suck the belief of a Christian, and therefore cannot choose but revere and
love her as a Mother) sicken of a pestilent canker, I tried to apply some
beginnings of a remedy, and finding her impatient of cure, while in her reach,
I betook me to a distance whence I might apply the cure, letting her know, that
her Innocations proceeding from Ambition and A^a^ice, are cause of her
Pestilent disease, that renders her odious to God and men. She should return
therefore to her former innocence and holiness, practiced by St. Peter and his
Successors for many Ages, which rendered them glorious and venerable to all the
world, when their study was not to make Princes of Nephews and Nieces; and of
Peasants, Heroes; pretending to that end to make all mankind tributary to their
power and riches; but to purchase heaven for themselves and for others, with a
contemt of the earth.

Soon after he says I should have taught, That there is no Salvation in the
Catholic Church, without telling where or when I did deliver such a doctrine
(as indeed he could not do,) I professing every day my belief in the Catholic
Church, and protesting I do, and will live and die in it. If by Catholic Church
he means, only the Popish or Roman, its a foul abuse of terms, especially
speaking to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or to any other of sense in a
polemic discourse; and even speaking of the Roman or Popish Church, it is
another great piece of untruth, to say, I should have taught that none may be
saved in it, as may appear by the second Chapter of this Treatise. Its another
wilful or rude mistake whereinto he falls very often, that by Roman Church I
should understand the Diocese of Rome, of which I never took any notice or
regard in my discourse, which was of the Roman Church, as opposi^e to the
Reformed, and so containing the whole congregation of men subject to the Pope
of Rome; and it is to me a wonder, that this great pretender to skill in
Controversies, should not know before now, that to be the meaning of the Roman
Church in Controversies of this kind.

What shall I say of his pitiful spite and envy in his Preface to the Reader,
pretending to rob me of those titles my Emploiments gave me so public and known
(as appears in the Preface of of this Treatise) without shame to be convinced
of palpable untruths? What of his rashness and rudeness in fixing for a Thesis
or Title to the eighth Chapter of his Book, That the Protestant Church is not
the Church of Christ, nor any part of it; that they cannot without Blasphemy
alledg Scripture for their Tenets? Of his prosane policy, in accusing me of
indiscretion in delivering what I knew to be truth, touching the Salvation of
Protestants when I was on the Romish side, as mentioned in the fourteenth
Chapter? What of his blasphemous impiety, in saying, that no Text of Scripture
tells us, that the Evangelists were in the state of Grace when they wrote the
Gospel, nor nothing else gives us assurance of it? Nay further against the
Gospel it self he pronounces this horrible Blasphemy, That not only we are
unsure of the Infallibility of the Gospel, but that we are assured it is not
infallible. And this hellish conception of his own he must father upon the
Protestant Church, saying, its the common doctrine of it, that it is impossible
to keep Gods Commandments: the falsehood of which mali^ious imposture I have
declared above in the 8th Chapter of this Treatise. What of his boldness in
challenging me and all Protestants to answer his ridiculous and silly Sophisms,
with undertakings that they shall never be answered, as appears in the
eighteenth Chapter touching Transubstantiation, and in the twenty sixth touching
Purgatory, in denying that Scotus, Ocham, and other Schole-men, should de^lare
Transubstantiation not to be proved out of Scripture, as above declared, chap.
20. As a so in denying that Costerus should say it is the common opinion of
Romish Divines, that the Image of God and Christ is to be adored by the worship
of Latria, as above mentioned, Chapter 23.

What of his terrible Hallucination in matter of History touching Indulgences
declared in Chapt. 29. appearing in every word ridiculously mistaken, when he
pretends to be most magisterial in correcting mistakes of his Adversary? And
carrying on constantly to the end this spirit of Untruth, Hallucination, and
Impropriety of terms, he concludes his Book with telling me, I know in my
conscience the Church of Rome is not guilty of the errors I attribute to her
for cause of my separation from her. How came you Sr to know the interior state
of my conscience? You tell me I know the Popes Supremacy in temporal affairs
over Princes was no article of Faith, but a Schole question. That the Popes
infallibility was but an opinion of some Divines. As to the Popes Supremacy I
have declared above c. 25. what little comfort is left to Princes by that
distinction of the Popes Supremacy in spirituals from that of his power in
temporals, whereas he backs his spiritual power with a temporal to the ruin and
deposing of all Princes and Emperors that resist him. The only case of furious
Hildebrand with the Emperor Henry the 3d, as related by his own most friendly
Historians, even Baronius, is apt to strike a horror into any human heart, and
a terror into Princes and people, if the unspeakable arrogance of the Roman
Court should not be bridled.

As for the Popes Infallibility, I have declared above in the 3d Chapter how
impertinent your distinction of Pope alone from Pope and his Council together,
is, to escape the force of my Arguments in the present Controversy. How falsely
you say I should speak only of the Infallibility of the Pope alone, my
Arguments proving he is fallible still, whether alone, or in a Council
depending upon him, as that of Trent. You tell me I left the Roman Church,
because I saw the Bible prohibited in it to the People, and the Liturgy
performed in an unknown Language. But tho that is a great crime of the Roman
Church (as I have declared in the precedent Chapter) it was not the only cause;
others several grievous I produced more immediately touching my own concern and
daily practice, wherein I could not continue with quiet or safety of Conscience.

You tell me I forsook a Church honored with many Saints, for the Protestant
Church, whereof there was never yet any Saint. If this be true, S. Peter and S.
Paul and the rest of the Apostles were no Saints, for I am certainly persuaded
they were of the Church that I am of: their Doctrine and their Faith and no
other being taught in it. But you speak with the vulgar of Protestants as
condistinct from Roman Catholics. Well, and how come you to know that none of
them was ever a Saint? Were you in the hearts of all, or did you sit in the
Tribunal of God, to know what degree of grace they had in his Sovereign
inscrutable judgment? What is rashness if this be not? But you have titular
Saints who have purchased that calling by public authority, as Dukes, Earls,
and Knights do purchase theirs: of such we have none. Then you speak of titular
Saints, not of real ones, and upon this account you may not expect to win me
from the Protestant Church to yours. I hear of some Sectaries about us, I know
not where, who style all of their Congregation Saints; to this degree of
Sanctity your Church did not aspire yet: then, if I am to remove to a Church of
more titular Saints, to these Sectaries I am to go, not to you. But you speak
of Saints that come to Heaven, and thither none may come but under the conduct
of the Roman Pope; he has the keys of Heaven, and none may go thither without
his leave. I heard of some Popes that were kept out themselves from entering
thither, and I have great reason to believe it was so, and to fear that I
following their conduct may have the like repulse. It is one of your damnable
errors, and not the least cause of my discontent with you, to say that none may
be saved without paying obedience to the Pope of Rome, a spark of Hellfire,
which kindled and conserves the miserable combustions and distractions of
Christendom, the bloody Massacre of so many thousands of Men, and the
desolation of so many noble Kingdoms and Provinces; a monstrous Paradox cut out
to the measure of the unmeasurable Ambition of the Roman Pope and his Court, to
force all the World with the fright of everlasting fire, adding to it the power
of the Sword where he can, to resign up their obedience, and contribute their
wealth and liberties to the support of that power and grandeur, the greatest
that ever was entertained in the fancy of man, if men were so mad as to yield
to the proposals of the Pope and his Emissaries.

To diminish the heat of this hellish Ambition, the Seminary of the miseries of
Christendom, I have contributed with my endeavors, even while I was among you,
using only the armor of principles learned in your own Schools, and declaring
that the practice of the Emissary Sycophants of the Roman Court is contrary,
not only to the intrinsic rules of Christian doctrine, but to the very
professed tenets of the Romish Church; I do not say of the Romish Court, for
tho both corrupt, they have their different ways, and to conform with the
tenets of the Roman Church was not thought sufficient in me, if I did not also
fashion my doctrine to the interest of the Roman Court, and to the extension of
the grandeur of it; which is the want of policy or prudence Mr. I. S. accused
me of, as before mentioned.

I will continue now with more liberty and resolution the same endeavors, of
letting the World know how false and pernicious this doctrine is; how great the
disingenuity of Romish Emissaries in publishing and preaching it to the People,
contrary to truth and their own knowledge, to win Proselytes by frights to the
Romish faction; but it shall be in the Schole language and style, to make it
more universal, not in the Vulgar, to shun dealing with quiblers and cavillers,
such as I find you to be, Mr. I. S. What you are in your person, I know not
certainly, but your style and mode of discourse fashioned to a vulgar humor,
with a total neglect of what learned and serious men may think of it, makes me
conceive you may be one of those Preachers I saw in Pulpits, with a dead man's
skull in their hand, or the picture of a Devil, or a damned Soul surrounded
with flames, and girded with Snakes and Toads, moving the Vulgar with tragic
cries and antic gestures to sighs and sobs, and knocking of their breasts;
while those of more sense and discretion did exercise their patience, and bite
their lips to refrain laughing at showers of nonsense powered down with
confidence. He that will reflect seriously upon the passages of your discourse,
I pointed at in this Chapter, and many others of the like sort to be seen in
your Book, will see I do you no injury in this Character I give of your
writing, resolving to take no notice of any I shall see for the future of this
kind, being desirous to make better use of the time God is pleased to lend me,
then to spend it in shifting such trifles.

Here I will add one argument more of this man's weakness and peevish temper,
that finding me refuting briefly a reply of Becan to an argument I was urging,
and not understanding the drift of my argument, or wanting an answer, he only
says that he knows not why I mentioned Becan, if it be not to let men know that
I am acquainted with the Books of great Divines. Such as are acquainted with
Schools and Books of Divinity, do know for what kind of Divines the Summary
Theology of Becan was made, for such as have not time or other requisits to go
deeper. Truly when I take points of Divinity in hand to resolve upon them, I am
not wont rest upon the Memorandums of Becan. I allow Mr. I. S. the glory of
being more conversant in this Writer. And indeed I find them svmbolize in one
thing, which is to put off pressing arguments of their Adversaries with a flout
or sarcasm, fitted more to a vulgar applause than to the satisfaction of solid
understandings. This I observed sometimes in Becan (which made me regard him
less) but very often in Mr. J. S.

Another proof of the man's truth and talent, is to say that all the arguments
contained in my discourse are found in Bellarmin, as also the answers of them,
with which I ought to have bin contented without giving him the trouble of
answering me. Say you so Sr? then the answers you return to me, either are of
Bellarmin, or of your own making: if of Bellarmin, your cause is desperate,
when your ablest Champion could produce no better defense of it: if of your own
making, you have betrayed your trust in building the credit of your cause upon
so weak a ground, and not producing the soundest reasons that were for it in an
occasion of so great expectation: for certainly he must be very blind, that
will not see by what is said in this Treatise, that your answers are very weak,
impertinent, and often ridiculous.

But of all this you have an excuse in the condition of your cause. The
greatest wits are too weak to support it. Look upon Scotus in 4. did. 10. q.
3. shivering the arguments of Aquinas and others in favor of
Transubstantiation, and you will see wit and learning triumph in his
discourses. Look upon the same Scotus engaged in defending Transubstantiation,
to comply with the Lateran Council against his own fentiments, as he confesses,
and you will find him ridiculous, as may appear by what I related of him above,
chap. 23. How strong and formal is Suarez in defense of Christian verities
against Infidels, how faint and wavering in the defense of Purgatory,
Indulgences, etc. as seen above, chap. 31. Its a complaint grown very common
among your party against Bellarmin, that the Arguments he objects against the
Romish Tenets, are stronger then his Answers to them: and certain I am, it was
not for want of wit or will in him to advance the Roman interest, it was the
condition of the Cause.

You brag of Austerities used by some orders of the Roman Church. If this be a
rule of perfection, Pagans there be that exceed you in it, afflicting their
bodies with desperate Austerities even to the destruction of soul and body
together. It is one of your calumnies to say Protestants should condem fasting
and corporal afflictions discreetly used and without Hypocrisy, to curb the
lust of the flesh; such they do commend, and many do practice, tho with less
ostentation then is used among you.

You tell me that the Precepts of the Roman Church, without Controvers do
oblige me, and that by every omission of a Holy Day Mass, etc. I commit a
heinous sin. Oh great Divine! I have demonstrated with reasons, in my own
judgment at least, evidently convincing, that I can not fulfill the Precepts of
the Roman Church without infringing the Divine, that in many things they are
opposite. Which of them shall I prefer? Is it not so, that we ought to obey God
rather then men? Act. v. 29. You speak of vows I made: but if all was grounded
upon a blind obedience to the Pope of Rome, including a dis-obedience to the
Laws of God, whereof I am now certainly persuaded, and delivered reasons of it,
which after sundry oppositions and straight scrutinies remain still in the same
force with me, by the common vote of Divines such vows are null, and I am
totally free from obligation of complying with them.

And finally, whereas you conclude with Exhortations to me of returning to your
Communion, I will requite you with an Admonition better grounded, of
considering the miserable condition you are in, dazzled with the splendour of the
Roman Grandeur, and baited with the strong allurements of it, deceiving the
world with colors of Sanctity, when Ambition and Avarice is the primum mobile,
and the Soul that animates all your motions. Many simple Souls are not aware of
the profane secular drifts of this great Engine of Religion set up by cunning
Italians, to make all the world contribute to their Lust and Pride, hooking in
with slight, more then those more honest anci^nt Romans could win with the
sword. But you and your like, that pretend to learning and knowledge, are in a
worse condition, and we have but too much ground to suspect you are wilfully in
an error, and therefore guilty of deceiving the world, and being accomplices of
the destruction and miseries of Christendom, being your self the most deceived,
when your work is to deceive others. This is a matter of greater scruple and
consequence, then that you intimate to me of an obligation to hear Mass on
every Holy Day. I commend it therefore to your serious consideration, and to
fear and think upon seriously that woe declared against corrupt Teachers, by the
Prophet Ezekiel XXXIV. 2. etc. Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed
themselves. Should not the shepherds feed the flocks?.... with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them; and they were scattered because there is no
shepherd.... Therefore, Oh ye shepherds, hear the words of the Lord, thus says
the Lord God, Behold I am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock at
their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, etc.

O how may we fear this will be the end of your Pride and Cruelty! that
pretending to have all, you may lose all; and while you pretend to domineer
over all the faithful, you may be trampled under the feet of Infidels. If you
continue to set God against you it will be so, he will cause you cease from
feeding the flock, and require at your hands the decay of it.

This is our fear: but our earnest desire and hearty prayer to God is, that he
may be graciously pleased to clear your minds from the cloud of earthly
passions, which possessed of the will, do blind the understanding; that he may
raise your hearts to a real inquiry of Gods honor and service, and inspire into
your leaders thoughts of peace with your Christian Brethren, and not a further
affliction to his holy Church.

FINIS.

