A Funeral Sermon Occasioned by the DEATH OF Mr. WILLIAM RATHBAND, An Aged and
Learned Servant of Christ, AND Preached October. 13. 1695. at Highgate.

By Samuel Slater, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill, Senr and Junr, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market. MDCXCV.

To the much Esteemed Mrs. SARAH RATHBAND In HIGHGATE.
Dear Sister,
THat stroke which the wise God lately gave to (...) Family, did, and yet does,
as I doubt not, sma(...) on your back, and pain you at the very heart. The
wresting of a loving Husband out of the bosom of an affectionate Wife, is not
much unlike tearing the flesh from the bones. Where indeed there is
unsuitableness and discontent, a galling yoke between persons so nearly
related, Cohabitation is more uneasy than Dissolution. They are not like to
grieve much for parting, who were a mutual vexation and torment. But I am
persuaded there was between you Conjugal Love, Kindness and Delight, and
walking together as Heirs of the grace of lise; whereupon separation by Death,
cannot but be a sore Affliction to you who are left behind. Yet, a reflection
upon such a life, and the blessed consequences of that Death which was the
period of it, may very well prove a sovereign Cordial to you, carrying along
with it strength and sweetness, support and comfort. God has been graciously
pleased to carry him through those difficulties which he did encounter in his
way, and to employ him in that honorable work of the Ministry which he loved
and faithfully did, notwithstanding there were many Adversaries, and but very
small encouragement he received from the hands of men who will give more to
their Household servant, than to an Ambassador of Christ; and he continued him
in the world, and in his work, to a good old age. When at last he had finished
his day and his work together, he entered into peace and rest. And now while he
rejoiceth in Fruition, do you rejoice in Hope. Long it will not be, ere he that
shall come, will come, and carry us away too to our eternal home; therefore
instead of an impotent mourning over our dead Relations and Friends, it is our
main wisdom and interest to prepare our selves for Death, that we may be found
in a fitness for a better life, in a meetness for the inheritance of the Saints
in light. Hearing it was my dear Brother's desire upon his Deathbed, that I
would preach the Funeral Sermon, I did most readily apply to the work; and your
self afterward desiring that what had been preached might be printed, I
complied therein also, notwithstanding multitude of business lying upon my
hands; here you have it in the following sheets. The good Lord accompany it
with his Spirit and blessing upon you and others that heard, or shall read it,
and thereby my desire and design will be accomplished. Your self I commend to
the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush. May the Ever-living and
Ever-blessed God be your Husband, Comforter and Portion.

DEAR SISTER, November. 8: 1695. I am yours in the best Bonds, SA. SLATER.

JOHN XVII. 13. And now come I to thee.
IN the thirteenth Chapter of this Holy Gospel we find our Lord Jesus (in whose
heart it was to fulfill all righteousness) had celebrated the Passover with his
Disciples; at which Judas having received the Sop, went out immediately,
leaving Christ and them behind him, but carrying the Devil in him. It was
Night, and therefore, as he thought, a fit season for that Work of Darkness,
the betraying of his Lord and Master into the hands of his Enemies, who
thirsted for his Blood. The Traitor being thus of his own accord withdrawn and
gone, and our Savior having none about him, but those whom he knew to be his
faithful and fast Friends, preached unto them this his last, most sweet and
excellent Sermon, wherein his Lips dropped as an Honeycomb; beginning it at the
Fourteenth Chapter, and continuing it to the end of the Sixteenth.

Therein he unbosoms himself to them, and speaks his very heart in the Language
of Love, affording to them precious and strong Cordials for the bearing up of
their hearts under his own departure from them (which he well-knew would be
sorely afflictive to their Spirits) and also under those many and great
Tribulations they would, during his absence, meet with in the World, being sent
as a little Flock of Sheep among a company of ravenous Wolves, that would be
set for fleecing and devouring them.

The Sermon being ended, which he delivered, that in him they might have Peace,
knowing they had to do with a conquered Enemy, the World being overcome by him;
we have him in this Chapter putting up a Prayer to his Father, wherein he first
asked something for himself, ver. 9. That his Father would glorify him with his
own self, with that glory which he had with him before the world was. He
desires the manifestation of that Glory which he had before the World was, and
his having it before the World was, speaks his Subsistence or Being before the
World was, and by consequence his being from Eternity, and therefore God. He
also prayed for his People, both those that did at that time believe in him,
and likewise those that should afterward believe in him through their Word.
The things he asked for them, were 1. That they might be sanctined through the
Truth; and while in the World, kept from the Evil. 2. That they might be united
and made One, yea, perfect in One. And 3. That at last they might all be with
him where he is, and behold his Glory, taken up to the beatifical Vision, to a
constant and close Communion, to a full and perfect Fruition of him. And the
reason of these his Desires, is, because he himself was to be no longer with
them in the World by his bodily Presence, verse 11. Now I am no more in the
world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. The Work that he came
into the World for, was at that time almost finished; and the Work which he had
to do elsewhere, viz. in Heaven, called him away. I am, says he, no more in
the world. The World and I cannot agree. It is a vain, empty, sinful, wicked,
and a malicious World, it refuses to be mended, and it cares not to be saved,
and I have been long enough in it; since we cannot agree, we will part. It is
weary of me, and I am as weary of it, yea and more weary too: I never tasted of
its Pleasures, and I care not for its Profits; that Work which my Father gave
me to do, being done, I will be gone.

I come to thee; with whom it is best being, for in thy Presence there is
fullness of Joy, and at thy Right Hand Pleasures for evermore. To thee, with
whom I was from everlasting, rejoicing always before thee, and being daily thy
delight, having a mutual Delight and complete Satisfaction each in other. To
thee, with whom I desire and long to be. Father, I come; as soon as ever I have
drunk off that Cup which thou have given me to drink of, I come; and how am I
straightened till that be accomplished, and glad I am at my very heart, that
thereupon I come to thee. Now I come, it will be but a little while first, and
the sooner the better. I am willing to leave all for thee, to leave the World
for thee, yea, to leave my dear Disciples for thee, tho they be my Friends, the
Men of my Choice, the Purchase of ray Blood, the Members of my Mystical Body,
yet do I freely leave them for thee; Only, Father, I consider where I leave
them, in a World that hates me, and will be sure to hate them for my sake; and
therefore while I leave them for thee, I would leave them with thee. I put them
into thy hand, let that uphold and defend them; I shelter them under thy Wing,
let that secure and comfort them. I have kept them while I was with them; when
I shall be gone, do thou undertake and be Surety for them for good, that they
may be safe in the midst of Enemies, and steadfast in the midst of Temptations
and Assaults; yea, and cheerful too in the midst of Sufferings and Troubles,
having my Joy fulfilled in themselves. And now come I to thee. The Doctrine
which from hence I shall observe and speak to in the following Discourse, is
this,

Doct. An Holy Soul is, and very well may be willing, yea, heartily glad to
leave the world; because when it does so, it will go to God. I look upon the
words of the Text, as the Words of one rejoicing; the Language of one whose
heart did even leap within him; of one whose Soul was upon the wing of holy
Desires, longing to be at its home. Now come I to thee, and when I once am with
thee, I shall be where I would be, and with whom, I would be; in the best
place, and with the best Company; what suits me most, and therefore must needs
please me best. Now I come to thee, whom I like abve all, being infinite in all
Perfections, and whom therefore I love and prefer before all. Now I come to
thee, who art mine Eternal Father, and wilt be my Eternal Satisfaction. Our
Savior had before told his Disciples in John 14. 28. That if they loved him,
they would rejoice because he said, I go to my Father; because that his
departure would be glorious to himself, and advantageous to them; but whether
they through want of a judicious Love would rejoice in it or no, he himself
would perfectly, understanding how things were and would be. Now come I to
thee. Once I came from thee to do thy will, and that was pleasing to me; I
delight to do thy Will, O my God, thy Law is within my heart. Now I come to
thee to enjoy thy Presence, and that will be to me incomparably, inexpressibly
sweet. Thus it was with our dearest Lord and Savior, this was the frame, these
the actings of his Spirit; and thus likewise it ought to be with all his
People, who were predestined to be conformed to his Image, and who ought to
have the same mind in them that was in him, for he acted and suffered, he lived
and died, leaving us an Example that we should tread in his Steps. In the
Doctrine which I have laid down, there are three things, which we ought to take
notice of.

First, That Gracious and Holy Souls must leave this World. The World to come
will be their Eternal Habitation, but in this present evil World they will have
but a short stay. Those that have the largest share of its good things, those
that are most useful in it, and live to the best purpose, serving their
Generations according to the Will of God, must leave it. Their loving Father
never intended this for the place for their constant Residence, nor the
Comforts and Enjoyments here for their Portion. The highest Heaven in his
Throne, the Habitation of his Holiness and Glory; and he was always resolved to
have his Children about him there. This World is but your School to learn in
during your Minority; your House to work in till you have finished what was
given you to do; your Tyring-room to dress in, that you may be ready for the
Marriage of the Lamb; a Stage to act your Part upon, see that you so quit your
selves as to be at last found to Praise and Honor; but it is not to be your
rest, because it is polluted. God has too much of the heart of a Father, and
loves his Children too well to keep them always in a Vale of Tears, where they
shall be frequently Suffering and Sighing, Complaining and Groaning; always in
a Wilderness that is overrun with Briars and Thorns, and an innumerable
company of Beasts of Prey; the wicked of the World are their irreconcilable
Enemies, and implacably hate them, therefore they shall not always have them to
wreak their Malice and Rage upon. They will for ever envy and gnash their Teeth
at them, because of their happiness in Heaven, but they shall not for ever
exercise their Patience, and disturb their Peace upon Earth. Often O Saints!
repeat in your thoughts, that this World is but the House of your Pilgrimage,
therefore let not any of you love it too well; but while you live in it, be you
weaned from it; remembering there is a better place prepared and taken up for
you, whither the forerunner, even Jesus, is entered, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens, whose builder and maker is God.

Secondly, Whenever Gracious and Holy Persons leave this World, they go to
God. The decayed and crazy Body does no sooner cease to be any longer capable
of housing so noble and excellent a Guest as the Soul, and the Soul does no
sooner dislodge and leave that once-beloved Structure, but that it does
immediately take its flight, and mount up with a swift and speedy Motion, and a
direct tendency (without the least and shortest Digression) to its great
Creator, even to him who alone is the Father of Spirits. It cares not for any
further Converse with things below, being entirely set for Communion with him,
by and for whom it was made, and on this side of whom, it is, and cannot but
be, resiless and unquiet. Genesis 5. 24. Enoch walked with God, and he was not,
for God took him, i. e. he took him home; he took him to himself, into the
presence of his Glory, into the bosom of his Love. And thus it has been, is,
and will be with all those who walk as Enoch did, who tread in the same Steps,
and keep up the same Communion; tho indeed they do not all go the same Way, yet
they go to the same Place, and to the same God. Enoch was translated that he
might not see death, Hebr. 11. 5. He was presently carried up to Heaven, having
his Soul purified, and his Body freed from Corruption. He was soon clothed
with a glorified Body; as for other holy Ones, tho they see Death, yet they are
translated too, carried from Earth to Heaven, from Creatures to God. The Body
must descend into the Grave, and there lie putrefying, corrupting, crumbling,
until it return to Dust as it once was, but the Spirit returns to God that gave
it. I desire you all frequently to call this to mind, and consider it with the
greatest seriousness, and see that you have sanctified Souls, Souls rightly
prepared, brought into such a frame as may be fit to appear in so glorious a
Presence, and converse with so pure and holy a Majesty; that when they return
to God they may be welcome to him, and being come into his Presence, for ever
dwell and abide there, and not afterward cast out and banished as the Object of
his loathing.

Thirdly, Holy Souls may very well be willing, yea glad to go to God. As a
Bride is to go to her endeared Husband; and as a Child at School under severe
Discipline is to go to his most affectionate and tender Parents, from whom
instead of hard Blows, he shall meet with soft Embraces. Some Saints upon
record in Scripture, we find, were in such a frame. Good old Simeon was in
haste and prayed for his Dismission, Luke 2. 29, 30. Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Having seen Christ, he would sain see the Father too. Having got
Christ in his Arms, he would have the World on his back. He reckoned that he
had lived long enough here, and would needs be gone. He had now got his full
freight, and therefore desired to set up his Sail for the other World. Having
beheld so great a sight as the Lord of Glory, tho but in his Infancy and
Swathingbands, he was loath that his Eyes should be embased with the beholding
of earthly Vanities any more. Paul likewise had the same thing in his desire;
so he told us in Phil. 1. 23. I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.
He would go from all, that he may go to him; and leave all, that he might be
with him; and he understood himself, and acted rationally in this desire; for
it is, says he in the next words, far better. Heaven is inconceivably better
than Earth, when it is in the greatest Peace, when it expresses the greatest
Kindness. He very well knew what he said, he was a competent Judge, having been
an Eyewitness of the Felicity and Glory above, taken up into Paradise into the
Third Heaven. And tho others have not been partakers of that Privilege, not so
rapt as Paul was, yet they are of the same Judgment, and have the same Desires
working in them; therefore he speaks of it as a Spirit and Disposition common
to all the Saints while they are in this Tabernacle. Their hearts stand
Heavenward, as the Needle does to the North Pole, when it has been once
touched with the Loadstone; as you may see in 2 Cor. 5. 2. In this we groan
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven.
They had not only some small Inclinations that way, and languid faint Desires,
but earnest Groans. And again, verse 8. We are confident, I say, and willing
rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord. We are willing,
not only out of necessity, because this is a thing must be, but out of choice,
we had rather leave the Body that we might go to God. But now we are to
enquire, why it is thus. And you will find there is sufficient, yea abundant
reason for it, if you do consider these four following Particulars:

First, In going to God, they go to their Father. This was the comfort and joy
of our Savior's heart; with this he comforted himself, and with this he
comforted his Disciples, looking upon it as a Cordial strong enough for them
all, John 20. 17. Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father
and your Father, and to my God and your God. Mine by Nature, yours by Adoption.
I am now going to one that I am most nearly related to, and most fully
interested in. And in John 17. we find him insisting and dwelling upon this, as
that which he took singular delight in, and sucked a great deal of sweetness
from, verse 1. Father, the hour is come. Verse 5. O Father, glorify thou me
with thine own. Verse 11. I come to thee, Holy Father. Verse 21. Thou Father
art in me, and I in thee. Verse 24. Father, I will that they whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am. Verse 25. O righteous Father, the World has
not known thee, but I have known thee, etc. It is certain, that when wicked
Men, the worst and vilest of them, dye, they go to God. Did I say, Go? Rather,
they are forced and dragged against their will; they cannot help it. It is to a
God that many of them did not believe, but labored with all their might to
obliterate the Notion of his Being, because troublesome and tormenting to them,
Psalm 14. 1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. It is to a God,
that none of them cared to know, and be acquainted with; Job 21. 14. They say
unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Neither
of his ways, nor of himself. They go to God as their Righteous Judge, but not
their reconciled and gracious Father. They are brought before his Tribunal as
Malefactors to receive their Doom, but they do not enter into his Kingdom as
Children to take Possession.

Whereas those that are truly gracious, go to him as a Father; as a Father of
Mercies, yea, and as their Father in Christ; to him as a God, yea, and to their
God in Covenant; to a God and Father, by whom they were begotten, of whom they
were born, whose Spirit they have received, and whose Image they bear. Wicked
Men go to God to give an account of what they have done in the Body; and when
once Sentence is past upon them, and they adjudged to their Place and eternal
State, they go to Devils, Matthew. 24. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. You followed his
Conduct, you did his Drudgery, now take your Wages with him. Where he is, there
shall his Servants also be. When the Saints go to God, they go to stay, and to
take up their everlasting abode with him, Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomes, will
I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall (...) no more out. As
they shall be exalted, so fixed; their Happiness shall never be abated, their
Glory never eclipsed. Once in Christ, and ever in Christ, there is no total and
final falling from Grace; they that are indeed planted in the house of the
Lord, shall never be plucked up; and so in the present case, once in Heaven, and
in Heaven to eternity: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. The dead in Christ shall rise first;
then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, so shall we ever be with the Lord.
After that meeting, there shall not be a parting any more.

Secondly, When holy Souls go to God, they shall he heartily welcome, and find
as loving and gracious a Reception as they can desire. When a Sinner does here
in this life by a sincere Repentance break off from his Sins, and returns to
God, there is rejoicing above, Luke 15. ^, and 10. There is joy in the presence
of the angels of God over one sinner that repents. Where upon Bernard said,
The Tears of a Sinner are the Wine of Angels. At such a time indeed, and upon
such an account, Hell is in an uproar, and the Devils fret and rage; they
cannot endure to think that they should lose any of their Prey, and that one of
their Vassals should be brought into the liberty of the Sons of God: But in
Heaven there are Triumphs, and singing of Allelujahs. This our Lord sets out in
the Parable of the Prodigal Son, upon whose return to his Father and his Duty,
there were Kisses and Embraces, Feasting and making Merry: The good old Man
forgot his Age, and found his Legs, ran to meet him; and the Family following
so good an example, was in a transport.

Just so there is in Heaven, upon a gracious Soul's arrival there after its
dissolution: The great God does welcome it; even the whole Trinity; the Father
who elected it, the Son who redeemed it, the Holy Ghost who sanctified it. Its
old Relations and godly Friends do welcome it, for they will not then be
Strangers to one another, but both know and be known. It shall be welcomed by
an innumerable company of Angels, who are now ministering Spirits unto the Heirs
of Salvation, and by the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, by all
the Spirits of just Men made perfect in Heaven. Whatever weeping and mourning,
bitter sighs and lamentations there are here, for being deprived of a faithful
Friend; a comfortable Yokefellow; a pleasant and hopeful Child; a learned,
orthodox and painful Minister; an useful, warm and exemplary Churchmember,
that did adorn Religion, and credit his holy Profession, there are Triumphs
above for the addition of another Star that will for ever gloriously shine in
that celestial Orb. Then indeed is that fulfilled which is written in Psalm. 45.
14, 15. Those thrice-happy Souls are brought unto the King in raiment of
needle work, a curiously embroidered garment, a spotless beautiful robe of
righteousness wrought for them by the hand of Christ himself; with gladness and
rejoicing are they brought, they do enter into the King's Palace. So shall they
be received with the highest demonstrations of affection. Christ has most
graciously and faithfully promised, that when Sinners do now come unto him, he
will in no wise cast them out. And when Saints do at death come to him, he will
in no wise shut them out, but an abundant entrance shall be ministered to them
into the glorious Kingdom of their God and Savior: Yea, and when the Lord
Jesus shall have delivered up his Mediatorial Kingdom to the Father, they shall
still keep the Mansions prepared for them in their Father's house, and God
himself shall be all in all to them.

Thirdly, These holy Souls shall not only meet with an hearty welcome from God,
and all the blessed Inhabitants of that Region of Light and Love; but also they
shall find a most splendid and glorious entertainment, such as will evidently
show forth the Love, and Greatness, and Glory of God himself; and not only
issue in their full satisfaction, but likewise excite and keep up in them
eternal Admirings. There are many Mansions, and a place provided for every one
of them, in which they shall have room enough, and whatsoever will be pleasant
to them for Delights. A Throne, a Robe of Glory, a Crown of Righteousness,
hidden Manna, the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God;
and to render their happiness complete, those bodies of theirs, which are now
bodies of vileness, when they come to be raised out of their Bed of dust by the
Divine Power, and reunited to their Souls, shall be made like unto Christ's own
most glorious body, Philip. 3. 21. What shall I say? Had I the Tongues of men
and Angels, I could not speak more than is, the largest descriptions will fall
unspeakably short; when you come there, you will say not one half was told you.
I may say this in general, in Heaven you will meet with that, which will far
more than defray all the Charges you were put to here; that which will
abundantly compensate and make amends for all the hardships you endured here.
Those that have been the greatest Sufferers in this world, when they come into
the next, will thankfully and cheerfully acknowledge they are no Losers. They
shall receive that which shall richly reward all their pains; so that instead
of complaining their labor is lost, they shall wonder such sorry services
should be so recompensed, and cry, Grace, Grace to it. They shall have the
accomplishment of all their hopes, their former askings and thoughts being
outdone. That which is laid up for them, and shall be given out to them, will
transcend their highest expectations, be a full and complete answer to all
their Prayers, satisfy, silence, and put an everlasting period to all their
desires; for their enjoyments will be so great, and their capacities so filled,
that there will be no room left for more. God will then make good all his
Promises, which are exceeding great and precious, so that not one tittle of
them shall fail; and by this means all tears shall be wiped from their eyes,
sorrow and sighing shall flee away, never more to return, and they shall enjoy
an endless Sabbath, an everlasting Triumph, being filled with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory. In short, there is that which mortal eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man; and though the holy and
blessed Angels, which kept their standing, and continue to be Heaven's
Courtiers, do both see and enjoy it, yet they are not able to express it; there
is all that which our dearest Lord Jesus did purchase at the inestimable price
of his own heart-blood. Now from all this which has been spoken, there is
abundant reason to conclude

Lastly, That those holy and truly happy Souls are better with God in Heaven,
than they were while here, or could ever possibly have been. True love is free
and liberal to its endeared object, it studieth to be so, and takes singular
pleasure in it. Those that are kind and affectionate Husbands, and live up to
the Law of their Relation, do and will make it their business and endeavor to
make the Lives of their Yokefellows not only easy to them, but as comfortable
as they can. But alas! how short is their Arm, how many outward and inward
Troubles are there which their skill and power cannot reach? But it must be
granted, all that which they can do, is not comparable to that which God does
for his People, nor to be named in the same day with it. All that own a God,
must acknowledge he is infinitely beyond the greatest of men in power,
infinitely above the highest and best of Creatures in love. What is a broken
Cistern that will hold no water, to the Well of Salvation, the Fountain of
living waters? What is a pitiful little Drop, but one remove from nothing, to
the boundless, bottomless Ocean of Being and Goodness? Suppose there were ten
thousand thousand worlds, and put them all together, what would they all be to
one God? And then though the enjoyment which the Saints have of God now, does
far exceed all the sinful and sensual enjoyments of carnal and profane
Worldlings, which was the reason why Moses did esteem the reproach of Christ
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, and rather chose to suffer
affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; and made that Noble Italian Marquis Galeaceus say, Cursed be that man
who counts all the world worth one hours enjoyment of Jesus Christ. Yet compare
the best, and fullest, and sweetest of the Saints enjoyments here, with those
in the mansions above, and they fall exceeding short of them; for, what is
sitting under the shadow of Christ, to the beholding of his glory? what is the
joy of Faith, to that of sight? what is a love letter, or message of peace, or
kind token from God now and then, to a lying in his bosom, to a being and
continuance in his joy? what is seeing of his power and glory in the Sanctuary,
to the beatifical Vision? what is seeing in a glass darkly, to a seeing face to
face; seeing as we are seen, and knowing as we are known? what are the
first fruits of the Spirit, to the whole harvest? what some Praelibamina,
foretastes, to a sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in that Kingdom
of God at the feast of glory, and there taking the fill of love to all
eternity? while the Saints are present in the body, they are absent from the
Lord, and a state of absence neither does nor can afford satisfaction; the holy
Soul during that, will with the enamoured Spouse be longing and crying, Make
haste my Beloved, and be thou like a Roe or young Heart upon the mountains of
spices. It is only in the glorious presence of God that such an one will find a
fullness of joy, and at his right hand those pleasures which are for evermore.
Let us now come to the improvement of this Point in a way of Application, and
the first Use shall be for Information, in three things: If it be just matter
of rejoicing to holy Souls, that at death they go to God; then from hence,

First, We may learn the folly and misery of those who do now depart from God;
whose lives are nothing else but a continual departure from him. Yea, in the
very Acts of Worship, when they draw nigh to him with their lips, their hearts
are estranged and far from him, running after their covetousness. The folly
that is in this course of life is very apparent, and the misery that certainly
attends it, will be one day no less sensible; but there are too too many among
us guilty hereof; some through the principle and power of Unbelief; their not
giving credit to the reports of the Word, neither to its dreadful Threatenings,
nor to its sweet and gracious Promises. Do you, I beseech you, look carefully
to it, that there be not in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God. Others, yea and the same persons too, make this departure
from God out of love to the world; for if any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him. And it is no wonder to see men going from that place
and company where and with whom they do not love to be; have a care of the
world therefore, let it not bewitch you. While ye live in it, be ye not devoted
to it, but weaned from it. If you do set your hearts upon the world, you will
turn your back upon God. Demas, says the Apostle, has forsaken me; and in
forsaking him, he forsook Christ: what was the reason of it, but his embracing
this present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. How powerful and prevalent are these two
things, unbelief, and love of the world, with the generality of men! what a
vast multitude of persons do they carry away from God! What is there that in a
moral way he could have done more, than that which he has done? He has
frequently and loudly called them by messenger after messenger; he has most
graciously invited them, most lovingly and sweetly allured them, and used
variety of means and arguments to conquer their aversness, to convince their
judgments, to gain their hearts, and bring them to him; yet, after all, he has
cause to complain, Ye will not come to me that ye may have life. Nay, in stead
of coming to him, they are running further and further from him, as if they
thought they could never be at too great a distance; whereas they have no cause
to run from God, for in so doing they run from life, and rest, and happiness,
and into the mouth of ruin and destruction, and are too far removed from him
already. They are already without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. They were
born with their backs upon God, were Transgressors from the womb, going astray,
speaking and seeking Lies, and so they continue to do, for every wilful Sin is
a step from God. Now I would desire such to consider, and that seriously,
whether this their way be not their folly. The Scripture does expressly tell us,
They that are far from him shall perish, Psalm. 73. 27. and that he has
destroyed all them that go a whoring from him. And as he has done, so he will
go on to do; for he is in one mind, and in this case Repentance shall be hid
from his eyes. And to this add one Consideration more, You must appear before
him at the last whether you will or no; though you should call to the rocks to
cover you, and the mountains to fall upon you, and hide you from the wrath of
the Lamb, and from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, yet you must
appear. Now you will not be invited to him as a Savior; then you shall be
dragged before him as a Judge. Suppose you should then beg and plead, Lord,
Lord, open to us; what answer can you look for at his hands but this, Depart
from me, for I know you not. And how do you think he should know you, since as
long as you lived, you would never acquaint your selves with him. Oh poor
Sinners! be wise while you may, and know assuredly, it is best going to him now
for a pardon, and grace, and acceptance, before you go to him to receive your
final Sentence. If you will not now go to him as humble Penitents, with
Confessions and Supplications, that your Sins may be blotted out, you shall
come to him as Criminals in order to execution; and if you desire to know
aforehand what your punishment will be, you may read it in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power.

Secondly, We may from hence learn, what our life in the world should be: It is
a matter of very high and near concernment for men and women to understand
themselves well in this particular, to know what they should be and do, and how
they should live, that they may be approved; and truly our life should be a
coming to God, and a walking with him. In the first Conversion there is a
facing about, a turning of the mind and heart to God. Christ sent Paul to the
Gentiles, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God. And after the first turn is made, there should be a further returning; all
the actions of the life should be so many steps back to God. This was the great
design and end of our Lord Jesus in his dying, not only that he might bring
pardon and peace to men, but also that he might bring men to God, bring them
into favor with God, yea, and into obedience and conformity to him, and into a
communion and conversation with him, 1 Pet. 3. 18. He suffered, the just for
the unjust, that he might bring us to God. Now since that was the gracious
design of Christ, the blessed and noble end he had in his eye, and was willing
to be at so much cost for the accomplishment of, shall not we comply with him
therein? shall it not be in our heart, as well as in his? And since we have so
great an excellent Person to take us by the hand and introduce us, and bring us
in and present us to the Father, let us go, let us not draw back, let us not
stand questioning and disputing, and saying, Shall I, shall I? this is a mere
loss of time, let us go presently, the sooner the better. You have heard that
you must go at last, yes, you must, there is no possibility of avoiding it, and
therefore let us all be persuaded, and heartily willing to go now. To day if
you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Go now to God in your Mind and
Thoughts, in your Hearts and Affections, before you go in your Persons. Get as
much of Heaven as you can beforehand. The Psalmist said, Psalm 73. ult. It was
good for him to draw night to God. And without peradventure, it is full out as
good now as it was then, as good for us as it was for him. It is both a
pleasant good, and a profitable one. Let us therefore do it, yea, and be
drawing nearer and nearer to him every day, never thinking our selves near
enough so long as we are in a far Country, and till we come to be with him in
Heaven. And yet again, let us not think it enough to to be making frequent
approaches to him in Holy Duties, and in Gospel Ordinances, which are as a
Jacob's Ladder, upon which the holy Soul ascends and makes its spiritual
advances, but keep up a daily Walk with God, as Enoch and Noah did in their
Generations; maintain an intimate and constant Communion with him, that you may
be able to say with Paul, Our Conversation is in Heaven. And with John, Truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh
how Noble is it to converse with God! it meliorates and raises, and
spiritualizeth the Soul; it never is with him, but it comes away better from
him; and how sweet is it, God being pleasant for delights; for certain you will
find and judge it so, when you do once come by experience to know what it is,
you will then say as Peter did upon the Mount of Transfiguration, It is good,
Lord, to be here.

Thirdly, We may from hence learn that, It is very much our Interest, and
therefore our wisdom to bid God heartily welcome, whenever he is geaciously
pleased so far to condescend as to come to us. You have heard, and I hope you
believe, that it is appointed for all Men once to dye, and when we do dye, let
it be in what way it will, and by what stroke it will and let us be in what
State and Frame we will, we must all of us go to God, all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ. And let us think with our selves what Entertainment we
would have then; how we would have Christ carry toward us. Do not we desire
that he should receive us graciously, and bid us welcome as some of his old
Friends and Acquaintance? Would we not be glad to hear him owning us before his
Father and the Holy Angels, and saying to us, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you? I do not in the least question but you
would. Then I counsel you, that in order thereunto, you would now carry kindly
toward God, and receive him as it becomes an infinite Great, Holy, and Glorious
Majesty to be received. Know this, such is his Goodness that he often comes to
you. Frequently in his word, therein he discovers and reveals his Mind and Will
concerning you, opens to you the Mysteries of his Kingdom that were kept hid
from Ages and Generations, from the Wise and Prudent of the World. Bid him
welcome, and his Word welcome, say with Hez^kiah, Good is the word of the Lord;
yea, those Precepts of it that are most contrary to corrupt Nature, and those
threatenings of it that are most tremendous and startling. Receive it into your
Hearts as well as into your Heads, and let it dwell richly in you. Do not
imprison any word of God, as Asa did one of the Messengers that brought it; do
not rebel against the Light; do not hold any truth in unrighteousness.
Sometimes he comes to you by his Spirit, in such and such an holy Motion,
awakening you out of your Sleep and Sloth, reducing you from such a wandering,
calling you to such a Word and Duty. Now, do not you resist him, but submit and
comply; do not you quench him, but bring fuel rather; do not grieve him, but
labor to be his Delight and Joy. Carefully listen to his Voice, and make speed
to follow his Ducture, as Paul did immediately, not consulting with Flesh and
Blood when God had once revealed his Son in him. The Spouse was guilty of vile
Ingratitude, and sinned grievously in lying lazily, and asking her self a
company of simple questions, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I
have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Which spoke her loath to stir,
when her beloved who had done a great deal more, and deserved much better at
her hands, stood all the while without knocking at the Door, calling and
begging for Admission, Cant. 5. 2. Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled. One would have thought such language of Love should have melted,
should have raised her. Do not you contract upon your selves guilt of the same
kind; therefore my advice to you shall be the same with what you find in Psalm
24. 7. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors,
and the king of glory shall come in. Follow this advice, will you? Oh that you
would, remembering that you your selves must one day go to God, and let that
influence you to such a demeanor of your selves toward him now, as that you
may not at last find the Door shut against you, and be forced to stand without
calling and crying in the bitterness of your Souls, Lord, Lord, open to us, but
may have an entrance ministered to you abundantly into the glorious kingdom of
your God and Savior; Know for certain, the very same measure you mete out,
shall be meted into you again; with the pure he will show himself pure, and
with the froward he will show himself froward. If you will be deaf to his call
now, he will not hear yours at last, Prove. 1. 24 etc. Because I have called,
and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. When your
fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind; when
distress and anguish comes upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.

The second Use that I shall make of this Point, shall be for Examination: Let
you and me fall to work, and put our selves upon the Scrutiny, for I can assure
you, it will be no lost labor to search and try our selves, whether we are
such, and our State such, as may at a dying hour be willing to go to God, and
may at the present rejoice in the thoughts of it; and so, tho we must expect to
fall by the stroke of Death, yet we are delivered from the fear of Death. And
in order to the resolving of this great case, let us propound to our selves
these three Questions, and deal faithfully with our own Souls, for it is
dangerous, yea ruinous to be deceived in a matter of so great importance.

First, Has there been reconciliation made between God and you. Is it Peace, O
my Soul, is it peace? There was a b^each, that breach sprung up to an Enmity,
that Enmity produced a War; you have been fighters against God, there have been
Acts of Hostility, how is it now? Is that Breach made up, is that Enmity taken
away, and the War at an end? There has been Peace offered to you, and most
condescending gracious Terms propounded, have you accepted and closed with
them? It cannot but be a most dreadful thing for a poor Creature to find it
self at last no other than a vessel of wrath fitted for destruction, one in
whom God can have no pleasure. It is a dreadful thing for one that lived a
pitiful life, and had little else but trouble in this world, to find it
unspeakably worse in the next, trouble here, and torment there. A dreadful
thing for one that was clothed with Silk and Velvet, fared deliciously every
day, swam in pleasures, and had the world at will, to lie down in sorrow upon a
Bed of Flames, where throughout Eternity he cannot procure a moment's ease, nor
a drop of water to cool his tongue. How sad will it be, when a poor Soul is
deprived of those comforts and delights which it eagerly hunted after, and
placed its happiness in, and is turned out of house and home; its old
tabernacle of the body being so weak and crazy, that there is no possibility of
continuing there any longer, and goes naked to God, who alone is able to
afford it succor and relief, and then it finds that he is an enemy to it, and
will not give it one good word or look, nor receive it into everlasting
habitations. Well, do you now think seriously of it, God is in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, and he has committed to us the Word of
reconciliation, and we as the Ambassadors of Christ, and Messengers of Peace,
have sounded this Word in your ears; and as tho God did beseech you by us, we
have often and often prayed you in Christ's stead that ye would be reconciled
to God. Now enquire how has this Word wrought upon you? Has it come to you
not in Word only, but also in Power? What effect has it had? Is the enmity
that was in your hearts and natures to God slain? Have you thrown down your
Weapons of Rebellion? Are you reconciled unto God? Have you laid hold by an
hand of Faith upon Christ, who is his strength, in order to the making of peace
with him? He has promised that in that way you shall make peace with him,
otherwise never expect it, for it will be but in vain; to persons out of
Christ, he is a consuming fire, and everlasting burnings. Have you submitted to
God, and stooped and bowed to his Government? Do you like and love his Law? Are
you desirous that he should reign over you, and erect his Throne in you? Set
this down with your selves as a most certain truth, that unless you receive him
for your Lord and King, you will never find him your Friend.

Secondly, Can you say as Christ did in this Chapter, that you have glorified
God upon earth? All the glory that great Personages, Lords and Ladies, Kings
and Queens have now, will not stead them, nor comfort them at the last, but
their having brought glory to God in their generation, and several places.
Christ did this, and he found the thought of it sweet to him, he reflected upon
it with joy; and this all of us should do too in cur measure, and to the utmost
of our power: for this was the end of our Creation, for this we were sent into
the world, without this we live to no purpose; and without this we cannot
rationally expect to be accepted of him, or glorified by him. But here some
poor humble Christian may object against its self, and say, When you speak of
my glorifying God, it strikes all my hopes dead, for I have not done it, nay, I
have not been in a capacity of doing it. What glory can the infinitely great
and ever-blessed God (who is exalted above all blessing and praise) possibly
receive from such a sorry contemptible Worm, such an earthen Vessel, such a
broken Potsherd as I am? I do with grief and self-abhorrence own and
acknowledge that I have highly dishonored him, being a discredit to his holy
and reverend Name while I was called by it, and a disparagement to Religion
while I made a profession of it. But let me ask thee, Was not the glory of God
dear to thee, and his Name precious? Was he not highest in thy esteem, valued
above all the world, set up in the Throne, all other things being made his
Footstool? Can thou not with all thy heart say after the Prophet in Psalm. 73.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire
beside thee? Have thou made him thy choice, and desired to live in an obedience
to him, and expressiveness of him? Have thou commended him to others, thy
Relations, Friends and Neighbors, and endeavored in thy place to enlarge his
Kingdom, and submit themselves to his Government? Have thou offered thy self
and thy praise to him? He himself tells thee, Psalm. 50. 23. That is a
glorifying him. Have thou had thy fruit unto holiness, and was thy heart set
for the bringing forth much fruit? Our Savior tells you, John 15. 8. Herein
his Father is glorified. If thou do find these things in thy self, tho thou
do also find too much of that which should not be, and is matter of grief to
thee, thou may meditate terror without being terrified, thou may be very
willing, yea glad to die, whenever God calls thee to it, being fully
persuaded that he will with an hand of grace put a glory upon thee, when at the
same time he will extort glory from others in a way of wrath and vengeance.

Thirdly, Can you say as our Savior did, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do? He had work given him by the Father, good and great work, in
which his Father, himself, and all his people were concerned, it being for his
Fathers and his own Glory, and for his Peoples Salvation and everlasting
Happiness. And he was intent upon it, industrious and diligent in it. I must,
says he, work the works of him that sent me while it is day. And at his giving
up of the Ghost, he could say, It is finished. Now none of us were made and
sent hither to be idle, nor to sport upon the Earth as Leviathan does in the
Sea. No, no, we all have Work to do, Work that our heavenly Father has given
us. There is the general Work of Godliness and Religion, and the particular
Work of our several Stations and Relations. None need sit still and study how
to pass away the time, for they have enough to do if they will but mind it. Now
if our Work be not done, how shall we with any comfort or boldness look our
great Lord and Master in the Face. It was a terrible Sentence that past upon
the lazy Servant that had buried his Talent in a Napkin. But here again, a poor
humble Christian will presently object against its self; for such an one needs
none Accuser, he can and will do that work fast enough. And in this case he
will take shame as his Portion, and declare he is very far from finishing the
Work which God gave him to do. You have minded other things of less concern,
yea of no concern, and neglected that. You have lived in the World to very
little purpose, led unprofitable Lives, and suffered your Days, your precious
Seasons, your golden Hours to run out at waste. You have done but very little
for God, and for your Souls, and in order to your everlasting Happiness; and
that which you have done, has been so pitifully done, that you are ashamed to
look upon it; you have botcht and bungled at it. And I do readily grant, your
best Works do not deserve acceptance with God; he may justly reject and abhor
them, and cast them as Dung into your Faces, because of the Iniquities which
adhere or cleave to them. But let me ask you, and do you ask your own Souls
when you are in your Retirements and greatest Seriousness, Have thou loved the
Work of God, and preferred the hardest and most unpleasing pieces of it before
the most facil and pleasant parts of the Devil's? Have thou counted his Service
perfect freedom, but that of Sin the basest of Drudgeries? Have you been
pleased and delighted when you did at any time find your hearts raised in it,
and enlarged, and more than ordinarily carried out? Has it been your Grief and
Trouble when you found in your selves straitness, deadness, and dullness? Have
you been angry with your selves, because you have done no more and no better
for God? Have you often and often with earnestness begged of God that he would
give you more Grace and greater Strength in order to your doing him better
Service, and bringing him more Glory? Then you need not be afraid to appear
before him, for he will spare you, as a Father spares his Son that serves
him; and you shall be accepted in the beloved; and your gracious and prevailing
Advocate will appear on your behalf, and plead your Cause, saying, as once he
did on the behalf of the good Woman, whom the Disciples in their discontent
quarreled, They have done what they could. And he will cover all your Failings,
and fill up all your Vacancies and Defects with his own most full and perfect
Obedience; for to your comfort know, tho thy Duties be weak, and deficient, and
defiled, yet his Obedience was complete and perfect; nay more, it was
Satisfactory too, and of a meritorious Nature too, and the merit of it is
sufficient for thee, and for all his People. And therefore if that which I have
spoken be the frame of your Spirits, you may at a dying hour with triumph say,
Now, Father, come I to thee.

We will now proceed to the third Use of this Doctrine, which will be by way of
Exhortation; and it shall be divided only into Two Branches.

My first Exhortation is this, Do not mourn immoderately over your deceased
Friends and Relations. Those of them I mean, who while they were here, lived
unto the Lord; and when they had finished their course, and came to the period
of their Days, those Bounds which they could not pass, died in the Lord, and in
the faith. As to the business now in hand, it is no matter by what they died,
whether a natural Death or a violent one, by the hand of an Enemy or an
Executioner; consumed by the merciless Flames, or swallowed up by the mighty
Waters; whether they died a short and easy Death, and having served their
Generation according to the Will of God sell asleep, or a tedious and lingering
one, cast upon Beds of Languishment, and having wearisom Days, Nights, and
Months, numbered out unto them. Nor is it as to this any matter in what manner
they died, whether under a dark and thick Cloud, having many Questions, Doubts,
and Fears; or under the Smiles of God, the Light of his Countenance, and the
bright sweet shining of his Face; whether they came to their Harbor in a
pleasant Calm, or in a blustering Storm. In a word, whether they had the
perfect use of their Understanding and Reason to the last, or were under a
delirium and distraction. These things are not so much to be insisted upon.
Were they Holy and Gracious? Were they born twice before they died once? Were
they partakers of the Holy Ghost in his renewing Influences? Was their Walk
with God, and their Motions toward Heaven? Did they carry Grace along with them
into the other World, and leave good ground of Hope in this concerning them?
Then keep your Grief within its due bounds. You may, yea you ought to be
sensible of God's hand, and of your own loss, and of the Nations and Churches
loss. God would not have his Children stupid, he allows not in them a Stoical
Apathy. Paul does not forbid all Mourning upon this account, but would not have
yours like that of theirs who mourn without hope. You may be sensible, but not
sink; drop some Tears over such an o(...)s Hearse, but not be drowned in Sorrow.
While by your Sorrow and Tears you express the dearness of your Affection to
your deceased Friend, be sure that by your patient Submission and humble
Silence, you do equally manifest your Faith and Hope. And to that purpose I
offer these Four following Particulars to your Consideration.

First, Your departed Relations and Friend^ are gone to him that loved them
best, and that both can and will do most for them. To him that is all Love, and
has all Power. To him who has Earth with all its fullness, Heaven with all its
Glory at his own dispose, and is himself alone better than both. They are gone
indeed, and shall not return; their Places here will know them no more. Oh!
says one, my Husband is gone, and he was my Guide and my Support. He lived
with me as a Man of Knowledge, and helped me on in the way everlasting. And
says another, My Wife is gone, and she was a suitable Yoke Fellow, a
delightful Companion, the desire of mine Eyes. And says another, My Child is
gone, and it was a pleasant One, the Child of my Hopes, but now that is gone,
that Bud is nipt, and those Hopes are blasted. And say others, Our Shepherd is
gone, who led us by the skilfulness of his Hands, brake to us the Bread of
Life, and sed us with sound Knowledge and Understanding. These are gone, and
gone for ever, and they will not return any more; and you say true, for they
cannot, Job 14. 14. If a man dye, shall he live again? Yes, in another World,
(Job did not question that, but rejoiced in the Faith of it) but not again in
this World. The most holy Persons that lived best, and pleased God most, cannot
return to live again here; and indeed as they cannot, so they would not; if
they could, they would not. For remember this, as they are gone from hence, and
from you, so they are gone to God, and to Heaven. They are gone, but it is from
their Labor to their Rest, to an undisturbed and everlasting Rest, after a
wearisome and tedious Life. They are gone, but it is from the Work of their
Lord, in which they were faithful and industrious, to the Joy of their Lord,
which nothing shall imbitter, neither can any take it from them. God will not,
Enemies shall not. They are gone, but it is from a life of Conflicts which they
had with the Corruptions of their own Hearts, and the Temptations of Satan, to
maintain an everlasting Triumph with the Lord Jesus, the Captain of their
Salvation. In short, They are gone, but it is out of the Wilderness which was
overrun with pricking Briars and vexing Thorns, and full of Beasts of prey,
Lions roaring, and Serpents hissing, the Devil and his Instruments creating
them all the trouble they can; and now they are entered into the Celestial
Canaan, a Land flowing not with Milk and Honey, but unspeakably better.
Enjoyments, infinitely purer and higher Delights. Do but you tread in their
Steps, and follow them in their Faith and Holiness, considering the end of
their Conversation, and then you shall meet them again, and that meeting shall
be with Joy.

Secondly, Tho they be gone, yet their time of going was first come. The
Apostle Paul speaks of a time of departure, 2 Timothy 4. 6. I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. The time which God in his
infinite Wisdom and Goodness had ordained and prefixed by an eternal and
unalterable Decree. They lived till the last Sand in their Glass was run out,
till they had reached those Bounds which they could not pass. There is one
thing which some surviving Relations do most unreasonably afflict and torture
themselves with, notwithstanding all the care they have taken, it is this; they
think if this or that had been done, their deceased Relation might have been
still alive; but that is a foolish Fancy, and I am apt to think it a Suggestion
of the Devil, who thereby would pour Vinegar into that Wound which Providence
has made; for if this and that, and an hundred, nay, a thousand things more
had been done, they all would not have kept them here. It is indeed
unquestionably our Duty to be in the diligent use of all lawful means for the
preservation of Health, the cure and removal of Diseases, and the continuance
of our own and our Relations Lives, and a known wilful neglect of any does
bring guilt with it, and may breed a painful sting in the Conscience; but all
the means that can be used cannot possibly hinder the accomplishment of any of
the divine purposes; Who has resisted his Will? and who can resist it? Will
you consider this, and work it upon your hearts by repeated thoughts? such
Friends and Relations of yours are gone, but not before they were sent for. God
bid Moses go up to Mount Nebo, and die there; the same God (in whose hand our
times are) did also bid them lie down upon such a Bed, and die there. Death was
God's Messenger, he commissioned it, and gave it his order, its work was to cut
off the thread of their lives, and fetch them home; and that work must be done,
how unacceptable and afflictive soever it is to any, yea, and it must be done
at that very time too. Tho in other things God exercises admirable patience,
waiting that he might be gracious; and being exulted, that he might have mercy
upon sinners; yet in this case he will not stay, nor is it at all fit that he
should, nor is it lawful for any to desire it. What reason can be given why
Infinite Wisdom should give way to humane weakness and folly, or why God should
in the most minute and smallest Circumstance act counter to his own most Holy
Will and Purpose for the gratifying of our humor and imprudent desires; let us
leave God to choose and order, as being best able, and learn our selves to
submit and accept; and since Death must and will do its work at its time, let
us be beforehand, and do our work in our time; since Death will not stay for
us nor any body, let us so prepare and get ready, that we may not have cause to
desire its stay.

Thirdly, Though they be gone, yet it was not before they were fit to go. Some
of thm lived but a little time, but they lived much in a little time; and how
are they to be commended, and the grace of God to be admired in them, who do
happily dispatch that work in twenty years or less, which others, and those
holy Souls too, are threescore or seventy years about. Some die young, it is a
sign they ripened apace. The Husband man cares not when he plucks up his
Weeds, because they are either for the Furnace or the Dunghill; but his Corn
shall be white to the Harvest before he puts in his Sickle. So a wise man will
let the Fruit of his Orchard hang till it be ripe, and when it is so he gathers
it. So does the wise and ever-blessed God; as for wicked men he is not so
curious about them, they only cumber the ground, they bring forth wild Grapes,
down with them, says Justice, it will be a good riddance, let better be
planted in their room; but he does otherwise with the Trees of Righteousness,
the souls of holy persons are prepared for glory by that time their bodies drop
into the Grave. The marriage of the Lamb will not come, before his Bride has
made her self ready. Now is not this enough to satisfy you? give one good
reason if you can, why any should remain upon earth, after they are once truly
fit for Heaven? why they should have their days prolonged, when their work is
finished? they shall not die before it, why should they live here after it? why
should they not receive the Crown of Righteousness, when they have fought the
good fight, and finished their course, and kept the faith? To what purpose, I
beseech you, should they live, when they have no more grace to get here, and no
more good to do? To such an one as loves God dearly, and is set for his glory,
an useless, barren, and unprofitable life would be an heavy burden, and a great
deal worse than death: Such an one in such a case would not know how to enjoy
himself an hour, but would long and pine, and cry out for the coming of death,
as the Mother of Sisera did for her Son, Why is his Chariot so long in coming,
why tarry the wheels of his Chariot?

Fourthly, As they are gone to God, so they had excellent company by the way.
It is not a little distance between this earth which the Saints now inhabit,
and the highest Heaven unto which at death they go, the habitation of God, and
seat of the blessed; and tho the holy Soul be exceeding swift in its motion,
when it is once freed from the heavy clog of dull flesh, and got upon the wing,
yet will it be some time before so long a Journey can be dispatched, and it
arrive at its desired home. At the beginning of Daniel's supplication the
Commandment came forth, and the Angel Gabriel was caused to flee swiftly, yet
he came not to him till the time of the evening oblation. And there is an
innumerable number of wicked spirits in the way, Legions of Devils in the
Regions of the Air, which envy the happiness of those who are to have an
everlasting abode in those places out of which they themselves were cast, and
therefore will be sure to do their utmost for the disturbing them in their
ascent. But for the preventing of it, the great and holy God has appointed
them a strong Guard, in Hebr. 1. 14. the holy Angels are said to be initistring
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be the heirs of salvation,
and they take pleasure in doing so. Little do we know the obligations we lie
under to them, how much we are beholden to them, how they watch over us, and
pitch their Tents about us, and are Assistants to us. Many and many are the
good offices which the good Angels do for the Saints while they live, and when
they die, they are a strong Convoy to their Souls, that will keep off from them
all Enemies and Dangers, and bring them with safety and honor into the King's
Palace, the Presence Chamber of their God and Father. Upon all these accounts I
counsel you not to lay the reins upon the neck of your passions, nor to mourn
over them who died in the Lord, as those who have no hope, for they are
blessed. When they lived, they were the habitations of God through the Spirit;
when they died, they died in the Lord, and their bodies sleep in Jesus; their
Souls upon dissolution, are the charge of Angels. It was they that carried the
Soul of poor, but precious Lazarus into the bosom of Abraham, tho the rich
Glutton suffered him to lie in his Rags and Sores, starving at his door,
neglected and despised; and both their souls and bodies, at the Resurrection of
the Just, shall have a consummate happiness in the full, uninterrupted, and
eternal enjoyment of God. Therefore, I say again, mourn not for them, there is
no cause, they are in a far better condition than you; turn your Grief into
another Channel, and, as our Savior directed, weep for your selves, and for
your children, on the score of what you have lost, and what you may feel in
this world of sin and uncertainty.

The second Branch of this Use of Exhortation will be this, Be you willing to
go to God also, whenever he shall please by death to send for you. You, I
mean, who have been indeed made partakers of grace; who love God, and have made
him your choice, and have good hope, yea, assurance of your interest in him. It
would be a shame for any of you to be unwilling and loath to die, God may very
well take that unkindly at your hands, and you for it have reason to be
displeased and angry with your selves. What is there upon earth that should
make you unwilling? What is there in Death that should affright and scare you?
Have you great affliction and trouble here, would it not be better for you to
be out of it; to exchange a tempestuous Sea for an Haven of Peace? Do you now
swim in Delights, and abound with Creature comforts, shall you not find better
in Heaven, than those you leave behind you? Would you stay yet longer, that so
you might provide for your Children, and see them settled well and comfortably
in the World? Will you not commit them to the care of your heavenly Father, who
is their God in Covenant as well as yours? Can you trust God with your Souls,
and will you not trust him with your Seed? Do you think it is an hard thing to
die, cannot God strengthen you for it? Is there a bitterness in it, cannot God
sweeten it to you? Cannot he make it easy to you, as he has made it to many of
his People? Cannot he by the light of his Countenance, and the witness of his
Spirit, and the shedding abroad of his love in your hearts, mitigate and abate
the sense of pain? Look to it that you do not leave him while you live, and
then rest confident of this, that he will not forsake you when you come to die.
David could say, Psalm 23. 4 Tho he did walk through the valley of the shadow of
death he would fear no evil; for God's rod and staff did comfort him. I am apt
to think the pains of Death are worst at a distance, and not seldom more
terrible to the Spectators than to the Patient. And I do not in the least
question, but the throws and agonies of many poor Women in Childbearing, and
those Pains also which are caused by the Cramp, the Gout, the Stone or
Strangury, are far greater and more severe than the Pains of Death usually are.
But however, we may be sure of this, those Pains, be they what they will, are
but short, if compared with that blessed Eternity which shall succeed them; and
so light, as not worthy to be mentioned the same day with that far more
exceeding weight of glory which shall be graciously bestowed upon them that
overcome. So the holy Apostle Paul says, Romans 8. 18. I reckon that the
sufferings of this present life, take them altogether from the first to the
last moment, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us. Therefore by Prayer earnestly beg of God a willingness to go to
him, and take pains with your own Souls, in order to the working of them up
thereunto. Humbly and freely leave it to him, who is infinite in wisdom to
choose, the time when it shall be; to him who is love it self, and whose
compassions do not fail, to order out the manner how it shall be; only be you
careful to prepare and get ready; labor to be fit to die, and meet for the
inheritance of the Saints in light; and when that grim Messenger comes, bid him
welcome, and let your hearts be glad, and your glory rejoice. Do your Souls now
at any time wander from God, call them in, and chide them home; and when you
come to die, sing them home, and the good Lord enable you by being with you
while you walk in the valley of the shadow of Death, comforting you with his
Rod and Staff, giving you to look within the veil, and to see your Advocate and
Mediator Jesus at the right hand of God ready to receive you, that so you may,
as the Protomarryr Stephen did, commend your spirit into his hand; and besides
what has been already said, before the time of your departure come, lay your
selves in with these comfortable meditations.

First God, whom you go to, is the best and dearest Friend. In him there is
infinite Fullness and everlasting Love. As the Sun when up and shining forth in
his Glory, does so obscure and darken all the Stars, that in his Presence they
hide their Heads and disappear; so does the Glory of God prevail and triumph
over all the Beauty and Glory of the Creature. He has all Perfections, and is
pleasant for Delights. It is his Glory to be Self-sufficient and
All-sufficient. He has enough for himself, and for the holy Angels, who look
no further and desire no more; therefore he cannot but have enough for you. And
as there is All fullness in him, so All-sweetness too. Here indeed a gracious
Soul may sometimes discover that in God which strikes a terror in it. The
Psalmist remembered God, and was troubled, Psalm 77. 3. The Prophet cried out, I
am undone, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, Isa 6. 5. But
in the other World, where the sight will be clear and full, you shall see
nothing in him, save that which will be your Comfort and Joy. Then every sight
of him will be ravishing, and every thought of him precious. He will then be in
your Account altogether lovely. You will then see he has such a Glory as
knows no blemish, such a Fullness as knows no defect, so that you cannot
desire him better than he is, nor would you have him other than he is; for, as
all his Attributes are his own Glory, so they will all contribute to, and issue
in your Satisfaction.

Secondly, Heaven is the sweetest place that you can be in: We have reason to
conclude it must of necessity be so, since God has chosen it for his own Seat,
the place of his own Residence. This World is but a Wilderness since Sin entered
into it, that is a Paradise far beyond the Terrestial one, out of which our
first Parents were driven. This World is but a Dunghill, that is a Mountain of
Myrrhs, there be the Beds of Spices. There is nothing to pollute, nothing to
offend, no danger of falling, no fear of losing, nothing to disturb the Spirit,
to break the Peace, or damp the Joy. Read and consider that excellent
Description which is given of the New Jerusalem in that Rev. 21. 10, etc. some
passages whereof are these, The foundations of the wall garnished with all
manner of precious stones, the twelve gates were twelve pearls; the City, yea,
the very street of it is pure gold; the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are
the temple of it; the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. And if there be such a Glory in that great City, which descends from
God out of Heaven, what do you think, and how great is the Glory of that great
City which is in Heaven? What words are big enough to express it? What mind
large enough to conceive it? Deus and Coelum non patiuntur hyperbolem. God and
Heaven are incapable of an Hyperbole; our most raised and enlarged Thoughts
will be too narrow, short and low. I will add but one thing more, and shut up
this Discourse.

Lastly, When once you come to Heaven, you will never be weary of being there.
Here indeed we are quickly weary and tired out at the best of our comforts. A
Man may lie in a Bed of Down till he is weary, and his Bones ache. He may sit at
a noble and sumptuous Feast till he is weary, and would be glad of a dimission.
We may pray, and preach, and hear, till we are weary, tho we should not be
weary of Gospel Ordinances and Religious Duties, yet we may be weary in them.
But there is no such thing as this in Heaven; no, nothing like it throughout
Eternity. The Saints there will neither be weary of God, nor of Heaven, nor of
themselves, nor of one another. Their Eye will not be weary of beholding God,
and contemplating his Glory, nor the Tongue weary of blessing and praising him,
nor Soul and Body weary of maintaining a close and intimate converse, with him.
As there will be a complete Enjoyment, so constant and fresh Delight. A Fullness
and All fullness of Joy, and that will infallibly afford Pleasures for evermore.

God has made a great Breach among you, who meet in this place, by taking away
his Servant, who labored in the Word and Doctrine. It is above Fifty years
since our first Acquaintance, we having been of the same College, and under the
same Tutor. He was a Learned Man, and as I am persuaded, truly Godly, one that
denied himself, and suffered much for Conscience Sake. I came hither to do you
good, not to commend him, for that is needless, you having known his Doctrine
and manner of Life. His Course is finished, and God has called him home, so
that you shall see his Face no more. I beseech you to live the Truths he
brought you; and since you are taken with the goodness of this Air, and the
pleasantness of this Place for the health of your Bodies; see that you neglect
not you Souls, but cheerfully allow to the procuring and settling one among you,
that may fe^d you with sound Knowledge and Understanding; by your Liberality
therein manifest the value you have for the Gospel; and the good Lord send one,
in whose Light you may rejoice.

FINIS.

