THE CRUELTY OF THE MAGISTRATES OF Evesham, in Worcestershire, OR, Some
further particulars of their dealings and proceedings at the late Sessions, and
othertimes, against those People, whom scornfully they call QVAKERS. With a
Warning to the HEADS and RVLERS and all people of this Nation.

Written from Evesham the 15. day of the 8. Month, 1655.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Black-spread-Eagle, near the west end of Paul's. 1655.

The Cruelty of the Magistrates of Evesham in Wercestershire.
UPon the nineth day of September so called, we had a meeting about the tenth
hour, at the common Goal in Evesham, there to wait upon the Lord, and after
some time Humphrey Smith having been in prison about three weeks before, and
being in the prison, he was moved to speak to the Lord in prayer, then the
Jailer, and some other Officers came into the Goal to Humphrey Smith, and
violently haled him away as he was speaking to the Lord in prayer, and put him
down into the dungeon; our friends keeping still together, after some time Tho.
Woodrove spoke the word of the Lord to the people, and having done, the
Constable came and inquired for him, but because they knew him not, he went
away that time; but before they departed, another meeting was appointed the
third hour in the afternoon, and then the people being come together at the
time appointed, Humphrey Smith spoke to his friends out of the Dungeon the word
of the Lord; and when the common Meeting at the Steeplehouse was ended, our
friend Thomas Woodrove was speaking to the people, without the prison, and many
of those that had been at the steeplehouse stood and heard him speak, who
having done speaking, was sought after, and took away by a Constable without a
Warrant, and brought him before the Mayor, and them called Justices, and Thomas
Matthew Priest, and then he was committed to the common Goal for speaking the
word of the Lord, and Shomas Matthew Priest, at his departure thanked the Mayor
for his care and pains, and on the morrow in the morning, Robert Martin, called
Justice, bid the Wardsmen, if the people would not be gone from the goal-hole,
he bid them knock them down, and bid the men throw shuffles full of dirt upon
them in the dungeon; and they set eight men with weapons, four on each side the
prison, to keep away all friends for coming to, or speaking with them they had
imprisoned; Humphrey being free to give books to some people of the Country
there in town, and the keeper did by violence take three books from them, and
tore them all; so he sent for a parcel of books he had in town about sixty in
number, which was for the glory of God, and for the beating down of all sin,
written by George Fox, James Naylor, Richard Farnsworth and James Parnel, these
books they were taken from the messenger by the wardsmen, and brought before
the Justices, who afterward burned them upon the Market-Cross before the
people, being the Fair-day; see their malice to them, having broke no Law, Esa.
59.54. Esa. 8.13,14,15. and Mic. 3.10,11. Mic. 7.2,3,4. Dan. 6.4. to the 16.
Prove. 29 17. This was done, notwithstanding that some of our friends did
present the Mayor the first day in the morning with a paper that had above
forty hands a^ it, declaring that they expected justice to be put in execution
according to the late Proclamation, which they denied to post up, though some
friends posted it up, and it was pulled down again; they only bear the names
of Justices, and do it not, but their actions are secretly contrary to law,
justice, and righteousness, and they are those that call the proud happy, yea
by their means those that do wickedly are even set up, and delivered, and they
lay snares for the righteous, and make a prey of those that fear the Lord,
whose faces are now turned toward Zion, lik^ their forefathers, Luke 23.25:
Act. 22.24,25. Act. 23.12,13. and Act. 24.5,6,9. Act. 25.2,3,4, etc. 1 Kings
18.17,18. Upon the 25 day of the 7 month called September, George Kemp, Mayor
of Evesham, sent for us prisoners, and more of friends in the town, and said, I
sent for you concerning a paper that you have put your hands to, being A
representation of the Government of Evesham.

Quest. Do you own this paper?

Answ. Yea, we do own it, and shall prove it to be all truth. He then began to
question some particular things in it to ensnare us, but after we urged very
much, he granted the reading of it, then he examined us that were there, but
all that were witness to the paper, were not then in the town; we bid him let
us be called all together, and we shall prove every thing therein; then said he,
seeing it is of so high concernment, and that you have appealed to the
Protector, you shall every one give security to answer it before the Protector.

Ans. We have not appealed to the Protector, for any redress, but we have
discharged our consciences in making manifest the corruption of them called
Magistrates in this Town, both to the Protector and to the whole Nation.

Quest Are you willing to answer it before him?

Ans. If we be by you or the rest compelled, we refuse not to go, for we are
more free to answer it before the Protector than here, for there we expect some
Justice, but here is none. I shall engage you all to appear at the Sessions,
and then you shall all give security to answer personally before Protector, or
else lie in Prison. What is the reason you will not swear, William Dewsberry
can swear, for in one of his books he says, in the presence of the Lord I own
Magistrates: Hum. Smith. So far as that I can say, for in the presence of the
Lord I own Magistrates that are for the praise of them that do well, and the
punishing of the evil doers: So he lets us that were Prisoners return to the
Prison, and the rest departed home.

Upon the 28. day of the Month, called September, Joshua Frensome and Iobn
Knight was sent for before them called Just^es, Robert Martin, and Samuel
Garner, and asked them if they owned the printed paper, they said we own it,
and can prove it all to be true; them called Justices said it was a Lybell,
they answered they would prove it was no Lybell by those twenty that are
subscribed in print to that paper, which they questioned them about, and also
by forty more; The Deputy-Recorder said whether it be true or false it is a
Lybell, because it is in disparagement to the Magistrates; so them called
Justices sent them both to Prison: At that time there was in the place, one
Thomas Milnard, the Priests wife father, who was a persecutor in the Bishops
days, he is one of them called Magistrates, he accused our friends of selling
their Bibles, he mentioned one of Hampton, who though he did sell a Bible has
two or three yet, and the Scriptures we own, yet I can sell thee a Bible, if
thou will buy one, for I have three. Thomas Milnard answered, I will have none
of thy Witchery stuff, he said more, that he was confident that the Mayor was
bewitched he did not send all our friends to Prison that 25. day of the 9.
Month Joshua Frensome, John Knight.

On the second of the eight month called October, James Wall having a trial at
their Court, he came into the trial of the cause, and Robert Atkins commanded
his hat to be taken off, James Wall said to him, Thou have not yet made me any
satisfaction for the last hat thou causest to be taken from me, neither is yet
restored; Robert Atkins commanded the Jailer to take him to prison, where he
has been without any Mittimus or any thing since laid to his charge.

The second of the said month, at the Sessions holden at Evesham, Thomas
Woodrove being first sent for, by himself, and brought before the Sessions, he
requested that his fellow prisoners might be sent for, that they might answer
to the crimes laid against them, if there were any.

Quest. You are accused to be a disturber of the peace.

Answ: Let that be proved, or read any Law that I have transgressed.

Judge. There may be a Law broken which cannot be read.

Ans. Is it possible there should be Law broken that cannot be proved nor read?

Judge. But as for your part you might have had your liberty if you had not came
in here in this contemptible way, with your Hat on, therefore you shall turn
back again to the Prison, until you do come with your hat off; take him Jailer.
He was sent to the prison, and the rest brought up to the Bar.

Robert Atkins said, Do you not know that you are prisoners? I marvel that you
will offer to come before a Court with your hats on; Jailer take off their hats.
It was done: thou may as well take off our Coats.

James Wall. Thou have not made me any satisfaction for the last hat thou did
cause to be taken from me.

Rob. Atkins said, Smith, You are the Ringleader of this Sect, and of this
people; I know you have Scripture enough, and you can tell of Paul's Condition,
and many such things, but you lead people contrary to the ways of God.

Humph: Smith. Paul was accounted as a Sectarian and a Mover of Sedition, and a
pestilent Fellow

Rob. Atkins. Paul was called so, but was not so; but you are called so, and
are so.

Ans. That is not yet proved:

Rob: Atkins. Where have you any Scripture for your keeping on your hats.

Tho. Cartwright. The servants of the Lord had their Hats on when they were
thrown into the Fiery Furnace, yet they were not thrown in for keeping their
hats on, but because they would not bow and worship the Kings Image.

Humphrey Smith. There is neither precept, practice, example, nor command in
the scripture, nor yet any National Law for putting off the hat, and so long
as I continued in swearing, lying, and in other wickedness, I was never
questioned by any magistrate, but now the Lord has called me from these Sins,
I am made a prey of by you; then said they one to another, he has aspersed all
the magistrates in England: Quest. Did you live in such Sins since you came to
this Town? Ans. Nay, Thomas Cartwright said, I have lived in drunkenness,
swearing, lying, and profaneness, until now of late, and none of you ever
questioned me, but now I have left it I am punished without a cause: if any one
here have ought against me now to charge me withal, let him now speak before
the people. Rob. ^tkins. Thou look with a good honest face, I thought thou
had not been a quaker, therefore I thought to have shown the some favor, but I
see by thy beha^iour who thou art; Humphrey Smith said, Moses that was a
qua^er, did look with a better face then he. Robert Atkins: Here is a
sufficient ground, that you have come into the Court with your hats on, to fine
you, and send you to Prison until you learn better manners, therefore I shall
fine you every one and send you to Prison, where you shall lie from one
Sessions til another, until you come with your hats off, if I may have my
will; and though you have been kept very high, J shall take course that you
shall be kept shorter, and looked closer unto, fine such in five pounds and the
rest in three pounds a piece, Jailer take them away; the Jailer hawling us
away, Humphrey Smith said, let it first be made manifest who we have offended,
or what we have transgressed, or what errors J hold, if any can be proved, that
the peop^ may be convinced with us of any evil we may be accused of, but the
Jailer hawling us away Humphrey Smith spoke further to the people, and said,
they have shamed all profession, and all national Government: Thus were we
thrust away from the bar in a quarter of an hours time, and not at all called
by name nor examined for what we were Prisoners, nor any Mittimus read or
mentioned, nor any other crime laid against us, or charged upon us, neither was
any Witness, nor any one by word or bill, that had any thing in the least
against us, neither did any open his mouth to that purpose, or in any such way
against us, neither did they themselves accuse us, though we often requested to
show us any cause why we were imprisoned, but the Jailer took four of us away,
but Robert Smith, John Clemens and Sames Wall he left at the bar, where they
then spoke for themselves; Robert Atkins hearing them, asked if they were
quakers too, and called the Sergeants, or Words men to take them away, but they
were let alone until the Jailer came back again from the Prison, in all which
time they were not examined, neither did any one accuse them of any thing. Rob.
Smith said he had been in Prison 6. weeks for saying the Priest did lie; now
there the Priest, George Hopkins is, and I am here to prove him a liar, and to
affirm him to be a liar before all the Court, if he be not a liar let him
speak, for I can prove him a liar in several things; the Priest being there
gave no answer. John Clemens said I was sent for by the Deputy-Recorder (who
sits there) from my fathers shop and his work, and he sent me to Prison
because I did not put off my hat, and for that have I been in prison 6. weeks,
and he called to the Deputy-Recorder, and bid him speak or charge him with
what he had against him, but he was silent, and spoke not, neither did any one
charge him with any thing; so when the Jailer came, he took them away to prison
also.

A true description of the imprisonment of William Pit, a soldier for the
Commonwealth.
I Came from my outward being in the City of Worcester, into the Borough of
Evesham, to visit some friends which were there in Prison for bearing witness
to the truth, as it is in Jesus being the time of the General Sessions for the
said Borough and coming into the Hall on the third of the 8th. Month, and was
walking with many of my friends in the lower end of the Hall, below the Bars
and the people, until there came a man with a Halbard, and carried me before
those which sat to do justice (but J found none) whereupon the Recorder told
me, he did perceive J had a desire to be amongst my fellows, and I should, have
my desire, I bid him do his pleasure, but J demanded him first to make it
appear I had transgressed either the Law of God or man, but he could not, then
he asked me what I came hither for from my dwelling place; my answer was, I
came to see the Trial of my friends which are here in bonds for the testimony
of Jesus, and I am chargeable to no man; so with some other questions of small
account, he bid take him Jailer, so I bid him let me know what he sent me to
Prison for, but he would not, but sent me to the Common-Goa!, without any
Mittimus or knowledge of my person or name, or whence I came, neither will they
let me know for what, although I have writ to the Mayor.

The third of the Month, called October, Joshua Frencom, and John knight,
Prisoners, were sent for unto the hall, and after Robert Atkins had commanded
to take off their hats, which were accordingly, he then caused a Bil of
indictment against them to be read, concerning some particulars in a former
printed paper, and asked if they were guilty or not guilty; Joshua answered, we
can bring witness to prove that to be true, which we are indicted for; Rob.
Atkins: Wherefore are you indicted? Josh. For the truth. Rob. Atk. For the
truth are you indicted? Joshua said, All people take notice, for the Truth it
is that we are indicted; and the people clapping their hands, gave a shout, and
some of them said to Rob. Atkins, let shame cover thy face, must not men speak
the truth? Rob. Atk. Take them away, for we shall not have peace so long as
they are here; on the same day, before mentioned, Rich. Walker was called, and
they read a bill of indictment against him, and they asked him whether he was
guilty or no; and he said he denied the bill, but said he owned the paper, and
he desired to have it read, and they did, and when it was read, he said, I
appeal to all your consciences, whether it be not all true, and they sat all
silent, and answered not a word. John Woodard, James Wall, Joshua Frencom,
Thomas Cartwright, and Will. Walker, were soldiers long in the service of the
Commonwealth, and most of them at Worcester fight for outward liberty, and now
are they fined, or imprisoned, or both, without any Law transgressed, and are
deprived of outward liberty: Humphrey Smith was a friend to the Parliaments
Army, from the first arsing of them, and afterward ventured his natural life,
and suffered much loss by the kings army, and now we have not the least benefit
of the liberty nor law of the Nation. Upon the third of the 8th. Month, John
Goodard was called before the bench, Rob. Atkins said, pluck off his hat, and
after his hat was off, the Town Clerk did read something, and said in his paper
that he had set his hand to a scandalous paper maliciously against the
magistrates of the town, and afterward asked him if he was guilty or not
guilty, and he said he was not guilty of wronging any man's person, neither had
he spite or malice against any man in England, and the Recorder said, it is
easy for any man to say he is not malicious; and the said John Goodard said,
thou may judge of me what thou will; and then Robert Atkins said, will you
own the paper? And he answered that he would own the printed paper; and prove
it to be true; and said, here are three men standing by, that have waited ever
since yesterday morning, to witness against Robert Martine, called Justice, for
swearing: Robert Atkins said he did not sit there to have it proved; and said,
if it were true it ought not to be spoke of if it were against a Magistrate;
and John Woodward said, all people take notice if this be not partiality: (The
Recorder commanded that Captain Pit ways hat to be taken off his head, which
is a Magistrate of the Town, and makes him stand bare, and suffers a priest to
sit by him with his hat on; and the Priest hearing this put off his hat, and
the Recorder bid him put it on again, and yet he sends our friends to prison
for coming before him with their hats on.) And then the Recorder said to the
rest of the Bench fine him; and some of them said three pounds; and they asked
the said John Woodward if he was contented, and he said, you may do what you
will with me; and the Recorder said, fine him five pounds: and he said you may
put in fifteen pounds, for I expect no favor from your hands; so they fined
him five pounds. And John Woodard said, Take notice the Grand Jury have brought
in, that swearers and drunkards are not punished; and said, Hear people, We are
not questioned for sweating nor being drunk, or any manner of sin, or evil
communication, but for speaking the truth: and one of the strangers said, I
witness against Robert Martine for swearing, and they did not answer him a word:

Upon the second day of the 8th. Month, called October, our Friend, Captain
Pitway, so called, was called before the Bench; and Robert Atkins, the
Recorder, said to him, I understand that you have been a Magistrate, and one of
the chiefest of the Bench, and I do much admire that you show no more reverence
to the Court then to come with your hat on, [mark reader,] and now a
ringleader of this sect, I will take course with you; and he answered to this
purpose, I see little justice done: and then Atkins said, you shall see justice
done, and said, pluck off his hat, that is one piece of justice; then Atkins
said, you are bound over to your Good Behavior, and then it was read what was
sworn against him, and that which was false in it he denied, and that which was
true in it he owned; and then Robert Atkins bid him relate what he did own, and
he said that he owned that the said Robert Martine, called Justice, was a
drunkard: and because he did pluck the prisoners out of their beds, and bred
such a disturbance in the night, and bidding the people whoop, and whooping
himself, that he said did cause him to say what he said, and said if they would
but give him leave to bring in his witnesses, he would prove it to be true; and
then he bad him bring in his witnesses on the morrow: then the recorder did
tell him of a paper that he had put his hand to, which was scandalous against
the Magistrates of the town, and he said he put his hand to a paper which was
no scandal but truth, and he was there ready to prove it to be true, and then
for that time he was put by, and the next morning about the ninth hour, he was
then called again, and then they read an Indictment against him, for setting
his hand to a paper, which they said was maliciously against the Magistrates,
and asked him if he owned it; and he said, all malice and spite I deny, but
for the printed paper he owned it to be true, and was there ready to prove it:
and Robert Atkins said, we conceive it to be scandalous, and would not suffer
him to call his Witnesses, and said, We must proceed to fine, and so fined him
20. l.

The 14th. Day of October, being the first day of the Week, there was a
meeting at Captain Edward Pitwaye's house, in the morning, and there were two
of our friends coming to the meeting, and as they passed by the Goal they
looked in at the the Goal hole, and spoke to the prisoners, and before they had
stayed half a quarter of an hour, there came the Mayor and put them in prison,
and said they should go into the prison right or vvrong: and in the afternoon,
Edward Young, the Mayor, came to our meeting before the Goal, where our
friend, Humphrey Smith, spoke out of the Goal-hole, and the Mayor came and laid
violent hands of many of our friends, and sent them away to prison, and
several Country people he set in the Stocks, although we were all peaceable,
and not a man did give him, or his Constables that was with him, a word that
was uncivil, but desired that we might be peaceable in our meeting, but the
Mayor was very outrageous, and one he did kick, and another he did lay hands
on, and said, he had almost forgotten the civil Gentleman, and so sent him to
prison, and did put our friend, Humphrey Smith, and the rest that were in the
Main-Goal into the Dungeon, and said we should not see his face again, it may
be, this twelve months, except he had order from above to take him out; and
some Women he laid hands on and plucked them, and said if he had a prison for
them they should go to Prison.

TO all the Heads and Rulers of this Nation, and Great men, and Rich men, who
would have the ha^ put off to you; and would have your persons respected, which
is contrary to the Law of God, for he that respects persons commits sin,
and he is a transgressor of the Law of God; and you that say authority commands
it, and would have your persons respected, you that do so commit sin, and would
have others to commit sin, and so to transgress the Law of ^od, and to depart
from the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is without respect of persons,
which faith is held in a pure conscience, which all who respect persons acts
contrary to that which does convince them, and casts the Law of God behind
their backs, and are reprobates concerning the Faith of our Lord Jesus: When
Haman would have had Mordicai to have bowed to him, when he could not disobey
the Law of God, Haman might say he disobeyed, and was not subject to authority,
as you do now, when men stands patiently by you, which say authority commands
it to put off the hat, who would have the creature worshipped more than the
Creator, upon such the judgments of God comes: as you may read, Rom: 1^. And
as the three Children could not bow to the Image which Nebuchadnezar had set
up, they might say they disobeyed authority, and was not subject to authority,
as you may do now, because men do not off their hats in your Sessions and
Courts, and so they come to be fined, which there is no example for in all the
Law of God, but it is a judge upon all that respect persons to which the soul
must be subject. And all who follows the lusts acts contrary to the Light which
does convince, there that is let in which wars against the soul; he that makes
Laws and acts in that nature, and with it, which follows the lusts, and sets up
that which wa^s against the soul, which the soul cannot be subject to, but to
the higher power, that which answers the Law of God, and the higher power is
that which does convince, which the soul must be subject to, and not to man's
will, neither to that which is made in it, nor to that which does command, for
the cross is to it, and so all you which would have hats put off to you seeing
there is not one example among all the heathenish Kings or rulers as you read
in all the Scriptures: and all you who has and does profess the Scripture to
be your rule, search it throughout, and see if you can find any example in it,
that ever any that were rulers for God that commanded any to put off their hats
to them; and if you cannot, you may see you are grown higher in iniquity, pride
and ambition than them all: Nebuchadnezar lost his Kingdom; and Haman and
Pharaoh destroyed, who oppressed the seed, of God. And beware all ye that scoff
and scorn, and persecute the righteous seed of God, the power of God is the
same now that it was then to throvv you down, and that of God in all
consciences shall answer it. And you who profess your selves Christians and
Christian Magistrates, and the Scriptures to be your rule, search it, and see
if you can find any example among all the Saints of God, or any of the
Christian Magistrates that did bear rule for God, command any to put of their
hats to them: Did ever Moses, Joshua, or Iephtha, Solomon, or Hezekiah, who
were Judges and Kings in Israel, command any to put off their hats that came
before them? Or did any of these imprison them? if they did not, or ever
Pharaoh, Herod, Pilate, Darius, or Foelex, or any of the heathenish Kings or
Governors command any to put off their hats that came before them, or fine
them, or imprison them, if they did not; now seeing none of these commanded any
to do it, what can you plead for it but your own wills? and beware how you make
that your Law, as you will answer it, for you must all give an account to the
just God of heaven and earth, who will tender to every man according to his
works, without respect of persons. From the Lord I warn you, and to the Light
in all consciences I speak, that with it you may see the same nature ruling in
you that ruled in Haman, who would have had Mordecai to have bowed down to have
satisfied his will, which he would not do though the King had commanded it, and
he was justified by God in not doing of it; and Haman, who would have been
honored, brought to shame and confusion. Read East. 2.7 10. Therefore all ye
Rulers, fear the living God, and give over persecuting the Saints, which cannot
respect your persons for Conscience sake, for the Lord God of Heaven and Earth
will be avenged of all his Adversaries, and upon all the oppressors of his own
people, that would make them transgress the righteous Law of God, which
respects no man's person, and you that do so are enemies to God, and so denies
the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is without respect of persons, Iam.
2. With the Light of Christ you are all seen, and with the Light you are to be
condemned, you that act contrary to it, for this is the condemnation, the
Light, says Christ; as you may read, John 3.19,20,21. John 1.9.

AND now all you that are called Magistrates, in Evesham, who are yet in the
murderous nature, hating, persecuting, and reviling the innocent whom you
cannot justly accuse, this have I written that you may look back and be ashamed
of all your former filthy actions, which have been contrary to all that ever
ruled for God, therefore now mind that of God in your Consciences, which will
witness for me, and judge and condemn your unjust actings, which have been
contrary to the righteous Law of God in your heart, and also to all the Laws in
the nation; and thou, George Kemp, when thou did examine us, these, or the
like words I then spoke and now write to thee, that thou, or any other, to
show, if they can, what Law I, or Thomas Cartwright, had transgressed, or who
we had harmed, or what uncivil carriage, words, or actions, we had offered to
any man; yet a Constable came and took us before them called Magistrates, who
having notice that we that are called Quakers would not swear, nor put off our
hats to worship the Beast in any man, but use plainness of speech to all, by
which we are made a prey of, so are many ensnared when there is no other way
found out to entangle them that cannot bow to your generation, that are found
fighters against the Lord. And thou Robert Atkins Recorder, and the rest that
joined and sat with thee at the Assizes in the persecuting of the Saints, even
of those that have always had their outward habitations in the same town, and
none of you, nor any other adversaries could then charge them with any thing of
transgression or evil behavior toward any, yet you fined many, and sent them
to prison, and fined them in sums of money for coming before you with their
hats on, and declaring against your filthy actions in a printed paper, wherein
your former actions are truly declared, as fifty of us can witness, and that
in your own consciences may witness the same.

Now are you made manifest and seen in the Light, and declared to all the
simple, to be such who are out of the counsel of God, acting in your own
wills, to your own shame; are these your actions? the fruits of your Ministry
you are upholding? do you thus requite the Lord for his Deliverance from the
outward Sword? Are you now leading into Captivity, and set wholly to persecute
and to delight your selves in mischief? Now hear and consider, all ye rulers of
the earth, that set your selves in battle against the Lord; Thus in the day of
his power wherein he is arising, yea the Lord of Hosts is risen to take
vengeance against ^u his enemies, and to break you all like a Potters Vessel;
yea, the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is kindled, which burns all the day, and
his jealousy is waxed hot against you, and his wrath you shall not escape; the
day of the wrath of the Almighty is at hand, wherein he is raining, and will
rain snares upon the wicked daily, and the wicked shall be taken in their own
craftiness, and shall howl and lament for all your abomination, for the Lord is
coming a swift witness against all proud, lofty and scornful persecutors, who
live in covetous practices, whoredoms, and the like: Woe unto them that take
counsel, but not of me, says the Lord; Woe unto you that go down to Egypt for
help; Woe unto you that decree unrighteous decrees; Woe unto you that lay snares
for the innocent, the judgments of the living God are your portions for ever
if you repent not speedily: Oh! repent, repent; return, return before it be too
late, that you may not all utterly be destroyed for ever, for by you the just
upright man is laughed to scorn, and judgment is turned away backwards, and
justice stands afar off, truth falls in the Streets, and equity cannot
enter, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey; but the Lord
loves the righteous, and he knows the wicked afar off, for on them he will
rain snares, fire and brimstone and horrible tempests, this shall be the
portion of your cup Woe unto you that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for Light, and Light for darkness. Woe unto you that are wise in your
own eyes, and prudent in your own sight. Woe unto you that are mighty to drink
wine, and men of strength to pour down strong drink; which justify the wicked
for rewards, and cast the innocent into holes, as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff, so your Root shall be rottenness,
and your blossom fade as the dust, because you have cast the Law of the Lord
behind your back, yea, the Lord will render to every one of you, in one day,
according to the evil of your heart, and what measure you have measured to us,
shall be measured to you again, and the Lord in his good time he will deliver us
out of the hands of the wicked and unreasonable men, which make a man an
offender for a word, and the time will come when you shall know that you have
been fighters against God, and have been persecutors of the righteous seed of
God, which are in scorn called Quakers: Therefore all people, both Judges and
Rulers, high and low, while you have time prise it, and repent from all your
dead works and serve the living God now in this the day of your visitation, for
there is no darkness nor shadow of death where you workers of iniquity may hide
your selves from the presence of our God, who is a consuming fire, before whom
all his enemies shall vanish like smoke, and howl, because of the torment that
is coming upon all that are found in Babell, out of which the Lord has called
many of us up into the Marriage of the Lamb, where we rejoice over Babylon
that is fallen, and all that are found in her, from whom we are delivered to
offer up praises, and honor, and obedience unto the living God of power, who
sits on the Throne, To him be given glory and honor for ever and ever, Rev.
19.1,2,3,4,5. and the 18.20:

Now a word in love to all people, to warn you every one to mind your own
condition, and cease from the busy mind, that goes forth from the light of
Christ in thee, to meddle with other men's matters, and so give way to the
adulterated spirit in thee, that is adulterated from the Lord, and so the feet
abides not in the house, but follows after that which enters forth after
that which says, Lo here, and lo there, and so minds not the Prisoner
within thee, which groaneth for deliverance, and cries for vengeance upon the
head of the wicked one in thee, which bears rule and leads thee from
obedience of what is made manifest to thee by the Light of Christ, to go forth
feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, where thou would be as God, knowing good
and evil. But to that in thy conscience do I speak thou know enough already
to be thy condemnation, for the Light of Christ is come into the worldly heart,
which shows thee sin, and evil, and wickedness is thy condemnation, because
thou love thy own unfruitful works rather than the Light which shows thee
it; therefore says the Lord, the people have chosen their own ways, and
delighting themselves in acting that which was not good, and have gone a
whoring after their own inventions, and will have none of me, but casts my Law
behind their backs, and rejects my counsel, and abhor my correction, and
receive not the fear of the Lord, although I have sent my servants the
Prophets, rising up early, and sending them to cry in the streets, the chief
places at Concourse, at the entering in of the Gates, and in the high places,
saying unto all, O do not this abominable thing which I hate: and this voice
does also call in thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it, when thou art
turning to the right hand or to the left; and yet the Lord has long waited to
be gracious, and to heal thy backslidings, and love thee freely, but thou
turnest to him thy back and not thy face: O ye rebellious children! How long
will you delight your selves in mischie? and how long will you walk in a way
that is not good? How long will you hold the truth of God in unrighteousness? O
people! will you nor be made clean? When shall it once be? How long will you
follow after the false Teachers that are gone forth from Christ, the Light and
the Truth, into the world? who have eyes full of Adultery, with the Spirit that
is adulterated from the Lord: Hearts, have they, exercised with covetous
practices, and such that are greedy after the error of Balaam, for rewards:
These are they that cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14, but have a form without
the power, and from such turn away: and mind the light of Christ the true
teacher, and the true Light that shows sin and evil; when no man can accuse
thee, yet the Light will then condemn thy unjust practices, and check thee in
secret for swearing, lying cozening, and the like; this is the Grace of God
which appears, unto all men, which teaches to deny all Ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, which all they that are Christ's have crucified with the
affections; who are become dead unto sin and alive unto righteousness, and then
how can these that are dead unto sin live any longer therein? for the wages of
sin are death, and he that commits sin is the servant of sin, and whilst we
were with you committing sin, we were free from righteousness, but being now
made free from Sin by the clensing of his Blood, we became the Servants of
righteousness: Therefore all you that are yet the servants of Corruption, mind
your condition, his secvants you ar^ to whom you obey, whether of sin unto
death, or of righteousness unto life, and not one of you can serve two Masters,
therefore be no longer dec^iued, God will not be mocked any longer by you: if
you continue sowing to the flesh thou shall as certainly of the flesh reap
Corruption; therefore all ye that are reader^ and not observers, and hearers of
the Word and not doers, you are all deceived, Iam. 1.2^. the swearer, liar,
drunkard, hater, proud, covetous and scorner are deceived already, none of all
these ever comes to enter into the Kingdom of God, until he be brought out of
their deceit, wherewith the Serpent has deceived all the Children of wrath,
for no unclean thing ever enters into the Kingdom of God, which is
righteousness, and joy, and Peace in the Holy Ghost. And all you that are
condemning those that persecuted the Prophets, and imprisoned them; and you
that are condemning those for persecuting imprisoning, and crucifying Christ
and his Apostles, and are saying, if you had been in the days of your
forefathers, you would not have persecuted the Saints as they did, and yet in
the mean time you your selves are in the same nature as they were, and the
Works of your fathers that s^vv the Prophets you will do, for this day are you
persecuting the righteous Seed, that ever suffered under your Generation
prisons, Stocks, D^ngeons, yea death it self: Therefore hear and consider; Did
ever the servants of Jesus Christ cause any to be imprisoned? Or did they ever
strike, stone, hate or revile any? Did they ever make use of any National law,
made by the will of man, to ensnare any? Or ever havvle any before earthly
Magistrates? Therefore consider, you that are laying snares for the innocent,
and are havvling them to prison that cannot bovv to Hamans nature nor yours,
that Heathenish custom of putting off the Hat, and that cannot svvear, but
abide in the Doctrine of Christ, Mat. 5.33,34. And them that do not break the
laws of God or man, are daily cast into prison, and great sums of Money
imposed upon them by the Will of proud man; Are not the great men of the earth
taking counsel against the Lord, and against his Anointed? Is not Pilate and
Herod agreed to crucify Christ in his Members? Are not the chief Priests and
Rulers joining together now as they did? Act. 24. Are not many moved with
envy? Are not the rulers now seeking for something against those they can find
nothing vvorthie of death or of bonds? like that of Act. 25.25,26. Is there not
like tumult raised by the swearing rude Multitude, as was Act. 17.5? Are not
many saying as they did of Christ, one said he is a good man, the other said
nay, but he deceives the people, John 7.12. Are not the great ones of the
earth sometimes saying now, as a certain Orator said of Paul (that was not made
a Minister by the will of man) that he was a Pestilent fellow, a mover of
Sedition, and a Ringleader of the Sect of Nazarites? Act. 24.5. Are there not
many Hamans now, that would have the true Mordecaies to bow to them, and
because they will not, all their glory in the world avails them nothing, and
therefore are ever saying of those who are Jews indeed, as it is said of the
Jews East. 3. that they are a certain up-start-people scattered abroad, which
regards not the Kings laws, neither are they for the Kings profit? And would
not many Hamans in England give large Money if they might prevail to have the
righteous cut off for ever out of the Nation? as it was East. 3. Nay, are not
you more blind and worse persecutors than they were, either in the days of the
prophets or Apostles, who then spoke the word of the Lord as they were moved
from the mouth of the Lord, 2 Pet. 1.21. and they had not a Scripture to prove
it by, yet you blame them that cast them into Prison? Now we speak plain
Scripture, and write plain Scripture, (which you say is your Rule) and we speak
nothing, neither do we act or uphold any thing but what is declared by plain
Scripture, yet are imprisoned therefore: Are you not worse than your
forefathers. Now Daniel was put in the Den, because, say they, he has broke
the Kings command in praying, Dan. 6. But I was put in the Dungeon and there
kept ten days only for praying and making supplications to the living God,
and in it I did not break any National Law, therefore are ye not worse than
your fathers? Again, they might have charged Paul with preaching contrary to
the Scriptures, for he says if they were circumcised Christ should profit them
nothing, Gal. 5.2. and yet Circumcision was a command of God to last in Israel
for ever. Genesis 17.13,14. and Christ himself was circumcised, yet the outward
circumcision Paul preached against, therefore Paul was persecuted; but we now
having so far a Declaration written Luke 11. from those holy men of God, who
spoke forth the Scripture from the same Spirit, Christ the Light of the world,
that was before the world was, in which Enoch walked with God, Noah preached
and obeyed, Arbaham believed before the Scripture was, in the which, Moses the
man of God saw and writ the creation that was many hundred years before his
natural birth; in the same the Prophets stood and prophesied of Christ to be
the Light of the Gentiles, and of them that sit in darkness, Isa. 4^.6. and
9.1. who came to fulfill that which was spoken of him by the Prophets, from the
same light and life which dwelt in him, Col. 1.19 in the which the Apostles
preached, in which we also preach repentance to the world, as Christ the Light
of the world did, Mat. 4,17. Mark 1. Luke 3 4. And we say from the same spirit
unto the righteous; it shall go well with them, Isa. 3.10,11: Mal: 3:18: which
is according to the Scripture, and so we speak the truth of God, which your
selves holds forth in words, but you live in untighteousness: Rom: 4:18:

Therefore all people leave off your wickedness, and turn to the living God,
who so loved the world, that he gave his only Son. Romans 5. the light of the
world which world is set in man's heart, Eccles. 3:11. of which Christ is the
inlightner, the which whosoever follows, shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life, John 8:12: Now why will you love the unfruitful works of
darkness? why will you go on in your wickedness? Do you not know, that the
wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall escape, and that the
unrighteous cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor 6:9: and that the Lord
will in no wise acquit the wicked, Exodus: 34:1: but will wound the head of his
enemies, and the hairy scalp of every one that goes on in iniquity, Psa.
69.21. Now in the light of Christ thou may read thy portion with the wicked,
which shall be turned into hell, as they that forget God, and cast his
righteous Law behind their backs, and trample the blood of the innocent under
their feet, and turn the grace of God into wantonness, foolish jesting, corrupt
communication, vain jangling, idle words, the foolish heart being full of
laughter, it is the sport of a fool to do mischief, the God of the world having
blinded the eye, the Prince of the power of the air bears rule in all the
children of disobedience; Therefore all ye slow of heart to believe all that
the Prophets and Apostles have said, you foolish people without understanding,
that have eyes but see not, and ears that hear not, fear ye not me, says the
Lord? will you not tremble at my presence? Ier. 5.21,22. which is terrible unto
all the workers of iniquity, who are now committing iniquity with greediness,
drinking it down as the Ox drinks water, heaping up wrath against the day
of wrath, and righteous judgments of God, which are now revealing from heaven
upon all manner of unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. wherein in this day of the
revelation of Jesus Christ, all that do wickedly shall be as stubble before him
that sits as a Refiners fire, Mat. 3.2,3. and is coming a swift witness against
his Adversaries: therefore all people consider your ways, see what you are a
doing, for none can escape the wrath at hand, whither can you go? whither can
you fly? where can you hide your selves from the presence of the Lord? who is
come to call for an account for every idle word, all unrighteousness is sin,
that which he will not suffer to go unpunished; therefore whilst you are
called to day Oh! harden not your hearts any longer; let not your words be ^out
against the Lord any more; let the wicked forsake his ways, and own the light
of Jesus Christ, while it now shines, least the Lord cause darkness, and thy
feet stumble for ever at the dark mountains, Ier: 13.16 and so thou come ^o be
for ever shut ou^ into utter darkness, where there is no recovery; therefore
give ear a little, hear and thy soul shall live: Despise not the day of thy
visitation; hear, for wisdom cries, and understanding puts forth her voice,
yea, she speaks excellent things, Prove. 8 Oh ye simple, turn you in hither,
and ye fools be ye of an understanding heart, why will ye die, Oh ye house of
Israel! seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies: turn ye
again, and ye shall live; go on, and ye shall dye the death eternally: Therefore
if thou have any love to thy own soul, that is more worth then the whole
world, mind thy condition, flatter thy self no longer between God and Mammon,
thou can not serve two Masters, while thou servest thy own will, which is
above the Cross, thou art contrary to the fathers will, which is, that all men
should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus, who
is the Savior of the soul, and the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophesy, Rev. 19.10. which shows things to come, John 16 13. whereby the
secrets of the Lord are revealed to us that fear him, Amos 3.7. Psa. 25.14 and
the mind of Christ comes to be known^ (1 Cor. 2.16.) unto the spiritual man
that judges all things, bu^ he himself is judged of no man, 1. Cor. 2.15. for
Christ the son o^ righteousness is raised up in him, Mal. 4.2. where the son
bears rule, unto whom all judgment is committed, Ioh. 5.22. by whom now the
Saints do judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2,3. that keeps in wickedness, therefore I
witness against all the world, that the works thereof are evil, Io 1:1 fer in
the world the dogs and the evil workers are, who are all disc. ouered in the
light of Christ.

From them that are prisoners for the truth; that are by the dark world called
Quakers, whose names in the flesh are, Humprey Smith, and Thomas Woodrove.

FJNJS.

