Select Discourses TREATING

1. Of the true Way or Method of attaining to Divine Knowledge. 2. Of
Superstition. 3. Of Atheism. 4. Of the Immortality of the Soul. 5. Of the
Existence and Nature of God. 6. Of Prophecy. 7. Of the Difference between the
Legal and the Evangelical Righteousness, the Old and the New Covenant, etc. 8.
Of the Shortness and Vanity of a Pharisaick Righteousness. 9. Of the Excellency
and Nobleness of True Religion. 10. Of a Christians Conflicts with, and
Conquests over, Satan.
By JOHN SMITH, late Fellow of Queen's College in Cambridge.

As also a SERMON preached by SIMON PATRICK (then Fellow of the same College)
at the AUTHOR's FUNERAL: WITH A brief Account of his LIFE and DEATH.

Hebrews 11. 4. -- (...). LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for W. Morden
Bookseller in Cambridg, Anno Domini M DC LX.

To the READER.
THE intendment of this Preface is not to court the Reader into an high esteem
of either these Discourses or their Author, (the Discourses will best speak
what they are, and for the Author, his own Works will praise him;) but only to
give a clear and plain Account of what concerns This Edition, and withal to
observe Something concerning the Discourses themselves and the Author of them,
not unnecessary perhaps for the Reader to be acquainted with.

The Papers now published I received from the Author's Of this Edition.
Executor, Mr. Samuel Cradock (then Fellow of Emmanuel College, now Rector of
North-Cadbury in Somersetshire,) whose Beneficence to the public in imparting
these Treasures I thought worthy to be here in the first place gratefully
remembered.

Having taken a more general view of these, and some other, Papers (diverse of
which were loose and scattered, not being written by the Author in any Book,)
my First care was to collect such as were Homogeneal and related to the same
Discourse; as also to observe where any new additional Matter was to be
inserted; (For the Author, whose Mind was a rich and fruitful soil, a bountiful
and ever-bubling Fountain, sometimes would superadde upon further thoughts some
other Considerations to what he had formerly delivered in public; and this he
would do sometimes after he had gone off from that Argument, and though Matter
of a different nature had come between.) This emploiment I found at first
sufficiently perplexed and toilsome; but through more then once reading over
the Manuscripts, I got through those difficulties, and dispatched that First
trouble. And I am well assured that the severed Parts, and also the additional
Considerations, are brought to their due and proper places where the Author
himself would have disposed them, if he had transcribed his Papers.

And now I found that I stood in need of more Hands and Eyes then mine own for
the fair transcribing of the Papers (otherwise impossible to be printed) as
also for the examining of the material Quotations in this Volume: and in this
Labor I had the assistance of some Friends to whom the memory of the Author
was very precious. As for some short Allusions and Expressions borrowed out of
ancient Authors, serving rather for Ornament then Support of the Matter in
hand, there seemed to be less need of being sollicitous about all of them: But
for the other Testimonies, which are many and weighty, there were but Few (some
possibly among such a number of Quotations might escape) that were not
examined; and I am sure that this labor was not unnecessary and in vain, how
wearisome soever it was, especially where the Authors, or the places in the
Authors, were not mentioned.

And then for the sake of such Readers whose Education had not acquainted them
with some of the Languages wherein many of the Testimonies were represented,
(being otherwise men of good accomplishments, and capable to receive the
designed benefit of these Papers) it seemed expedient to render the Latin, but
especially the Hebrew and Greek, Quotations into English; (except in such
places where, the substance and main importance of the Quotations being
insinuated in the neighboring words, a Translation was less needful.) For the
Author seldom translated the Hebrew, and more seldom the Greek, but into
Latin; as considering that he delivered these Discourses in the
College-Chappel before an Auditory not needing any such Condescensions as are
requisite in the publishing of these Papers for the benefit of some Readers.

To dispatch this First part of the Preface which concerns the Preparations to
this Edition, I shall add only one thing more; That whereas the Papers now
published (especially those that contained the Six first Discourses) were
written in the Author's own Copy without any Distinction or Sections, (uno
tenore and continua serie, as the Jews observe of the ancient writing of the
Law, (...), The whole Law was but as one Verse;) it seemed expedient for the
Reader's accommodation to distinguish them into several Discourses or Treatises
(the Title Page to each Discourse giving a General account of the Matter
contained therein) and the Discourses themselves into Chapters and Sections
(except the Discourses were short, as two or three of them are, which therefore
have the Contents set in the Beginning) and before the Chapters to give a
Particular account of the Chief matters therein contained; that so the Reader
might have a clearer and fuller view (as of the strength and importance, so
also) of the Contexture of the whole, and the Coherence of the several Parts of
the respective Discourses: which otherwise would not be so easily discerned by
every Reader, especially where there are some Excursions and Digressions in any
of the Treatises, (things not unusual in the Writings or Discourses of other
men, when the Notion does strongly affect and possess their Minds, and their
Phansies are therefore more active and vigorous) and some such Digressions the
Reader will meet with here more then once; though even therein he will see that
the Author did still respicere titulum, and kept the main design always in
his Eye. Nor does the Author in these Digressions lead the Reader a little out
of the way, only to see a Reed shaken with the wind, an ordinary trifle, some
slight and inconsiderable Object; but for better purposes; that he might the
better present to the perspicacious Reader something which is worthy his
Observation: and therefore these (...) being usually of such importance, need
not be severely censured by rigid Methodists, if any such chance to read these
Treatises.

This is a plain Account of some Instances of the care and labor preparatory
to this Edition; of all which I accounted the Author of these Discourses to be
most Of the Author.
worthy: For I considered him as a Friend, one whom I knew for many years, not
only when he was Fellow of Queen's Col. but when a Student in Emman. Col. where
his early Piety and the remembering his Creator in those days of his youth, as
also his excellent improvements in the choicest parts of Learning, endeared him
to many, particularly to his careful Tutor, then Fellow of Emman. Col.
afterward Provost of Kings College, Dr. Whichcote; to whom for his Directions
and Encouragements of him in his Studies, his seasonable provision for his
support and maintenance when he was a young Scholar, as also upon other
obliging Considerations, our Author did ever express a great and singular
regard.

But besides I considered him (which was more) as a true Servant and Friend of
God: and to such a one, and what relates to such, I thought that I owed no less
care and diligence. The former Title [a Servant of God] is very often in
Scripture given to that incomparable person Moses: incomparable for his Act. 7.
22.
Philosophical accomplishments and knowledge of Nature, as also for his
Political Wisdom, and great abilities in the Conduct and managing of affairs;
and in speaking excellent sense, strong and clear Reason in any business and
Case that was before him; for he was mighty in words and in deeds, Acts 7. (and
of both these kinds of Knowledge wherein Moses excelled, as also in the more
recondite and mysterious knowledge of the Egyptians, there are several
Instances and Proofs in the Pentateuch written by him:) incomparable as well
for the loveliness of his Disposition and Temper, the inward ornament and
beauty of a Number. 12. 3.
meek and humble Spirit, as for the extraordinary amiableness of his outward
person; and incomparable for his unexampled Heb. 11. 24, etc.
Self-denial in the midst of the greatest allurements and most tempting
advantages of this world. And from all these great Accomplishments and
Perfections in Moses, it appears how excellently he was qualified and enabled
to answer that Title [The Servant of God] more frequently given to him in
Scripture then unto any other.

The other Title [a Friend of God] is given to Abraham, the Father of the
Faithful, an eminent Exemplar of Self-resignation and Obedience even in Romans 4.
Heb. 11. Jam. 2.
Trials of the greatest difficulty: and it is given to him thrice in Scripture,
2 Chronicles. 20. 7. Esaias 41. 8. James 2. 23. and plainly implied in Genes. 18. 17.
Shall I hide from Abraham, etc. but expressed in the Jerusalem Targum there,
(...), and in De Verbis, Resipuit Noe.
Philo Jud. (...). Nor is less insinuated concerning Moses, with whom God is
said to have spoken, (...) Number. 12. 8.
mouth to mouth, and (...) Exodus 33. 11.
mouth to mouth, as a man speaks unto his friend.

And how fitly and properly both these Titles were verified concerning our
Author, who was a faithful, hearty and industrious Servant of God, counting it
his Duty and Dignity, his Meat and Drink to do the will of his Master in
heaven, and that (...) and (...), from his very Soul, and with good will, (the
Ephesians. 6. 6, 7.
characters of a good Servant) and who was dearly affected toward God, and
treated by God as a Friend; may appear from that Account of him represented in
the Sermon at his Funeral. I might easily fill much Paper, if I should
particularly recount those many Excellencies that shined forth in him: But I
would study to be short. I might truly say, That he was not only Romans 5. 7.
(...), but (...), both a Righteous and truly Honest man, and also a Good man.
He was a Follower and Imitator of God in Purity and Holiness, in Benignity,
Goodness and Love, a Love enlarged as God's Love is, whose Goodness overflows
and spreads it self to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. He
was a Ephesians. 6.
Lover of our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, a Lover of his Spirit and of his
Life, a Lover of his Excellent Laws and Rules of holy life, a serious Practiser
of his Sermon in the Mount, that Best Sermon that ever was Mat. chapter 5, 6, 7.
preached, and yet none more generally neglected by those that call themselves
Christians; though the observance of it be for the true Interest both of men's
Souls and of Christian States and Commonwealths; and accordingly (as being the
surest way to their true Settlement and Establishment) it is compared to the
building upon a Rock, Matthew. 7. 24. To be short, He was a Christian not only
Act. 26. 29.
(...), but (...), more then a little, even wholly and altogether such; a
Christian Romans 2 29.
(...), inwardly and in good earnest: Religious he was, but without any
Vaingloriousness and Ostentation; not so much a talking or a disputing, as a
living, a doing and an obeying Christian; one inwardly acquainted with the
Simplicity and Power of Godliness, but no admirer of the Pharisaick forms and
Sanctimonious shows (though never so goodly and specious) which cannot and do
not affect the adult and strong Christians, though they may and do those that
are unskillful and weak. For in this weak and low state of the divided Churches
in Christendom weak and slight things (especially if they make a fair show in
the flesh, as the Apostle speaks,) are most esteemed; whereas in the mean time
the weightier matters of the Law, the most concerning and Substantial parts of
Religion are passed over and disregarded by them, as being grievous to them,
and no way for their turns, no way for their corrupt interests, fleshly ease,
and worldly advantages. But God's thoughts are not as their thoughts: The Romans
2. 29.
Circumcision which is of the heart, and in the spirit, is that whose praise is
of God, though not of men; and Luke 16. 15.
that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God.

What I shall further observe concerning the Author, is only this,

That he was Eminent as well in those Perfections which have most of Divine
worth and excellency in them, and rendered him a truly God-like man; as in those
other Perfections and Accomplishments of the Mind, which rendered him a very
Rational and Learned man: and withal, in the midst of all these great
Accomplishments, as Eminent and Exemplary in unaffected Humility and true
Lowliness of Mind. And herein he was like to Moses that Servant and Friend of
God, who was most meek and lowly in heart (as our Lord is also said to be, Mat.
11. in this, as in all other respects, greater then Moses who was vir
mitissimus) above all the men which were upon the face of the Earth, Number. 12.
And thus he excelled others as much in Humility as he did in Knowledge, in that
thing which, though in a lesser degree in others, is apt to puff up and swell
them with Pride and Self-conceit. But Moses was humble, though he was a Person
of brave parts, (...)* as Josephus speaks of him, and having had the advantages
of a most Acts 7. 21, 22.
ingenuous Education was admirably, accomplished in the choicest parts of
Knowledge, and * learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; whereby some of the
Ancients understood the Mysterious Hieroglyphical learning, Natural Philosophy,
Music, Physic, and Mathematics. And for this last (to omit the rest) how
excellent this Humble man, the Author, was therein, did appear to those that
heard him read a Mathematick Lecture in the Schools for some years, and may
appear hereafter to the Reader, if those Lectures can be recovered. To
conclude, He was a plain-hearted both Friend and Christian, one in whose Spirit
and mouth there was no guile; a profitable Companion; nothing of vanity and
trislingness in him, as there was nothing of sowrness and Stoicism. I can very
well remember, when I have had private converse with him, how pertinently and
freely he would speak to any Matter proposed, how weighty, substantial and
clearly expressive of his Sense his private Discourses would be, and both for
Matter and Language much-what of the same importance and value with such
Exercises as he studied for, and performed in public.

I have intimated some things concerning the Author; much more might be added:
but it needs not, there being (as I before insinuated) already drawn a fair and
lively Character of him by a worthy Friend of his in the Sermon preached at his
Funeral; for the publishing whereof and annexing it (as now it is) to these
Discourses, he was importuned by Letters from several hands, and prevailed
with: wherein if some part of the Character should seem to have in it any thing
of Hyperbolism and Strangeness, it must seem so to such only who either were
unacquainted with him and Strangers to his worth, or else find it an hard thing
not to be Envious, and a difficulty to be Humble. But those that had a more
inward converse with him, knew him to be one of those Hebr. 11.
of whom the world was not worthy, one of the Psalm. 16.
Excellent ones in the Earth; a person truly Exemplary in the temper and
constitution of his Spirit, and in the well-ordered course of his life; a life
unius quasi coloris, sine actionum dissensione (as I remember Seneca does
express it somewhere in his Epistles) all of one color, everywhere like it
self: and Eminent in those things that are worthy of Praise and Imitation. And
certainly a just Representation of those Excellencies that shined in him (as
also a faithful Celebration of the like Accomplishments in others) is a doing
honor to God who is wonderful in his Saints, (if I may with some apply to this
sense that in Psalm. 68. (...)) and it may be also of great use to others,
particularly for the awakening and obliging them to an earnest endeavoring
after those heights and eminent degrees in Grace and Virtue and every worthy
Accomplishment, which by such Examples they see to be possible and attainable
through the assistances which the Divine Goodness is ready to afford those
Souls which press toward the mark and reach forth to those things that are
before. The Lives and Examples of men eminently Holy and Useful in their
generation, such as were (...), are ever to be valued by us as great Blessings
and Favors from Heaven, and to be considered as excellent Helps to the
Advancement of Religion in the World: and therefore there being before us these
(...), (as S. Basil speaks in his first Epist. and a little afterward in the
same Ep.) (...), such living Pictures, moving and active Statues, fair Ideas
and lively Patterns of what is most praiseworthy, lovely and excellent; it
should be our serious care that we be not, through an unworthy and lazy
Self-neglect, Ingentium Exemplorum parvi imitatores, to use Salvian's
expression; it should be our holy ambition to transcribe their Virtues and
Excellencies, (...), to make their noblest and best Accomplishments our own by
a constant endeavor after the greatest resemblance of them, and by being
followers of them, as they were also of Christ, who is the fair and bright
Exemplar of all Purity and Holiness, the highest and most absolute Pattern of
whatsoever is Lovely and Excellent and makes most for the accomplishing and
perfecting of Humane Nature.

Having observed Some things concerning This Edition Of the Discourses.
and the Author of these Discourses, I proceed now (which was the Last thing
intended in this Preface) to observe something concerning the several
Discourses and Treatises in this Volume. And indeed some of these Observations
I ought not in justice to the Author to pretermit: and all of them may be for
the benefit of at least some Readers.

The First Discourse Concerning the true Way or Method of attaining to Divine
Knowledge, and an Increase therein, was intended by the Author as a necessary
Introduction to the ensuing Treatises; and therefore is the shorter: yet it
contains (...) (to use Plutarch's Expression) excellent Sense and solid Matter
well beaten and compacted and lying close together in a little room, many very
seasonable Observations for this Age, wherein there is so much of fruitless
Notionality, so little of the true Christian life and practice.

Shorter yet are the Two next Tracts Of Superstition and Atheism, which were
also intended by the Author to prepare the way for some of the following
Discourses upon which the Author purposed to enlarge his Thoughts.

Yet as for that Tract Of Superstition, some things that are but briefly
intimated by the Author therein, may receive a further Explication from his
other Discourses, more especially from the Eighth, viz. Of the Shortness and
Vanity of a Pharisaick Righteousness, or Page 347.
An Account of the false Grounds upon which men are apt vainly to conceit
themselves to be Religious. And indeed what the Author writes concerning that
more refined, that more close and subtle Superstition (by which he understands
the formal and specious Sanctity and vain Religion of Pharisaick Christians,
who yet would seem to be very abhorrent from Superstition, and are apt to call
every thing Babylonish and Antichristian that is not of their way) I say what
he writes concerning This in both these (or any other) Discourses, he would
frequently speak of, and that with Authority and Power. For being possessed of
the inward life and power of true Holiness, he had a very strong and clear
sense of what he spoke, and therefore a great and just indignation (as against
open and gross Irreligion, so also) against that vainglorious, slight and
empty Sanctity of the spiritual Pharisees, who would (as our Savior speaks of
the old Pharisees, Mark 7.) make void and very fairly disannul the Commandments
of God, the weightier things of Religion, the indispensable concernments of
Christianity; while in stead of an inward living Righteousness and entire
Obedience they would substitute some external Observances and a mere outward,
liveless and slight Righteousness, and in the room of the New creature made
after God set up some Creature of their own, made after their own image, a
Self-framed Righteousness: they being strict in some things which have a show
of Wisdom and Sanctity, things less necessary and more doubtful, and where the
H. Scripture has not placed the Kingdom of God, but in the mean time loose and
careless in their plain duty toward God and toward their Neighbor, in things
holy and divine, unquestionably just and good; yet to make some compensation
for their being deficient in things strictly and necessarily required, and
primarily pleasing to God, and to excuse themselves, they would express a more
then ordinary diligence and zeal in some easy and little things, as all the
most specious observances of Formal Christians are, and not worthy to be named
with those great Instances of the Power of Godliness, such as Hearty and
Universal Obedience, Entire Self-resignation, a being crucified to the world,
plucking out of the right eye, and cutting off of the right hand, Mortification
of the more dear and beloved Sins, and the closer tendencies and inclinations
to Sin and Vanity, and the like.

This is a short character of the Pharisaick and conceited Righteousness; and
in our Author's plain discovering the thinness and slightness thereof, and free
reproving of these false Religionists, it appears that the same Nobleness of
Mind and Spirit was in him which was also in Christ Jesus, who never expressed
himself with so much vehemence and smartness, as when he was to reprove the
Pharisees in his days, those Patterns of Matthew. 23.
Formal Christians in all ages. For there is nothing more grievous to the
sincerely-religious Soul, then Affectation and Canting in Religion, empty
(though specious) shows of Sanctity, great pretendings to Spirituality and
higher degrees of Grace, when to the freespirited and discerning Christian it
clearly appears that such Boasters are but low and weak things, Heb. 5.
unskillful and unexperienced in the word and way of Righteousness, and
manifestly short of being plain Moral men; and that they are Sensual, having
not the Spirit, nor bringing forth those lovely and well-relish'd fruits of the
Spirit, mentioned Gal. 5. 22. but on the contrary the corrupt fruits of the
Flesh grow out of their Hearts, and the works of the Flesh there mentioned are
manifested in them: So far are they from being crucified (and not alive) to the
world and the world to them, so far are they from having crucified the Flesh
with the affections and lusts, that they do * (...) and (...) Romans 8. Col. 3.
(...), mind and earnestly affect, favor and relish, the things of the Flesh,
and of the Earth; aspiring as much after power and greatness, as self-seeking
and self-pleasing, as great lovers of themselves, loving the world and the
things in the world, making have to be rich, thirsting still after more of this
world, pursuing worldly advantages and interests, with as much craft and
policy, as much solicitude and eagerness, with as unsatisfied desires, as
those do whom they call Worldly and Carnal. So of old the Gnostics called all
others but themselves Carnal and Animal men; they only were (...), others were
(...) and (...) (as Irenaeus l. 1. tells us:) whereas in truth none were more
Sensual, more unspiritual, then they who by their unevangelical lives were the
great spots and blemishes of the Christian profession.

But to let these alone, and to return to the former, (with whom our Author had
to do in both these Treatises, and in the 2, 3, and 4. chapters of his seventh
Treatise) I shall add this word of faithful Admonition; Be not deceived, God is
not mocked: God will not be put off with empty pretenses and Pharisaick
appearances (how glorious and precious soever in the eyes of men.) God will not
be flattered with goodly praises, nor satisfied with words and notions, when
the Life and Practice is a real contradiction to them. God will not be
satisfied with a specious Form of Godliness, when men under this Form are
Lovers of themselves, covetous, 2 Timothy 3.
proud, high-minded, fierce, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, and
are manifestly under the power of these and the like Spiritual (if not also
Fleshly) wickednesses. For the Power of sin within can (it seems) easily agree
and consist with the Form of Godliness without: but two such contrary Powers as
the Power of Godliness and the Power of Sin, two such contrary Kingdoms as the
Kingdom of the Spirit and the Kingdom of the Flesh, which is made up of many
petty and lesser Principalities of Titus 3. 3.
various Lusts and Pleasures, warring sometimes amongst themselves, but always
confederate in warring against the Soul; these so contrary Powers and Kingdoms
cannot stand together nor be established in one Soul. Be wise now therefore and
be ye instructed O ye sanctimonious Pharisees, ye blind leaders of the blind,
and know the things that belong unto your peace: for the day of the Lord will
come that shall burn as an oven, when all those fine coverings, wherewith men
thought to hide their ungodlike dispositions, shall be torn from them and cast
into the Fire; and in this day shall even these weak and beggarly Elements melt
with a fervent heat, and for Hypocrites, Gal. 4.
all their paint shall then drop off, and their deformity shall appear: in this
day all affected modes of Religion shall be rendered despicable, and all
disguises and artificial dresses (whereby false Christians thought to hide
their crookednesses) shall be plucked off, and all things shall appear as they
are. Verily there is a God that judges in the Earth: he will judge of men by
other measures and rules then they used here, whereby they deceived themselves
and others. God is for Reality and Truth: He desires Truth in the inward parts,
his delight is in sincere and single minds. It will then appear That he that
walks uprightly, walks surely; and That he that does the will of God, abides
for ever, Prove. 10. 1 John 2.

If what the Author, out of great Charity to the Souls of men, has observed
concerning these things were seriously considered and laid to heart,
Christianity would then recover its reputation, and appear in its own primitive
luster and native loveliness, such as shined forth in the lives of those First
and Best Christians, who were Christians in good earnest, (...), and were
distinguished from all other men in excelling and outshining them in whatsoever
things were true, venerable, just, pure, lovely, and of good report. Then would
the true Power of Godliness manifest it self; which signifies infinitely More
then a Power to dispute with heat and vehemence about some Opinions, or to
discourse volubly about some matters in Religion, and in such Forms of words as
are taking with the weak and unskillful: More then a power to pray without a
Form of words; (for these and the like may be, and frequently are, done by the
formal and unspiritual Christian:) More then a Power to deny themselves in some
things that are easy to part with, and do not much cross their inclinations,
their self-will, their corrupt designs and interests, nor prejudice their dear
and more beloved lusts and pleasures, their profitable and advantageous Sins:
and More then a power to observe some lesser and easier Commands, or to perform
an outward obedience arising out of slavish Fear, void of inward Life and Love,
and a Complacency in the Law of God (of which temper our Author discourses at
large.) For concerning such cheap and little strictnesses as these it may be
enquired, What do you more then others? Do not even Publicans and Pharisees
the same? (...); what excellent and extraordinary thing do you? what hard or
difficult thing do you perform, such as may deserve to be thought a worthy
Instance and real Manifestation of the Power of Godliness? except such things
are to be accounted hard or extraordinary, which are common to the real and to
the formal Christian, and are performable by unregenerate and natural men, and
are no peculiar Characters of Regeneration. No, these and the like performances
by which such Religionists would set off themselves, are but poor and
inconsiderable things, if compared with the mighty acts and noble achievements
of the more excellent (though less ostentatious) Christians, who through Faith
in the Goodness and Power of God have been enabled to do all things through
Christ, knowing both how to abound, and how to be abased, etc. Phil. 4. enabled
to overcome the World without them, and the Love of the World within them;
enabled to overcome themselves, (and for a man to rule his own Spirit is a
greater instance of power and valor then to take a City, as Solomon judges
Prove. 16.) enabled to resist the powers of darkness, and to quit themselves
like men and good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, giving many signal overthrows to
those Lusts that war against their Souls, and to the mightiest and strongest of
them, the Sons of Anak: and by engaging in the hardest Services of this
Spiritual warfare, wherein the Pharisaick boasters dare not follow them, they
show that there is a Spirit of power in them, and that they can do more then
others. These are some of the Exploits of strong and healthful Christians; and
for the encouraging of them in these Conflicts which shall end in glorious
Conquests and joyous Triumphs, the Author has in the Tenth and last Discourse
suggested what is worthy our Consideration.

But I must not forget that there remains something to be observed concerning
some other Treatises: and having been so large in the last Observation (which
was not unnecessary, the world abounding, and ever having abounded, with
spiritual Pharisees) I shall be shorter in the rest. And now to proceed to the
next, which is of Atheism; This Discourse (being but Preparatory to the ensuing
Tracts) is short: yet I would mind the Reader, that what is more briefly
handled here, may be supplied and further cleared out of the Fifth Discourse,
viz. Of the Existence and Nature of God, of which (if the former part seem more
Speculative, Subtle and Metaphysical, yet) the Latter and Greater part,
containing several Deductions and Inferences from the Consideration of the
Divine Nature and Attributes, is less obscure, and more Practical, as it
clearly directs us to the best (though not much observed) way of glorifying
God, and being made happy and blessed by a Participation and Resemblance of
him; and as it plainly directs a man to such Apprehensions of God as are apt
and powerful to beget in him the Noblest and dearest Love to God, the sweetest
Delight, and the most peaceful Confidence in him.

One thing more I would observe to the Reader concerning the Discourse Of
Atheism, and the same I would desire to be observed also concerning the next,
that large Treatise Of the Immortality of the Soul, especially of the former
part thereof; and it is shortly this, That the Author in these Treatises
pursues his discourse with a particular reflection on the Dogmata and Notions of
Epicurus and his followers, especially that great admirer of him, Lucretius,
whose Principles are here particularly examined and refuted. These were the men
whose Opinions our Author had to combat with; He lived not to see Atheism so
closely and craftily insinuated, nor lived he to see Sadduceism and Epicurism
so boldly owned and industriously propagated, as they have been of late, by
some who being heartily desirous That there were no God, no Providence, no
Reward nor Punishment after this life, take upon them to deride the Notion of
Spirit or Incorporeal Substance, the Existence of Separate Souls, and the Life
to come: and by infusing into men's Minds Opinions contrary to these Fundamental
Principles of Religion, they have done that which manifestly tends to the This
was of old confessed, and boasted of by Lucretius more then once in his Poems.
overthrow of all Religion, the destruction of Morality and Virtuous living,
the debauching of Mankind, the consuming and eating out of any good Principle
left in the Conscience which does testify for God and Goodness, and against
Sin and Wickedness, and to the defacing and expunging of the Law written in
men's hearts; and so the holy Apostle judges of the Epicurean Notions and
discourses, (a taste of which he gives in that passage, 1 Cor. 15. Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we die, and then there is an End of all, no other life
or state,) and he expresses his judgment concerning the evil and dangerousness
of these doctrines and their teachers, partly in a Verse out of Menander,

(...), Evil communications corrupt good manners, and in what he subjoins v.
34. besides many other passages in this Chapter in opposition to the doctrine
of the Sadducees and Epicureans: and to the same purpose he speaks in 2. Tim.
2. 16, 17, 18. concerning those that denied the Doctrine of the Resurrection or
any Future State and the Life to come. The sum and substance of the Apostles
judgment concerning these Epicurean principles is plainly this, That these
Principles properly and powerfully tend to the corrupting of men's Minds and
Lives, to the advancement of Irreligion and Immorality in the world; That they
are no benign Principles to Piety and a Good life. It Is true that some of the
more wary and considerate modern Epicureans, may express some care to live
inoffensively, and to keep out of danger, and to maintain a reputation in the
world as to their converse with others, (and herein they mind their worldly
interests and the advantages of this present life, the only life which they
have in their eye) they may also express a care in avoiding what is prejudicial
to health and a long life in this world: But all this is short of a true and
noble Love of Goodness; and if in these men there be any appearance of what is
Good and praiseworthy, they would have been really better, if they had been of
other Principles, and had believed in their Hearts That there is a Providence,
a Future state, and Life to come, and had lived agreeably to the Truths of the
Christian Philosophy, which do more ennoble and accomplish and every way better
a man, then the Principles of the Epicurean Sect. But to return, We have before
observed. That our Author in these Two Treatises pursued his design in
opposition to the Master-Notions and chief Principles of Epicurus and Lucretius
of old: I shall only add this, That if any of this Sect in our days has done
more then revived and repeated those Principles, if any such has superadded any
thing of any seeming force and moment to the pretensions of the old Epicureans
mentioned in these Tracts, the Reader may find it particularly spoken to and
fully answered by One whom our Author highly esteemed, Mr. Henry More, in his
late Treatise Of the Immortality of the Soul, and in another Discourse
entitled An Antidote against Atheism, and in the Appendix thereunto annexed.

I pass on to the Discourse of Prophecy, which, as it cost the Author more
pains (I believe) then any of the other, (it containing many considerable
Enquiries in an Argument not commonly treated of, and more then vulgar
Observations out of ancient Jewish writers,) so did it (together with the
former part of the next Discourse) require more labor to prepare it for the
Press and the benefit of the Reader then any of the other Tracts, by reason of
the many Quotations, especially the Hebrew ones, to be examined: in the
perusing of which there would sometimes occurr a dubious and dark Expression,
and then I thought it safest to confer with our Hebrew Professor, Dr. Cudworth,
for whom the Author had always a great affection and respect.

It Is true, This Elaborate Treatise is of a more Speculative nature then any of
the rest, yet is it also Useful, and contains sundry Observations not only of
Light and Knowledge but also of Use and Practice. For, besides that in this
Treatise several Passages of Scripture are illustrated out of Jewish Monuments,
(which is no small instance of its Usefulness,) there are Two Chapters (to name
no more) viz. 4, and 8. (the longest in this Treatise) which more particularly
relate to Practice, and might be (if well considered) available to the
bettering of some men's manners. The matter of the Fourth Chapter treating of
the Difference between the true Prophetical Spirit and Enthusiastical
impostures is seasonably useful, and of no small importance. Not to mention
any latter Experiments and Proofs how powerful such Enthusiastical impostures
have been to disquiet and endanger several parts of Christendom, it appears by
good History (and the Event is yet apparent) how strangely that Political
Enthusiast, Mahomet, has befooled a very great part of the world by his
pretensions of being inspired and taught by the divine Spirit whispering in his
ear, by his Epileptical fits, pretended Visions and Revelations. Thus Mahomet's
Dove has as wonderfully prevailed in the World as of old the Roman Eagles:
although yet (which may abate our wondering at this success) this imposturous
and pretendedly-inspired Doctrine was not propagated and promoted with a
Dove-like Spirit, but with force of Arms; Mahumetanism cut out its way by the
Sword, the worst instrument for propagating of Religigion; to say nothing of
the advantages it had from its compliance with Flesh and blood and a Sensual
life, and from the Ignorance, Rudeness and Barbarism of that people to whom
that impure Prophet communicated his Alcoran, a people capable of any doctrine
how absurd and irrational soever. Whereas Christianity was at first promoted
and made its way in the world by methods more innocent and worthy of the
Doctrine of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ that true and great
Prophet, of whom the Voice from heaven was, Matthew 17. See also Acts 3. 22.
Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
Hear ye him: after whose revelation of the Counsel and Will of God to man,
there is not to be expected any new (and by him unrevealed) Doctrine as
pertaining to Life and Godliness and necessary to Salvation. Neither is the
Eighth Chapter, treating of the Dispositions preparatory to Prophesy, without
its Usefulness; there being an easy appliableness of what is contained therein
to such as are pretenders to Prophesying, according to the more general
importance of that Word; and it may be both a just Reproof and a sober Advice
to those who being full of themselves, swelled with Self-conceit, and pufft up
with an opinion of their own Knowledge and Abilities (which yet is but (...),
Job 15. a windy and vain knowledge, a knowledge falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.) and
being wise and righteous in their own eyes, take upon them to be most talkative
and dogmatical, pert and magisterial, Desiring to be Teachers, although they
understand neither what they say, nor 1 Timothy 1.
whereof they affirm; and therefore Modesty and Sparingness of speech and
Swiftness to hear would better become such then Empty Confidence and
Talkativeness, and a pouring out words without knowledge, (...) for indeed this
is the true account of these men and their performances, the weakness and
insignificancy of which (notwithstanding the strong voice and loud noise of the
speakers) are easily discerned by those who in understanding are men, and have
put away childish things.

What I would further intimate concerning this Treatise Of Prophesy, is briefly
this, That though it be one of the largest Treatises in this Volume, yet there
are some parts and passages in it which I think the Author would have more
enlarged and filled up, had he not hastened to that which according to the
method designed by him he calls The Third Great Principle of Religion. But of
this I have given an account in an Page 280.
Advertisement at the end of this Treatise, as also of the adjoining next to it.

The Discourse Of the Legal and the Evangelical Righteousness, etc. which
Discourse is a much Practical as the former was Speculative. Nor was the
composure of that Treatise more painful to the Author, then the elaborating of
this, at least the former half of this, wherein the Author has traversed --
loca nullius ante Trita solo -- the more unknown Records and Monuments of
Jewish Authors, for the better stating the Jewish Notion of the Righteousness
of the Law; the clearing of which in chap. 2, and 3. as also the settling the
Difference between That Righteousness which is of the Law, and That which is of
Faith, between the Old and the New Covenant, and the Account of the Nature of
Justification and Divine Acceptance, etc. are all of them of no small use and
consequence, but together with the Appendix to this Tract (made up of certain
brief but comprehensive Observations) they offer to the Reader what is not
unworthy of his serious consideration.

Of the Eighth Discourse, showing the Vanity of a Pharisaick Righteousness or
Godliness falsely so called, I have spoken before.

The next Discourse, largely treating of the Excellency and Nobleness of True
Religion and Holiness, shows the Author's Mind to have been not slightly
tinctured and washed over with Religion, but rather to have been double-dyed,
thoroughly imbued and colored with that generosum honestum, as the Satyrist not
unfitly styles it, -- incoctum generoso pectus honesto. But the Author's Life
and Actions spoke no less; and indeed there is no language so fully expressive
of a man as the language of his Deeds. Those that were thoroughly acquainted
with him, knew well That as there was in him (...) (as'twas said of Solomon) a
largeness and 1 Kings 4. 29.
vastness of Heart and Understanding, so there was also in him (...) Psalm. 51.
12.
, a free, ingenuous, noble Spirit, most abhorrent of what was sordid and
unworthy; and this (...) (as the Lxx. translate that Hebrew) is the genuine
product of Religion in that Soul where it is suffered to rule, and (as S. James
speaks of Patience) to have her perfect work. The Style in this Tract may seem
more raised and sublime then in the other, (which might be perhaps from the
Nature and quality of the subject matter, apt to heighten expressions;) but yet
in this (as in the other Tracts) it is free from the Vanity of Affectation,
which a Mind truly ennobled by Religion cannot stoop to, as counting it a
Pedantick business, and a certain argument of a Poorness and Weakness of Spirit
in the either Writer or Speaker.

But if in this Tract the Style seem more magnificent, yet in the Tenth and
Last Discourse (viz. Of a Christian's Conflicts and Conquests) it is most
familiar. The Matter of it is very Useful and Practical: for as it more fully
and clearly acquaints a Christian with the more dangerous and unseen Methods of
Satan's activity, (concerning which the Notions and Conceptions of many men are
discovered here to be very short and imperfect;) so it also acquaints him with
such Principles as are available to beget in him the greatest Courage, Spirit
and Resolution against the day of battle, chasing away all lazy
faintheartedness and despair of Victory. This for the Matter. The Style is (as
I said) most familiar. This Discourse was delivered in public at Huntingdon,
where one of Queen's College is every year on March 25. to preach a Sermon
against Witchcraft, Diabolical Contracts, etc. I shall only add this, That
when he preached in lesser Country-Auditories (particularly at Achurch near
Oundle in Northamptonshire, the place of his Nativity) as it was his care to
preach upon arguments of most practical concernment, so was it also his Desire
and Endeavor to accommodate his Expressions to ordinary vulgar Capacities;
being studious to be understood, and not to be ignorantly wondered at by amuzing
the People either with high unnecessary Speculations, or with hard Words and
vain Ostentations of Scholastic Learning (the low design of some that by such
arts would gain a poor respect to themselves, for such (and no better) is all
that stupid respect which is not founded upon Knowledge and Judgment:) He was
studious, I say, there to speak unto men (...) Edification, and (...) what was
significant and easy to be understood, as the 1 Cor. ^4. 3, and 9.
Apostle does phrase it, and to express his Mind in a way suitable to the
apprehensions of Popular Auditories. And as for the Discourses now published,
they also were delivered (being College-Exercises) in a way not less suitable
to that Auditory: and therefore it may not be thought strange, if sometimes
they seem for Matter and Style more remote from vulgar capacities. Yet even in
these Discourses what is most Practical, is more easily intelligible by every
honest-hearted Christian. And indeed, that the whole might be made more
familiar and easy, and more accommodate to the use of any such, I thought it
would be very expedient (as to cast the Discourses into Chapters, so) before
every Chapter to propose to the Readers view the full Scope, Sense and Strength
of the principal Matters contained therein: and I could willingly have spared
such a labor (the greater, when busied about the Notions and Conceptions of
another, and not our own,) if I had not conceived it to be greatly helpful and
beneficial to some Readers: besides another advantage to them hereby, viz. That
they may the more easily find out and select any such particular Matters in
these Discourses, as they shall think most fit or desirable for their perusal.

Thus have I given the Reader some account of what seemed fit to be observed
concerning these Ten Discourses, which now present themselves to his free and
candid Judgment. And now if in the reading of these Tracts enriched with
Arguments of great variety there should occur any Passage wherein either He or
I may (...), it need not be a matter of wonder; for what Book (besides that
Book of Books, the Bible) has not something in it that speaks the Author Man?
It would not have displeased our Author in his lifetime to have been thought
less then Infallible. He was not (...), he was no fond Self-admirer, nor was he
desirous that others should have his person, his opinion and judgment, in
admiration: he was far from the humor of Magisterial dictating to others, not
ambitious to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi, as were and are the old and the
Matthew 23.
modern Pharisees; nor of the number of those who are inwardly transported and
tickled, when others applaud their judgment and receive their Dictates with the
greatest veneration and respect; but very peevish and sour, disturbed and out
of order, when any shall express themselves dissatisfied and otherwise minded,
or go about modestly to discover their mistakes. No, he was truly (...), a
lover of Truth, and of Peace and Charity. He loved an ingenuous and sober
Freedom of Spirit, the generous Berean-like temper and practice (agreeable to
the * Apostle's prudent and faithful advice) of proving all things, and holding
fast 1 Thessalonians. 5.
that which is good. But to return, Its possible that some Passages in these
Tracts which seem dubious, may, upon a patient considering of them, if the
Reader be unprejudiced and one of a clear Mind and Heart, gain his assent; and
what upon the first reading seems obscure and less grateful, may upon another
view, and further thoughts, clear up and be thought worthy of all acceptance.
It is not with the fair Representations and Pictures of the Mind as with other
Pictures; these of the Mind show best the nearer they are viewed, and the
longer the Intellectual Eye dwells upon them.

There is only one thing more which I ought not to forget to mind the Reader
of, and it is shortly this, That he would please to remember that the
now-published Tracts are Posthumous works; and then affording that charity,
candor and fair respect which is commonly allowed to such works of Worthy men,
I nothing doubt but he will judge them too good to have been buried in
obscurity; although its likely, if the Author himself had revised them in his
lifetime with an intent to present them to public view, they would have
received from his happy hand some further polishing and enlargements. He could
have easily obliged the world with other Discourses of as valuable importance,
if he had lived and been so minded. But it pleased the onlywise God (in whose
hand our breath is) to call for him home to the Spirits of just men made
perfect, after he had lent him to this unworthy world for about Five and thirty
years. A short life his was if we measure it by so many years; but if we
consider the great Ends of Life and Being in the world, which he fulfilled in
his generation, his great Accomplishments qualifying him for eminent Service,
and accompanied with as great a Readiness to approve himself a good and
faithful Servant to his gracious Lord and Master in heaven, his life was not to
be accounted short, but long; and we may justly say of him what is said by the
Author of the Book of Wisdom concerning Enoch, that great Exemplar of holiness
and the shortest-liv'd of the Patriarchs before the flood, (for he lived but
365 years, as many years as there are days in one year,) Chapter 4. 13.
(...), He being consummated in a short time, fulfilled a long time. For (as
the same Author does well express it in some * preceding verses) Ver. 8, 9.
Honorable age is not that which stands in length of time, nor that which is
measured by number of years: But Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an
unspotted life is old age.

Thus much for the Papers now published. There are some other pieces of this
Author's (both English and Latin) which may make another considerable Volume,
especially if some papers of his (in other hands) can be retriv'd. For my
particular, I shall wish and endeavor that not the least Fragment of his may
be concealed, which his Friends shall think worthy of publishing: and I think
all such Fragments being gathered up may fitly be brought together under the
Title of Miscellanies. If others who have any of his Papers shall please to
communicate them, I doubt not but that there will be found in some of his
Friends a readiness to publish them with all due care and faithfulness. Or if
they shall think good to do it themselves and publish them apart, I would
desire and hope that they would bestow that labor and diligence about the
preparing them for public view and use, as may testify their respect both to
the Readers benefit and the honor of the Author's memory.

And now that this Volume is finished through the good guidance and assistance
of God, the Father of lights and the Father of mercies, (whose rich Goodness
and Grace in enabling me both to will and to do, and to continue patiently in
so doing, notwithstanding the many tedious difficulties accompanying such kind
of labor, I desire humbly to acknowledge;) now that the severed Papers are
brought together in this Collection to their due and proper places, (as it was
said of the Bones scattered in the valley, that they came together, bone to his
bone, Ezekiel. 37.) what remains but that the Lord of life, he who gives to all
things life and breath, be with all earnestness and humility implored, That he
would please to put breath into these (otherwise dry) Bones, that they may
live; That besides this Paper-life (which is all that Man can give to these
Writings) they may have a living Form and Vital Energy within us; That the
Practical Truths contained in these Discourses may not be unto us a Dead
letter, but Spirit and Life? That He who teaches us to profit, would prosper
these Papers for the attainment of all those good Ends to which they are
designed; That it would please the God of all grace to remove all darkness and
prejudice from the Mind and Heart of any Reader, and whatsoever would hinder
the fair reception of Truth; That the Reader may have an inward, Practical and
feeling knowledge of the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, and live a
life worthy of that Knowledge; is the Prayer of

His Servant in Christ Jesus, JOHN WORTHINGTON.
Cambridge, December 22. 1659. [In this Epistle page vii. lin. alt. for mouth
to mouth, r. face to face.]
The CONTENTS of the several DISCOURSES in this Volume.
DISCOURSE I. Of the true WAY or METHOD of attaining to DIVINE KNOWLEDGE.
SEct. I. That Divine things are to be understood rather by a Spiritual
Sensation then a Verbal Description, or mere Speculation. Sin and Wickedness
prejudicial to True Knowledge. That Purity of Heart and Life, as also an
Ingenuous Freedom of Judgment, are the best Grounds and Preparations for the
Entertainment of Truth. Page. 1. Sect. II. An Objection against the Method of
Knowing laid down in the former Section, answered. That Men generally,
notwithstanding their Apostasy, are furnished with the Radical Principles of
True Knowledge. Men want not so much Means of knowing what they ought to do,
as Wills to do what they know. Practical Knowledge differs from all other
Knowledge, and excells it. page 13. Sect. III. Men may be considered in a
Fourfold capacity in order to the perception of Divine things. That the Best
and most excellent Knowledge of Divine things belongs only to the true and
sober Christian; and that it is but in its infancy while he is in this Earthly
Body. page 17.
DISCOURSE II. OF SUPERSTITION.
THE true Notion of Superstition well expressed by (...), i. e. an
over-timorous and dreadful apprehension of the Deity. A false Opinion of the
Deity the true Cause and Rise of Superstition. Superstition is most incident to
such as Converse not with the Goodness of God, or are conscious to themselves
of their own unlikeness to him. Right apprehensions of God beget in man a
Nobleness and Freedom of Soul. Superstition, though it looks upon God as an
angry Deity, yet it counts him easily pleased with flattering Worship.
Apprehensions of a Deity and Guilt meeting together are apt to excite Fear.
Hypocrites to spare their Sins seek out ways to compound with God. Servile and
Superstitious Fear is increased by Ignorance of the certain Causes of Terrible
Effects in Nature etc. as also by frightful Apparitions of Ghosts and Specter.
A further Consideration of Superstition as a Composition of Fear and Flattery.
A fuller Definition of Superstition, according to the Sense of the Ancients.
Superstition does not always appear in the same Form, but passes from one Form
to another, and sometimes shrouds it self under Forms seemingly Spiritual and
more refined. page 25.
DISCOURSE III. OF ATHEISM.
THat there is a near Affinity between Atheism and Superstition. That
Superstition does not only prepare the way for Atheism. but promotes and
strengthens it. That Epicurism is but Atheism under a mask. A Confutation of
Epicurus his Master-notion, together with some other pretenses and Dogmata of
his Sect. The true Knowledge of Nature is advantageous to Religion. That
Superstition is more tolerable then Atheism. That Atheism is both ignoble and
uncomfortable. What low and unworthy notions the Epicureans had concerning
Man's Happiness: and what trouble they were put to How to define, and Where to
place true Happiness. A true belief of a Deity supports the Soul with a present
Tranquillity and future Hopes. Were it not for a Deity, the World would be
unhabitable. p. 41.
DISCOURSE IV. OF THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL.
CHap. I. The First and main Principles of Religion, viz. 1. That God is. 2.
That God is a rewarder of them that seek him: Wherein is included the Great
Article of the Immortality of the Soul. These two Principles acknowledged by
religious and serious persons in all Ages. 3. That God communicates himself to
mankind by Christ. The Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul discoursed of in
the first place, and why? page 59. Chap. II. Some Considerations preparatory to
the proof of the Souls Immortality. page 63. Chap. III. The First Argument for
the Immortality of the Soul. That the Soul of man is not Corporeal. The gross
absurdities upon the Supposition that the Soul is a Complex of fluid Atoms, or
that it is made up by a fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, which is Epicurus his
Notion concerning Body. The Principles and Dogmata of the Epicurean Philosophy
in opposition to the Immateriall and Incorporeall nature of the Soul, asserted
by Lucretius, but discovered to be false and insufficient. That Motion cannot
arise from Body or Matter. Nor can the power of Sensation arise from Matter:
Much less can Reason. That all Humane knowledge has not its rise from Sense.
The proper function of Sense, and that it is never deceived. An Addition of
Three Considerations for the enforcing of this first Argument, and further
clearing the Immateriality of the Soul. That there is in man a Faculty which 1.
controlls Sense: and 2. collects and unites all the Perceptions of our several
Senses. 3. That Memory and Prevision are not explicable upon the supposition of
Matter and Motion. page 68. Chap. IV. The Second Argument for the Immortality
of the Soul. Actions either Automatical or Spontaneous. That Spontaneous and
Elicite Actions evidence the distinction of the Soul from the Body. Lucretius
his Evasion very slight and weak. That the Liberty of the Will is inconsistent
with the Epicurean principles. That the Conflict of Reason against the
Sensitive Appetite argues a Being in us superior to Matter. page 85. Chap. V.
The Third Argument for the Immortality of the Soul. That Mathematical Notions
argue the Soul to be of a true Spiritual and Immaterial Nature. page 93. Chap.
VI. The Fourth Argument for the Immortality of the Soul. That those clear and
stable Ideas of Truth which are in Man's Mind evince an Immortal and Immaterial
Substance residing in us, distinct from the Body. The Soul more knowable then
the Body. Some passages out of Plotinus and Proclus for the further confirming
of this Argument. page 96. Chap. VII. What it is that, beyond the Highest and
most subtle Speculations whatsoever, does clear and evidence to a Good man the
Immortality of his Soul. That True Goodness and Virtue begets the most raised
Sense of this Immortality. Plotinus his excellent Discourse to this purpose.
page 101. Chap. VIII. An Appendix containing an Enquiry into the Sense and
Opinion of Aristotle concerning the Immortality of the Soul. That according to
him the Rational Soul is separable from the Body and Immortal The true meaning
of his Intellectus Agens and Patiens. page 106. Chap. IX. A main Difficulty
concerning the Immortality of the Soul [viz. The strong Sympathy of the Soul
with the Body] answered. An Answer to another Enquiry, viz. Under what account
Impressions derived from the Body do fall in Morality. p. 112.
DISCOURSE V. OF THE EXISTENCE and NATURE OF GOD.
CHap. I. That the Best way to know God is by an attentive reflection upon our
own Souls. God more clearly and lively pictured upon the Souls of Men, then
upon any part of the Sensible World. page 123. Chap. II. How the Contemplation
of our own Souls, and a right Reflection upon the Operations thereof, may lead
us into the knowledge of 1. The Divine Unity and Omniscience, 2. God's
Omnipotence, 3. The Divine Love and Goodness, 4. God's Eternity, 5. His
Omnipresence, 6. The Divine Freedom and Liberty. p. 126. Chap. III. How the
Consideration of those restless motions of our Wills after some Supreme and
Infinite Good, leads us into the knowledge of a Deity. page 135. Chap. IV.
Deductions and Inferences from the Consideration of the Divine Nature and
Attributes. 1. That all Divine productions are the free Effluxes of Omnipotent
Love and Goodness. The true Notion of God's glory what it is. Men very apt to
mistake in this point. God needs not the Happiness or Misery of his Creatures
to make himself glorious by. God does most glorify himself by communicating
himself: we most glorify God when we most partake of him, and resemble him
most. page 140.
Chap. V. A second Deduction. 2. That all things are supported and governed by
an Almighty Wisdom and Goodness. An Answer to an Objection made against the
Divine Providence from an unequal distribution of things here below. Such
quarrelling with Providence arises from a Paedanticall and Carnal notion of
Good and Evil. page 144.
Chap. VI. A third Deduction. 3. That all true Happiness consists in a
participation of God arising out of the assimilation and conformity of our
Souls to him; and, That the most real Misery arises out of the Apostasy of
Souls from God. No enjoyment of God without our being made like to him. The
Happiness and Misery of Man defined and stated, with the Original and
Foundation of both. page 147.
Chap. VII. A fourth Deduction. 4. The fourth Deduction acquaints us with the
true Notion of the Divine Justice, That the proper scope and design of it, is
to preserve Righteousness, to promote and encourage true Goodness. That it does
not primarily intend Punishment, but only takes it up as a mean to prevent
Transgression. True Justice never supplants any that it self may appear
glorious in their ruins. How Divine Justice is most advanced. page 151.
Chap. VIII. The fifth and last Deduction. 5. That seeing there is such an
Intercourse and Society as it were between God and Men, therefore there is also
some Law between them, which is the Bond of all Communion. The Primitive rules
of God's Economy in this world, not the sole Results of an Absolute Will, but
the sacred Decrees of Reason and Goodness. God could not design to make us
Sinful or Miserable. Of the Law of Nature embosom'd in Man's Soul, how it
obliges man to love and obey God, and to express a Godlike spirit and life in
this world. All Souls the Offspring of God; but Holy Souls manifest themselves
to be, and are more peculiarly, the Children of God. page 154.
Chap. IX. An Appendix concerning the Reason of Positive Laws. page 158. Chap.
X. The Conclusion of this Treatise concerning the Existence and Nature of God,
showing how our Knowledge of God comes to be so imperfect in this State, while
we are here in this Terrestrial Body. Two ways observed by Plotinus, whereby
This Body does prejudice the Soul in her Operations. That the better
Philosophers and more contemplative Jews did not deny the Existence of all kind
of Body in the other state. What meant by Zoroaster's (...). What kind of
knowledge of God cannot be attained to in this life. What meant by Flesh and
Blood, 1 Cor. 15. page 162.
DISCOURSE VI. OF PROPHECY.
CHap. I. That Prophecy is the way whereby Revealed Truth is dispensed and
conveyed to us. Man's Mind capable of conversing and being acquainted as well
with Revealed or Positive Truth, as with Natural Truth. Truths of Natural
inscription may be excited in us and cleared to us by means of Prophetical
Influence. That the Scripture frequently accommodates it self to vulgar
apprehension, and speaks of things in the greatest way of condescension. page
169. Chap. II. That the Prophetical Spirit did not always manifest it self
with the same clearness and evidence. The Gradual difference of Divine
illumination between Moses, the Prophets, and the Hagiographi. A general survey
of the Nature of Prophecy properly so called. Of the joint impressions and
operations of the Understanding and Fancy in Prophecy. Of the four degrees
of Prophecy. The difference between a Vision and a Dream. page 176. Chap. III.
How the Prophetical Dreams did differ from all other kinds of Dreams recorded
in Scripture. This further illustrated out of several passages of Philo Judaeus
pertinent to this purpose. page 183. Chapter IV. A large account of the Difference
between the true Prophetical Spirit and Enthusiastical impostures. That the
Pseudo-Prophetical Spirit is seated only in the Imaginative Powers and
Faculties inferior to reason. That Plato and other Wise men had a very low
opinion of this Spirit, and of the Gift of Divination, and of Consulting the
Oracles. That the True Prophetical Spirit seats it self as well in the Rational
Powers as in the Sensitive, and that it never alienates the Mind, but informs
and enlightens it. This further cleared by several Testimonies from Gentile and
Christian Writers of old. An Account of those Fears and Consternatioons which
often seized upon the Prophets. How the Prophets perceived when the Prophetical
influx seized upon them. The different Evidence and Energy of the True and
false Prophetical Spirit. p. 190. Chap. V. An Enquiry concerning the Immediate
Efficient that represented the Prophetical Visions to the Fancy of the
Prophet. That these Representations were made in the Prophet's Fancy by some
Angel. This cleared by several passages out of the Jewish Monuments, and by
Testimonies of Scripture. page 210. Chap. VI. The Second Enquiry, What the
meaning of those Actions is that are frequently attributed to the Prophets,
whether they were Real, or only Imaginary and Scenical. What Actions of the
Prophets were only Imaginary and performed upon the Stage of Fancy. What we
are to think of several Actions and res gestae recorded of Hosea, Jeremie and
Ezekiel in their Prophesies. p. 220. Chap. VII. Of that Degree of Divine
inspiration properly called Ruach hakkodesh, i. e. The Holy Spirit. The Nature
of it described out of Jewish Antiquities. Wherein this Spiritus Sanctus
differed from Prophecy strictly so called, and from the Spirit of Holiness in
purified Souls. What Books of the Old Testament were ascribed by the Jews to
Ruach hakkodesh. Of the Urim and Thummim. page 229. Chap. VIII. Of the
Dispositions antecedent and preparatory to Prophecy. That the Qualifications
which did fit a man for the Prophetical Spirit were such as these, viz. Inward
Piety, True Wisdom, a Pacate and Serene temper of Mind, and a due cheerfulness
of Spirit; in opposition to Vitiousness, Mental crazedness and inconsistency,
unsubdued Passions, black Melancholy and dull Sadness. This illustrated by
several Instances in Scripture. That Music was greatly advantageous to the
Prophets and Holy men of God, etc. What is meant by Readiness Evil Spirit. page
240. Chap. IX. Of the Sons or Disciples of the Prophets. An Account of several
Schools of Prophetical Education, as at Naioth in Rama, at Jerusalem, Jericho,
Gilgal, etc. Several passages in the Historical Books of Scripture pertinent to
this Argument explained. page 252. Chap. X. Of Bath Kol, i. e. Filia Vocis:
That it succeeded in the room of Prophecy: That it was by the Jews counted the
Lowest degree of Revelation. What places in the New Testament are to be
understood of it. page 257. Chap. XI. Of the Highest Degree of Divine
Inspiration, viz. the Mosaical. Four Differences between the Divine Revelations
made to Moses, and to the rest of the Prophets. How the Doctrine of men
Prophetically inspired is to approve it self by Miracles, or by it is
Reasonableness. The Sympathy and Agreeableness between an Holy Mind and Divine
Truth. page 261. Chap. XII. When the Prophetical Spirit ceased in the Jewish
Church. The Cessation of Prophecy noted as a famous Epoch by the Jews. The
restoring of the Prophetical Spirit by Christ. Some passages to this purpose in
the New Testament explained. When the Prophetical Spirit ceased in the
Christian Church. That it did not continue long, proved by several Testimonies
of the Ancient Writers. page 267. Chap. XIII. Some Rules and Observations
concerning Prophetical Writ in general. page 272.
DISCOURSE VII. OF THE RIGHTEOUSNESS Legal. Evangelical.


CHap. I. The Introduction, showing What it is to have a right Knowledge of
Divine Truth, and What it is that is either Available or Prejudicial to the
true Christian Knowledge and Life. page 285. Chap. II. An Enquiry into that
Jewish Notion of a Legal Righteousness, which is opposed by S. Paul. That their
notion of it was such as this, viz. That the Law externally dispensed to them
(though it were, as a Dead letter, merely without them) and conjoined with the
power of their own Free Will, was sufficient to procure them Acceptance with
God, and to acquire Merit enough to purchase Eternal Life, Perfection and
Happiness. That this their Notion had these two Grounds; First, An Opinion of
their own Self-sufficiency, and that their Free Will was so absolute and
perfect, as that they needed not that God should do any thing for them but
only furnish them with some Laws to exercise this Innate power about. That they
asserted such a Freedom of Will as might be to them a Foundation of Merit. page
288. Chap. III. The Second ground of the Jewish Notion of a Legal
Righteousness, viz. That the Law delivered to them on Mount Sinai was a
sufficient Dispensation from God, and all that needed to be done by him to
bring them to Perfection and Happiness: and That the Scope of their, Law was
nothing but to afford them several ways and means of Merit. The Opinion of the
Jewish Writers concerning Merit and the Reward due to the Works of the Law.
Their distinguishing of men in order to Merit and Demerit into three sorts,
viz. Perfectly righteous, Perfectly wicked, and a middle sort betwixt these.
The Mercenary and Low Spirit of the Jewish Religion. An Account of what the
Cabbalists held in this Point of Legal Righteousness. page 297. Chap. IV. The
Second Enquiry, Concerning the Evangelical Righteousness or the Righteousness
of Faith, and the true difference between the Law and the Gospel, the Old and
the New Covenant, as it is laid down by the Apostle Paul. A more General
Ansiver to this enquiry, together with a General observation of the Apostle's
main End in opposing Faith to the Works of the Law, viz. To beat down the
Jewish proud conceit of Merit. A more particular and Distinct answer to the
Enquiry, viz. That the Law or Old Covenant is considered only as an External
administration, a dead thing in it self, a Dispensation consisting in an
Outward and Written Law of Precepts: but the Gospel or New Covenant is an
Internal thing, a Vital Form and Principle of Righteousness in the Souls of
men, an Inward manifestation of Divine Life, and a living Impression upon the
Minds and Spirits of Men. This proved from several Testimonies of Scripture.
page 308. Chap. V. Two Propositions for the better understanding of the
Doctrine of Justification and Divine Acceptance. 1. Prop. That the Divine
judgment and estimation of every thing is according to the truth of the thing;
and God's acceptance or disacceptance of things is suitable to his judgment. On
what account S. James does attribute a kind of Justification to Good works. 2.
Prop. God's justifying of Sinners in pardoning their Sins carries in it a
necessary reference to the sanctifying of their Natures. This abundantly proved
from the Nature of the thing. page 325. Chap. VI. How the Gospel-righteousness
is conveyed to us by Faith, made to appear from these two Considerations. 1.
The Gospel lays a strong foundation of a cheerful dependence upon the Grace
and Love of God, and affiance in it. This confirmed by several
Gospel-expressions containing plainly in them the most strong Motives and
Encouragements to all ingenuous addresses to God, to all cheerful dependence
on him, and confident expectation of all assistance from him. 2. A true
Evangelical Faith is no lazy or languid thing, but an ardent breathing and
thirsting after Divine grace and righteousness: it looks beyond a mere pardon
of sin, and mainly pursues after an inward participation of the Divine nature.
The mighty power of a living Faith in the Love and Goodness of God, discoursed
of throughout the whole Chapter. page 332. Chap. VII. An Appendix to the
foregoing Discourse; How the whole business and Undertaking of Christ is
eminently available both to give full relief and ease to our Minds and Hearts,
and also to encourage us to Godliness or a God-like righteousness, briefly
represented in sundry Particulars. page 343.
DISCOURSE VIII. OF THE SHORTNESS OF A Pharisaick Righteousness.
CHap. I. A General account of men's Mistakes about Religion. Men are no where
more lazy and sluggish, and more apt to delude themselves, then in matters of
Religion. The Religion of most men is but an Image and Resemblance of their own
Fancies. The Method propounded for discoursing upon those words in S. Matthew.
1. To discover some of the Mistakes and False Notions about Religion. 2. To
discover the Reason of these Mistakes. A brief Explication of the Words. page
349. Chap. II. An Account of men's Mistakes about Religion in 4 Particulars. 1.
A Partial obedience to some Particular Precepts. The False Spirit of Religion
spends it self in some Particulars, is confined, is overswayed by some
prevailing Lust. Men of this spirit may by some Book-skill, and a zeal about
the Externals of Religion, loose the sense of their own Guiltiness, and of
their deficiencies in the Essentials of Godliness, and fansy themselves nearly
related to God. Where the true Spirit of Religion is it informs and actuates
the whole man, it will not be confined, but will be absolute within us, and not
suffer any corrupt Interest to grow by it. p. 353. Chap. III. The Second
Mistake about Religion, viz. A mere compliance of the Outward man with the Law
of God. True Religion seats it self in the Center of men's Souls, and first
brings the Inward man into Obedience to the Law of God: the Superficial
Religion intermeddles chiefly with the Circumference and Outside of men; or
rests in an outward abstaining from some Sins. Of Speculative and the most
close and Spiritual wickedness within. How apt men are to sink all Religion
into Opinions and External Forms. page 357. Chap. IV. The Third Mistake about
Religion, viz. A constrained and forced Obedience to God's Commandments. The
Religion of many (some of whom would seem most abhorrent from Superstition) is
nothing else but Superstition properly so called. False Religionists, having no
inward sense of the Divine Goodness, cannot truly love God: Yet their sour and
dreadful apprehensions of God compel them to serve him. A slavish spirit in
Religion may be very prodigal in such kind of serving God as does not pinch
their Corruptions; but in the great and weightier matters of Religion, in such
things as prejudice their beloved Lusts, it is very needy and sparing. This
servile Spirit has low and mean thoughts of God, but an high opinion of its
Outward services, as conceiting that by such cheap things God is gratified and
becomes indebted to it. The different Effects of Love and Slavish fear in the
truly, and in the falsely, Religious. page 361. Chap. V. The Fourth and last
Mistake about Religion, When a mere Mechanical and Artificial Religion is taken
for that which is a true Impression of Heaven upon the Souls of men, and which
moves like a new Nature. How Religion is by some made a piece of Art, and how
there may be specious and plausible Imitations of the Internals of Religion as
well as of the Externals. The Method and Power of Fansy in contriving such
Artificial imitations. How apt men are in these to deceive both themselves and
others. The Difference between those that are governed in their Religion by
Fansy, and those that are actuated by the Divine Spirit and in whom Religion is
a living Form. That True Religion is no Art, but a new Nature. Religion
discovers it self best in a Serene and clear Temper of Mind, in deep Humility,
Meekness, Self-denial, Universal love of God and all true Goodness. p. 366.
DISCOURSE IX. OF THE EXCELLENCY and NOBLENESS OF RELIGION.
CHap. I. 1. The Nobleness of Religion in regard of its Original and Fountain:
it comes from Heaven and moves toward Heaven again. God the First Excellency
and Primitive Perfection. All Perfections and Excellencies in any kind are to
be measured by their approach to, and Participation of, the First Perfection.
Religion the greatest Participation of God: none capable of this Divine
Communication but the Highest of created Beings: and consequently Religion is
the greatest Excellency. A twofold Fountain in God whence Religion flows, viz.
1. His Nature. 2. His Will. Of Truth Natural and Revealed. Of an Outward and
Inward Revelation of God's Will. page 380. Chap. II. 2. The Nobleness of
Religion in respect of it is Nature, briefly discovered in some Particulars. How
a man actuated by Religion 1. lives above the world; 2. converses with himself,
and knows how to love, value and reverence himself, in the best sense; 3. lives
above himself, not being content to enjoy himself, except he may enjoy God too,
and himself in God. How he denies himself for God. To deny a man's self, is not
to deny Right Reason, for that were to deny God, in stead of denying himself
for God. Self-love the only Principle that acts wicked men. The happy
privileges of a Soul united to God. page 385. Chap. III. 3. The Nobleness of
Religion in regard of its Properties, etc. of which this is one, 1. Religion
enlarges all the Faculties of the Soul, and begets a true Ingenuity, Liberty
and Amplitude, the most Free and Generous Spirit in the Minds of Good men. The
nearer any Being comes to God, the more large and free; the further is slides
from God, the more streightened. Sin is the sinking of man's Soul from God into
sensual Selfishness. An account when the most Generous freedom of the Soul is
to be taken in its just proportions. How Mechanical and Formal Christians make
an Art of Religion, set it such bounds as may not exceed the scant Measure of
their Principles; and then fit their own Notions as so many Examples to it. A
Good man finds not his Religion without him, but as a living Principle within
him. God's Immutable and Eternal Goodness the Unchangeable Rule of his Will.
Pecvish, Self-willed and Imperious men shape out such Notions of God as are
agreeable to this Pattern of themselves. The Truly Religious have better
apprehensions of God. page 392. Chap. IV. The Second Property discovering the
Nobleness of Religion, viz. That it restores man to a just power and dominion
over himself, enables him to overcome his Self-will and Passions. Of Self-will,
and the many Evils that flow from it. That Religion does nowhere discover its
power and prowess so much, as in subduing this dangerous and potent Enemy. The
Highest and Noblest Victories are those over our Self-will and Passions. Of
Self-denial, and the having power over our Wills; the Happiness and the
Privileges of such a State. How that Magnanimity and Puissance which Religion
begets in Holy Souls differs from and excells that Gallantry and Puissance
which the great Nimrods of this world boast of. page 397. Chap. V. The Third
Property or Effect discovering the Nobleness of Religion, viz. That it directs
and enables a man to propound to himself the Best End, viz. The Glory of God,
and his own becoming like unto God. Low and Particular Ends and Interests both
debase and streighten a man's Spirit: The Universal, Highest and Last End both
ennobles and enlarges it. A man is such as the End is he aims at. The great
power the End has to mold and fashion man into its likeness. Religion obliges
a man (not to seek himself, nor to drive a trade for himself; but) to seek the
Glory of God, to live wholly to him; and guides him steddily and uniformly to
the One Chief Good and Last End. Men are prone to flatter themselves with a
pretended aiming at the Glory of God. A more full and distinct explication of
what is meant by a man's directing all his actions to the Glory of God. What it
is truly and really to glorify God. God's seeking his Glory in respect of us
is the flowing forth of his Goodness upon us: Our seeking the Glory of God is
our endeavoring to partake more of God, and to resemble him (as much as we
can) in true Holiness and every Divine Virtue. That we are not nicely to
distinguish between the Glory of God and our own Salvation. That Salvation is
nothing else for the main but a true Participation of the Divine Nature. To
love God above our selves, is not to love him above the Salvation of our Souls;
but above our particular Beings and above our sinful affections, etc. The
Difference between Things that are Good relatively, and those that are Good
absolutely and Essentially: That in our conformity to these God is most
glorified, and we are made most Happy. page 403. Chap. VI. The Fourth Property
or Effect discovering the Excellency of Religion, viz. That it begets the
greatest Serenity and Composedness of Mind, and brings the truest Contentment,
the purest and most satisfying Joy and Pleasure to every holy Soul. God, as
being that Uniform chief Good, and the One last End, does attract and fix the
Soul. Wicked men distracted through a Multiplicity of Objects and Ends. How the
restless Appetite of our Wills after some Supreme Good leads to the knowledge
(as of a Deity, so) of the Unity of a Deity. How the Joys and Delights of Good
men differ from and far excel those of the Wicked. The Constancy and
Tranquillity of the Spirits of Good men in reference to External troubles. All
Perturbations of the Mind arise from an Inward rather then an Outward Cause.
The Stoics Method for attaining (...) and true rest examined, and the
Insufficiency of it discovered. A further Illustration of what has been said
concerning the Peaceful and Happy State of Good men, from the contrary State
of the Wicked. page 412. Chap. VII. The Fifth Property or Effect discovering
the Excellency of Religion, viz. That it advances the Soul to an holy boldness
and humble familiarity with God, and to a comfortable confidence concerning the
Love of God toward it, and its own Salvation. Fearfulness, Consternation of
Mind and frightfull passions are consequent upon Sin and Guilt. These together
with the most dismal deportments of Trembling and amazement are agreeable to
the nature of the Devil, who delights to be served in this manner by his
worshippers. Love, Joy and Hope are most agreeable to the nature of God, and
most pleasing to him. The Right apprehensions of God are such as are apt to
beget Love to God, Delight and Confidence in him. A true Christian is more for
a solid and well-grounded Peace then for high raptures and feelings of joy. How
a Christian should endeavor the Assurance of his Salvation. That he should not
importunately expect or desire some extraordinary manifestations of God to him,
but rather look after the manifestation of the life of God within him, the
foundation or beginning of Heaven and Salvation in his own Soul. That
Self-resignation, and the subduing of our own Wills, are greatly available to
obtain Assurance. The vanity and absurdity of that Opinion, viz. That in a
perfect resignation of our Wills to God's will, a man should be content with
his own Damnation and to be the subject of Eternal wrath in Hell, if it should
so please God. page 423. Chap. VIII, The Sixth Property or Effect discovering
the Excellency of Religion, viz. That it Spiritualizes Material things, and
carries up the Souls of Good men from Sensible and Earthly things to things
Intellectual and Divine. There are lesser and fuller representations of God in
the Creatures. To converse with God in the Creation, and to pass out of the
Sensible World into the Intellectual, is most effectually taught by Religion.
Wicked men converse not with God as shining out in the Creatures; they converse
with them in a Sensual and Unspiritual manner. Religion does spiritualize the
Creation to Good men: it teaches them to look at any Perfections or
Excellencies in themselves and others, not so much as Theirs or That others,
but as so many Beams flowing from One and the Same Fountain of Light; to love
them all in God, and God in all; the Universal Goodness in a Particular Being.
A Good man enjoys and delights in whatsoever Good he sees otherwhere, as if it
were his own: he does not fondly love and esteem either himself or others. The
Divine temper and strain of the ancient Philosophy. page 429. Chap. IX. The
Seventh and last Property or Effect discovering the Excellency of Religion,
viz. That it raises the Minds of Good men to a due observance of and
attendance upon Divine Providence, and enables them to serve the Will of God,
and to acquiesce in it. For a man to serve Providence and the Will of God
entirely, to work with God, and to bring himself and all his actions into a
Compliance with God's Will, his Ends and Designs, is an argument of the truest
Nobleness of Spirit; it is the most excellent and divine life; and it is most
for man's advantage. How the Consideration of Divine Providence is the way to
inward quietness and establishment of Spirit. How wicked men carry themselves
unbecomingly through their impatience and fretfulness under the disposals of
Providence. The beauty and harmony of the various Methods of Providence. page
435. Chap. X. 4. The Excellency of Religion in regard of its Progress, as it
is perpetually carrying on the Soul toward Perfection. Every Nature has its
proper Center which it hastens to. Sin and Wickedness is within the attractive
power of Hell, and hastens thither: Grace and Holiness is within the Central
force of Heaven, and moves thither. It Is not the Speculation of Heaven as a
thing to come that satisfies the desires of Religious Souls, but the real
Possession of it even in this life. Men are apt to seek after Assurance of
Heaven as a thing to come, rather then after Heaven it self and the inward
possession of it here. How the Assurance of Heaven rises from the growth of
Holiness and the powerful Progress of Religion in our Souls. That we are not
hastily to believe that we are Christ's, or that Christ is in us. That the
Works which Christ does in holy Souls testify of him, and best evidence
Christ's spiritual appearance in them. page 439. Chap. XI. 5. The Excellency of
Religion in regard of its Term and End, viz. Perfect Blessedness. How unable we
are in this state to comprehend and describe the Full and Perfect state of
Happiness and Glory to come. The more Godlike a Christian is, the better may he
understand that State. Holiness and Happiness not two distinct things, but two
several Notions of one and the same thing. Heaven cannot so well be defined by
any thing without us, as by something within us. The great nearness and
affinity between Sin and Hell. The Conclusion of this Treatise, containing a
serious Exhortation to a diligent minding of Religion, with a Discovery of the
Vanity of those Pretenses which keep men off from minding Religion. page 443.
DISCOURSE X. OF A CHRISTIANS CONFLICTS with, and CONQUESTS over, SATAN.
CHap. I. The Introduction, Summarily treating of the perpetual Enmity between
God, the Principle of Good, and the Principle of Evil, the Devil: as also
between Whatsoever is from God and that which is from the Devil. That Wicked
men by destroying what there is from God within them, and devesting themselves
of all that which has any alliance to God or true Goodness, and transforming
themselves into the Diabolical image, fit themselves for correspondence and
converse with the Devil. The Fears and Horrors which infest both the Apostate
Spirits and Wicked men. The weakness of the Devil's kingdom; Christ's success
against it. page 455. Chap. II. The First observable, That the Devil is
continually busy with us. The Devil considered under a double notion. 1. As an
Apostate Spirit which fell from God. The great danger of the Devils activity,
not only when he presents himself in some corporeal shape, but when he is
unseen and appears not. The weakness and folly of those who are afraid of him
only when he appears embodyed. That the Good Spirit of God is active for the
Good of Souls. How regardless men are of the gentle motions of the Divine
Spirit; and how unwatchfull and secure under the Suggestions of the Evil
Spirit. How we may discover the Devil in his Stratagems and under his several
disguises and appearances. page 458. Chap. III. 2. Of the activity of the Devil
considered as a Spirit of Apostasy and as a Degenerate nature in men. That the
Devil is not only the name of one Particular thing, but a Nature. The
Difference between the Devil and Wicked men is rather the Difference of a Name
then of Natures. The Kingdom and Tyranny of the Devil and Hell is chiefly
within, in the Qualities and Dispositions of men's Minds. Men are apt to
quarrel with the Devil in the name and notion, and defy him with their
Tongues, while they entertain him in their Hearts, and comply with all that
which the Devil is. The vanity of their pretended Love to God, and Hatred of
the Devil. That there is nothing Better then God himself, for which we should
love him; and to love him for his own Beauty and Excellency is the best way of
loving him. That there is nothing worse then Sin it self, for which we should
hate it; and to hate it for its own deformity is the truest way of hating it.
How Hell and Misery arises from within men. Why Wicked men are so insensible of
their Misery in this life. page 462. Chap. IV. The Second Observable, viz. The
Warfare of a Christian life. True Religion consists not in a mere passive
capacity and sluggish kind of doing nothing, nor in a melancholy sitting still
or slothful waiting, etc. but it consists in inward life and power, vigor and
activity. A discovery of the dullness and erroneousness of that Hypothesis, viz.
That Good men are wholly Passive and unable at any time to move without some
external impetus, some impression and impulse from without upon them: or, That
all Motions in Religion are from an External Principle. Of the Quality and
Nature of the true Spiritual Warfare, and of the Manner and Method of it. That
it is transacted upon the inner Stage of men's Souls, and managed without Noise
or pompous Observation; and without any hindrance or prejudice to the most
peaceful, sedate and composed temper of a religious Soul. This further
illustrated from the consideration of the false and pretended Zeal for God and
his Kingdom against the Devil; which though it be impetuous, and makes a great
noise, and a fair show in the world, is yet both impotent and ineffectual. page
469. Chap. V. The Third Observable, viz. The Certainty of Success and victory
to all those that resist the Devil. This grounded upon 1. The Weakness of the
Devil and Sin considered in themselves. 2. God's powerful assisting all
faithful Christians in this warfare. The Devil may allure and tempt, but
cannot prevail, except men consent and yield to his suggestions. The Devil's
strength lies in men's treachery and falseness to their own Souls. Sin is
strong, because men oppose it weakly. The Error of the Manichees about a
Principium mali defended by men in their lives and practices. Of God's
readiness to assist Christians in their Spiritual Conflicts; his Compassionate
regards and the more special respects of his Providence toward them in such
occasions. The Conclusion, discovering the Evil and Horridness of Magic,
Diabolical Contracts, etc. page 474.
A DISCOURSE Concerning The true WAY or METHOD of attaining to DIVINE KNOWLEDGE.

Psalm. 3. 10. The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom: a good
Understanding have all they that do his Commandments. John 7. 17. If any man
will do his Will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God -- Clem.
Alexandr. Strom. 3.

(...) --

(...) --

(...).

A PRAEFATORY DISCOURSE CONCERNING The true Way or Method of attaining to
DIVINE KNOWLEDGE.
Section I. That Divine things are to be understood rather by a Spiritual
Sensation then a Verbal Description, or mere Speculation. Sin and Wickedness
prejudicial to True Knowledge. That Purity of Heart and Life, as also an
Ingenuous Freedom of Judgment, are the best Grounds and Preparations for the
Entertainment of Truth.

Sect. II. An Objection against the Method of Knowing laid down in the former
Section, answered. That Men generally, notwithstanding their Apostasy, are
furnished with the Radical Principles of True Knowledge. Men want not so much
Means of knowing what they ought to do, as Wills to do what they know.
Practical Knowledge differs from all other Knowledge, and excells it.

Sect. III. Men may be considered in a Fourfold capacity in order to the
perception of Divine things. That the Best and most excellent Knowledge of
Divine things belongs only to the true and sober Christian; and That it is but
in its infancy while he is in this Earthly Body.

SECT. I.
IT has been long since well observed, That every Art and Science has some
certain Principles upon which the whole Frame and Body of it must depend; and
he that will fully acquaint himself with the Mysteries thereof, must come
furnished with some Praecognita or (...), that I may speak in the language of
the Stoics. Were I indeed to define Divinity, I should rather call it a Divine
life, then a Divine science; it being something rather to be understood by a
Spiritual sensation, then by any Verbal description, as all things of Sense and
Life are best known by Sentient and Vital faculties; (...), as the Greek
Philosopher has well observed, Every thing is best known by that which bears a
just resemblance and analogy with it: and therefore the Scripture is wont to
set forth a Good life as the Prolepsis and Fundamental principle of Divine
Science; Wisdom has built her an house, and hewn out her seven pillars: But
the fear of the Lord is (...) the beginning of wisdom, the Foundation of the
whole fabric.

We shall therefore, as a Prolegomenon or Preface to what we shall afterward
discourse upon the Heads of Divinity, speak something of this True Method of
Knowing, which is not so much by Notions as Actions; as Religion it self
consists not so much in Words as Things. They are not always the best skilled
in Divinity, that are the most studied in those Pandects which it is sometimes
digested into, or that have erected the greatest Monopolies of Art and Science.
He that is most Practical in Divine things, has the purest and sincerest
Knowledge of them, and not he that is most Dogmatical. Divinity indeed is a
true Efflux from the Eternal light, which, like the Sunbeams, does not only
enlighten, but heat and enliven; and therefore our Savior has in his
Beatitudes connext Purity of heart with the Beatifical Vision. And as the Eye
cannot behold the Sun, (...), unless it be Sunlike, Plotin. En. 1. l. 6.
and has the form and resemblance of the Sun drawn in it; so neither can the
Soul of man behold God, (...), unless it be Godlike, has God formed in it, and
be made partaker of the Divine Nature. And the Apostle S. Paul, when he would
lay open the right way of attaining to Divine Truth, he says that Knowledge
puffs up, but it is Love that edifieth. The knowledge of Divinity that
appears in Systems and Models is but a poor wan light, but the powerful energy
of Divine knowledge displaies it self in purified Souls: here we shall find
the true (...), as the ancient Philosophy speaks, the land of Truth.

To seek our Divinity merely in Books and Writings, is to seek the living among
the dead: we do but in vain seek God many times in these, where his Truth too
often is not so much enshrined, as entombed: no; intrate quaere Deum, seek for
God within thine own soul; he is best discerned (...), as Plotinus phraseth it,
by an Intellectual touch of him: we must see with our eyes, and hear with our
ears, and our hands must handle the word of life, that I may express it in S.
John's words. (...). The Soul it self has its sense, as well as the Body: and
therefore David, when he would teach us how to know what the Divine Goodness
is, calls not for Speculation but Sensation, Taste and see how good the Lord is.
That is not the best and truest knowledge of God which is wrought out by the
labor and sweat of the Brain, but that which is kindled within us by an
heavenly warmth in our Hearts. As in the natural Body it is the Heart that
sends up good Blood and warm Spirits into the Head, whereby it is best enabled
to its several functions; so that which enables us to know and understand
aright in the things of God, must be a living principle of Holiness within us.
When the Tree of Knowledge is not planted by the Tree of Life, and sucks not up
sap from thence, it may be as well fruitful with evil as with good, and bring
forth bitter fruit as well as sweet. If we would indeed have our Knowledge
thrive and flourish, we must water the tender plants of it with Holiness. When
Zoroaster's Scholars asked him what they should do to get winged Souls, such
as might soar aloft in the bright beams of Divine Truth, he bids them bathe
themselves in the waters of Life: they asking what they were; he tells them,
the four Cardinal Virtues, which are the four Rivers of Paradise. It is but a
thin, aerie knowledge that is got by mere Speculation, which is ushered in by
Syllogisms and Demonstrations; but that which springs forth from true Goodness,
is (...), as Origin speaks, it brings such a Divine light into the Soul, as is
more clear and convincing then any Demonstration. The reason why,
notwithstanding all our acute reasons and subtle disputes, Truth prevails no
more in the world, is, we so often disjoyn Truth and true Goodness, which in
themselves can never be disunited; they grow both from the same Root, and live
in one another. We may, like those in Plato's deep pit with their faces bended
downwards, converse with Sounds and Shadows; but not with the Life and
Substance of Truth, while our Souls remain defiled with any vice or lusts.
These are the black Lethe-lake which drench the Souls of men: he that wants
true Virtue, in heaven's Logic is blind, and cannot see afar off. Those ^ Pet.
^.
filthy mists that arise from impure and terrene minds, like an Atmospheare,
perpetually encompass them, that they cannot see that Sun of Divine Truth that
shines about them, but never shines into any unpurged Souls; the darkness
comprehends it not, the foolish man understands it not. All the Light and
Knowledge that may seem sometimes to rise up in unhallowed minds, is but like
those fuliginous flames that arise up from our culinary fire, that are soon
quenched in their own smoke; or like those foolish fires that fetch their birth
from terrene exudations, that do but hop up and down, and flit to and fro upon
the surface of this earth where they were first brought forth; and serve not so
much to enlighten, as to delude us; nor to direct the wandering traveller into
his way, but to lead him farther out of it. While we lodge any filthy vice in
us, this will be perpetually twisting up it self into the thread of our
finest-spun Speculations; it will be continually climbing up into the (...),
the Hegemonicall powers of the Soul, into the bed of Reason, and defile it:
like the wanton Ivy twisting it self about the Oak, it will twine about our
Judgments and Understandings, till it has sucked out the Life and Spirit of
them. I cannot think such black oblivion should possess the Minds of some as
to make them question that Truth which to Good men shines as bright as the Sun
at noonday, had they not foully defiled their own Souls with some hellish vice
or other, how fairly soever it may be they may dissemble it. There is a
benumming Spirit, a congealing Vapor that arises from Sin and Vice, that will
stupifie the senses of the Soul; as the Naturalists say there is from the
Torpedo that smites the senses of those that approach to it. This is that
venomous Solanum, that deadly Nightshade, that derives its cold poison into the
Understandings of men.

Such as Men themselves are, such will God himself seem to be. It is the Maxim
of most wicked men, That the Deity is some way or other like themselves: their
Souls do more then whisper it, though their lips speak it not; and though
their tongues be silent, yet their lives cry it upon the house-tops, and in the
public streets. That Idea which men generally have of God is nothing else but
the picture of their own Complexion: that Archetypall notion of him which has
the supermacie in their minds, is none else but such an one as has been
shaped out according to some pattern of themselves; though they may so cloathe
and disguise this Idol of their own, when they carry it about in a pompous
Procession to expose it to the view of the world, that it may seem very
beautiful, and indeed any thing else rather then what it is. Most men (though
it may be they themselves take no great notice of it) like that dissembling
Monk, do aliter sentire in Scholis, aliter in Musaeis, are of a different
judgment in the Schools from what they are in the retirements of their private
closets. There is a double head, as well as a double heart. Men's corrupt hearts
will not suffer their notions and conceptions of divine things to be cast into
that form that an higher Reason, which may sometime work within them, would put
them into.

I would not be thought all this while to banish the belief of all Innate
notions of Divine Truth: but these are too often smothered, or tainted with a
deep dye of men's filthy lusts. It is but lux sepulta in opaci materia, light
buried and stifled in some dark body, from whence all those colored, or rather
discolored, notions and apprehensions of divine things are begotten. Though
these Common notions may be very busy sometimes in the vegetation of divine
Knowledge; yet the corrupt vices of men may so clog, disturb and overrule them,
(as the Naturalists say this unruly and masterless matter does the natural
forms in the formation of living creatures) that they may produce nothing but
Monsters miserably distorted and misshapen. This kind of Science, as Plotinus
speaks, (...), companying too familiarly with Matter, and receiving and
imbibing it into it self, changes its shape by this incestuous mixture. At
best, while any inward lust is harbored in the minds of men, it will so weaken
them, that they can never bring forth any masculine or generous knowledge; as
Aelian observes of the Stork, that if the Night-owle chances to sit upon her
eggs, they become presently as it were (...), and all incubation rendered
impotent and ineffectual. Sin and lust are always of an hungry nature, and suck
up all those vital affections of men's Souls which should feed and nourish their
Understandings.

What are all our most sublime Speculations of the Deity, that are not
impregnated with true Goodness, but insipid things that have no taste nor life
in them, that do but swell like empty froath in the souls of men? They do not
feed men's souls, but only puff them up and fill them with Pride, Arrogance
and Contempt and Tyranny toward those that cannot well ken their subtle
Curiosities: as those Philosophers that Tully complains of in his times, qui
disciplina^ suam ostentatione^ scientiae, non legem vitae, putabant, which made
their knowledge only matter of ostentation, to venditate and set off
themselves, but never caring to square and govern their lives by it. Such as
these do but Spider-like take a great deal of pains to spin a worthless web
out of their own bowels, which will not keep them warm. These indeed are those
silly Souls that are ever learning, but never come to the knowledge of the
Truth. They may, with Pharaoh's lean kine, eat up and devour all Tongues and
Sciences, and yet when they have done, still remain lean and ill-favored as
they were at first-Jejune and barren Speculations may be hovering and
fluttering up and down about Divinity, but they cannot settle or fix themselves
upon it: they unfold the Plicatures of Truth's garment, but they cannot behold
the lovely face of it. There are hidden Mysteries in Divine Truth, wrapped up one
within another, which cannot be discerned but only by divine Epoptists.

We must not think we have then attained to the right knowledge of Truth, when
we have broke through the outward Shell of words and phrases that house it up;
or when by a Logical Analysis we have found out the dependencies and
coherencies of them one with another; or when, like stout champions of it,
having well guarded it with the invincible strength of our Demonstration, we
dare stand out in the face of the world, and challenge the field of all those
that would pretend to be our Rivalls.

We have many Grave and Reverend Idolaters that worship Truth only in the
Image of their own Wits; that could never adore it so much as they may seem to
do, were it any thing else but such a Form of Belief as their own wandering
speculations had at last met together in, were it not that they find their own
image and superscription upon it.

There is a knowing of the truth as it is in Jesus, as it is in a Christ-like
nature, as it is in that sweet, mild, humble, and loving Spirit of Jesus, which
spreads itself like a Morning-Sun upon the Souls of good men, full of light
and life. It profits little to know Christ himself after the flesh; but he gives
his Spirit to good men, that searches the deep things of God. There is an
inward beauty, life and loveliness in Divine Truth, which cannot be known but
only then when it is digested into life and practice. The Greek Philosopher
could tell those high-soaring Gnostics that thought themselves no less then
Jovis alites, that could (as he speaks in the Comedy) (...), and cried out so
much (...), look upon God, that (...), Without Virtue and real Goodness God is
but a name, a dry and empty Notion. The profane sort of men, like those old
Gentile Greeks, may make many ruptures in the walls of God's Temple, and break
into the holy ground, but yet may find God no more there then they did.

Divine Truth is better understood, as it unfolds itself in the purity of men's
hearts and lives, then in all those subtle Niceties into which curious Wits may
lay it forth. And therefore our Savior, who is the great Master of it, would
not, while he was here on earth, draw it up into any Systeme or Body, nor would
his Disciples after him; He would not lay it out to us in any Canons or
Articles of Belief, not being indeed so careful to stock and enrich the World
with Opinions and Notions, as with true Piety, and a Godlike pattern of purity,
as the best way to thrive in all spiritual understanding. His main scope was to
promote an Holy life, as the best and most compendious way to a right Belief.
He hangs all true acquaintance with Divinity upon the doing Gods will, If any
man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God.
This is that alone which will make us, as S. Peter tells us, that we shall not
be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior. There is an
inward sweetness and deliciousness in divine Truth, which no sensual mind can
taste or relish: this is that (...), that natural man that savours not the
things of God. Corrupt passions and terrene affections are apt of their own
nature to disturb all serene thoughts, to precipitate our Judgments, and warp
our Understandings. It was a good Maxim of the old Jewish Writers, (...) the
Holy Spirit dwells not in terrene and earthly passions. Divinity is not so well
perceived by a subtle wit, (...) as by a purified sense, as Plotinus phraseth
it.

Neither was the ancient Philosophy unacquainted with this Way and Method of
attaining to the knowledge of Divine things; and therefore Eth. Nicom. l. 1.
Aristotle himself thought a Young man unfit to meddle with the grave precepts
of Morality, till the heat and violent precipitancy of his youthful affections
was cooled and moderated. And it is observed of Pythagoras, that he had several
ways to try the capacity of his Scholars, and to prove the sedateness and
Moral temper of their minds, before he would entrust them with the sublimer
Mysteries of his Philosophy. The Platonists were herein so wary and solicitous,
that they thought the Minds of men could never be purged enough from those
earthly dregs of Sense and Passion, in which they were so much steeped, before
they could be capable of their divine Metaphysics: and therefore they so much
solicit a (...), as they are wont to phrase it, a separation from the Body, in
all those that would (...), as Socrates speaks, that is indeed, sincerely
understand Divine Truth; for that was the scope of their Philosophy. This was
also intimated by them in their defining Philosophy to be (...) a Meditation of
Death; aiming herein at only a Moral way of dying, by loosening the Soul from
the Body and this Sensitive life; which they thought was necessary to a right
Contemplation of Intelligible things: and therefore besides those (...) by
which the Souls of men were to be separated from sensuality and purged from
fleshly filth, they devised a further way of Separation more accommodated to
the condition of Philosophers, which was their Mathemata, or Mathematical
Contemplations, whereby the Souls of men might farther shake off their
dependency upon Sense, and learn to go as it were alone, without the crutch of
any Sensible or Material thing to support them; and so be a little inured,
being once got up above the Body, to converse freely with Immaterial natures,
without looking down again and falling back into Sense. Besides many other
ways they had, whereby to rise out of this dark Body; (...), as they are wont
to call them, several steps and ascents out of this miry cave of mortality,
before they could set any sure footing with their Intellectual part in the land
of Light and Immortal Being.

And thus we should pass from this Topic of our Discourse, upon which we have
dwelt too long already, but that before we quite let it go, I hope we may
fairly make this use of it farther (besides what we have openly driven at all
this while) which is, To learn not to devote or give up our selves to any
private Opinions or Dictates of men in matters of Religion, nor too zealously
to propugne the Dogmata of any Sect. As we should not like rigid Censurers
arraign and condemn the Creeds of other men which we comply not with, before a
full and mature understanding of them, ripened not only by the natural
sagacity of our own Reasons, but by the benign influence of holy and mortified
Affection: so neither should we over-hastily credere in fidem alienam,
subscribe to the Symbols and Articles of other men. They are not always the
Best men that blot most paper; Truth is not, I fear, so Voluminous, nor swells
into such a mighty bulk as our Books do. Those minds are not always the most
chaste that are most parturient with these learned Discourses, which too often
bear upon them a foul stain of their unlawful propagation. A bitter juice of
corrupt affections may sometimes be strained into the ink of our greatest
Clerks, their Doctrines may taste too sour of the cask they come through. We
are not always happy in meeting with that wholesome food (as some are wont to
call the Doctrinal-part of Religion) which has been dressed out by the
cleanest hands. Some men have too bad hearts to have good heads: they cannot be
good at Theorie who have been so bad at the Practice, as we may justly fear too
many of those from whom we are apt to take the Articles of our Belief have
been. Whilst we plead so much our right to the patrimony of our Fathers, we may
take too fast a possession of their Errors as well as of their sober opinions.
There are Idola specus, Innate Prejudices, and deceitful Hypotheses, that many
times wander up and down in the Minds of good men, that may fly out from them
with their graver determinations. We can never be well assured what our
Traditional Divinity is; nor can we securely enough addict our selves to any
Sect of men. That which was the Philosopher's motto, (...), we may a little
enlarge, and so fit it for an ingenuous pursuer after divine Truth: He that
will find Truth, must seek it with a free judgment, and a sanctified mind: he
that thus seeks, shall find; he shall live in Truth, and that shall live in
him; it shall be like a stream of living waters issuing out of his own Soul;
he shall drink of the waters of his own cisterne, and be satisfied; he shall
every morning find this Heavenly Manna lying upon the top of his own Soul,
and be fed with it to eternal life; he will find satisfaction within, feeling
himself in conjunction with Truth, though all the World should dispute against
him.

SECTION II.
AND thus I should again leave this Argument, but that perhaps we may all this
while have seemed to undermine what we intend to build up. For if Divine Truth
spring only up from the Root of true Goodness; how shall we ever endeavor to
be good, before we know what it is to be so? or how shall we convince the
gainsaying world of Truth, unless we could also inspire Virtue into it?

To both which we shall make this Reply, That there are some Radical Principles
of Knowledge that are so deeply sunk into the Souls of men, as that the
Impression cannot easily be obliterated, though it may be much darkened. Sensual
baseness does not so grossly sully and bemire the Souls of all Wicked men at
first, as to make them with Diagoras to deny the Deity, or with Protagoras to
doubt of, or with Diodorus to question the Immortality of Rational Souls.
Neither are the Common Principles of Virtue so pulled up by the roots in all,
as to make them so dubious in stating the bounds of Virtue and Vice as Epicurus
was, though he could not but sometime take notice of them. Neither is the
Retentive power of Truth so weak and loose in all Scepticks, as it was in him,
who being well scourged in the streets till the blood ran about him, questioned
when he came home, whether he had been beaten or not. Arrianus has well
observed, That the Common Notions of God and Virtue impressed upon the Souls of
men, are more clear and perspicuous then any else; and that if they have not
more certainty, yet have they more evidence, and display themselves with less
difficulty to our Reflexive Faculty then any Geometrical Demonstrations: and
these are both availeable to prescribe out ways of Virtue to men's own souls,
and to force an acknowledgment of Truth from those that oppose, when they are
well guided by a skillful hand. Truth needs not any time fly from Reason,
there being an Eternal amity between them. They are only some private
Dogmata, that may well be suspected as spurious and adulterate, that dare not
abide the trial thereof. And this Reason is not every where so extinguished,
as that we may not by that enter into the Souls of men. What the Magnetical
virtue is in these earthly Bodies, that Reason is in men's Minds, which when it
is put forth, draws them one to another. Besides in wicked men there are
sometimes Distasts of Vice, and Flashes of love to Virtue; which are the
Motions which spring from a true Intellect, and the faint struglings of an
Higher life within them, which they crucify again by their wicked Sensuality.
As Truth does not always act in good men, so neither does Sense always act in
wicked men: they may sometimes have their lucida intervalla, their sober fits;
and a Divine spirit blowing and breathing upon them may then blow up some live
sparks of true Understanding within them; though they may soon endeavor to
quench them again, and to rake them up in the ashes of their own earthly
thoughts.

All this, and more that might be said upon this Argument, may serve to point
out the Way of Virtue. We want not so much Means of knowing what we ought to
do, as Wills to do that which we may know. But yet all that Knowledge which
is separated from an inward acquaintance with Virtue and Goodness, is of a far
different nature from that which arises out of a true living sense of them,
which is the best discerner thereof, and by which alone we know the true
Perfection, Sweetness, Energie, and Loveliness of them, and all that which is
(...), that which can no more be known by a naked Demonstration, then Colors
can be perceived of a blind man by any Definition or Description which he can
hear of them.

And further, the clearest and most distinct Notions of Truth that shine in the
Souls of the common sort of men, may be extremely clouded, if they be not
accompanied with that answerable practice that might preserve their integrity:
These tender Plants may soon be spoiled by the continual droppings of our
corrupt affections upon them; they are but of a weak and feminine nature, and
so may be sooner deceived by that wily Serpent of Sensuality that harbors
within us.

While the Soul is (...), full of the Body, while we suffer those Notions and
Common Principles of Religion to lie asleep within us; that (...), the power of
an Animal life, will be apt to incorporate and mingle it self with them; and
that Reason that is within us, as Plotinus has well expressed it, becomes more
and more (...), it will be infected with those evil Opinions that arise from
our Corporeal life. The more deeply our Souls dive into our Bodies, the more
will Reason and Sensuality run one into another, and make up a most dilute,
unsavourie, and muddie kind of Knowledge. We must therefore endeavor more and
more to withdraw our selves from these Bodily things, to set our Souls as free
as may be from its miserable slavery to this base Flesh: we must shut the Eyes
of Sense, and open that brighter Eye of our Understandings, that other Eye of
the Soul, as the Philosopher calls our Intellectual Faculty, (...), which
indeed all have, but few make use of it. This is the way to see clearly; the
light of the Divine World will then begin to fall upon us, and those sacred
(...), those pure Coruscations of Immortal and Ever-living Truth will shine out
into us, and in Gods own light shall we behold him. The fruit of this Knowledge
will be sweet to our taste, and pleasant to our palates, sweeter then the honey
or the honeycomb. The Priests of Mercury, as Plutarch tells us, in the eating
of their holy things, were wont to cry out (...), Sweet is Truth. But how sweet
and delicious that Truth is which holy and heaven-born Souls feed upon in their
mysterious converses with the Deity, who can tell but they that taste it? When
Reason once is raised by the mighty force of the Divine Spirit into a converse
with God, it is turned into Sense: That which before was only Faith well built
upon sure Principles, (for such our Science may be) now becomes Vision. We
shall then converse with God (...), whereas before we conversed with him only
(...) with our Discursive faculty, as the Platonists were wont to distinguish.
Before we laid hold on him only (...), with a struggling, Agonistical, and
contentious Reason, hotly combating with difficulties and sharp contests of
diverse opinions, and laboring in it self, in its deductions of one thing from
another; we shall then fasten our minds upon him (...), with such a serene
Understanding, (...), such an Intellectual calmness and serenity as will
present us with a blissful, steady, and invariable sight of him.

SECTION III.
AND now if you please, setting aside the Epicurean herd of Brutish men, who
have drowned all their own sober Reason in the deepest Lethe of Sensuality, we
shall divide the rest of Men into these Four ranks, according to that Method
which Simplicius upon Epictetus has already laid out to us, with a respect to
a Fourfold kind of Knowledge, which we have all this while glanced at.

The First whereof is (...) 1.
(...), or, if you will, (...), that Complex and Multifarious man that is made
up of Soul and Body, as it were by a just equality and Arithmetical proportion
of Parts and Powers in each of them. The knowledge of these men I should call
(...) in Plutarch's phrase; a Knowledge wherein Sense and Reason are so twisted
up together, that it cannot easily be unravel'd, and laid out into its first
principles. Their highest Reason is (...) complying with their senses, and both
conspire together in vulgar opinion. To these that Motto which the Storcks have
made for them may very well agree, (...), their life being steered by nothing
else but Opinion and Imagination. Their higher notions of God and Religion are
so entangled with the Birdlime of fleshly Passions and mundane Vanity, that
they cannot rise up above the surface of this dark earth, or easily entertain
any but earthly conceptions of heavenly things. Such Souls as are here lodged,
as Plato speaks, are (...) heavy behind, and are continually pressing down to
this world's center: and though, like the Spider, they may appear sometime
moving up and down aloft in the air, yet they do but sit in the loome, and
move in that web of their own gross fancies, which they fasten and pin to some
earthly thing or other.

The Second is (...), The man that looks at himself as being what he 2.
is rather by his Soul then by his Body; that thinks not fit to view his own
face in any other Glass but that of Reason and Understanding; that reckons upon
his Soul as that which was made to rule, his Body as that which was born to
obey, and like an handmaid perpetually to wait upon his higher and nobler part.
And in such an one the Communes notitiae, or common Principles of Virtue and
Goodness, are more clear and steady. To such an one we may allow (...), more
clear and distinct Opinions, as being already (...), in a Method or course of
Purgation, or at least fit to be initiated into the Mysteria minora the lesser
Mysteries of Religion. For though these Innate notions of Truth may be but
poor, empty, and hungry things of themselves, before they be fed and filled
with the practice of true Virtue; yet they are capable of being impregnated,
and exalted with the Rules and Precepts of it. And therefore the Stoic
supposed (...), that the doctrine of Political and Moral virtues was fit to be
delivered to such as these; and though they may not be so well prepared for
Divine Virtue (which is of an higher Emanation) yet they are not immature for
Humane, as having the Seeds of it already within themselves, which being
watered by answerable practice, may sprout up within them.

The Third is (...), He 3.
whose Soul is already purged by this lower sort of Virtue, and so is
continually flying off from the Body and Bodily passion, and returning into
himself. Such in S. Peter's language are those who have escaped the pollutions
which are in the world through lust. To these we may attribute a (...), a lower
degree of Science, their inward sense of Virtue and moral Goodness being far
transcendent to all mere Speculative opinions of it. But if this Knowledge
settle here, it may be quickly apt to corrupt. Many of our most refined
Moralists may be, in a worse sense then Plotinus means, (...), full with their
own pregnancy; their Souls may too much heave and swell with the sense of their
own Virtue and Knowledge: there may be an ill Ferment of Self-love lying at the
bottom, which may puff it up the more with Pride, Arrogance, and
Self-conceit. These forces with which the Divine bounty supplies us to keep a
stronger guard against the evil Spirit, may be abused by our own rebellious
Pride, enticing of them from their allegiance to Heaven, to strengthen it self
in our Souls, and fortify them against Heaven: like that supercilious Stoic,
who when he thought his Mind well armed and appointed with Wisdom and Virtue,
cried out, Sapiens contendet cum ipso Jove de felicitate. They may make an
aerie heaven of these, and wall it about with their own Self-flattery, and then
sit in it as Gods, as Cosroes the Persian king was sometime laughed at for
enshrining himself in a Temple of his own. And therefore if this Knowledge be
not attended with Humility and a deep sense of Self-penury and Self-emptiness,
we may easily fall short of that True Knowledge of God which we seem to aspire
after. We may carry such an Image and Species of our Selves constantly before
us, as will make us lose the clear sight of the Divinity, and be too apt to
rest in a mere Logical life (it is Simplicius his expression) without any true
participation of the Divine life, if we do not (as many do, if not all, who
rise no higher) relapse and slide back by vainglory, popularity, or such like
vices, into some mundane and external Vanity or other.

The fourth is (...), The true Metaphysical 4.
and Contemplative man, (...), who running and shooting up above his own
Logical or Self-rational life, pierces into the Highest life: Such a one, who
by Universal Love and Holy affection abstracting himself from himself,
endeavors the nearest Union with the Divine Essence that may be, (...), as
Plotinus speaks; knitting his own center, if he have any, unto the center of
Divine Being. To such an one the Platonists are wont to attribute (...) a true
Divine wisdom, powerfully displaying it self (...) in an Intellectual life,
as they phrase it. Such a Knowledge they say is always pregnant with Divine
Virtue, which arises out of an happy Union of Souls with God, and is nothing
else but a living Imitation of a Godlike prefection drawn out by a strong
servent love of it. This Divine Knowledge (...) etc. as Plotinus speaks, makes
us amorous of Divine beauty, beautiful and lovely; and this Divine Love and
Purity reciprocally exalts Divine Knowledge; both of them growing up together
like that (...) and (...) that Pausanias sometimes speaks of. Though by the
Platonists leave such a Life and Knowledge as this is, peculiarly belongs to
the true and sober Christian who lives in Him who is Life it self, and is
enlightened by Him who is the Truth it self, and is made partaker of the Divine
Unction, and knows all things, as S. John speaks. This Life is nothing else
but God's own breath within him, and an Infant-Christ (if I may use the
expression) formed in his Soul, who is in a sense (...), the shining forth of
the Father's glory. But yet we must not mistake, this Knowledge is but here in
its Infancy; there is an higher knowledge or an higher degree of this knowledge
that does not, that cannot, descend upon us in these earthly habitations. We
cannot here see (...) in Speculo lucido; here we can see but in a glass, and
that darkly too. Our own Imaginative Powers, which are perpetually attending
the highest acts of our Souls, will be breathing a gross dew upon the pure
Glass of our Understandings, and so fully and besmear it, that we cannot see
the Image of the Divinity sincerely in it. But yet this Knowledge being a true
heavenly fire kindled from God's own Altar, begets an undaunted Courage in the
Souls of Good men, and enables them to cast a holy Scorn upon the poor petty
trash of this Life in comparison with Divine things, and to pity those poor
brutish Epicureans that have nothing but the mere husks of fleshly pleasure to
feed themselves with. This Sight of God makes pious Souls breath after that
blessed time when Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life, when they shall no
more behold the Divinity through those dark Mediums that eclipse the blessed
Sight of it.

A SHORT DISCOURSE OF SUPERSTITION.

Clem. Alexandr. in Admon. ad Graec. (...).

Hierocles in Pythag. (...).

Lactantius de Vero cultu. Hic verus est cultus, in quo men's colentis seipsam
Deo immaculatam victimam sistit.

Ibid. Nihil Sancta and singularis illa Majestas aliud ab homine desiderat,
quam solam innocentiam: quam siquis obtulerit Deo, satis pie, satis religiose
litavit.

The Contents of the ensuing Discourse.
The true Notion of Superstition well expressed by (...), i. e. an
over-timorous and dreadful apprehension of the Deity.

A false Opinion of the Deity the true Cause and Rise of Superstition.

Superstition is most incident to such as Converse not with the Goodness of
God, or are conscious to themselves of their own unlikeness to him.

Right apprehensions of God beget in man a Nobleness and Freedom of Soul.

Superstition, though it looks upon God as an angry Deity, yet it counts him
easily pleased with flattering Worship.

Apprehensions of a Deity and Guilt meeting together are apt to excite Fear.

Hypocrites to spare their Sins seek out ways to compound with God.

Servile and Superstitious Fear is increased by Ignorance of the certain Causes
of Terrible Effects in Nature, etc. as also by frightful Apparitions of Ghosts
and Specter.

A further Consideration of Superstition as a Composition of Fear and Flattery.

A fuller Definition of Superstition, according to the Sense of the Ancients.

Superstition does not always appear in the same Form, but passes from one
Form to another, and sometimes shrouds it self under Forms seemingly Spiritual
and more refined.

Of SUPERSTITION.
HAving now done with what we propounded as a Preface to our following
Discourses, we should now come to treat of the main Heads and Principles of
Religion. But before we do that, perhaps it may not be amiss to inquire into
some of those Anti-Deities that are set up against it, the chief whereof are
ATHEISM and SUPERSTITION; which indeed may seem to comprehend in them all kind
of Apostasy and Praevarication from Religion. We shall not be overcurious to
pry into such foul and rotten carcasses as these are too narrowly, or to make
any subtle Anatomy of them; but rather enquire a little into the Original and
Immediate Causes of them; because it may be they may be nearer of kin then we
ordinarily are aware of, while we see their Complexions to be so vastly
different the one from the other.

And first of all for SUPERSTITION (to lay aside our Vulgar notion of it which
much mistakes it) it is the same with that Temper of Mind which the Greeks call
(...), (for so Tully frequently translates that word, though not so fitly and
emphatically as he has done some others:) It imports an overtimorous and
dreadful apprehension of the Deity; and therefore with Hesychius (...) and
(...) are all one, and (...) is by him expounded (...), an Idolater, and also
one that is very prompt to For so that word (...) must here signify; if indeed
it be not corrupted, and to be read (...), a word which some other
Lexicographers use in this case.
worship the Gods, but withal fearful of them. And therefore the true Cause
and Rise of Superstition is indeed nothing else but a false opinion of the
Deity, that renders him dreadful and terrible, as being rigorous and
imperious; that which represents him as austere and apt to be angry, but yet
impotent, and easy to be appeased again by some flattering devotions,
especially if performed with sanctimonious shows and a solemn sadness of Mind.
And I wish that that Picture of God which some Christians have drawn of him,
wherein Sowreness and Arbitrariness appear so much, does not too much resemble
it. According to this sense Plutarch has well defined it in his Book (...)
(...) in this manner, (...), a strong passionate Opinion, and such a
Supposition as is productive of a fear debasing and terrifying a man with the
representation of the Gods as grievous and hurtful to Mankind.

Such men as these converse not with the Goodness of God, and therefore they
are apt to attribute their impotent passions and peevishness of Spirit to him.
Or it may be because some secret advertisements of their Consciences tell them
how unlike they themselves are to God, and how they have provoked him; they are
apt to be as much displeased with him as too troublesome to them, as they think
he is displeased with them. They are apt to count this Divine Supremacy as but
a piece of Tyranny that by its Sovereign Will makes too great encroachments
upon their Liberties, and that which will eat up all their Right and Property;
and therefore are slavishly afraid of him, (...), fearing Heaven's Monarchy as
a severe and churlish Tyranny from which they cannot absolve themselves, as the
same Author speaks: and therefore he thus discloseth the private whisperings of
their minds, (...), etc. the broad gates of hell are opened, the rivers of fire
and Stygian inundations run down as a swelling flood, there is thick darkness
crowded together, dreadful and ghastly Sights of Ghosts screeching and howling,
Judges and tormentors, deep gulfes and Abysses full of infinite miseries. Thus
he. The Prophet Esaias gives us this Epitome of their thoughts, chap. 33. The
Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfullness has surprised the hypocrites: who
shall dwell with the devouring fire? who shall dwell with everlasting burnings?
Though I should not dislike these dreadful and astonishing thoughts of future
torment, which I doubt even good men may have cause to press home upon their
own spirits, while they find Ingenuity less active, the more to restrain sin;
yet I think it little commends God, and as little benefits us, to fetch all this
horror and astonishment from the Contemplations of a Deity, which should
always be the most serene and lovely: our apprehensions of the Deity should be
such as might ennoble our Spirits, and not debase them. A right knowledge of
God would beget a freedom and Liberty of Soul within us, and not servility;
(...), as Plutarch has well observed; our thoughts of a Deity should breed in
us hopes of Virtue, and not gender to a spirit of bondage.

But that we may pass on. Because this unnatural resemblance of God as an
angry Deity in impure minds, should it blaze too furiously, like the Basilisk
would kill with its looks; therefore these Painters use their best arts a
little to sweeten it, and render it less unpleasing. And those that fancy God
to be most hasty and apt to be displeased, yet are ready also to imagine him so
impotently mutable, that his favor may be won again with their uncouth
devotions, that he will be taken with their formal praises, and being thirsty
after glory and praise and solemn addresses, may, by their pompous furnishing
out all these for him, be won to a good liking of them: and thus they represent
him to themselves as Lusian in his De Sacrificiis speaks too truly, though it
may be too profanely.
(...). And therefore Superstition will always abound in these things whereby
this Deity of their own, made after the similitude of men, may be most
gratified, slavishly crouching to it. We will take a view of it in the words of
Plutarch, though what refers to the Jews, if it respects more their Rites then
their Manners, may seem to contain too hasty a censure of them. Superstition
brings in (...) wallowings in the dust, tumblings in the mire, observations of
Sabbaths, prosternations, uncouth gestures, and strange rites of worship.
Superstition is very apt to think that Heaven may be bribed with such
false-hearted devotions; as Porphyrie has well explained it by this, that it
is Lib. 2. (...).
(...), an apprehension that a man may corrupt and bribe the Deity: which (as
he there observes) was the Cause of all those bloody sacrifices, and of some
inhumane ones among the Heathen, men imagining (...) like him in the Prophet
that thought by the fruit of his body and the firstlings of his flock to
expiate the sin of his Soul. Micah 6.

But it may be we may seem all this while to have made too Tragical a
Description of Superstition; and indeed our Author whom we have all this while
had recourse to seems to have set it forth, as anciently Painters were wont to
do those pieces in which they would demonstrate most their own skill; they
would not content themselves with the shape of one Body only, but borrowed
several parts from several Bodies as might most fit their design and fill up
the picture of that they desired chiefly to represent. Superstition it may be
looks not so foul and deformed in every Soul that is dyed with it, as he has
there set it forth, nor does it every where spread it self alike: this (...)
that shrowds it self under the name of Religion, will variously discover it self
as it is seated in Minds of a various temper, and meets with variety of matter
to exercise it self about.

We shall therefore a little further inquire into it, and what the Judgments of
the soberest men anciently were of it; the rather for that a learned Author of
our own seems unwilling to own that Notion of it which we have hitherto out of
Plutarch and others contended for; who though he has freed it from that gloss
which the late Ages have put upon it, yet he may seem to have too strictly
confined it to a Cowardly Worship of the ancient Gentile Demons, as if
Superstition and Polytheism were indeed the same thing, whereas Polytheism or
Daemon-worship is but one branch of it: which was partly observed by the
learned Casaubon in his Notes upon that Chapter of Theophrastus (...), where it
is described to be (...), which he thus interprets, Theophrastus voce (...) and
Deos and Daemones complexus est, and quicquid divinitatis esse particeps
malesana putavit antiquitas. And in this sense it was truly observed by
Petronius Arbiter, Primus in orb Deos fecit Timor --
The whole progeny of the ancient Demons, at least in the Minds of the Vulgar,
sprung out of Fear, and were supported by it: though notwithstanding, this
Fear, when in a Being void of all true sense of Divine goodness, has not
escaped the censure of Superstition in Varro's judgment, whose Maxim it was, as
S. Austin tells us, Deum a religioso vereri, a superstitioso timeri: which
distinction Servius seems to have made use of in his Comment upon Virgil,
Aeneid. 6. where the Poet describing the torments of the wicked in hell, he
runs out into an Allegorical exposition of all, it may be too much in favor of
Lucretius whom he there magnifies. His words are these, Ipse etiam Lucretius
dicit per eos super quos jamjam casurus imminet lapis, Superstitiosos
significari, qui inaniter semper verentur, and de Diis and Coelo and locis
superioribus male opinantur; nam Religiosi sunt qui per reverentiam timent.

But that we may the more fully unfold the Nature of this (...), and the
Effects of it, which are not always of one sort, we shall first premise
something concerning the Rise of it.

The Common Notions of a Deity, strongly rooted in Men's Souls, and meeting with
the apprehensions of Guiltiness, are very apt to excite this Servile fear: and
when men love their own filthy lusts, that they may spare them, they are
presently apt to contrive some other ways of appeasing the Deity and
compounding with it. Unhallowed minds, that have no inward foundations of true
Holiness to fix themselves upon, are easily shaken and tossed from all inward
peace and tranquillity: and as the thoughts of some Supreme power above them
seize upon them, so they are struck with the lightning thereof into inward
affrightments, which are further increased by a vulgar observation of those
strange, stupendous and terrifying Effects in Nature, whereof they can give no
certain reason, as Earthquakes, Thundrings and Lightnings, blazing Comets and
other Meteors of a like Nature, which are apt to terrify those especially who
are already unsettled and chased with an inward sense of guilt, and, as Seneca
speaks, inevitabilem metum ut supra nos aliquid timeremus incutiunt. Petronius
Arbiter has well described this business for us,

Primus in orb Deos fecit Timor, ardua coelo
Fulmina cum caderent, discussaque moenia flammis,
Atque ictus flagraret Athos --
From hence it was that the Libri fulgurales of the Romans, and other such
like Volumes of Superstition, swelled so much, and that the pulvinaria Deorum
were so often frequented, as will easily appear to any one a little conversant
in Livy, who every where sets forth this Devotion so largely, as if he himself
had been too passionately in love with it.

And though as the Events in Nature began sometimes to be found out better by a
discovery of their immediate Natural Causes, so some particular pieces of
Superstitious Customs were antiquated and grown out of date, (as is well
observed concerning those Charms and Februations anciently in use upon the
appearing of an Eclipse, and some others) yet often affrights and horrors were
not so easily abated, while they were unacquainted with the Deity, and with the
other mysterious Events in Nature, which begot those Furies and unlucky
Empusas, (...), in the weak minds of men. To all which we may add the frequent
Specter and frightfull Apparitions of Ghosts and Mormos: all which extorted
such a kind of Worship from them as was most correspondent to such Causes of
it. And those Rites and Ceremonies which were begotten by Superstition, were
again the unhappy Nurses of it; such as are well described by Plutarch in his
De defect, Oracul. (...), etc. Feasts and Sacrifices, as likewise observations
of unlucky and fatal days, celebrated with eating of raw things, lacerations,
fastings, and howlings, and many times filthy Speeches in their sacred rites,
and frantic behavior.

But as we insinuated before, This Root of Superstition diversely branched
forth it self, sometimes into Magic and Exorcismes, other times into
Paedanticall Rites and idle observations of Things and Times, as Theophrastus
has largely set them forth in his Tract (...) in others it displayed itself in
inventing as many new Deities as there were several Causes from whence their
affrights proceeded, and finding out many (...) appropriate to them, as
supposing they ought to be worshipped cum sacro horrore. And hence it is that we
hear of those inhumane and Diabolical sacrifices called (...), frequent among
the old Heathens (as among many others Porphyry in his De abstinentia has
abundantly related) and of those dead men's bones which our Ecclesiastic
Writers tell us were found in their Temples at the demolishing of them.
Sometimes it would express itself in a prodigal way of sacrificing, for which
Ammianus Marcellinus (an heathen Writer, but yet one who seems to have been
well pleased with the simplicity and integrity of Christian Religion) taxes
Julian the Emperor for Superstition. Julianus, Superstitiosus magis quam
legitimus sacrorum observator, innumeras sine parsimonia pecudes mactans, ut
aestimaretur, si revertisset de Parthis, boves jam defuturos: like that Marcus
Caesar, of whom he relates this common proverb, (...). Besides many other ways
might be named wherein Superstition might occasionally show it self.

All which may best be understood, if we consider it a little in that
Composition of Fear and Flattery which before we intimated: and indeed Flattery
is most incident to base and slavish minds; and where the fear and jealousy of
a Deity disquiet a wanton dalliance with sin, and disturb the filthy pleasure
of Vice, there this fawning and crouching disposition will find out devices to
quiet an angry conscience within, and an offended God without, (though as men
grow more expert in this cunning, these fears may in some degree abate.) This
the ancient Philosophy has well taken notice of, and therefore well defined
(...) by (...), and uses these terms promiscuously. Thus we find Max. Tyrius
in his Dissert. 4. concerning the difference between a Friend and a Flatterer.
(...). The sense whereof is this, The Pious man is God's friend, the
Superstitious is a flatterer of God: and indeed most happy and blessed is the
condition of the Pious Man, God's friend; but right miserable and sad is the
state of the Superstitious. The Pious man, emboldned by a good Conscience and
encouraged by the sense of his integrity, comes to God without fear and dread:
but the Superstitious being sunk and deprest through the sense of his own
wickedness, comes not without much fear, being void of all hope and confidence,
and dreading the Gods as so many Tyrants. Thus Plato also sets forth this
Superstitious temper, though he mentions it not under that name, but we may
know it by a property he gives of it, viz. to collogue with Heaven, Lib. 10. de
Legibus; where he distinguishes of Three kinds of Tempers in reference to the
Deity, which he there calls (...), which are, Total Atheism, which he says
never abides with any man till his Old age; and Partial Atheism, which is a
Negation of Providence; and a Third, which is a persuasion concerning the Gods
(...), that they are easily wone by sacrifices and prayers, which he after
explaines thus, (...), etc. that with gifts unjust men may find acceptance with
them. And this Discourse of Plato's upon these three kinds of Irreligious (...)
Simplicius seems to have respect to in his Comment upon Epictetus, cap. 38.
which treats about Right Opinions in Religion; and there having pursued the two
former of them, he thus states the latter, which he calls (...) as well as the
other two, as a conceit (...), quod muneribus and donariis and stipis
distributione a sententia deducuntur: such men making account by their
devotions to draw the Deity to themselves, and winning the favor of Heaven, to
procure such an indulgence to their lusts as no sober man on earth would give
them; they in the mean while not considering (...), that Repentance,
Supplications and Prayers, etc. ought to draw us nearer to God, not God nearer
to us; as in a ship, by fastening a Cable to a firm Rock, we intend not to draw
the Rock to the Ship, but the Ship to the Rock. Which last passage of his is
therefore the more worthy to be taken notice of, as holding out so large an
Extent that this Irreligious temper is of, and of how subtle a Nature. This
fond and gross dealing with the Deity was that which made the scoffing Lucian
so much sport, who in his Treatise De sacrificiis tells a number of stories how
the Demons loved to be feasted, and where and how they were entertained, with
such devotions which are rather used Magically as Charms and Spells for such as
use them, to defend themselves against those Evils which their own Fears are
apt perpetually to muster up, and to endeavor by bribery to purchase Heaven's
favor and indulgence, as Juvenal speaks of the Satyr. 6.
Superstitious Egyptian,

Illius lacrymae mentitaque munera praestant
Ut veniam culpae non abnuat, ansere magno
Scilicet and tenui popano corruptus Osiris.
Though all this while I would not be understood to condemn too severely all
servile fear of God, if it tend to make men avoid true wickedness, but that
which settles upon these lees of Formality.

To conclude, Were I to define Superstition more generally according to the
ancient sense of it, I would call it Such an apprehension of God in the
thoughts of men, as renders him grievous and burdensome to them, and so
destroys all free and cheerful converse with him; begetting in the stead
thereof a forced and jejune devotion, void of inward Life and Love. It is that
which discovers it self Paedantically in the worship of the Deity, in any thing
that makes up but only the Body or outward Vesture of Religion; though there
it may make a mighty bluster: and because it comprehends not the true Divine
good that arises to the Souls of men from an internal frame of Religion, it
is therefore apt to think that all it is insipid devotions are as so many
Presents offered to the Deity and gratifications of him. How variously
Superstition can discover and manifest itself, we have intimated before: To
which I shall only add this, That we are not so well rid of Superstition, as
some imagine when they have expelled it out of their Churches, expunged it out
of their Books and Writings, or cast it out of their Tongues, by making
Innovations in names (wherein they sometimes imitate those old Caunii that
Herodotus speaks of, who that they might banish all the foreign Gods that had
stolen in among them, took their procession through all their Country, beating
and scourging the Air along as they went;) No, for all this, Superstition may
enter into our chambers, and creep into our closets, it may twine about our
secret Devotions, and actuate our Forms of belief and Orthodox opinions, when
it has no place else to shroud itself or hide its head in; we may think to
flatter the Deity by these, and to bribe it with them, when we are grown weary
of more pompous solemnities: nay it may mix it self with a seeming Faith in
Christ; as I doubt it does now in too many, who laying aside all sober and
serious care of true Piety, think it sufficient to offer up their Savior, his
Active and Passive Righteousness, to a severe and rigid Justice, to make
expiation for those sins they can be willing to allow themselves in.

A SHORT DISCOURSE OF ATHEISM.

Job 21. 14, 15. They say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit should we have if we pray unto him?

Plutarchus (...). (...).

Plutarch. (...). (...).

The Contents of the ensuing Discourse.
That there is a near Affinity between Atheism and Superstition.

That Superstition does not only prepare the way for Atheism, but promotes and
strengthens it.

That Epicurism is but Atheism under a mask.

A Confutation of Epicurus his Master-notion, together with some other
pretenses and Dogmata of his Sect.

The true knowledge of Nature is advantageous to Religion.

That Superstition is more tolerable then Atheism.

That Atheism is both ignoble and uncomfortable.

What low and unworthy Notions the Epicureans had concerning Man's Happiness:
and What trouble they were put to How to define, and Where to place true
Happiness.

A true belief of a Deity supports the Soul with a present Tranquillity and
future Hopes.

Were it not for a Deity, the World would be unhabitable.

A SHORT DISCOURSE OF ATHEISM.
WE have now done with what we intended concerning Superstition, and shall a
little consider and search into the Pedigree of ATHEISM, which indeed has so
much affinity with Superstition that it may seem to have the same Father with
it. (...). Superstition could be well content there were no God to trouble or
disquiet it, and Atheism thinks there is none. And as Superstition is engendered
by a base opinion of the Deity as cruel and tyrannical (though it be
afterward brooded and hatched by a slavish fear and abject thoughts) so also is
Atheism: and that sour and ghastly apprehension of God, when it meets with
more stout and surly Natures, is apt to enrage them, and cankering them with
Malice against the Deity they so little brook, provokes them to fight against
it and undermine the Notion of it; as this Plastic Nature which intends to
form Living creatures, when it meets with stubborn and unruly Matter, is fain
to yield to it, and to produce that which answers not her own Idea; whence the
Signatures and impressions of Nature sometimes vary so much from that Seal that
Nature would have stamped upon them. (...). If these Melancholic Opinions and
disquieting Fears of the Deity mould not the Minds of men into Devotion, as
finding them too churlish and untameable to receive any such impressions; they
are then apt to exasperate men against it, and stir them up to contend with
that Being which they cannot bear, and to destroy that which would deprive them
of their own Liberty. These unreasonable fears of a Deity will always be
moving into Flattery or Wrath. Atheism could never have so easily crept into
the world, had not Superstition made way and opened a Backdoor for it; it
could not so easily have banished the Belief of a Deity, had not that first
accused and condemned it as destructive to the Peace of Mankind; and therefore
it has always justified and defended it self by Superstition: as Plutarch
has well expressed it, (...) (...), Superstition afforded the principle of
Generation to Atheism, and afterward furnished it with an Apology, which
though it be neither true nor lovely, yet wants it not a specious pretense. And
therefore Simplicius (as we heard before) calls the Notion of Superstition
(...), as having an ill savor of Atheism in it, seeing (as he gives an account
of it) it disrobes the Deity of true Majesty and Perfection, and represents it
as weak and infirm, clothed with such fond, feeble and impotent passions as
men themselves are. And Dionysius Longinus, that noble Rhetorician, fears not
to challenge Homer as Atheistical for his unsavory language of the Gods,
which indeed was only the Brat of his Superstition. If the Superstitious man
thinks that God is altogether like himself (which indeed is a character most
proper to such) the Atheist will soon say in his heart, There is no God; and
will judge it not without some appearance of Reason to be better there were
none; as Plutarch has discoursed it, (...); Were it not better for the Gauls
and Scythians, not to have had any Notion, fansy or History of the Gods, then
to think them such as delighted in the Blood of men offered up in sacrifices
upon their Altars, as reckoning this the most perfect kind of Sacrifice and
consummate Devotion? For thus his words are to be translated in reference to
those ancient Gauls and Scythians, whom almost all Histories testify to have
been (...) which horrid and monstrous Superstition was anciently very frequent
among the Heathen, and was sharply taxed by Empedocles of old, (...)
(...) --
This made Lucretius cry out with so much indignation, when he took notice of
Agamemnon's Diabolical devotion in sacrificing his Daughter Iphigenia to make
expiation at his Trojan Expedition, Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum. And
indeed what sober man could brook such an esteem of himself as this blind
Superstition (which overspread the Heathen world and (I doubt) is not
sufficiently rooted out of the Christian) fastened upon God himself? which made
Plutarch so much in defiance of it cry out, as willing almost to be an Atheist
as to entertain the Vulgar Superstition, As for me (says he) I had rather men
should say that there is no such man nor ever was as Plutarch, then to say that
he is or was (...), an inconstant fickle man, apt to be angry, and for every
trifle revengefull, etc. as he goes on farther to express this Blasphemy of
Superstition.

But it may not be amiss to learn from Atheists themselves what was the
Impulsive cause that moved them to banish away all thoughts and sober fear of a
Deity, what was the Principle upon which this black Opinion was built and by
which it was sustein'd. And this we may have from the confessions of the
Epicureans, who though they seemed to acknowledge a Deity, yet I doubt not but
those that search into their Writings will soon embrace Tully's censure of
them, Verbis quidem ponunt, reipsa tollunt Deos. Indeed it was not safe for
Epicurus (though he had a good mind to let the World know how little he cared
for their Deities) to profess he believed there was none, lest he should have
met with the same entertainment for it that Protagoras did at Athens, who for
declaring himself doubtful (...), was himself put to Death, and his books
burnt in the streets of Athens, (...) sub voce Praeconis, as Diogenes Laertius
and others record: and indeed the world was never so degenerated any where as
to suffer Atheism to appear in public View.

But that we may return, and take the Confessions a little of these secret
Atheists of the Epicurean sect: and of these Tully gives us a large account in
his Books de Finibus and other parts of his Philosophy. Torquatus the Epicurean
in his first book de Finibus liberally spends his breath to cool that too-much
heat of Religion, as he thought, in those that could not apprehend God as any
other then curiosum and plenum negotii Deum (as one of that Sect does phrase it
Lib. 1. de Not. Deor.) and so he states this Maxim of the Religion that then
was most in use, Superstitione qui est imbutus, quietus esse nunquam potest. By
the way, it may be worth our observing, how this monstrous progeny of men, when
they would seem to acknowledge a Deity, could not forget their own beloved
Image which was always before their eyes; and therefore they would have it as
careless of any thing but its own pleasure and idle life as they themselves
were. So easy is it for all Sects some way or other to slide into a compliance
with the Anthropomorphitae, and to bring down the Deity to a conformity to
their own Image.

But we shall rather choose a little to examine Lucretius in this point, who has
in the name of all his Sect largely told us the Rise and Original of this
Design. After a short Ceremony to his following Discourse of Nature, he thus
begins his Prologue in commendation of Epicurus his exploit, as he fancies it.

Humana ante oculos foede cum vita jaceret,
In terris oppressa gravi sub Relligione,
Quae caput e coeli regionibus ostendebat
Horribili aspectu semper mortalibus instans;
Primum Graius homo mortales tendere contra
Est oculos ausus, primusque obsistere contra:
Quem nec fama Deum, nec Fulmina, nec minitanti
Murmr compressit Coelum --
And a little after in a sorry Ovation, proudly cries out, Quare Relligio
pedibus subjecta vicissim
Obteritur; nos exaequat victoria coelo.
But to proceed; Our Author observing the timorous minds of men to have been
struck with this dreadful Superstition from the observation of some stupendous
Effects and Events (as he pleases rather to call them) in Nature; he
therefore, following herein the steps of his great Master Epicurus, undertakes
so to solve all those knots which Superstition was tied up into, by unfolding
the Secrets of Nature, as that men might find themselves loosned from those
saevi Domini and crudeles Tyranni, as he calls the vulgar Creeds of the Deity.
And so begins with a simple Confutation of the Opinion of the Creation, which
he supposed to contein a sure and sensible Demonstration of a Deity, and to
have sprung up from an admiring ignorance of Natural productions.

Quippe ita Formido mortales continet omnes, Lib. 1.

Quod multa in terris fieri coeloque tuentur,
Quorum operum Causas nulla ratione videre
Possunt, ac fieri Divino numine rentur.
And toward the end of this first Book, Primum quod magnis doceo de rebus, and
arctis
Relligionum animos nodis exsolvere pergo.
But herein all the Epicureans (who are not the true, but foster-fathers of
that Natural Philosophy they brag of, and which indeed Democritus was the first
Author of) do miserably blunder themselves. For though a lawful acquaintance
with all the Events and Phenomenon that show themselves upon this mundane stage
would contribute much to free men's Minds from the slavery of dull Superstition:
yet would it also breed a sober and amiable Belief of the Deity, as it did in
all the Pythagoreans, Platonists and other Sects of Philosophers, if we may
believe themselves; and an ingenuous knowledge hereof would be as fertile with
Religion, as the ignorance thereof in affrighted and base Minds is with
Superstition.

For which purpose I shall need only to touch upon Epicurus his master-notion
by which he undertakes to salve all difficulties that might hold our thoughts
in suspense about a (...), or a Creator, which is that Plenum (which is all one
with Corpus) and Inane, that this Body (which in his Philosophy is nothing else
but an Infinity of Insensible Atoms moving to and fro in an Empty Space) is,
together with that Space in which it is, sufficient to beget all those
Phenomenon which we see in Nature. Which however it might be true, Motion being
once granted, yet herein Tully has well scotcht the wheel of this overhasty
Philosophy, Lib. 1. de Finibus, Cum in Rerum natura duo sint quaerenda, unum,
quae Materia sit ex qua quaeque res efficiatur; alterum, quae Vis sit quae
quidque efficiat: de Materia disseruerunt Epicurei; Vim and causam efficiendi
reliquerunt. Which is as much as if some conceited piece of Sophistry should go
about to prove that an Automaton had no dependency upon the skill of an
Artificer, by descanting upon the several parts of it, without taking notice in
the meanwhile of some external Weight or Spring that moves it: or, to use his
own Similitude, as if one that undertakes to Analyze any Learned Book, should
tell us how so many Letters meeting together in several Combinations, should
beget all that sense that is contained therein, without minding that Wit that
cast them all into their several Ranks. And this made Aristotle, otherwise not
over-zealous of Religion, soberly to acknowledge some First mover, (...).

And yet could we allow Epicurus this power of Motion to be seated in Nature,
yet that he might perform the true task of a Naturalist, he must also give us
an account how such a force and power in Nature should subsist: which indeed is
easy to do, if we call in (...), God himself as the Architect and mover of
this Divine Artifice; but without some Infinite power, impossible.

And we should further inquire, How these moveable and rambling Atoms come to
place themselves so orderly in the Universe, and observe that absolute Harmony
and Decorum in all their Motions, as if they kept time with the Musical laws of
some Almighty Mind that composed all their lessons and measured out their
Dances up and down in the Universe; and also how it comes to pass, if they be
only moved by Chance and Accident, that such Regular mutations and generations
should be begotten by a fortuitous concurse of Atoms, as sometimes they speak
of, they having no center to seat themselves about in an infinite Vacuity, as
Tully argues; and how these Bodies that are once moved by some impulse from
their former station, return again, or at least come to stay themselves, and
do not rather move perpetually the same way the First impulse and direction
carried them; or why they do not there rest where their Motion first began to
cease, if they were interrupted by any thing without them: or again, if the
proper motion of these Atoms be always toward some Center, as Epicurus
sometimes is pleased to state the business, Lineis Rectis, as he says, then
how comes there, as Tully replies, to be any Generation? or if there be a Motus
declinationis joined with this Motion of Gravity (which was one of Epicurus his
(...) which he borrowed not from Democritus) then why should not all tend the
same way? and so all those Motions, Generations and Appearances in Nature all
vanish, seeing all Variety of Motion would be taken away which way soever this
unhallowed Opinion be stated?

Thus we see, though we should allow Epicurus his Principle and fundamental
absurdity in the frame of Nature, yet it is too aerie and weak a thing to
support that massy bulk of Absurdities which he would build upon it. But it
was not the lot of any of his stamp to be over-wise (however they did boast
most in the title of Sophi) as is well observed of them; for then they might
have been so happy too as to have dispelled these thick and filthy mists of
Atheism, by those bright beams of Truth that shine in the frame of this
inferior world, wherein, as S. Paul speaks, the (...) is made manifest.

Atheism most commonly lurks in confinio scientiae and ignorantiae; when the
Minds of men begin to draw those gross, earthly vapors of sensual and
material Speculations by dark and cloudy disputes, they are then most in
danger of being benighted in them. There is a Natural Sense of God that lodges
in the minds of the lowest and dullest sort of vulgar men, which is always
roving after him, catching at him, though it cannot lay any sure hold on him;
which works like a natural Instinct antecedent to any mature knowledge, as
being indeed the First principle of it: and if I were to speak precisely in the
mode of the Stoics, I would rather call it (...) then with Plutarch (...). But
when contentious disputes, and frothy reasonings, and contemplations informed
by fleshly affections, conversant only about the outside of Nature, begin to
rise up in men's Souls; they may then be in some danger of depressing all those
Inbred notions of a Deity, and to reason themselves out of their own sense, as
the old Scepticks did: and therefore it may be it might be wished that some men
that have not Religion, had had more Superstition to accompany them in their
passage from Ignorance to Knowledge.

But we have run out too far in this Digression: we shall now return, and
observe how our former Author takes notice of another piece of Vulgar
Superstition, which he thinks fit to be chased away by Atheism, and that is The
terrors of the world to come, which he thus sets upon in his Third book,

-- Animi natura videtur
Atque Animae claranda meis jam versibus esse,
Et metus ille for as praeceps Acheruntis agendus
Funditus, humanam vitam qui turbat ab imo,
Omnia suffundens mortis nigrore --
And afterward he tells us how this Fear of the Gods thus proceeding from the
former Causes, and from those Specter and ghastly Apparitions with which men
were sometimes terrified, begat all those Fantastic rites and ceremonies in
use amongst them, as their Temples, sacred Lakes and Pools, their Groves,
Altars, Images, and other like Vanities, as so many idle toys to please these
Deities with; and at last concludes himself thus into Atheism, as a strong Fort
to preserve himself from these cruel Deities that Superstition had made,
because he could not find the way to true Religion,

Nunc quae sausa Deum per magnas numina gentes Lib. 5.

Pervulgarit, and ararum compleverit urbes,
Suscipiendaque curarit solennia sacra,
Quae nunc in magnis florent rebusque locisque;
Unde etiam nunc est mortalibus insitus horror
Qui delubra Deum nova toto suscitat orbi
Terrarum, and in festis cogit celebrare diebus;
Non ita difficile est rationem reddere verbis.
Thus we see how Superstition strengthened the wicked hands of Atheism; so far
is a Formal and Ritual way of Religion proceeding from baseness and Servility
of Mind (though backed with never so much rigor and severity) from keeping it
out. And I wish some of our Opinions in Religion in these days may not have
the same evil influences as the notorious Gentile- Superstition of old had, as
well for the begetting this brat of Atheism, as I doubt it is too manifest they
have for some other.

Thus we should now leave this Argument; only before we pass from it, we shall
observe two things which Plutarch has suggested to us. The first whereof is,
That howsoever Superstition be never so unlovely a thing, yet it is more
tolerable then Atheism: which I shall repeat in his words, Lib. (...).
(...), We should endeavor to take off Superstition from our Minds, as a Film
from our Eyes; but if that cannot be, we must not therefore pluck out our Eyes,
and blind the faith that generally we have of the Deity. Superstition may keep
men from the outward acts of sin sometimes, and so their future punishment may
have some abatement. Besides that Atheism offers the greatest violence to men's
Souls that may be, pulling up the Notions of a Deity, which have spread their
Roots quite through all the Powers of men's Souls.

The second is this, That Atheism it self is a most ignoble and uncomfortable
thing, as Tully has largely discussed it, and especially Plutarch in the
abovenamed Tractate of his, written by way of Confutation of Colotes the
Epicurean, who writ a Book to prove That a man could not live quietly by
following any other sects of Philosophers besides his own; as if all true good
were only conversant (...), about the belly, and all the pores and passages of
the Body, and the way to true happiness was (...), or else (...), as Plutarch
has not more wittily then judiciously replied upon him.

What is all that Happiness that arifeth from these bodily pleasures to any one
that has any high or noble sense within him? This gross, muddy, and stupid
Opinion is nothing else but a Dehonestamentum humani generis, that casts as
great a scorn and reproach upon the nature of mankind as may be, and sinks it
into the deepest Abyss of Baseness. And certainly were the Highest happiness
of mankind such a thing as might be felt by a corporeal touch, were it of so
ignoble a birth as to spring out of this earth, and to grow up out of this mire
and clay; we might well sit down, and bewail our unhappy fates, that we should
rather be born Men then Brute beasts, which enjoy more of this worlds happiness
then we can do, without any sin or guilt. How little of Pleasure these short
lives taste here, which only lasts so long as the Indigency of nature is in
supplying, and after that, only (...), a flying shadow, or flitting dream of
that pleasure (which is choked as soon as craving Nature is satisfied) remains
in the Fancy, (...), as Plutarch has well observed in the same Discourse!

And therefore Epicurus seeing how slippery the Soul was to all Sensual
pleasure, which was apt to slide away perpetually from it, and again how little
of it the Body was capable of where it had a shorter stay; he and his followers
could not well tell where to place this beggarly guest: and therefore, as
Plutarch speaks, (...), one while they would place it in the Body, and then
lead it back again into the Soul, not knowing where to bestow it. And Diodorus,
and the Cyreniaci, and the Epicureans, as Tully tells us, who all could fancy
nothing but a Bodily happiness, yet could not agree whether it should be
Voluptas, or Vacuitas doloris, or something else; it being ever found so hard a
thing to define, like that base Matter of which it is begotten, which by reason
of it is penury and scantness of Beings as Philosophers tell us, does effugere
intellectum, and is nothing else but a shady kind of Nothing, something that
has a name but nothing else. I dare say that all those that have any just
esteem of humanity, cannot but with a noble scorn defy such a base-born
Happiness as this is, generated only out of the slime of this earth: and yet
this is all the portion of Atheism, which teaches the entertainers of it to
believe themselves nothing else but so many Heaps of more refined dust,
fortuitously gathered together, which at last must be all blown away again.

But a true Belief of a Deity is a sure Support to all serious minds, which
besides the future hopes it is pregnant with, entertains them here with
Tranquillity and inward serenity. What the Stoic said in his cool and mature
thoughts, (...), it is not worth the while to live in a world empty of God and
Providence, is the sense of all those that know what a Deity means. Indeed it
were the greatest unhappiness that might be, to have been born into such a
world, where we should be perpetually tossed up and down by a rude and blind
Fortune, and be perpetually liable to all those abuses which the savage Lusts
and Passions of the world would put upon us. It is not possible for any thing
well to bear up the spirit of that man that shall calmly meditate with himself
the true state and condition of this world, should that Mind and Wisdom be
taken away from it which governs every part of it, and overrules all those
disorders that at any time begin to break forth in it. Were there not an
Omniscient skill to temper, and fitly to rank up in their due places all those
quarrelsome and extravagant spirits that are in the world, it would soon prove
an unhabitable place, and sink under the heavy weight of it is own confusion;
which was wittily signified in that Fable of Phaeton, who being admitted to
drive the chariot of the Sun but for one day, by his rude and unskilful
guidance of it made it fall down, and burn the world. Remove God and Providence
out of the world, and then we have nothing to depend upon but Chance and
Fortune, the Humors and Passions of men; and he that could then live in it,
had need be as blind as these Lords would be, that he might not see his own
misery always staring upon him; and had need be more senseless and stupid, that
he might not be affected with it.

Psalm. 10. 4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek
after God: God is not in all his thoughts. Ecclus 23. 4. O Lord, Father and God
of my life, give me not a proud look; but turn away from thy servants a (...).
Sic Edit. Complut.
Giant-like mind.
A Discourse demonstrating THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL.

Phocylides. (...).

Epicharmus apud Clem. Alex. Strom. 4. (...).

Plotin. Ennead. 4. l. 4. c. 45. (...).

Hierocl. in Pythag. aur. carm. (...).

A DISCOURSE OF THE Immortality of the Soul.
CHAP. I.
The First and main Principles of Religion, viz. 1. That God is. 2. That God is
a rewarder of them that seek him: Wherein is included the Great Article of the
Immortality of the Soul. These two Principles acknowledged by religious and
serious persons in all Ages. 3. That God communicates himself to mankind by
Christ. The Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul discoursed of in the first
place, and why?

HAving finished our two short Discourses concerning those two Anti-Deities,
viz. Superstition and Atheism; we shall now proceed to discourse more largely
concerning the maine Heads and Principles of Religion.

And here we are to take Notice of those two Cardinal points which the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews makes the necessary Foundations of all Religion,
viz. That God is, and That He is a rewarder of them that seek him. To which we
should add, The Immortality of the Reasonable Soul, but that that may seem
included in the former: and indeed we can neither believe any Invisible reward
of which he there speaks, without a Prolepsis of the Soul's Immortality;
neither can we entertain a serious belief of that, but the notions of Poena and
Praemium will naturally follow from it; we never meet with any who were
persuaded of the former, that ever doubted of the latter: and therefore the
former two have been usually taken alone for the First principles of Religion,
and have been most insisted upon by the Platonists; and accordingly a novel
Platonist writing a Summary of Plato's Divinity, intitles his book, De Deo and
Immortalitate Animae. And also the Stoical Philosophy requires a belief of
these as the Prolepses of all Religion, of the one whereof Cap. 38.
Epictetus himself assures us, (...), etc. Know that the main Foundation of
Piety is this, to have (...) right opinions and apprehensions of God, viz. That
he is, and that he governs all things (...). And the other is sufficiently
insinuated in that Cardinal distinction of their (...), and (...), and is more
fully expressed by Simplicius. For however the Stoics may seem to lay some
ground of suspicion, as if they were dubious in this point, yet I think that
which Tully and others deliver concerning their opinion herein, may fully
answer all scruples, viz. That as they made certain Vicissitudes of
Conflagrations and Inundations whereby the World should perish in certain
periods of time; so they thought the Souls of men should also be subject to
these periodical revolutions; and therefore though they were of themselves
immortal, should in these changes fall under the power of the common fate.

And indeed we scarce ever find that any were deemed Religious, that did not
own these two Fundamentals. For the Sadducees, the Jewish Writers are wont
commonly to reckon them among the Epicureans, because though they held a God,
yet they denied the Immortality of men's Souls, which the New Testament seems to
include, if not especially to aim at, in imputing to them a denial of the
Resurrection; which is therefore more fully explained in the Acts, Chap. 23. 8.
where it is added that they held there was neither Angel nor Spirit. And these
two Principles are chiefly aimed at in those two Inscriptions upon the Temple
at Delphos, the one, EI, referring to God, by which Title those that came in to
worship were supposed to invoke him, acknowledging his Immutable and Eternal
nature; the other, (...), as the admonition of the Deity again to all his
worshippers, to take notice of the dignity and Immortality of their own Souls,
as Plutarch and Tully, as also Clemens Alexandr. expound them.

But if we will have the Fundamental Articles of Christian Religion, we must
add to the former, The Communication of God to Mankind through Christ; which
last the Scripture treats of at large, so far as concerns our practice, with
that plainness and simplicity, that I cannot but think, that whosoever shall
ingenuously and with humility of Spirit addressing himself to God, converse
therewith, will see the bright beams of Divinity shining forth in it, and it
may be find the Text it self much plainer then all those Glosses that have been
put upon it; though it may be it is not so clear in matters of Speculation, as
some Magisterial men are apt to think it is.

Now for these three Articles of Faith and Practice, I think if we duly
consider the Scriptures, or the Reason of the thing it self, we shall easily
find all Practical Religion to be referred to them, and built upon them: The
Nature of God and of our own Immortal Souls both show us what our Religion
should be, and also the Necessity of it; and the Doctrine of Free grace in
Christ, the sweet and comfortable means of attaining to that perfection and
Blessedness which the other Belief teaches us to aim at.

In pursuing of these we shall first begin with The Immortality of the Soul,
which if it be once cleared, we can neither leave any room for Atheism (which
those I doubt are not ordinarily very free from that have gross material
notions of their own Souls) not be wholly ignorant what God is: for indeed the
chief natural way whereby we can climb up to the understanding of the Deity is
by a Contemplation of our own Souls. We cannot think of him but according to
the measure and model of our own Intellect, or frame any other Idea of him then
what the impressions of our own Souls will permit us: and therefore the best
Philosophers have always taught us to inquire for God within our selves;
Reason in us, as Tully tells us, being participata similitudo rationis
internae: and accordingly some good Expositours have interpreted that place in
S. John's Gospel chap. 1. He is that true light which enlightens every man that
comes into the world; which if I were to gloss upon in the language of the
Platonists, I should do it thus, (...), the Eternal Word is the light of
Souls, which the Vulgar Latin referred to in Signatum est supra nos lumen
vultus tui, Domine, as Aquinas Psalm. 4. 7.
observes. But we shall not search into the full nature of the Soul, but rather
make our inquiry into the Immortality of it, and endeavor to demonstrate that.

CHAP. II.
Some Considerations preparatory to the proof of the Soul's Immortality.

BUT before we fall more closely upon this, viz. the demonstrating the Soul's
Immortality, we shall premise three things.

1. That the Immortality of the Soul does not absolutely need any Demonstration
to clear it by, but might be assumed rather as a Principle or Postulatum,
seeing the notion of it is apt naturally to insinuate it self into the belief
of the most vulgar sort of men. Men's understandings commonly lead them as
readily to believe that their Souls are Immortal, as that they have any
Existence at all. And though they be not all so wise and Logical, as to
distinguish aright between their Souls and their Bodies, or tell what kind of
thing that is that they commonly call their Soul; yet they are strongly
inclined to believe that some part of them shall survive another, and that that
Soul, which it may be they conceive by a gross Phantasm, shall live, when the
other more visible part of them shall moulder into dust. And therefore all
Nations have consented in this belief, which has almost been as vulgarly
received as the belief of a Deity; as a diligent converse with History will
assure us, it having been never so much questioned by the Idiotical sort of
men, as by some unskilful Philosophers, who have had Wit and Fancy enough to
raise doubts, like Evil Spirits, but not Judgment enough to send them down
again.

This Consensus Gentium Tully thinks enough to conclude a Law and Maxim of
Nature by, which though I should not universally grant, seeing sometimes Error
and Superstition may strongly plead this Argument; yet I think for those things
that are the matter of our first belief, that Notion may not be refused. For we
cannot easily conceive how any Prime notion that has no dependency on any
other antecedent to it, should be generally entertained; did not the common
dictate of Nature or Reason acting alike in all men move them to conspire
together in the embracing of it, though they knew not one another minds. And
this it may be might first persuade Averroes to think of a Common Intellect,
because of the uniform judgments of men in some things. But indeed in those
Notions which we may call notiones ortae, there a communis notitia is not so
free from all suspicion; which may be cleared by taking an Instance from our
present Argument. The notion of the Immortality of the Soul is such an one as
is generally owned by all those that yet are not able to collect it by a long
Series and concatenation of sensible observations, and by a Logical dependence
of one thing upon another deduce it from sensible Experiments; a thing that it
may be was scarce ever done by the wisest Philosophers, but is rather believed
with a kind of repugnancy to Sense, which shows all things to be mortal, and
which would have been too apt to have deluded the ruder sort of men, did not a
more powerful impression upon their own Souls forcibly urge them to believe
their own Immortality. Though indeed if the common notions of men were well
examined, it may be some common notion adherent to this of the Immortality may
be as generally received, which yet in it self is false; and that by reason of
a common prejudice which the earthly and Sensual part of man will equally
possess all men with, until they come to be well acquainted with their own
Souls; as namely a notion of the Souls Materiality, and it may be it is
Traduction too, which seems to be as generally received by the vulgar sort as
the former. But the reason of that is evident, for the Souls of men exercising
themselves first of all (...), as the Greek Philosopher expresses, merely by a
Progressive kind of motion, spending themselves about Bodily and Material acts,
and conversing only with Sensible things; they are apt to acquire such deep
stamps of Material phantasms to themselves, that they cannot imagine their own
Being to be any other then Material and Divisible, though of a fine Ethereal
nature: which kind of conceit, though it be inconsistent with an Immortal and
Incorruptible nature, yet has had too much prevalencie in Philosophers
themselves, their Minds not being sufficiently abstracted while they have
contemplated the highest Being of all. And some think Aristotle himself cannot
be excused in this point, who seems to have thought God himself to be nothing
else but (...), as he styles him. But such Common Notions as these are, arising
from the deceptions and hallucinations of Sense, ought not to prejudice those
which not Sense, but some Higher power begets in all men. And so we have done
with that.

The second thing I should premise should be in place of a Postulatum to our
following Demonstrations, or rather a Caution about them, which is, That, to a
right conceiving the force of any such Arguments as may prove the Souls
Immortality, there must be an antecedent Converse with our own Souls. It is no
hard matter to convince any one by clear and evident principles, fetched from
his own sense of himself, who has ever well meditated the Powers and
Operations of his own Soul, that it is Immaterial and Immortal.

But those very Arguments that to such will be Demonstrative, to others will
lose something of the strength of Probability: For indeed it is not possible
for us well to know what our Souls are, but only by their (...), their
Circular and Reflex motions, and Converse with themselves, which only can
steal from them their own secrets. All those Discourses which have been written
of the Soul's Heraldry, will not blazon it so well to us as it self will do.
When we turn our own eyes in upon it, it will soon tell us it is own royal
pedigree and noble extraction, by those sacred Hieroglyphics which it bears
upon it self. We shall endeavor to interpret and unfold some of them in our
following Discourse.

3. There is one thing more to be considered, which may serve as a common Basis
or Principle to our following Arguments; and it is this Hypothesis, That no
Substantial and Indivisible thing ever perishes. And this Epicurus and all of
his Sect must needs grant, as indeed they do, and much more then it is lawful
to plead for; and therefore they make this one of the first Principles of their
Atheistical Philosophy, Ex nihilo fieri nil, and in nihilum nil posse reverti.
But we shall here be content with that sober Thesis of Plato in his Timaeus,
who attributes the Perpetuation of all Substances to the Benignity and
Liberality of the Creator, whom he therefore brings in thus speaking to the
Angels, those (...), as he calls them, (...), etc. You are not of your selves
immortal, nor indissoluble; but would relapse and slide back from that Being
which I have given you, should I withdraw the influence of my own power from
you: but yet you shall hold your Immortality by a Patent of mere grace from my
self. But to return, Plato held that the whole world, howsoever it might meet
with many Periodicall mutations, should remain Eternally; which I think our
Christian Divinity does no where deny: and so Plotinus frames this general
Axiom, (...), that no Substance shall ever perish. And indeed if we collate all
our own Observations and Experience with such as the History of former times
has delivered to us, we shall not find that ever any substance was quite lost;
but though this Proteus-like Matter may perpetually change its shape, yet it
will constantly appear under one Form or another, what art soever we use to
destroy it: as it seems to have been set forth in that old Gryphe or Riddle of
the Peripatetick School, Aelia Laelia Crispis, nec mas, nec faemina, nec
androgyna, nec casta, nec meretrix, nec pudica; sed omnia, etc. as Fortunius
Licetus has expounded it. Therefore it was never doubted whether ever any piece
of Substance was lost, till of latter times some hot-brained Peripateticks, who
could not bring their fiery and subtle fancies to any cool judgment, began
rashly to determine that all Material Forms (as they are pleased to call them)
were lost. For having once jumbled and crowded in a new kind of Being, never
anciently heard of, between the parts of a Contradiction, that is Matter and
Spirit, which they call Material Forms, because they could not well tell whence
these new upstarts should arise, nor how to dispose of them when Matter began
to shift herself into some new garb, they condemned them to utter destruction;
and yet lest they should seem too rudely to control all Sense and Reason, they
found out this common tale which signifies nothing, that these Substantial
Forms were educed ex potentia Materiae, whenever Matter began to appear in any
new disguise, and afterward again returned in gremium Materiae; and so they
thought them not quite lost. But this Curiosity consisting only of words
fortuitously packt up together, being too subtle for any sober judgment to lay
hold upon, and which they themselves could never yet tell how to define; we
shall as carelessly lay it aside, as they boldly obtrude it upon us, and take
the common distinction of all Substantial Being for granted, viz. That it is
either Body, and so Divisible, and of three Dimensions; or else it is something
which is not properly a Body or Matter, and so has no such Dimensions as that
the Parts thereof should be crouding for place, and justling one with another,
not being all able to couch together or run one into another: and this is
nothing else but what is commonly called Spirit. Though yet we will not be too
Critical in depriving every thing which is not grossly corporeal of all kind of
Extension.

CHAP. III.
The First Argument for the Immortality of the Soul. That the Soul of man is
not Corporeal. The gross absurdities upon the Supposition that the Soul is a
Complex of fluid Atoms, or that it is made up by a fortuitous Concourse of
Atoms: which is Epicurus his Notion concerning Body. The Principles and
Dogmata of the Epicurean Philosophy in opposition to the Immateriall and
Incorporeal nature of the Soul, asserted by Lucretius; but discovered to be
false and insufficient. That Motion cannot arise from Body or Matter. Nor can
the power of Sensation arise from Matter: Much less can Reason. That all Humane
knowledge has not its rise from Sense. The proper function of Sense, and that
it is never deceived. An Addition of Three Considerations for the enforcing of
this first Argument, and further clearing the Immateriality of the Soul. That
there is in man a Faculty which 1. controlls Sense: and 2. collects and unites
all the Perceptions of our several Senses. 3. That Memory and Prevision are not
explicable upon the supposition of Matter and Motion.

WE shall therefore now endeavor to prove That the Soul of man is something
really distinct from his Body, of an Indivisible nature, and so cannot be
divided into such Parts as should flit one from another; and consequently is
apt of it is own Nature to remain to Eternity, and so will do, except the
Decrees of Heaven should abandon it from Being.

And first, we shall prove it ab absurdo, and here do as the Mathematicians
use to do in such kind of Demonstrations: we will suppose that if the
Reasonable Soul be not of such an Immaterial Nature, then it must be a Body,
and so suppose it to be made up as all Bodies are: where because the Opinions
of Philosophers differ, we shall only take one, viz. that of Epicurus, which
supposes it to be made up by a fortuitous Concourse of Atoms; and in that
demonstrate against all the rest: (for indeed herein a particular Demonstration
is an Universal, as it is in all Mathematical Demonstrations of this kind.) For
if all that which is the Basis of our Reasons and Understandings, which we here
call the Substance of the Soul, be nothing else but a mere Body, and therefore
be infinitely divisible, as all Bodies are; it will be all one in effect
whatsoever notion we have of the generation or production thereof. We may give
it, if we please, finer words, and use more demure and smooth language about it
then Epicurus did, as some that, lest they should speak too rudely and
rustically of it by calling it Matter, will name it Efflorescentia Materiae;
and yet lest that should not be enough, add Aristotle's Quintessence to it
too: they will be so trim and courtly in defining of it, that they will not
call it by the name of Aer, Ignis, or Flamma, as some of the ancient vulgar
Philosophers did, but Flos flammae: and yet the Epicurean Poet could use as
much Chemistry in exalting his fansy as these subtle Doctors do; and when he
would dress out the Notion of it more gaudily, he resembles it to Lucret. lib.
3.
Flos Bacchi, and Spiritus unguenti suavis. But when we have taken away this
disguise of wanton Wit, we shall find nothing better then mere Body, which will
be recoiling back perpetually into it is own inert and sluggish Passiveness:
though we may think we have quickened it never so much by this subtle artifice
of Words and Phrases, a man's newborn Soul will for all this be but little
better then his Body; and, as that is, be but a rasura corporis alieni, made up
of some small and thin shavings pared off from the Bodies of the Parents by a
continual motion of the several parts of it; and must afterward receive its
augmentation from that food and nourishment which is taken in, as the Body
does. So that the very Grass we walk over in the fields, the Dust and Mire in
the streets that we tread upon, may, according to the true meaning of this dull
Philosophy, after many refinings, macerations and maturations, which Nature
performs by the help of Motion, spring up into so many Rational Souls, and
prove as wise as any Epicurean, and discourse as subtily of what it once was,
when it lay drooping in a senseless Passiveness. This conceit is so gross, that
one would think it wanted nothing but that witty Sarcasm that Plutarch cast
upon Nicocles the Epicurean, to confute it, (...).

But because the heavy minds of men are so frequently sinking into this earthly
fancy, we shall further search into the entralls of this Philosophy; and see
how like that is to a Rational Soul, which it pretends to declare the
production of. Lucretius first of all taking notice of the mighty swiftness and
celerity of the Soul in all its operations, lest his Matter should be too soon
tired and not able to keep pace with it, he first casts the Atoms prepared for
this purpose into such perfect Sphaerical and small figures as might be most
capable of these swift impressions; for so he, lib. 3.

At, quod mobile tantopere est, constare rotundis
Perquam seminibus debet, perquamque minutis,
Momine uti parvo possint impulsa moveri.
But here before we go any further, we might inquire what it should be that
should move these small and insensible Globes of Matter. For Epicurus his two
Principles, which he calls Plenum and Inane, will here by no means serve our
turn to find out Motion by. For though our communes notitiae assure us that
wherever there is a Multiplicity of parts, (as there is in every Quantitative
Being) there may be a Variety of application in those parts one to another, and
so a Mobility; yet Motion it self will not so easily arise out of a Plenum,
though we allow it an empty Space and room enough to play up and down in. For
we may conceive a Body, which is his Plenum, only as trine dimensum, being
longum, latum and profundum, without attributing any motion at all to it: and
Aristotle in his De Coelo doubts not herein to speak plainly, (...), that
Motion cannot arise from a Body. For indeed this Power of motion must needs
argue some Efficient cause, as Tully has well observed, if we suppose any Rest
antecedent; or if any Body be once moving, it must also find some potent
Efficient to stay it and settle it in Rest, as Simplicius has somewhere in his
Comment upon Epictetus wisely determined. So that if we will suppose either
Motion or Rest to be contained originally in the nature of any Body; we must of
necessity conclude some potent Efficient to produce the contrary, or else
attribute this Power to Bodies themselves; which will at last grow unbounded
and infinite, and indeed altogether inconsistent with the nature of a Body.

But yet though we should grant all this which Lucretius contends for, how
shall we force up these particles of Matter into any true and real Perceptions,
and make them perceive their own or others motions, which he calls Motus
sensiferi? For he having first laid down his Principles of all Being, as he
supposes, (neither is he willing to leave his Deities themselves out of the
number) he only requires these Postulata to unfold the nature of all by, Lib.
1.
Concursus, motus, ordo, positura, figurae. But how any such thing as
sensation, or much less Reason, should spring out of this barren soil, how
well tilled soever, no composed mind can imagine. For indeed that infinite
variety which is in the Magnitude of parts, their Positions, Figures and
Motions, may easily, and indeed must needs, produce an infinite variety of
Phenomenon, which the Epicurean philosophy calls Eventa. And accordingly where
there is a Sentient faculty, it may receive the greatest variety of Impressions
from them, by which the Perceptions, which are the immediate result of a
Knowing faculty, will be distinguished: Yet cannot the Power it self of
Sensation arise from them, no more then Vision can rise out of a Glass,
whereby it should be able to perceive these Idola that paint themseves upon it,
though it were never so exactly polished, and they much finer then they are or
can be.

Neither can those small corpuscula, which in themselves have no power of
sense, ever produce it by any kind of Concourse or Motion; for so a Cause might
in its production rise up above the height of its own nature and virtue; which
I think every calm contemplator of Truth will judge impossible: for seeing
whatsoever any Effect has, it must needs derive from its Causes, and can
receive no other tincture and impression then they can bestow upon it; that
Signature must first be in the Cause it self, which is by it derived to the
Effect. And therefore the wisest Philosophers amongst the Ancients universally
concluded that there was some higher Principle then mere Matter, which was the
Cause of all Life and Sense, and that to be Immortal: as the Platonists, who
thought this reason sufficient to move them to assert a Mundane Soul. And
Aristotle, though he talks much of Nature, yet he delivers his mind so
cloudily, that all that he has said of it may pass with that which himself
said of his Acroatici Libri, or Physics, that they were (...). Nor is it
likely that he who was so little satisfied with his own notion of Nature as
being the Cause of all Motion and Rest, as seemingly to desert it while he
places so many Intelligences about the Heavens, could much please himself with
such a gross conceit of mere Matter, that that should be the true Moving and
Sentient Entelech of some other Matter; as it is manifest he did not.

But indeed Lucretius himself, though he could in a jolly fit of his
over-flush'd and fiery fansy tell us,

Et ridere potest non ex ridentibu' factus,
Et sapere, and doctis rationem reddere dictis, Lib. ^.

Non ex seminibus sapientibus, atque disertis:
yet in more cool thoughts he found his own common notions too sturdy to be so
easily silenced; and therefore sets his wits a-work to find the most
Quintessential particles of Matter that may be, that might do that feat, which
those smooth Spherical bodies, Calor, Aer and Ventus (for all come into this
composition) could not do: and this was of such a subtle and exalted nature,
that his earthly fansy could not comprehend it, and therefore he confesses
plainly he could not tell what name to give it, though for want of a better he
calls it Mobilem vim, as neither his Master before him, who was pleased to
compound the Soul (as Plutarch Lib. 4. de placitis Philosophorum.
relates) of four ingredients, (...). But because this Giant-like Proteus found
himself here bound with such strong cords, that notwithstanding all his
struggling he could by no means break them off from him, we shall relate his
own words the more largely. I find them lib. 3.

Sic calor, atque aer, and venti caeca potestas
Mista creant unam naturam, and mobilis illa
Vis, initium motus abs se quae dividit ollis:
Sensifer unde oritur primum per viscera motus.
Nam penitus prorsum latet haec natura, subestque;
Nec magis hac infra quidquam est in corpore nostro;
Atque anima'st animae proporro totius ipsa.
Quod genus in nostris membris and corpore toto
Mista latens animi vis est, animaeque potestas,
Corporibus quia de parvis paucisque creata est.
Sic tibi nominis haec expers vis, facta minutis
Corporibus, latet --
Thus we see how he found himself overmaster'd with difficulties, while he
endeavored to find the place of the Sensitive powers in Matter: and yet this
is the highest that he dares aim at, namely to prove that Sensation might from
thence derive its Original, as stiffly opposing any Higher power of Reason;
which we shall in lucro ponere against another time.

But surely had not the Epicureans abandoned all Logic together with some
other Sciences (as Tully and Laertius tell us they did) they would here have
found themselves too much pressed with this Argument, (which yet some will think
to be but levis armaturae in respect of some other) and have found it as little
short of a Demonstration to prove the Souls Immortality as the Platonists
themselves did: But herein how they dealt, Enn. 4. l. 7. c. 4.
Plotinus has well observed of them all who denied Lives and Souls to be
immortal, which he asserts, and make them nothing but Bodies, that when they
were pinched with the strength of any Argument fetched from the (...) of the
Soul, it was usual amongst them to call this Body (...), or Ventus certo
quodam modo se habens; to which he well replies, (...). Where by this (...)
seems to be nothing meant but that same thing which Lucretius called vim
mobilem, and he would not allow it to be any thing else but a Body, though what
kind of Body he could not tell: yet by it he understands not merely an Active
power of motion, but a more subtle Energie, whereby the force and nature of
any motion is perceived and insinuated by its own strength in the bodies moved;
as if these sorry Bodies by their impetuous justling together could awaken one
another out of their drowsy Lethargy, and make each other hear their mutual
impetuous knocks: which is as absurd as to think a Musical instrument should
hear its own sounds, and take pleasure in those harmonious aires that are
played upon it. For that which we call Sensation, is not the Motion or
Impression which one Body makes upon another, but a Recognition of that Motion;
and therefore to attribute that to a Body, is to make a Body privy to its own
acts and passions, to act upon itself, and to have a true and proper
self-feeling virtue; which in his Tract, (...).
Porphyrie has elegantly expressed, (...), In the sensations of living
creatures the Soul moves, as if unbodied Harmony her self should play upon an
Instrument, and smartly touch the well-tuned strings: but the Body is like that
Harmony which dwells inseparably in the strings themselves which have no
perception of it.

Thus we should now leave this Topic of our Demonstration, only we shall add
this as an Appendix to it, which will further manifest the Souls Incorporeal
and Immaterial nature, that is, That there is a Higher Principle of knowledge
in man then mere Sense, neither is that the sole Original of all that Science
that breaks forth in the minds of men; which yet Lucretius maintains, as being
afraid lest he should be awakened out of this pleasant dream of his, should
any Higher power rouse his sleepy Soul: and therefore he thus lays down the
opinion of his Sect, Lib. 4.


Invenies primis ab sensibus esse creatam
Notitiam very, neque sensus posse refelli:
Nam majore fide debet reperirier illud,
Sponte sua veris quod possit vincere falsa.
But yet this goodly Champion does but lay siege to his own Reason, and
endeavor to storm the main fort thereof, which but just before he defended
against the Scepticks who maintained that opinion, That nothing could be known;
to which he having replied by that vulgar Argument, That if nothing can be
known, then neither do we know this That we know nothing; he pursues them more
closely with another, That neither could they know what it is to know, or what
it is to be ignorant,

Quaeram, quom in rebus very nil viderit ante;
Unde sciat, quid sit scire, and nescire vicissim:
Notitiam very quae res falsique crearit.
But yet if our Senses were the only Judges of things, this Reflex knowledge
whereby we know what it is to know, would be as impossible as he makes it for
Sense to have Innate Idea's of its own, antecedent to those stamps which the
Radiations of external Objects imprint upon it. For this knowledge must be
antecedent to all that judgment which we pass upon any Sensatum, seeing except
we first know what it is to know, we could not judge or determine aright upon
the approach of any of these Idola to our Senses.

But our Author may perhaps yet seem to make a more full confession for us in
these two points.

First, That no sense can judge another's objects, nor convince it of any
mistake, Non possunt alios alii convincere sensus,
Nec porro poterunt ipsi reprehendere sese.
If therefore there be any such thing within us as controlls our Senses, as all
know there is; then must that be of an Higher nature then our Senses are.

But secondly, he grants further, That all our Sensation is nothing else but
Perception, and therefore wheresoever there is any hallucination, that must
arise from something else within us besides the power of sense,

-- quoniam pars horum maxima fallit
Propter opinatus animi, quos addimus ipsi,
Pro visis ut sint, quae non sunt sensibu' visa.
In which words he has very happily lighted upon the proper function of Sense,
and the true reason of all those mistakes which we call the Deceptions of
Sense, which indeed are not truly so, seeing they arise only from a Higher
Faculty, and consist not in Sensation it self, but in those deductions and
Corollaries that our Judgments draw from it.

We shall here therefore grant that which the Epicurean philosophy, and the
Peripatetick too, though not without much caution, pleads for universally, That
our Senses are never deceived, whether they be sani or laesi, sound or
distempered, or whatsoever proportion or distance the Object or medium bears to
it: for if we well scan this business, we shall find that nothing of Judgment
belongs to Sense, it consisting only (...), in Perception; neither can it make
any just observation of those Objects that are without, but only discerns its
own passions, and is nothing else but (...), and tells how it finds it self
affected, and not what is the true cause of those impressions which it finds
within it self; (which seems to be the reason of that old Philosophical maxim
recited by Aristotle l. 3. de Anima, cap. 2. (...), that these Simulachra were
only in our Senses; which notion a late Author has pursued:) and therefore
when the Eye finds the Sun's circle represented within it self of no greater a
bigness then a foot-diameter, it is not at all herein mistaken; nor a
distempered Palate, when it tastes a bitterness in the sweetest honey, as
Proclus a famous Mathematician and Platonist has well determined, in Plat.
Tim. (...), The Senses in all things of this nature do but declare their own
passions or perceptions, which are always such as they seem to be, whether
there be any such parallelum signaculum in the Object as bears a true analogy
with them or not: and therefore in truth they are never deceived in the
execution of their own functions. And so does Aristotle l. 3 de Anima, c. 3.
conclude, That error is neither in Sense nor Phansy, (...), it is in no
Faculty but only that in which is Reason. Though it be as true on the other
side, that Epicurus and all his Sect were deceived, while they judged the Sun
and Moon and all the Stars to be no bigger then that Picture and Image which
they found of them in their own Eyes; for which silly conceit though they had
been for many Ages sufficiently laughed at by wise men, yet could not Lucretius
tell how to enlarge his own fancy, but believes the Idolum in his own Visive
organ to be adequate to the Sun it self, in despite of all Mathematical
demonstration; as indeed he must needs, if there were no Higher principle of
knowledge then Sense is, which is the most indisciplinable thing that may be,
and can never be taught that Truth which Reason and Understanding might attempt
to force into it. (...), etc. Though Reason inculcates this notion ten thousand
times over, That the Sun is bigger then the Earth, yet will not the Eye be
taught to see it any bigger then a foot breadth: and therefore he rightly calls
it, as all the Platonical and Stoical philosophy does, (...), and it may well
be put among the rest of the Stoics (...).

Thus I hope by this time we have found out (...), some more noble Power in the
Soul then that is by which it accommodates it self to the Body, and according
to the measure and proportion thereof converseth with External Matter. And this
is the true reason why we are so apt to be mistaken in Sensible objects,
because our Souls sucking in the knowledge of external things thereby, and not
minding the proportion that is between the Body and them, mindless of its own
notions, collates their corporeal impressions with external objects
themselves, and judges of them one by another. But whenever our Souls act in
their own power and strength, untwisting themselves from all corporeal
complications, they then can find confidence enough to judge of things in a
seeming contradiction to all those other visa corporea.

And so I suppose this Argument will amount to no less then a Demonstration of
the Soul's Immateriality, seeing to all sincere understanding it is necessary
that it should thus abstract it self from all corporeal commerce, and return
from thence nearer into it self.

Now what we have to this purpose more generally intimated, we shall further
branch out in these two or three Particulars.

First, That that Mental faculty and power whereby 1.
we judge and discern things, is so far from being a Body, that it must retract
and withdraw it self from all Bodily operation whenever it will nakedly
discern Truth. For should our Souls always mould their judgment of things
according to those (...) and impressions which seem to be framed thereof in the
Body, they must then do nothing else but chain up Errors and Delusions one
with another in stead of Truth: as should the judgments of our Understandings
wholly depend upon the sight of our Eyes, we should then conclude that our mere
accesses and recesses from any Visible Object have such a Magical power to
change the magnitudes of Visible Objects, and to transform them into all
varieties of figures and fashions; and so attribute all that variety to them
which we find in our corporeal perceptions. Or should we judge of Gustables by
our Taste, we should attribute to one and the self-same thing all that variety
which we find in our own Palates. Which is an unquestionable Argument That that
Power whereby we discern of things and make judgments of them different and
sometimes contrary to those perceptions that are the necessary results of all
Organical functions, is something distinct from the Body; and therefore though
the Soul, as Plato has well observed, be (...), various and divisible
accidentally in these Sensations and Motions wherein it extends and spreads it
self as it were upon the Body, and so according to the nature and measure
thereof perceives its impressions; yet it is (...) indivisible, returning into
it self. Whenever it will speculate Truth it self, it will not then listen to
the several clamours and votes of these rude Senses which always speak with
divided tongues; but it consults some clearer Oracle within it self: and
therefore Plotinus, Enn. 4. l. 3. has well concluded concerning the Body,
(...), should a man make use of his Body in his Speculations, it will entangle
his mind with so many contradictions, that it will be impossible to attain to
any true knowledge of things. We shall conclude this therefore, as Tully does
his Contemplation of the Souls operations about the frame of Nature, the
fabric of the Heavens and motions of the Stars, Animus qui haec intelligit,
similis est ejus qui ea fabricatus in coelo est.

Secondly, We also find such a Faculty within our own 2.
Souls as collects and unites all the Perceptions of our several Senses, and is
able to compare them together; something in which they all meet as in one
Center: which (...). 4. l. 7. ^. 6.
Plotinus has well expressed, (...), That in which all those several
Sensations meet as so many Lines drawn from several points in the
Circumference, and which comprehends them all, must needs be One. For should
that be various and consisting of several parts, which thus receives all these
various impressions, then must the sentence and judgment passed upon them be
various too. Aristotle in his de Anima, (...), That must be one that judges
things to be diverse; and that must judge too (...), setting all before it at
once. Besides we could not conceive how such an immense variety of impressions
could be made upon any piece of Matter, which should not obliterate and deface^
one another. And therefore Plotinus has well disputed against them who make
all Sensation (...) which brings me to the Third.

Thirdly, That Knowledge which the Soul retains in it self of things past, and
in some sort Prevision of things 3.
to come, whereby many grow so sagacious in foreseeing future Events, that
they know how to deliberate and dispose of present affairs, so as to be ready
furnished and prepared for such Emergencies as they see in a train and Series
of Causes which sometimes work but contingently: I cannot think Epicurus
himself could in his cool thoughts be so unreasonable as to persuade himself,
that all the shuffling and cutting of Atoms could produce such a Divine piece
of Wisdom as this is. What Matter can thus bind up Past, Present and Future
time together? which while the Soul of man does, it seems to imitate (as far as
its own finite nature will permit it to strive after an imitation of) God's
eternity: and grasping and gathering together a long Series of duration into it
self, makes an essay to free it self from the rigid laws of it, and to purchase
to it self the freedom of a true Eternity. And as by its (...) (as the
Platonists are wont to speak) its Chronical and successive operations, it
unravels and unfolds the contexture of its own indefinite intellectual powers
by degrees; so by this Memory and Prevision it recollects and twists them up
all together again into it self. And though it seems to be continually sliding
from it self in those several vicissitudes and changes which it runs through in
the constant variety of its own Effluxes and Emanations; yet is it always
returning back again to its first Original by a swift remembrance of all those
motions and multiplicity of operations which have begot in it the first sense
of this constant flux. As if we should see a Sunbeam perpetually flowing forth
from the bright body of the Sun, and yet ever returning back to it again; it
never loses any part of its Being, because it never forgets what it self was:
and though it may number out never so vast a length of its duration, yet it
never comes nearer to its old age, but carries a lively sense of its youth and
infancy, which it can at pleasure lay a fast hold on, along with it.

But if our Souls were nothing else but a Complex of fluid Atoms, how should
we be continually roving and sliding from our selves, and soon forget what we
once were? The new Matter that would come in to fill up that Vacuity which the
Old had made by its departure, would never know what the Old were, nor what
that should be that would succeed that: (...), that new pilgrim and
stranger-like Soul would always be ignorant of what the other before it knew,
and we should be wholly some other bulk of Being then we were before, as
Plotinus has excellently observed Enn. 4. l. 7. c. 5. It was a famous speech
of wise Heraclitus, (...), a man cannot enter twice into the same River: by
which he was wont symbolically to express the constant flux of Matter, which is
the most unstable thing that may be. And if Epicurus his Philosophy could free
this Heap of refined Atoms, which it makes the Soul to be, from this
inconstant and flitting nature, and teach us how it could be (...) some stable
and immutable thing, always resting entire while it is in the Body; though we
would thank him for such a goodly conceit as this is, yet we would make no
doubt but it might as well be able to preserve it self from dissolution and
dissipation out of this gross Body, as in it: seeing it is no more secured from
the constant impulses of that more gross Matter which is restlesly moving up
and down in the Body, then it is out of it: and yet for all that we should take
the leave to ask Tully's question with his sober disdain; Quid, obsecro,
terrane tibi aut hoc nebuloso and caliginoso coeno aut sata aut concreta
videtur tanta vis memoriae? Such a jewel as this is too precious to be found in
a dunghill: mere Matter could never thus stretch forth its feeble force, and
spread it self over all its own former praeexistencies. We may as well suppose
this dull and heavy Earth we tread upon to know how long it has dwelt in this
part of the Universe that now it does, and what variety of Creatures have in
all past Ages sprung forth from it, and all those occurrences and events which
have all this time happened upon it.

CHAP. IV.
The second Argument for the Immortality of the Soul. Actions either
Automatical or Spontaneous. That Spontaneous and Elicite Actions evidence the
Distinction of the Soul from the Body. Lucretius his Evasion very slight and
weak. That the Liberty of the Will is inconsistent with the Epicurean
principles. That the Conflict of Reason against the Sensitive Appetite argues a
Being in us superior to Matter.

WE have done with that which we intended for the First part of our Discourse
of the Soul's Immortality: we have hitherto looked at it rather in Concreto
then in Abstracto, rather as a Thing complicated with and united to the Body;
and therefore considered it in those Operations, which as they are not proper
to the Body, so neither are they altogether independent upon it, but are rather
of a mixed nature.

We shall now take notice of it in those Properties, in the exercise whereof it
has less commerce with the Body, and more plainly declares its own high
descent to us, That it is able to subsist and act without the aid and
assistance of this Matter which it informs.

And here we shall take that course that Aristotle did in his Books de Anima,
and first of all inquire, Whether it has (...), some kind of Action so proper
and peculiar to it self; as not to depend upon the Body. And this soon offers
it self in the first place to us in those Elicite motions of it, as the
Moralists are wont to name them, which though they may end in those they call
Imperate acts, yet have their first Emanation from nothing else but the Soul it
self.

For this purpose we shall take notice of Two sorts of Actions which are
obvious to the experience of every one that observes himself, according to a
double Source and emanation of them, which a late Philosopher has very happily
suggested to us. The first are those Actions which arise up within us without
any Animadversion; the other are those that are consequent to it.

For we find frequently such Motions within our selves 1.
which first are, before we take notice of them, and which by their own
turbulency and impetuousness force us to an Advertency: as those Fiery spirits
and that inflamed Blood which sometimes fly up into the head; or those gross
and Earthly Fumes that disturb our brains; the stirring of many other Humors
which beget within us Grief, Melancholy, Anger, or Mirth, or other Passions;
which have their rise from such Causes as we were not aware of, nor gave no
consent to create this trouble to us. Besides all those Passions and
Perceptions which are begotten within us by some external motions which derive
themselves through our Senses, and fiercely knocking at the door of our Minds
and Understandings force them sometimes from their deepest debates and musings
of some other thing, to open to them and give them an audience.

Now as to such Motions as these are, it being necessary for the preservation
of our Bodies that our Souls should be acquainted with them, a man's Body was so
contrived and his Soul so united to it, that they might have a speedy access to
the Soul. Indeed some ancient Philosophers thought that the Soul descending
more deeply into the Body, as they express it, first begot these corporeal
motions unbeknown to it self by reason of its more deep immersion, which
afterward by their impetuousness excited its advertency. But whatsoever truth
there is in that Assertion, we clearly find from the relation of our own Souls
themselves, that our Soul disowns them, and acknowledges no such Motions to
have been so busy by her commission; neither knows what they are, from whence
they arise, or whither they tend, until she has duly examined them. But these
Corporeal motions as they seem to arise from nothing else but merely from the
Machina of the Body it self; so they could not at all be sensated but by the
Soul.

Neither indeed are all our own Corporeal actions perceived by us, but only
those that may serve to maintain a good correspondence and intelligence between
the Soul and Body, and so foment and cherish that Sympathy between them which
is necessary for the subsistence and well-being of the whole man in this
mundane state. And therefore there is very little of that which is commonly
done in our Body, which our Souls are informed at all of. The constant
Circulation of Blood through all our Veins and Arteries; the common motions of
our Animal spirits in our Nerves; the maceration of Food within our Stomachs,
and the distribution of Chyle and nourishment to every part that wants the
relief of it; the constant flux and reflux of more sedate Humors within us;
the dissipations of our corporeal Matter by insensible Transpiration, and the
accesses of new in the room of it; all this we are little acquainted with by
any vital energie which arises from the union of Soul and Body: and therefore
when we would acquaint our selves with the Anatomy and vital functions of our
own Bodies, we are fain to use the same course and method that we would to find
out the same things in any other kind of Animal, as if our Souls had as little
to do with any of these in our own Bodies, as they have in the Bodies of any
other Brute creature.

But on the other side, we know as well, that manythings 2.
that are done by us, are done at the dictate and by the commission of our own
Wills; and therefore all such Actions as these are, we know, without any great
store of Discoursive inquiry, to attribute to their own proper causes, as
seeing the efflux and propagation of them. We do not by a naked speculation
know our Bodies first to have need of nourishment, and then by the Edict of our
Wills enjoin our Spirits and Humors to put themselves into an hungry and
craving posture within us by corroding the Tunicles of the Stomach; but we
first find our own Souls solicited by these motions, which yet we are able to
gainsay, and to deny those petitions which they offer up to us. We know we
commonly meditate and discourse of such Arguments as we our selves please: we
mould designs, and draw up a plot of means answerable thereto, according as the
free vote of our own Souls determines; and use our own Bodies many times,
notwithstanding all the reluctancies of their nature, only as our Instruments
to serve the will and pleasure of our Souls. All which as they evidently
manifest a true Distinction between the Soul and the Body, so they do as
evidently prove the Supremacy and dominion which the Soul has over the Body.
Our Moralists frequently dispute what kind of government that is whereby the
Soul, or rather Will, rules over the Sensitive Appetite, which they ordinarily
resolve to be Imperium politicum; though I should rather say, that all good men
have rather a true despotical power over their Sensitive faculties, and over
the whole Body, though they use it only according to the laws of Reason and
Discretion. And therefore the Platonists and Stoics thought the Soul of man to
be absolutely freed from all the power of Astral Necessity, and uncontrollable
impressions arising from the subordination and mutual Sympathy and Dependence
of all mundane causes, which is their proper notion of Fate. Neither ever durst
that bold Astrology which presumes to tell the Fortunes of all corporeal
Essences, attempt to enter into the secrets of man's Soul, or predict the
destinies thereof. And indeed whatever the destinies thereof may be that are
contained in the vast volume of an Infinite and Almighty Mind, yet we evidently
find a (...), an (...), a liberty of Will within our selves, maugre the
stubborn malice of all Second Causes. And Aristole, who seems to have disputed
so much against that (...) of Souls which his Master before him had soberly
maintained, does indeed but quarrel with that common sense and Experience which
we have of our Souls; this (...) of the Soul being nothing else but that Innate
force and power which it has within it, to stir up such thoughts and motions
within it self as it finds it self most free to. And therefore when we reflect
upon the productions of our own Souls, we are soon able to find out the first
Efficient cause of them. And though the subtilty of some Wits may have made it
difficult to find out whether the Understanding or the Will or some other
Faculty of the Soul be the First Mover, whence the motus primo primus (as they
please to call it) proceeds; yet we know it is originally the Soul it self
whose vital acts they all are: and although it be not (...) the First Cause as
deriving all its virtue from it self, as Simplicius distinguishes in 1. de An.
cap. 1. yet it is (...), vitally co-working with the First Causes of all: But
on the other side, when we come to examine those Motions which arise from the
Body, this stream runs so far under ground, that we know not how to trace it to
the head of it; but we are fain to analyze the whole artifice, looking from the
Spirits to the Blood, from that to the Heart, viewing all along the Mechanical
contrivance of Veins and Arteries: neither know we after all our search whether
there be any Perpetuum mobile in our own Bodies, or whether all the motions
thereof be only by the redundancy of some external motions without us; nor how
to find the First mover in nature; though could we find out that, yet we know
that there is a Fatal determination which sits in all the wheels of mere
Corporeal motion; neither can they exercise any such noble freedom as we
constantly find in the Wills of men, which are as large and unbounded in all
their Elections as Reason it self can represent Being it self to be.

Lucretius, that he might avoid the dint of this Argument, according to the
Genius of his Sect feigns this Liberty to arise from a Motion of declination,
whereby his Atoms always moving downwards by their own weight toward the
Center of the World, are carried a little obliquely, as if they tended toward
some point different from it, which he calls clinamen principiorum. Which
riddle though it be as good as any else which they, who held the Materiality
and Mortality of Souls in their own nature, can frame to salve this difficulty;
yet is of such a private interpretation, that I believe no Oedipus is able to
expound it. But yet by what we may guess at it, we shall easily find that this
insolent conceit (and all else of this nature) destroys the Freedom of Will,
more then any Fate which the severest censours thereof, whom he sometimes
taxes, ever set over it. For how can any thing be made subject to a free and
impartial debate of Reason, or fall under the Level of Free Will, if all things
be the mere result either of a Fortuitous or Fatal motion of Bodies, which can
have no power or dominion over themselves? and why should he or his great
Master find so much fault with the Superstition of the world, and condemn the
Opinions of other men when they compare them with that transcendent sagacity
they believe themselves to be the Lords of, if all was nothing else but the
mere issue of Material motions; seeing that necessity which would arise from a
different concourse and motion of several particles of Matter begetting that
diversity of Opinions and Wills, would excuse them all from any blame?

Therefore to conclude this Argument, Whatsoever Essence finds this Freedom
within it self, whereby it is absolved from the rigid laws of Matter, may know
it self also to be Immaterial; and having dominion over its own actions, it
will never desert it self: and because it finds it self non vi aliena sed sua
moveri, as Tully argues, it feels it self able to preserve it self from the
foreign force of Matter, and can say of all those assaults which are at any
time made against those sorry mud-walls which in this life enclose it, (...),
as the Stoic did, all this is nothing to me, who am yet free and can command
within, when this feeble Carcass is able no longer to obey me; and when that is
shattered and broken down, I can live any where else without it; for I was not
That, but had only a command over It, while I dwelt in it.

But before we wholly desert this Head, we may add some further strength to
it, from the Observation of that Conflict which the Reasons and Understandings
of men maintain against the Sensitive appetite: and wheresoever the Higher
powers of Reason in a man's Soul prevail not, but are vanquished by the
impetuousness of their Sensual affections through their own neglect of
themselves; yet are they never so broken, but they may strengthen themselves
again: and where they subdue not men's inordinate Passions and Affections, yet
even there will they condemn them for them. Whereas were a Man all of one
piece, and made up of nothing else but Matter; these Corporeal motions could
never check or control themselves, these Material dimensions could not
struggle with themselves, or by their own strength render themselves any thing
else then what they are. But this (...), as the Greeks call it, this
Self-potent Life which is in the Soul of man, acting upon it self and drawing
forth its own latent Energie, finds it self able to tame the outward man, and
bring under those rebellious motions that arise from the mere Animal powers,
and to tame and appease all those seditions and mutinies that it finds there.
And if any can conceive all this to be nothing but a mere fighting of the
male-contented pieces of Matter one against another, each striving for
superiority and preeminence; I should not think it worth the while to teach
such an one any higher learning, as looking upon him to be endued with no
higher a Soul then that which moves in Beasts or Plants.

CHAP. V.
The third Argument for the Immortality of the Soul. That Mathematical Notions
argue the Soul to be of a true Spiritual and Immaterial Nature.

WE shall now consider the Soul awhile in a further degree of Abstraction, and
look at it in those Actions which depend not at all upon the Body, wherein it
does (...), as the Greeks speak, and converseth only with its own Being. Which
we shall first consider in those (...) or Mathematical notions which it
conteins in it self, and sends forth from within it self; which as they are in
themselves Indivisible, and of such a perfect nature as cannot be received or
immersed into Matter; so they argue that Subject in which they are seated to be
of a true Spiritual and Immaterial nature. Such as a pure Point, Linea (...),
Latitude abstracted from all Profundity, the Perfection of Figures, Aequality,
Proportion, Symmetry and Asymmetry of Magnitudes, the Rise and propagation of
Dimensions, Infinite divisibility, and many such like things; which every
ingenuous Son of that Art cannot but acknowledge to be the true characters of
some Immaterial Being, seeing they were never buried in Matter, nor extracted
out of it: and yet these are transcendently more certain and infallible
Principles of Demonstration then any Sensible thing can be. There is no
Geometrician but will acknowledge Angular sections, or the cutting of an Arch
into any number of parts required, to be most exact without any diminution of
the whole; but yet no Mechanical art can possibly so perform either, but that
the place of section will detract something from the whole. If any one should
endeavor to double a Cube, as the Delian Oracle once commanded the Athenians,
requiring them to duplicate the dimensions of Apollo's Altar, by any
Mechanical subtilty; he would find it as impossible as they did, and be as
much laughed at for his pains as some of their Mechanics were. If therefore no
Matter be capable of any Geometrical effections, and the Apodictical precepts
of Geometry be altogether unimitable in the purest Matter that Fancy can
imagine; then must they needs depend upon something infinitely more pure then
Matter, which has all that Stability and Certainty within it self which it
gives to those infallible Demonstrations.

We need not here dispute with Empedocles, (...), etc.
We know earth by earth, fire by fire, and water by water, that is, by the
Archetypal Idea's of all things in our own Souls; though it may be it were no
hard matter to prove that, as in this case S. Austin did, when in his Book de
Quant, animae, he would prove the Immortality of the Soul from these notions of
Quantity, which come not by any possible Sense or Experience which we can make
of bodily Being, and therefore concludes they must needs be immediately
engraven upon an Immaterial Soul. For though we could suppose our Senses to be
the School-Dames that first taught us the Alphabet of this learning; yet
nothing else but a true Mental Essence could be capable of it, or so much
improve it as to unbody it all, and strip it naked of any Sensible garment, and
then only, when it has done it, embrace it as its own, and commence a true
and perfect understanding of it. And as we all hold it impossible to shrink up
any Material Quality, which will perpetually spread it self commensurably to
the Matter it is in, into a Mathematical point: so is it much more impossible
to extend and stretch forth any Immaterial and unbodied Quality or notion
according to the dimensions of Matter, and yet to preserve the integrity of its
own nature.

Besides, in these Geometrical speculations we find that our Souls will not
consult with our Bodies, or ask any leave of our Fancies how or how far they
shall distribute their own notions by a continued progress of Invention; but
spending upon their own stock, are most free and liberal, and make Fancy only
to serve their own purpose in painting out not what Matter will afford a copy
of, but what they themselves will dictate to it; and if that should be too
busy, silence and control it by their own Imperial laws. They so little care
for Matter in this kind of work, that they banish it as far as may be from
themselves, or else chastise and tame the unruly and refractory nature of it,
that it should yield it self pliable to their sovereign commands. These
Embodied Bodies (for so this present Argument will allow me to call them) which
our Senses converse with, are perpetually justling together, contending so
irresistably each for its own room and space to be in, and will not admit of
any other into it, preserving their own intervals: but when they are once in
their Unbodied nature entertained into the Mind, they can easily penetrate one
another (...). The Soul can easily pyle the vastest number up together in her
self, and by her own force sustain them all, and make them all couch together
in the same space: she can easily pitch up all those Five Regular Bodies
together in her own Imagination, and inscribe them one in another, and then
entering into the very heart and center of them, discern all their Properties
and several Respects one to another; and thus easily find her self freed from
all Material or Corporeal confinement; showing how all that which we call Body,
rather issued forth by an infinite projection from some Mind, then that it
should exalt it self into the nature of any Mental Being; and, as the
Platonists and Pythagoreans have long since well observed, how our Bodies
should rather be in our Souls, then our Souls in them. And so I have done with
that Particular.

CHAP. VI.
The Fourth Argument for the Immortality of the Soul. That those clear and
stable Ideas of Truth which are in Man's Mind evince an Immortal and Immaterial
Substance residing in us, distinct from the Body. The Soul more knowable then
the Body. Some passages out of Plotinus and Proclus for the further confirming
of this Argument.

AND now we have traced the Immortality of the Soul, before we were aware,
through those Three Relations or (...), or (if you will) Degrees of knowledge,
which Proclus in his Comment upon Plato's Timaeus has attributed to it, which
he calls (...). The First is (...), a naked perception of Sensible impressions,
without any work of Reason. The Second, (...), a Miscellaneous kind of
knowledge arising of a collation of its Sensations with its own more obscure
and dark Idea's. The Third, (...), Discourse and Reason, which the Platonists
describe Mathematical knowledge by, which, because it spins out its own notions
by a constant series of Deduction, knitting up Consequences one upon another by
Demonstrations, is by him called (...), a Progressive kind of knowledge; to
which he adds a Fourth, which we shall now make use of for a further Proof of
the Immortality of the Soul. There is therefore Fourthly (...), which is a
naked Intuition of Eternal Truth which is always the same, which never rises
nor sets, but always stands still in its Vertical, and fills the whole Horizon
of the Soul with a mild and gentle light. There are such calm and serene Idea's
of Truth, that shine only in pacate Souls, and cannot be discerned by any
troubled or fluid Fancy, that necessarily prove a (...), some Permanent and
Stable Essence in the Soul of man, which (as Simplicius on Epictet well
observes) arises only (...), from some immovable and unchangeable Cause
which is always the same. For these Operations about Truth we now speak of,
are not (...) any Chronical Energies, as he further expresses it, but the true
badges of an Eternal nature, and speak a (...) and (...) (as Plato is wont to
phrase it) in man's Soul. Such are the Archetypall Idea's of Justice, Wisdom,
Goodness, Truth, Eternity, Omnipotency, and all those either Moral, Physical,
or Metaphysical notions, which are either the First Principles of Science, or
the Ultimate complement and final perfection of it. These we always find to be
the same, and know that no Exorcisms of Material mutations have any power over
them: though we our selves are but of yesterday, and mutable every moment, yet
these are Eternal, and depend not upon any mundane vicissitudes; neither could
we ever gather them from our observation of any Material thing where they were
never sown.

If we reflect but upon our own Souls, how manifestly do the Species of
Reason, Freedom, Perception, and the like, offer themselves to us, whereby we
may know a thousand times more distinctly what our Souls are then what our
Bodies are? For the former we know by an immediate converse with our selves,
and a distinct sense of their Operations; whereas all our knowledge of the Body
is little better then merely Historical, which we gather up by scraps and
piecemeals from more doubtful and uncertain experiments which we make of them:
but the notions which we have of a Mind, i. e. something within us that thinks,
apprehends, reasons, and discourses, are so clear and distinct from all those
notions which we can fasten upon a Body, that we can easily conceive that if
all Body-Being in the world were destroyed, yet we might then as well subsist
as now we do. For whenever we take notice of those Immediate motions of our
own Minds whereby they make themselves known to us, we find no such thing in
them as Extension or Divisibility, which are contained in every Corporeal
essence: and having no such thing discovered to us from our nearest familiarity
with our own Souls, we could never so easily know whether they had any such
things as Bodies joined to them or not, did not those extrinsecal impressions
that their turbulent motions make upon them admonish them thereof.

But as the more we reflect upon our own Minds, we find all Intelligible things
more clear, (as when we look up to the Heavens, we see all things more bright
and radiant, then when we look down upon this dark Earth when the Sunbeams are
drawn away from it:) so when we see all Intelligible Being concentring together
in a greater Oneness, and all kind of Multiplicity running more and more into
the strictest Unity, till at last we find all Variety and Division sucked up
into a perfect Simplicity, where all happily conspire together in the most
undivided peace and friendship; we then easily perceive that the reason of all
Diversity and Distinction is (that I may use Plotinus his words not much
differently from his meaning) (...). For though in our contentious pursuits
after Science, we cast Wisdom, Power, Eternity, Goodness and the like into
several formalities, that so we may trace down Science in a constant chain of
Deductions; yet in our naked Intuitions and visions of them, we clearly discern
that Goodness and Wisdom lodge together, Justice and Mercy kiss each other:
and all these and whatsoever pieces else the cracked glasses of our Reasons may
sometime break Divine and Intelligible Being into, are fast knit up together in
the invincible bonds of Eternity. And in this sense is that notion of Proclus
descanting upon Plato's riddle of the Soul, [(...), as if it were generated and
yet not generated] to be understood; (...), the Soul partaking of Time in its
broken and particular conceptions and apprehensions, and of Eternity in its
comprehensive and stable contemplations. I need not say that when the Soul is
once got up to the top of this bright Olympus, it will then no more doubt of
its own Immortality, or fear any Dissipation, or doubt whether any drowsy
Sleep shall hereafter seize upon it: no, it will then feel it self grasping
fast and safely its own Immortality, and view it self in the Horizon of
Eternity. In such sober kind of Ecstasies did Plotinus find his own Soul
separated from his Body, as if it had divorced it for a time from it self:
(...), etc. I being often awakened into a sense of my self, and being
sequestered from my body, and betaking my self from all things else into my
self; what admirable beauty did I then behold, etc. as he himself tells us, En.
4. l. 8. c. 1. Thus is that Intelligence begotten which Proclus l. 2. in Plat.
Tim. calls a Correction of Science: his notion is worth our taking notice of,
and gives us in a manner a brief recapitulation of our former discourse,
showing how the higher we ascend in the contemplation of the Soul, the higher
still we rise above this low sphere of Sense and Matter. His words are these,
(...), etc. that is, Science as it is in the Soul (by which he means the
Discoursive power of it) is blameless, but yet is corrected by the Mind; as
resolving that which is Indivisible, and dividing Simple Being as if it were
Compounded: as Fansy corrects Sense for discerning with passion and material
mixture, from which that purifies its object; Opinion corrects Fancy, because
it apprehends things by forms and phantasms, which it self is above; and
Science corrects Opinion, because it knows without discerning of causes; and
the Mind (as was insinuated) or the Intuitive faculty corrects the
Scientifical, because by a Progressive kind of Analysis it divides the
Intelligible Object, where it self knows and sees things together in their
undivided essence: wherefore this only is Immovable, and Science or
Scientifical reason is inferior to it in the knowledge of true Being. Thus he.

But here we must use some caution, lest we should arrogate too much to the
power of our own Souls, which indeed cannot raise up themselves into that pure
and steady contemplation of true Being; but will rather act with some
Multiplicity or (...) (as they speak) attending it. But thus much of its high
original may appear to us, that it can (as our Author told us) correct it self,
for dividing and disjoyning therein, as knowing all to be every way One most
entire and simple: though yet all men cannot easily improve their own
Understandings to this High degree of Comprehension; and therefore all ancient
Philosophers and Aristotle himself made it the peculiar privilege of some men
more abstracted from themselves and all corporeal commerce.

CHAP. VII.
What it is that, beyond the Highest and most subtle Speculations whatsoever,
does clear and evidence to a Good man the Immortality of his Soul. That True
Goodness and Virtue begets the most raised Sense of this Immortality. Plotinus
his excellent Discourse to this purpose.

AND now that we may conclude the Argument in hand, we shall add but this one
thing further to clear the Soul's Immortality, and it is indeed that which
breeds a true sense of it, viz. True and real goodness. Our highest
speculations of the Soul may beget a sufficient conviction thereof within us,
but yet it is only True Goodness and Virtue in the Souls of men that can make
them both know and love, believe and delight themselves in their own
Immortality. Though every good man is not so Logically subtle as to be able by
fit mediums to demonstrate his own Immortality, yet he sees it in a higher
light: His Soul being purged and enlightened by true Sanctity is more capable of
those Divine irradiations, whereby it feels it self in conjunction with God,
and by a (...) (as the Greeks speak) the Light of divine goodness mixing it
self with the light of its own Reason, sees more clearly not only that it may,
if it please the supreme Deity, of its own nature exist eternally, but also
that it shall do so: it knows it shall never be deserted of that free Goodness
that always embraces it: it knows that Almighty Love, which it lives by, to
be stronger then death, and more powerful then the grave; it will not suffer
those holy ones that are partakers of it to lie in hell, or their Souls to see
corruption; and though worms may devour their flesh, and putrefaction enter
into those bones that fence it, yet it knows that its Redeemer lives, and that
it shall at last see him with a pure Intellectual eye, which will then be clear
and bright, when all that earthly dust, which converse with this mortal body
filled it with, shall be wiped out: It knows that God will never forsake his
own life which he has quickened in it; he will never deny those ardent desires
of a blissfull fruition of himself, which the lively sense of his own Goodness
has excited within it: those breathings and gaspings after an eternal
participation of him are but the Energy of his own breath within us; if he had
had any mind to destroy it, he would never have shown it such things as he has
done; he would not raise it up to such Mounts of Vision, to show it all the
glory of that heavenly Canaan flowing with eternal and unbounded pleasures, and
then tumble it down again into that deep and darkest Abyss of Death and
Nonentity. Divine goodness cannot, it will not, be so cruel to holy souls that
are such ambitious suitors for his love. The more they contemplate the
blissfull Effluxes of his divine love upon themselves, the more they find
themselves strengthened with an undaunted confidence in him; and look not upon
themselves in these poor bodily relations and dependences, but in their eternal
alliances, (...), (as Arrianus sometimes speaks) as the Sons of God who is the
Father of Souls, Souls that are able to live any where in this spacious
Universe, and better out of this dark and lonesome Cell of Bodily matter, which
is always checking and clogging them in their noble motions, then in it: as
knowing that when they leave this Body, they shall then be received into
everlasting habitations, and converse freely and familiarly with that Source of
Life and Spirit which they conversed with in this life in a poor disturbed and
straightened manner. It is indeed nothing else that makes men question the
Immortality of their Souls, so much as their own base and earthly loves, which
first makes them wish their Souls were not immortal, and then to think they are
not: which Plotinus has well observed, and accordingly has soberly pursued
this argument.

I cannot omit a large recital of his Discourse, which tends so much to
disparage that flat and dull Philosophy which these later Ages have brought
forth; as also those heavy-spirited Christians that find so little divine life
and activity in their own Souls, as to imagine them to fall into such a dead
sleep as soon as they leave this earthly tabernacle, that they cannot be
awakened again, till that last Trumpet and the voice of an Archangel shall
rouse them up. Our Authors discourse is this, Enn. 4. lib. 7. c. 10. having
first premised this Principle, That every Divine thing is immortal, (...),
etc. Let us now consider a Soul (says he) not such an one as is immerst into
the Body, having contracted unreasonable Concupiscence and Anger ((...),
according to which they were wont to distinguish between the Irascible and
Concupiscible faculty) and other Passions; but such a one as has cast away
these, and as little as may be communicates with the Body: such a one as this
will sufficiently manifest that all Vice is unnatural to the Soul, and
something acquired only from abroad; and that the best Wisdom and all other
Virtues lodge in a purged Soul, as being allied to it. If therefore such a Soul
shall reflect upon it self, how shall it not appear to it self to be of such a
kind of nature as Divine and Eternal Essences are? For Wisdom and true Virtue
being Divine Effluxes can never enter into any unhallowed and mortal thing: it
must therefore needs be Divine, seeing it is filled with a Divine nature (...)
by its kindred and consanguinity therewith. Whoever therefore amongst us is
such a one, differs but little in his Soul from Angelical essences; and that
little is the present inhabitation in the Body, in which he is inferior to
them. And if every man were of this raised temper, or any considerable number
had but such holy Souls, there would be no such Infidels as would in any sort
disbelieve the Soul's Immortality. But now the vulgar sort of men beholding the
Souls of the generality so mutilated and deformed with Vice and Wickedness,
they cannot think of the Soul as of any Divine and Immortal Being; though
indeed they ought to judge of things as they are in their own naked essences,
and not with respect to that which extraessentially adheres to them; which is
the great prejudice of knowledge. Contemplate therefore the Soul of man,
denuding it of all that which it self is not, or let him that does this view
his own Soul; then he will believe it to be Immortal, when he shall behold it
(...), fixed in an Intelligible and pure nature; he shall then behold his own
Intellect contemplating not any Sensible thing, but Eternal things, with that
which is Eternal, that is, with it self, looking into the Intellectual world,
being it self made all Lucid, Intellectual, and shining with the Sunbeams of
eternal Truth, borrowed from the First Good, which perpetually rayeth forth
his Truth upon all Intellectual Beings. One thus qualified may seem without
any arrogance to take up that saying of Empedocles, (...). -- Farewell all
earthly allies, I am henceforth no mortal wight, but an Immortal Angel,
ascending up into Divinity, and reflecting upon that likeness of it which I
find in my self. When true Sanctity and Purity shall ground him in the
knowledge of divine things, then shall the inward Sciences, that arise from the
bottom of his own Soul, display themselves; which indeed are the only true
Sciences: for the Soul runs not out of it self to behold Temperance and Justice
abroad, but its own light sees them in the contemplation of its own Being, and
that divine essence which was before enshrined within it self.

I might after all this add many more Reasons for a further confirmation of
this present Thesis, which are as numerous as the Soul's relations and
productions themselves are; but to every one who is willing to do his own Soul
right, this Evidence we have already brought in is more then sufficient.

CHAP. VIII.
An Appendix containing an Enquiry into the Sense and Opinion of Aristotle
concerning the Immortality of the Soul. That according to him the Rational Soul
is separable from the Body and Immortal. The true meaning of his Intellectus
Agens and Patiens.

HAving done with the several Proofs of the Soul's Immortality (that great
Principle of Natural Theology, which if it be not entertained as a Communis
Notitia, as I doubt not but that it is by the Vulgar sort of men, or as an
Axiom, or, if you will, a Theoreme of free and impartial Reason, all
endeavors in Religion will be very cool and languid) it may not be amiss to
enquire a little concerning His opinion whom so many take for the great
Intelligencer of Nature and Omniscient Oracle of Truth; though it be too
manifest that he has so defaced the sacred Monuments of the ancient
Metaphysical Theology by his profane hands, that it is hard to see that lovely
face of Truth which was once engraven upon them (as some of his own
Interpreters have long ago observed) and so blurred those fair Copies of
divine learning which he received from his Predecessors, that his late
Interpreters (who make him their All) are as little sometime acquainted with
his meaning and design, as they are with that Elder philosophy which he so
corrupts: which indeed is the true reason they are so ambiguous in determining
his Opinion of the Soul's immortality; which yet he often asserts and
demonstrates in his Three Books de Anima. We shall not here traverse this
Notion through them all, but only briefly take notice of that which has made
his Expositours stumble so much in this point; the main whereof is that
Definition which he gives of the Soul, wherein he seems to make it nothing else
for the Genus of it, but an Entelechia or Informative thing, which spends all
its virtue upon that Matter which it informs, and cannot act any other way then
merely by information; being indeed nothing else but some Material (...), like
an impression in wax which cannot subsist without it, or else the result of it:
whence it is that he calls only either Material Forms, or the Functions and
Operations of those Forms, by this name. But indeed he intended not this for a
general Definition of the Soul of man, and therefore after he had laid down
this particular Definition of the Soul, lib. 2. cap. 1. he tells us expressly,
That that which we call the Rational Soul is (...) or separable from the Body,
(...), because it is not the Entelech of any Body. Which he lays down the
demonstration of in several places of all those Three books, by enquiring
(...), as he speaks, lib. 1. cap. 1. whether the Soul has any proper function
or operation of its own, or whether all be compounded and result from the Soul
and Body together: and in this inquiry finding that all Sensations and
Passions arise as well from the Body as from the Soul, and spring out of the
conjunction of both of them (which he therefore calls (...), as being begotten
by the Soul upon the Body) he concludes that all this savours of nothing else
but a Mateterial nature, inseparable from the Body. But then finding acts of
Mind and Understanding, which cannot be propagated from Matter, or causally
depend upon the Body, he resolves the Principles from whence they flow to be
Immortal; which he thus sets down lib. 2. cap. 2. (...), etc. that is, Now as
for the Mind and Theoreticall power, it appears not, viz. that they belong to
that Soul which in the former Chapter was defined by (...), but it seems to be
another kind of Soul, and that only is separable from the Body, as that which
is Eternal and Immortal from that which is Corruptible. But the other Powers or
Parts of the Soul (viz. the Vegetative and Sensitive) are not separable, (...),
as some think. Where by these [(...) some] which he here refutes, he manifestly
means the Platonists and Pythagoreans, who held that all kinds of Souls were
immortal, as well the Souls of beasts as of men; whereas he upon that former
inquiry concluded that nothing was immortal, but that which is the Seat of
Reason and Understanding: and so his meaning is, that this Rational Soul is
altogether a distinct Essence from those other; or else that glory which he
makes account he reaps from his supposed victory over the other Sects of
Philosophers will be much eclipsed, seeing they themselves did not so much
contend for that which he decries, viz. an exercise of any such Informative
faculties in a state of Separation, neither do we find them much more to
reject one part of that complex Axiom of Lib. 3. c. 4.
his, (...), That which is sensitive is not without the Body, but the Intellect
or Mind is separable, then they do the other.

The other difficulty which Aristotle's opinion seems to be clogged withal is
that Conclusion which he lays down lib. 3. c. 5. (...), which is commonly thus
expounded, Intellectus patiens est corruptibilis. But all this difficulty will
soon be cleared, if once it may appear how ridiculous their conceit is, that
from that Chapter fetch that idle distinction of Intellectus Agens and Patiens;
meaning by the Agens, that which prepares phantasmes, and exalts them into the
nature of intelligible species; and then propounds them to the Patiens to judge
thereof: whereas indeed he means nothing else by his (...), but only the
Understanding in potentia, and by his (...), the same in actu or in habitu, as
the Schoolmen are wont to phrase it; and accordingly thus lays down his
meaning and method of this notion. In the preceding Chapter of that Book, he
disputes against Plato's Connate species, as being afraid, lest if the Soul
should be prejudiced by any home-born notions, it would not be indifferent to
the entertaining of any other Truth. Where, by the way, we may observe how
unreasonable his Argument is: for if the Soul has no such stock of principles
to trade with, nor any proper notions of its own that might be a (...) of all
Opinions, it would be so indifferent to any, that the foulest Error might be
as easily entertained by it as the fairest Truth; neither could it ever know
what guest it receives, whether Truth, or Falsehood. But yet our Author found
himself able to swallow down this absurdity, though when he had done he could
not well digest it. For he could not but take notice of that which was obvious
for any one to reply, That (...), and so reflecting upon it self, may find
matter within to work upon; and so lays down this scruple in a way not much
different from his Masters, (...), etc. but the Soul it self is also
intelligible, as well as all other intelligible natures are; and in those
Beings which are purely abstracted from Matter, that which understands is the
same with that which is understood. Thus he. But not being Master of this
notion, he finds it a little too unruly for him, and falls to enquire why the
Soul should not then always be in actu; quitting himself of the whole
difficulty at once by telling us, that our souls are here clogged with a Hyle
or Matter that cleaves to them, and so all the matter of their knowledge is
contained in sensible objects, which they must extract out of them, being
themselves only (...) or in potentia ad intelligendum. Just as in a like
argument (Chap. 8.) he would needs persuade us, That the Understanding beholds
all things in the glass of Fancy; and then questioning how our (...) or First
principles of knowledge should be Phantasmes, he grants that they are not
indeed phantasmes, (...), but yet they are not without phantasmes; which he
thinks is enough to say, and so by his mere dictate without any further
discussion to solve that knot: whereas in all Reflex acts, whereby the Soul
reviews its own opinions, and finds out the nature of them, it makes neither
use of Sense or Phantasmes; but acting immediately by its own power, finds it
self (...), as Simplicius observes.

But to return, This Hyle or Matter which our Author supposes to hinder a free
and uninterrupted exercise of Understanding, is indeed nothing else but the
Souls potentiality; and not any kind of divisible or extended nature. And
therefore when he thus distinguishes between his Intellectus Agens and
Patiens, he seems to mean almost nothing else but what our ordinary
Metaphysitians do in their distinction of Actus and Potentia, (as Simplicius
has truly observed) when they tell us, that the finest created nature is made
up of these two compounded together. For we must know that the genius of his
Philosophy led him to fancy an (...), a certain subject or obediential power in
every thing that fell within the compass of Physical speculation, or that had
any relation to any natural body; and some other power which was (...), that
was of an active and operating nature: and consequently that both these
Principles were in the Soul it self, which as it was capable of receiving
impressions and species from the Fancy, and in a posse to understand, so it
was Passive; but as it does actually understand, so it is (...) or Active. And
with this Notion he begins his 5. Chap. (...), etc. that is, Seeing that in
every nature there is something which as a First subject is all things
potentially, and some Active principle which produces all things, as Art does
in Matter; it is necessary that the Soul also partake of these differences. And
this he illustrates by Light and Colors; resembling the Passive power of the
Intellect to Colors, the Active or Energetical to Light: and therefore he
says, it is (...), separable, unmixt, and impassible; and so at last
concludes, (...), in the state of Separation this Intellect is always that
which it is (that is, it is always Active and Energetical, as he had told us
before, (...), the essence of it being activity) (...), and this only is
immortal and eternal, but we do not remember because it is impassible. In
which last words he seems to disprove Plato's Reminiscentia, because the Soul
in a state of Separation being always in act, the Passive power of it, which
then first begins to appear when it is embodied, could not represent or contain
any such Traditionall species as the Energeticall faculty acted upon before;
seeing there was then no Fancy to retain them in, as Simplicius expounds it,
(...), because in all remembrance we must reflect upon our Fancy. And this
our Author seems to glance at, it being indeed never out of his eye, in these
words we have endeavored to give an account of, (...), But the Passive
intellect is corruptible, and without this we can understand nothing in this
life. And thus our forenamed Commentator doubts not to gloss on them.

CHAP. IX.
A main Difficulty concerning the Immortality of the Soul [viz. The strong
Sympathy of the Soul with the Body] answered. An Answer to another Enquiry,
viz. Under what account Impressions derived from the Body do fall in Morality.

WE have now done with the Confirmation of this Point, which is the main Basis
of all Religion, and shall not at present trouble our selves with those
difficulties that may seem to incumber it; which indeed are only such as beg
for a Solution, but do not, if they be impartially considered, proudly contest
with it: and such of them which depend upon any hypothesis which we may
apprehend to be laid down in Scripture, I cannot think them to be of any such
moment, but that any one who deals freely and ingenuously with this piece of
God's truth, may from thence find a far better ansa of answering, then he can
of moving of any scruples against the Souls Immortality, which that most
strongly every where supposes, and does not so positively and (...) lay down,
as presume that we have an antecedent knowledge of it, and therefore
principally teaches us the right Way and Method of providing in this life for
our happy subsistence in that eternal estate. And as for what pretends to
Reason or Experience, I think it may not be amiss briefly to search into one
main difficulty concerning the Soul's Immortality: and that is, That strange
kind of dependency which it seems to have on the Body, whereby it seems
constantly to comply and sympathize therewith, and to assume to it self the
frailties and infirmities thereof, to laugh and languish as it were together
with that: and so when the Body is composed to rest, our Soul seems to sleep
together with it; and as the Spring of bodily Motion seated in our Brains is
more clear or muddy, so the conceptions of our Minds are more distinct or
disturbed.

To answer this difficulty, it might be enough perhaps to say, That the
Sympathy of things is no sufficient Argument to prove the Identity of their
essences by, as I think all will grant; yet we shall endeavor more fully to
solve it.

And for that purpose we must take notice, that though our Souls be of an
Incorporeal nature, as we have already demonstrated, yet they are united to our
Bodies, not as Assisting forms or Intelligences, as some have thought, but in
some more immediate way; though we cannot tell what that is, it being the great
arcanum in Man's nature, that which troubled Plotinus so much, when he had
contemplated the Immortality of it, that, as he speaks of himself, Enn. 4. lib.
8. c. 1. (...) (...). But indeed to make such a Complex thing as Man is, it was
necessary that the Soul should be so united to the Body, as to share in its
passions and infirmities so far as they are void of sinfulness. And as the Body
alone could not perform any act of Sensation or Reason, and so it self become a
(...), so neither would the Soul be capable of providing for the necessities of
the Body, without some way whereby a feeling and sense of them might be
conveyed to it; neither could it take sufficient care of this corporeal life,
as nothing pertaining to it, were it not solicited to a natural compunction
and compassion by the indigencies of our Bodies. It cannot be a mere Mental
Speculation that would be so sensibly affected with hunger or cold or other
griefs that our Bodies necessarily partake of, to move our Souls to take care
for their relief: and were there not such a commerce between our Souls and
Bodies, as that our Souls also might be made acquainted by a pleasurable and
delightful sense of those things that most gratify our Bodies, and tend most
to the support of their Crasis and temperament; the Soul would be apt wholly to
neglect the Body, and commit it wholly to all changes and casualties. Neither
would it be any thing more to us then the body of a Plant or Star, which we
contemplate sometimes with as much contentment as we do our own bodies, having
as much of the Theory of the one as of the other. And the relation that our
Souls bear to such peculiar bodies as they inhabit, is one and the same in
point of notion and speculation with that which they have to any other body:
and therefore that which determines the Soul to this Body more then that, must
be some subtle vinculum that knits and unites it to it in a more Physical way,
which therefore Proclus sometimes calls (...), a spiritual kind of vehicle,
whereby corporeal impressions are transferred to the Mind, and the dictates and
decrees of that are carried back again into the Body to act and move it.
Heraclitus wittily glancing at these mutual aspects and entercourses, calls
them Plotin. Enn. 4. l. 8. c. 1.
(...), the Responsals or Antiphons wherein each of them catches at the others
part and keeps time with it; and so he tells us that there is (...), a way that
leads upwards and downwards between the Soul and Body, whereby their affairs
are made known to one another. For as the Soul could not have a sufficient
relation of the state and condition of our Bodies, except it received some
impressions from them; so neither could our Souls make use of our Bodies, or
derive their own virtue into them as they do, without some intermediate
motions. For as some motions may seem to have their beginning in our Bodies, or
in some external mover, which are not known by our Souls till their advertency
be awakened by the impetuousness of them: so some other motions are derived by
our own Wills into our Bodies, but yet in such a way as they cannot be into any
other body; for we cannot by the mere Magical virtue of our Wills move any
thing else without our selves, nor follow any such virtue by a concurrent sense
of those mutations that are made by it, as we do in our own Bodies.

And as this Conjugal affection and sympathy between Soul and Body are thus
necessary to the Being of Mankind; so we may further take notice of some
peculiar part within us where all this first begins: which a late fagacious
Philosopher has happily observed to be in that part of the Brain from whence
all those Nerves that conduct the Animal spirits up and down the Body take
their first Original; seeing we find all Motions that first arise in our
Bodies, to direct their course straight up to that, as continually respecting
it, and there only to be sensated, and all the imperate motions of our Wills
issuing forth from the same consistory. Therefore the Animal spirits, by reason
of their constant mobility and swift motion, ascending to the place of our
Nerves origination, move the Soul, which there sits enthroned, in some
mysterious way; and descending at the beck of our Wills from thence, move all
the Muscles and joints in such sort as they are guided and directed by the
Soul. And if we observe the subtle Mechanics of our own Bodies, we may easily
conceive how the least motion in these Animal Spirits will, by their relaxing
or distending the Nerves, Membranes and Muscles, according to their different
quantity or the celerity and quality of their motions, beget all kind of
motions likewise in the Organical part of our Bodies. And therefore that our
Souls may the better inform our Bodies, they must perceive all their varieties;
and because they have such an immediate proximity to these Spirits, therefore
also all the Motions of our Souls in the highest way of Reason and
Understanding are apt to stir these quick and nimble spirits always attending
upon them, or else fix them too much. And thus we may easily see that should
our Souls be always acting and working within us, our Bodies could never take
that rest and repose which is requisite for the conservation of Nature. As we
may easily perceive in all our studies and meditations that are most serious,
our Spirits are the more fixed, attending the beck of our Minds. And except
this knot whereby our Souls are wedded to our Bodies were unloosed that our
Souls were loose from them, they could not act, but presently some Motion or
other would be impressed upon our Bodies: as every Motion in our Bodies that is
extraordinary, when our Nerves are distended with the Animal spirits, by a
continual communication of it self in these Nerves like so many intended Chords
to their original, moves our Souls; and so though we always perceive that one
of them is primarily affected, yet we also find the other presently by consent
to be affected too.

And because the Soul has all Corporeal passions and impressions thus conveyed
to it, without which it could not express a due benevolence to that Body which
peculiarly belongs to it; therefore as the Motions of these Animal Spirits are
more or less either disorderly and confused, or gentle and composed, so those
Souls especially who have not by the exercise of true Virtue got the dominion
over them, are also more or less affected proportionably in their operations.
And therefore indeed to question whether the Soul, that is of an Immortal
nature, should entertain these corporeal passions, is to doubt whether God
could make a Man or not, and to question that which we find by experience in
our selves; for we find both that it does thus, and yet that the Original of
these is sometimes from Bodies, and sometimes again by the force of our Wills
they are impressed upon our Bodies.

Here by the way we may consider in a moral way what to judge of those
Impressions that are derived from our Bodies to our Souls, which the Stoics
call (...) not because they are repugnant to Reason, or are aberrations from
it; but because they derive not their original from Reason, but from the Body,
which is (...) and are by Aristotle, more agreeably to the ancient Dialect,
called (...) material or corporeal Idea's or impressions. And these we may
safely reckon, I think, amongst our Adiaphora in Morality, as being in
themselves neither good nor evil, (as all the ancient Writers have done) but
only are formed into either by that stamp that the Soul prints upon them, when
they come to be entertained into it. And therefore whereas some are apt in the
most severe way to censure (...), all those Commotions and Passions that first
affect our Souls; they might do well more cautelously to distinguish between
such of these motions as have their origination in our Bodies, and such as
immediately arise from our Souls: else may we not too hastily displace the
ancient termini, and remove the landmarks of Virtue and Vice? For seeing the
Soul could not descend into any corporeal act, as it must do while it is more
present to one body then another, except it could partake of the griefs and
pleasures of the Body; can it be any more sinful for it to sensate this, then
it is for it to be united to the Body? If our Soul could not know what it is to
eat or drink, but only by a mere ratiocination, collecting by a dry
syllogisticall discourse [That meats and drinks preserve the health and fabric
of the Body, repairing what daily exhales from it] without sensating any kind
of grief in the want, or refreshment in the use, of them; it would soon suffer
the Body to languish and decay. And therefore as these Bodily infirmities and
passions are not evil in themselves; so neither are they evil as they first
affect our Souls. When our Animal Spirits, begot of fine and good blood, gently
and nimbly play up and down in our Brains, and swiftly fly up and down our
whole Bodies, we presently find our Phansies raised with mirth and
cheerfulness: and as when our Phansies are thus exalted, we may not call this
the Energy of Grace; so if our Spleen or Hypochondria, swelling with terrene
and sluggish Vapors, send up such Melancholic fumes into our heads as move us
to sadness and timorousness, we cannot justly call that Vice; nor when the Gall
does degurgitate its bitter juice into our Liver, which mingling it self with
the blood, begets fiery Spirits that presently fly up into our Brain, and there
beget impressions of Anger within us. The like we may say of those Corporeal
passions which are not bred first of all by any Peccant humors or
distemperatures in our own bodies, but are excited in us by any External
objects which by those idola and images that they present to our Senses, or
rather those Motions they make in them, may presently raise such commotions in
our Spirits: For our Body maintains not only a conspiration and consent of all
its own parts, but also it bears a like relation to other mundane bodies with
which it is conversant, as being a part of the whole Universe. But when our
Soul, once moved by the undisciplined petulancy of our Animal spirits, shall
foment and cherish that Irrational Grief, Fear, Anger, Love, or any other such
like Passions contrary to the dictates of Reason; it then sets the stamp of
sinfulness upon them. It is the consent of our own Wills that by brooding of
them brings forth those hateful Serpents. For though our Souls be espoused to
these Earthly Bodies, and cannot but in some measure sympathize with them, yet
has the Soul a true dominion of its own acts. It is not the mere passion, if
we take it in a Physical sense, but rather some inordinate action of our own
Wills that entertain it: and these passions cannot force our Wills, but we may
be able to chastise and allay all the inordinacy of them by the power of our
Wills and Reasons: and therefore God has not made us under the necessity of
sin, by making us men subject to such infirmities as these are which are merely
(...), as the Greek Philosopher has well called them, the blossomings and
shootings forth of bodily life within us; which is but (...) or Humanity.

And, if I mistake not, our Divinity is wont sometimes to acknowledge some such
thing in our Savior himself, who was in all things made like to us, our
sinfulness excepted. He was a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, as the
Prophet Esaias speaks of him: and when he was in bodily agonies and horrors, the
powerful assaults thereof upon his Soul moved him to petition his Father, that
if it were possible, that bitter Cup might pass from him; and the sense of
death so much afflicted him, that it bred in him the sad griefs which S. Peter
expresses by (...) Act. 2. the pangs or throes of death, and that fear that
extorted a desire to be freed from it, as it is insinuated by that in Heb. 5.
7. he was delivered from what he feared; for so the words, being nothing else
but an Hebraism, are to be rendered, (...). And we are wont to call this the
language and dictate of Nature which lawfully endeavors to preserve it self,
though presently an higher principle must bring all these under a subjection to
God, and a free submission to his good pleasure: as it was with our Savior,
who moderated all these passions by a ready resignment of himself and his own
Will up to the Will of God; and though his Humanity craved for ease and
relaxation, yet that Divine Nature that was within him would not have it with
any repugnancy to the supreme Will of God.

A DISCOURSE Concerning THE EXISTENCE AND NATURE OF GOD

Agapetus ad Justinianum. (...).

M. T. Cicero l. 1. De Legibus. Ex tot generibus nullum est animal praeter
hominem quod habeat notitiam aliquam Dei: ipsisque in hominibus nulla gens est
neque tam immansueta, neque tam fera, quae non, etiamsi ignoret qualem habere
Deum deceat, tamen habendum sciat.

OF THE EXISTENCE AND NATURE OF GOD.
CHAP. I.
That the Best way to know God is by an attentive reflection upon our own Souls.
God more clearly and lively pictured upon the Souls of Men, then upon any part
of the Sensible World.

WE shall now come to the other Cardinal Principle of all Religion, and treat
something concerning God. Where we shall not so much demonstrate That he is, as
What he is.

Both which we may best learn from a Reflection upon our own Souls, as Plotinus
has well taught us, (...), He which reflects upon himself, reflects upon his
own Original, and finds the clearest Impression of some Eternal Nature and
Perfect Being stamped upon his own Soul. And therefore Plato seems sometimes to
reprove the ruder sor^ of men in his times for their contrivance of Pictures
and Images to put themselves in mind of the (...) or Angelical Beings, and
exhorts them to look into their own Souls, which are the fairest Images not
only of the Lower divine Natures, but of the Deity it self; God having so
copied forth himself into the whole life and energy of man's Soul, as that the
lovely Characters of Divinity may be most easily seen and read of all men
within themselves: as they say Phidias the famous Statuary, after he had made
the Statue of Minerva with the greatest exquisiteness of Art to be set up in
the Acropolis at Athens, afterward impressed his own Image so deeply in her
buckler, ut nemo delere possit aut divellere, qui totam statuam non imminueret.
And if we would know what the Impresse of Souls is, it is nothing but God
himself, who could not write his own name so as that it might be read but only
in Rational Natures. Neither could he make such without imparting such an
Imitation of his own Eternal Understanding to them as might be a perpetual
Memorial of himself within them. And whenever we look upon our own Soul in a
right manner, we shall find an Urim and Thummim there, by which we may ask
counsel of God himself, who will have this always born upon its breast plate.

There is nothing that so embases and enthralls the Souls of men, as the
dismal and dreadful thoughts of their own Mortality, which will not suffer
them to look beyond this short span of Time, to see an hours length before
them, or to look higher then these material Heavens; which though they could
be stretched forth to infinity, yet would the space be too narrow for an
enlightened mind, that will not be confined within the compass of corporeal
dimensions. These black Opinions of Death and the Nonentity of Souls (darker
then Hell it self) shrink up the freeborn Spirit which is within us, which
would otherwise be dilating and spreading it self boundlesly beyond all Finite
Being: and when these sorry pinching mists are once blown away, it finds this
narrow sphere of Being to give way before it; and having once seen beyond Time
and Matter, it finds then no more ends nor bounds to stop its swift and
restless motion. It may then fly upwards from one heaven to another, till it be
beyond all orb of Finite Being, swallowed up in the boundless Abyss of
Divinity, (...), beyond all that which darker thoughts are wont to represent
under the Idea of Essence. This is that (...) which the Areopagite speaks of,
which the higher our Minds soar into, the more incomprehensible they find it.
Those dismal apprehensions which pinion the Souls of men to mortality,
churlishly check and starve that noble life thereof, which would always be
rising upwards, and spread it self in a free heaven: and when once the Soul
has shaken off these, when it is once able to look through a grave, and see
beyond death, it finds a vast Immensity of Being opening it self more and more
before it, and the ineffable light and beauty thereof shining more and more
into it; when it can rest and bear up itself upon an Immaterial center of
Immortality within, it will then find it self able to bear it self away by a
self-reflexion into the contemplation of an Eternal Deity.

For though God has copied forth his own Perfections in this conspicable and
sensible World, according as it is capable of entertaining them; yet the most
clear and distinct copy of himself could be imparted to none else but to
intelligible and inconspicable natures: and though the whole fabric of this
visible Universe be whispering out the notions of a Deity, and always inculcates
this lesson to the contemplators of it, (...), as Plotinus expresses it; yet
we cannot understand it without some interpreter within. The Heavens indeed
declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork, and the
(...), that which may be known of God, even his eternal power and Godhead, as
S. Paul tells us, is to be seen in these external appearances: yet it must be
something within that must instruct us in all these Mysteries, and we shall
then best understand them, when we compare that copy which we find of them
within our selves, with that which we see without us. The Schoolmen have well
compared Sensible and Intelligible Beings in reference to the Deity, when they
tell us that the one do only represent Vestigia Dei, the other Faciem Dei. We
shall therefore here enquire what that Knowledge of a Deity is which a due
converse with our own naked Understandings will lead us into.

CHAP. II.
How the Contemplation of our own Souls, and a right Reflection upon the
Operations thereof, may lead us into the knowledge of 1. The Divine Unity and
Omniscience, 2. God's Omnipotence, 3. The Divine Love and Goodness, 4. God's
Eternity, 5. His Omnipresence, 6. The Divine Freedom and Liberty.

IT being our design to discourse more particularly of that knowledge of the
Deity that we may learn immediately from our selves, we shall observe,

First, There is nothing whereby our own Souls are 1.
better known to us then by the Properties and Operations of Reason: but when
we reflect upon our own Idea of Pure and Perfect Reason, we know that our own
Souls are not it, but only partake of it; and that it is of such a Nature that
we cannot denominate any other thing of the same rank with our selves by; and
yet we know certainly that it is, as finding from an inward sense of it within
our selves that both we and other things else beside our selves partake of it,
and that we have it (...) and not (...) neither do we or any Finite thing
contain the source of it within our selves: and because we have a distinct
Notion of the most Perfect Mind and Understanding, we own our deficiency
therein. And as that Idea of Understanding which we have within us points not
out to us This or That Particular, but something which is neither This nor
That, but Total, Understanding; so neither will any elevation of it serve
every way to fit and answer that Idea. And therefore when we find that we
cannot attain to Science but by a Discursive deduction of one thing from
another, that our knowledge is confined, and is not fully adequate and
commensurate to the largest Sphere of Being, it not running quite through it
nor filling the whole area of it; or that our knowledge is Chronical and
successive, and cannot grasp all things at once, but works by intervals, and
runs out into Division and Multiplicity; we know all this is from want of
Reason and Understanding, and that a Pure and Simple Mind and Intellect is free
from all these restraints and imperfections, and therefore can be no less then
Infinite. As this Idea which we have of it in our own Souls will not suffer us
to rest in any conception thereof which represents it less then Infinite: so
neither will it suffer us to conceive of it any otherwise then as One Simple
Being: and could we multiply Understandings into never so vast a number, yet
should we be again collecting and knitting them up together in some Universal
one. So that if we rightly reflect upon our own Minds and the Method of their
Energies, we shall find them to be so framed, as not to admit of any other then
One Infinite source of all that Reason and Understanding which themselves
partake of, in which they live, move and have their Being. And therefore in the
old Metaphysical Theology, an Original and Uncreated (...) or Unity is made
the Fountain of all Particularities and Numbers which have their Existence from
the Efflux of its Almighty power.

And that is the next thing which our own Understandings 2.
will instruct us in concerning God, viz. His Eternal Power. For as we find a
Will and Power within our selves to execute the Results of our own Reason and
Judgment, so far as we are not hindered by some more potent Cause: so indeed we
know it must be a mighty inward strength and force that must enable our
Understandings to their proper functions, and that Life, Energy and Activity
can never be separated from a Power of Understanding. The more unbodied any
thing is, the more unbounded also is it in its Effective power: Body and Matter
being the most sluggish, inert and unwieldy thing that may be, having no power
from it self nor over it self: and therefore the Purest Mind must also needs be
the most Almighty Life and Spirit; and as it comprehends all things and sums
them up together in its Infinite knowledge, so it must also comprehend them all
in its own life and power. Besides, when we review our own Immortal Souls and
their dependency upon some Almighty Mind, we know that we neither did nor could
produce our selves; and withal know that all that Power which lies within the
compass of our selves, will serve for no other purpose then to apply several
praeexistent things one to another, from whence all Generations and Mutations
arise, which are nothing else but the Events of different applications and
complications of Bodies that were existent before: and therefore that which
produced that Substantial Life and Mind by which we know our selves, must be
something much more Mighty then we are, and can be no less indeed then
Omnipotent, and must also be the First architect and (...) of all other Beings,
and the perpetual Supporter of them.

We may also know from the same Principles, That 3.
an Almighty Love, every way commensurate to that most Perfect Being, eternally
rests in it, which is as strong as that is Infinite, and as full of Life and
Vigor as that is of Perfection. And because it finds no Beauty nor Loveliness
but only in that and the issues thereof, therefore it never does nor can
fasten upon any thing else. And therefore the Divinity always enjoies it self
and its own Infinite perfections, seeing it is that Eternal and stable Sun of
goodness that neither rises nor sets, is neither eclipsed nor can receive any
increase of light and beauty. Hence the Divine Love is never attended with
those turbulent passions, perturbations, or wrestlings within it self, of Fear,
Desire, Grief, Anger, or any such like, whereby our Love is wont to explicate
and unfold its affection toward its Object. But as the Divine Love is
perpetually most infinitely ardent and potent, so it is always calm and
serene, unchangeable, having no such ebbings and flowings, no such diversity of
stations and retrogradations as that Love has in us which arises from the
weakness of our Understandings, that do not present things to us always in
the same Orient luster and beauty: neither we nor any other mundane thing (all
which are in a perpetual flux) are always the same. Besides, though our Love
may sometimes transport us and violently rend us from our selves and from all
Self-enjoyment, yet the more forcible it is, by so much the more it will be apt
to torment us, while it cannot center it self in that which it so strongly
endeavors to attract to it; and when it possesses most, yet is it always
hungry and craving, as Plotinus has well expressed it, (...), it may always
be filling it self, but, like a leaking vessel, it will be always emptying it
self again. Whereas the Infinite ardour of the Divine Love arising from the
unbounded perfection of the Divine Being, always rests satisfied within it
self, and so may rather be defined by a (...) then a (...), and is wrapped up and
rests in the same Centrall Unity in which it first begins. And therefore I
think some men of later times have much mistaken the nature of the Divine Love,
in imagining that Love is to be attributed to God, as all other Passions are,
rather secundum effectum then affectum: whereas S. John, who was well
acquainted with this noble Spirit of Love, when he defined God by it, and calls
him LOVE, meant not to signify a bare nothing known by some Effects, but that
which was infinitely such as it seems to be. And we might well spare our
labor, when we so industriously endeavor to find something in God that might
produce the Effects of some other Passions in us, which look rather like the
Brats of Hell and Darkness then the lovely offspring of Heaven.

When we reflect upon all this which signifies some Perfect Essence, as a Mind,
Wisdom, Understanding, 4.
Omnipotency, Goodness, and the like, we can find no such thing as Time or
Place, or any Corporeal or Finite properties which arise indeed not ex
plenitudine, but ex inopia entitatis; we may also know God to be Eternal and
Omnipresent, not because he fills either Place or Time, but rather because he
wants neither. That which first begets the Notion of Time in us, is nothing
else but that Succession and Multiplicity which we find in our own Thoughts,
which move from one thing to another, as the Sun in the Firmament is said to
walk from one Planetary house to another, and to have his several Stages to
pass by. And therefore where there is no such Vicissitude or Variety, as there
can be no sense of Time, so there can be nothing of the thing. Proclus has
wittily observed that Saturn, or (as the Greeks called him) (...), was the
first of the (...) or Mundane Gods, (...), because Time is necessarily
presupposed to all Generation, which proceeds by certain motions and
intervalls. This World is indeed a great Horologe to it self, and is
continually numbering out its own age; but it cannot lay any sure hold upon its
own past revolutions, nor can it gather up its infancy and old age, and couple
them up together. Whereas an Infinitelycomprehensive Mind has a Simultaneous
possession of its own never-flitting life; and because it finds no Succession
in its own immutable Understanding, therefore it cannot find any thing to
measure out its own duration. And as Time lies in the Basis of all Finite life,
whereby it is enabled by degrees to display all the virtue of its own Essence,
which it cannot do at once: so such an Eternity lies at the foundation of the
Divinity, whereby it becomes one without any shadow of turning, as S. James
speaks, without any Variety or Multiplicity within himself, which all created
Beings that are carried down in the current of Time partake of. And therefore
the Platonists were wont to attribute (...) or Eternity to God, not so much
because he had neither beginning nor end of days, but because of his Immutable
and Uniform nature, which admits of no such variety of Conceptions as all
Temporary things do: And Time they attributed to all created Beings, because
there is a (...) or constant generation both of and in their essence, by reason
whereof we may call any of them, as Proclus tells us, by that borrowed
expression, (...) old and new, being every moment as it were re-produced, and
acting something which it did not individually before. Though otherwise they
supposed This World, constantly depending upon the Creatour's Omnipotency,
might from all Eternity flow forth from the same Power that still sustains it,
and which was never less potent to uphold it then now it is: notwithstanding
this piece of it which is visible to us, or at least this Scheme or fashion of
it, they acknowledged to have been but of a late date.

Now thus as we conceive of God's Eternity, we may 5.
in a correspondent manner apprehend his Omnipresence; not so much by an
Infinite Expanse or Extension of Essence, as by an unlimited power, as Plotinus
has fitly expressed it, (...). For as nothing can ever stray out of the bounds
or get out of the reach of an Almighty Mind and Power; so when we barely think
of Mind or Power, or any thing else most peculiar to the Divine Essence, we
cannot find any of the Properties of Quantity mixing themselves with it: and as
we cannot confine it in regard thereof to any one point of the Universe, so
neither can we well conceive it extended through the whole, or excluded from
any part of it. It is always some Material Being that contends for Space:
Bodily parts will not lodge together, and the more bulky they are, the more
they justle for room one with another; as Plotinus tells us, (...), Bodily
Beings are great only in bulk, but Divine Essences in virtue and power.

We may in the next place consider that Freedom 6.
and Liberty which we find in our own Souls, which is founded in our Reason and
Understanding; and this is therefore- Infinite in God, because there is nothing
that can bound the First Mind, or disobey an Almighty power. We must not
conceive God to be the freest Agent, because he can do and prescribe what he
pleases, and so set up an Absolute will which shall make both Law and Reason,
as some imagine. For as God cannot know himself to be any other then what
indeed he is; so neither can he will himself to be any thing else then what he
is, or that any thing else should swerve from those Laws which his own Eternal
Nature and Understanding prescribes to it. For this were to make God free to
dethrone himself, and set up a Liberty within him that should contend with the
royal prerogative of his own boundless Wisdom.

To be short; When we converse with our own Souls, we find the Spring of all
Liberty to be nothing else but Reason; and therefore no Unreasonable creature
can partake of it: and that it is not so much any Indifferency in our Wills of
determining without, much less against, Reason, as the liberal Election of,
and Complacency in, that which our Understandings propound to us as most
expedient: And our Liberty most appears, when our Will most of all
congratulates the results of our own Judgments; and then shows it self most
vigorous, when either the Particularness of that Good which the Understanding
converseth with, or the weak knowledge that it has of it, restrains it not.
Then is it most pregnant and flows forth in the fullest stream, when its Object
is most full, and the acquaintance with it most ample: all Liberty in the Soul
being a kind of Liberality in the bestowing of our affections, and the want or
scarce measure of it Parsimoniousness and Niggardise. And therefore the more
the Results of our Judgments tend to an Indifferency, the more we find our
Wills dubious and in suspense what to choose; contrary inclinations arising and
falling within enterchangeably, as the Scales of a Balance equally laden with
weights; and all this while the Soul's Liberty is nothing else but a
Fluctuation between uncertainties, and languisheth away in the impotency of our
Understandings. Whereas the Divine Understanding beholding all things most
clearly, must needs beget the greatest Freedom that may be; which Freedom as
it is bred in it, so it never moves without the Compass of it. And though the
Divine Will be not determined always to this or that particular, yet it is never
bereft of Eternal Light and Truth to act by: and therefore though we cannot
see a Reason for all Gods actions, yet we may know they were neither done
against it nor without it.

CHAP. III.
How the Consideration of those restless motions of our Wills after some
Supreme and Infinite Good, leads us into the knowledge of a Deity.

WE shall once more take a view of our own Souls, and observe how the Motions
thereof lead us into the knowledge of a Deity. We always find a restless
appetite within our selves which craves for some Supreme and Chief good, and
will not be satisfied with any thing less then Infinity it self; as if our own
Penury and Indigency were commensurate to the Divine fullness: and therefore no
Question has been more canvas'd by all Philosophy then this, De summo hominis
bono, and all the Sects thereof were anciently distinguished by those Opinions
that they entertained De finibus Boni and Mali, as Tully phraseth it. But of
how weak and dilute a Nature soever some of them may have conceived that Summum
Bonum, yet they could not so satisfy their own inflamed thirst after it. We
find by Experience that our Souls cannot live upon that thin and spare diet
which they are entertained with at their own home; neither can they be satiated
with those jejune and insipid morsels which this Outward world furnishes their
Table with. I cannot think the most voluptuous Epicurean could ever satisfy
the cravings of his Soul with Corporeal pleasure, though he might endeavor to
persuade himself there was no better: nor the most Quintessential Stoics find
an (...) and (...) a Self-sufficiency and Tranquillity within their own Souls,
arising out of the pregnancy of their own Mind and Reason; though their sullen
thoughts would not suffer them to be beholden to an Higher Being for their
Happiness. The more we endeavor to extract an Autarchy out of our own Souls,
the more we torment them, and force them to feel and sensate their own pinching
poverty. Ever since our Minds became so dim-sighted as not to pierce into that
Original and Primitive Blessedness which is above, our Wills are too big for
our Understandings, and will believe their beloved prey is to be found where
Reason discovers it not: they will pursue it through all the vast Wilderness of
this World, and force our Understandings to follow the chase with them: nor may
we think to tame this violent appetite or allay the heat of it, except we can
look upward to some Eternal and Almighty goodness which is alone able to master
it.

It is not the nimbleness and agility of our own Reason which stirs up these
hungry affections within us, (for then the most ignorant sort of men would
never feel the sting thereof) but indeed some more Potent nature which has
planted a restless motion within us that might more forcibly carry us out to it
self; and therefore it will never suffer it self to be controlled by any of our
thin Speculations, or satisfied with those aierie delights that our Fancies may
offer to it: it does not, it cannot, rest it self any where but upon the Center
of some Almighty good, some solid and substantial Happiness; like the hungry
child that will not be stilled by all the mother's music, or change its sower
and angry looks for her smiling countenance; nothing will satisfy it but the
full breasts.

The whole work of this World is nothing but a perpetual contention for True
Happiness, and men are scattered up and down the world, moving to and fro
therein, to seek it. Our Souls by a Natural Science as it were feeling their
own Original, are perpetually travailing with new designs and contrivances
whereby they may purchase the scope of their high ambitions. Happiness is that
Pearl of price which all adventure for, though few find it. It is not Gold or
Silver that the Earthlings of this world seek after, but some satisfying good
which they think is there treasured up. Neither is it a little empty breath
that Ambition and Popularity soars after, but some kind of Happiness that it
thinks to catch and suck in with it.

And thus indeed when men most of all fly from God, they still seek after him.
Wicked men pursue indeed after a Deity in their worldly lusts; wherein yet they
most blaspheme; for God is not a mere empty Name or Title, but that
Self-sufficient good which brings along that Rest and Peace with it which they
so much seek after, though they do most prodigiously conjoyn it with something
which it is not, nor can it be, and in a true and real strain of blasphemy,
attribute all that which God is to something else which is most unlike him,
and, as S. Paul speaks of those infatuated Gentiles, Romans 1.
turn the glory of the uncorruptible God into the image of corruptible man, of
birds and four-footed beasts and creeping things.

God is not better defined to us by our Understandings then by our Wills and
Affections: He is not only the Eternal Reason, that Almighty Mind and Wisdom
which our Understandings converse with; but he is also that unstained Beauty
and Supreme Good which our Wills are perpetually catching after: and
wheresoever we find true Beauty, Love and Goodness, we may say, Here or there
is God. And as we cannot understand any thing of an Intelligible nature, but by
some primitive Idea we have of God, whereby we are able to guess at the
elevation of its Being and the pitch of its Perfection; so neither do our
Wills embrace any thing without some latent sense of Him, whereby they can taste
and discern how near any thing comes to that Self-sufficient good they seek
after: and indeed without such an internal sensating Faculty as this is we
should never know when our Souls are in conjunction with the Deity, or be able
to relish the ineffable sweetness of true Happiness. Though here below we know
but little what this is, because we are little acquainted with fruition and
enjoyment; we know well what belongs to longings and languishment, but we know
not so well what belongs to plenty and fullness; we are well acquainted with the
griefs and sicknesses of this inbred love, but we know not what its health and
complacencies are.

To conclude this particular, (...), the Soul has strong and weighty motions,
and nothing else can bear it up but something permanent and immutable. Nothing
can beget a constant serenity and composedness within, but something Supreme to
its own Essence; as if having once departed from the primitive Fountain of its
life, it were deprived of it self, perpetually contesting within it self and
divided against it self: and all this evidently proves to our inward sense and
feeling, That there is some Higher Good then our selves, something that is much
more amiable and desirable, and therefore must be loved and preferred before
our selves, as Plotinus has excellently observed, (...), etc. Every thing that
desires the enjoyment of the First good, would rather be That then what it is,
because indeed the nature of that is much more desirable then its own. And
therefore the Platonists, when they contemplate the Deity under these three
notions of (...) and (...), and question which to place first in order of
understanding, resolve the preeminence to be due to the (...), as Simplicius
tells us, because That is first known to us as the Architect of the world, and,
we may add, as that which begets in us this (...), these strong passionate
desires whereby all sorts of men (even those that are rude and illiterate) are
first known to themselves, and by that knowledge may know what diminutive, poor
and helpless, things themselves are, who can never satiate themselves from
themselves, and what an Excellent and Sovereign goodness there is above them
which they ought to serve, and cannot but serve it, or some filthy idol in
stead of it; though this mental Idolatry be like that gross and external in
this also, that howsoever we attend it not (and so are never the more
blameless) yet our worship of these images and pictures of Goodness rests not
there, it being some all-sufficient Good that (as we observed before) calls
forth and commands our adorations.

CHAP. IV.
Deductions and Inferences from the Consideration of the Divine Nature and
Attributes.

1. That all Divine productions are the free Effluxes of Omnipotent Love and
Goodness. The true Notion of God's glory what it is. Men very apt to mistake in
this point. God needs not the Happiness or Misery of his Creatures to make
himself glorious by. God does most glorify himself by communicating himself:
we most glorify God when we most partake of him, and resemble him most.

WE have seen how we may rise up to the understanding of the Deity by the
contemplation of our own Souls: and now it may seem worthy of the best
attention of our Minds to consider some Deductions and Inferences which
naturally flow from the true knowledge of the Divine Nature and Attributes.

And the First is this, That all Divine productions or operations that
terminate in something without Him, are nothing else but the free Effluxes of
his own Omnipotent Love and Goodness, which always moves along with them, and
never willingly departs from them. When God made the world, it was not out of a
piece of Self-Interest, as if he had had any design to advance himself, or to
enlarge his own stock of glory and happiness; for what Beauty or Perfection can
be in this whole Creation which was not before contained in himself as the free
Fountain of all? or what could he see out of himself that could add any thing
to his own stature, which he found not already in himself? He made not the
World (...), It was not for any need, or that he might gain some honor to
himself from Men, Archangels or Angels, as the Tribute or Rent to be paid to
him from his Creation, as Clemens Alexandrinus observes out of Strom. 5.
Plato. Though I know not how it comes about that some bring in God as it were
casting about how he might erect a new Monopoly of glory to himself, and so to
serve this purpose made the World, that he might have a stock of glory here
going in it. And I doubt we are wont sometimes to paint him forth too much in
the likeness of corrupt and impotent men, that by a fond ambition please
themselves and feed their lustful phansies with their own praises chanted out
to them by their admirers, and another while as much sport themselves and
applaud their own Greatness, to hear what hideous cries the Severity of their
own Power can extort from those they have a mind to make miserable.

We all speak much of the Glory of God, and entertain a common belief that
that is the only End for which we were all made: and I wish we were all more
inwardly moved with a true and lively sense of it. There can be nothing else
that either God could propound to himself, or that we ought, if it be rightly
understood. But we must not think that God, who is Infinite fullness, would seek
for any thing without himself: he needs neither our Happiness nor our Misery to
make himself more illustrious by; but being full in himself, it was his good
pleasure to communicate of his own fullness: for, as Lib. 4. in Timaeum.
Proclus has well observed, (...) (...), etc. How can he look without himself,
being he is a pure Mind always encompassed with its own glorious brightness?
But the good pleasure of his Will being filled with bounty, and the power of a
most gracious Deity proceeding from it, liberally dispensed themselves, and
distributed those gifts of grace that might make all created Being the more to
resemble that Archetypall Idea of themselves. Accordingly Timaeus Locrus
represents the Creator of the World in the same strain that Moses did, (...),
delighted as it were in himself to see that all things that he had made were
good, and some things exceeding good. God himself being infinitely full, and
having enough and to spare, is always overflowing; and Goodness and Love issue
forth from him by way of redundancy. When he made the World, because there was
nothing better then himself, he shadowed forth himself therein, and, as far as
might be, was pleased to represent himself and manifest his own eternal glory
and perfection in it. When he is said to seek his own glory, it is indeed
nothing else but to ray and beam forth, as it were, his own luster; as R.
Jehuda in his Book Cofri has glanced at it, (...) Gloria haec scintilla est
lucis divinae, cedens in utilitatem populi ejus in terra ejus.

God does then most glorify and exalt himself in the most triumphant way that
may be ad extra or out of himself, if I may so phrase it, when he most of all
communicates himself, and when he erects such Monuments of his own Majesty
wherein his own Love and Goodness may live and reign.

And we then most of all glorify him, when we partake most of him, when our
serious endeavors of a true assimilation to him and conformity to his Image
declare that we think nothing Better then He is, and are therefore most
ambitious of being one with him by an Universal Resignation of our selves unto
him.

This is his Glory in its lowest Humiliation, while it beams forth out of
himself; and our Happiness in its Exaltation, which Heaven never separates nor
divides though Earth does. His Honor is His Love and Goodness in paraphrase,
spreading it self over all those that can or do receive it; and this he loves
and cherishes wheresoever he finds it, as something of himself therein.

Thus I should leave this particular, but that being gone so far in it, it may
be worth the while to take notice of Three things wherein God most of all
glories and takes the greatest complacency, in reference to Creatures, as they
are laid down by Proclus l. 4. in Tim. 1. (...), The First, and chiefest, is
concurrent with his own internal vision of all things in that simple, expedite
and simultaneous comprehension of all things intelligible, piercing through all
their essences, and viewing them all in himself, he is delighted therein, as
seeing how his own Glory can display and imitate it self in outward Matter. 2.
The second is, (...), in the aptness and capacity of those things which he has
made to receive a further influence of good ready to stream forth from himself
into them. 3. The last is, (...), in the sweet symmetry of his own forms with
this capacity, and as it were the harmonious conspiration and symphony of them,
when his own light pleasantly plays upon those well-tuned instruments which he
has fitted to run the descants of his own Goodness upon. And therefore it
becomes us whom he has endued with vital power of action, and in some sense a
Self-moving life, to stir up his good gifts within our selves; and, if we would
have him take pleasure in us, to prepare our own Souls more and more to receive
of his Liberality, (...), that that stock which he is pleased to impart to us
may not lie dead within us. And this is the Application which he makes of this
Particular.

CHAP. V.
A second Deduction.

2. That all things are supported and governed by an Almighty Wisdom and
Goodness. An Answer to an Objection made against the Divine Providence from an
unequal distribution of things here below. Such quarrelling with Providence
arises from a Paedanticall and Carnal notion of Good and Evil.

IN the next place we may by way of further Deduction gather, That that
Almighty Wisdom and Goodness which first made all things, does also
perpetually conserve and govern them; deriving themselves through the whole
Fabric, and seating themselves in every Finite Essence, (...), (as the same
Philosopher expresses it) lest straggling and falling off from the Deity, they
should become altogether disorderly, relapsing and sliding back into their
first Chaos. As in all Motion there must be some First Mover, from whence the
beginning and perpetuation of all Motion is deduced: so in Beings there must be
some First Essence upon which all other must constantly depend. And therefore
the Pythagorean philosophy was wont to look upon these (...), as they call this
production of every thing that is not truly divine, (...), as being always in
fieri. For as no Finite thing can subsist by its own strength, or take its
place upon the stage of Space without the leave of an Almighty and Supreme
power: so neither can it remain here without license and assistance from it.
The Deity indeed is the Center of all finite Being, and Entity it self, which
is Self-sufficient, must of necessity be the Foundation and Basis of every one
of these weak Essences, which cannot bear up themselves by any Centrall power
of their own; as we may also be almost assured of from a sensible feeling of
all the constant mutations and impotency which we find both in our selves and
all other things.

And as God thus preserves all things, so he is continually ordering and
disposing all things in the best way, and providing so as may be best for them.
He did not make the World as a mere Exercise of his Almighty power, or to try
his own strength, and then throw it away from himself without any more minding
of it; for he is that Omnipresent Life that penetrates and runs through all
things, containing and holding all fast together within himself; and therefore
the ancient Philosophy was wont rather to say, that the World was in God, then
that God was in the World. He did not look without himself to search for some
solid foundation that might bear up this weighty building, but indeed reared it
up within him, and spread his own Omnipotency under it and through it: and
being centrally in every part of it, he governs it according to the prescript
of his own unsearchable Wisdom and Goodness, and orders all things for the
best. And this is one principal Orthodox point the Stoics would have us to
believe concerning Providence, (...), that all things are here done in this
World by the appointment of the Best Mind.

And now if any should quarrel with the unequal distribution of things here,
as if rather some blind Fortune had bestowed her blessings carelessly till she
had no more left, and thereby made so many starvelings, rather then some
All-knowing Mind that deals forth its bounty in due proportions; I should send
them to Plutarch and Plotinus to have their Reasons fully satisfied in this
point, (for we here deal with the Principles of Natural light) all these
debates arising from nothing but Paedanticall and Carnal notions of Good and
Evil: as if it were so gallant a thing to be dealing with Crowns and Scepters,
to be bravely arrayed, and wallow in that which is called the Wealth of this
World. God indeed never took any such notice of Good men as to make them all
Rulers, as the Plotin. Enn. 3. l. 2. c. 9.
last of those forecited Authors tells us; neither was it worth the while,
(...), neither is it fit for good men that partake of an higher life then the
most Princely is, to trouble themselves about lording and ruling over other
men; as if such a splendid kind of nothing as this is were of so much worth. It
may be generally much better for us, while we are so apt to magnify and court
any Mundane beauty and glory, as we are, that Providence should disorder and
deface these things, that we might all be weaned from the love of them, then
that their lovely looks should so bewitch and enchant our Souls as to draw them
off from Better things. And I dare say that a sober mind that shall contemplate
the state and temper of men's minds, and the confused frame of this outward
world, will rather admire at the Infinite Wisdom of a gracious Providence in
permitting and ordering that Ataxy which is in it, then he would were it to be
beheld in a more comely frame and order.

CHAP. VI.
A third Deduction.

3. That all true Happiness consists in a participation of God arising out of
the assimilation and conformity of our Souls to him; and, That the most real
Misery arises out of the Apostasy of Souls from God. No enjoyment of God
without our being made like to Him. The Happiness and Misery of Man defined and
stated, with the Original and Foundation of both.

WE proceed now to another Deduction or Inference, viz. That all True Happiness
consists in a participation of God arising out of the assimilation and
conformity of our Souls to him, and the most real Misery arises out of the
Apostasy of Souls from God. And so we are led to speak of the Rewards and
Punishments of the Life to come, Praemium and Poena, (...) as the Jewish
Writers are wont to express them: and it will not be any hard labor from what
has been said to find out the Original and Nature of both of them; and though
perhaps we cannot dive into the bottom of them, yet we may go about them, and
tell how in a general way to define and distinguish them.

Happiness is nothing else, as we usually describe it to our selves, but the
Enjoyment of some Chief good: and therefore the Deity is so boundlesly Happy,
because it is every way one with its own Immense perfection; and every thing so
much the more feelingly lives upon Happiness, by how much the more it comes to
partake of God and to be made like to him: And therefore the Platonists well
defined it to consist in idea Boni. And as it is impossible to enjoy Happiness
without a fruition of God; so it is impossible to enjoy him without an
assimilation and conformity of our Natures to him in a way of true goodness and
Godlike perfection. It is a common Maxim of Socrates, (...), it is not lawful
for any impure nature to touch pure Divinity. For we cannot enjoy God by any
External conjunction with him: Divine fruition is not by a mere kind of
Apposition or Contiguity of our Natures with the Divine, but it is an Internal
Union, whereby a Divine Spirit informing our Souls, derives the strength of a
Divine life through them; and as this is more strong and active, so is
Happiness it self more Energeticall within us. It must be some Divine Efflux
running quite through our Souls, awakening and exalting all the vital powers
of them into an active Sympathy with some Absolute good, that renders us
completely blessed. It is not to sit gazing upon a Deity by some thin
speculations; but it is an inward feeling and sensation of this Mighty Goodness
displaying it self within us, melting our fierce and furious natures, that
would fain be something in contradiction to God, into an Universal compliance
with it self, and wrapping up our amorous Minds wholly into it self, whereby
God comes to be all in all to us. And therefore so long as our Wills and
Affections endeavor to fix upon any thing but God and true Goodness, we do
but indeed anxiously endeavor to wring Happiness out of something that will
yield no more then a flinty Rock to all our pressing and forcing of it. The
more we endeavor to force out our Affections to stay and rest themselves upon
any Finite thing, the more violently will they recoil back again upon us. It is
only a true sense and relish of God that can tame and master that rage of our
insatiable and restless desires which is still forcing us out of our selves to
seek some Perfect Good, that which from a latent sense of our own Souls we feel
our selves to want.

The Foundation of Heaven and Hell is laid in men's own Souls, in an ardent and
vehement appetite after Happiness, which can neither attain to it, nor miss
finally of it and of all appearances of it, without a quick and piercing sense.
Our Souls are not like so many lumps of dead and senseless Matter to a true
living Happiness, they are not like these dull clods of Earth which sent not
the good or ill savor of those Plants that grow upon them. Gain and Loss are
very sensibly felt by greedy minds. The Soul of man was made with such a large
capacity as it is, that so it might be better fitted to entertain a full and
liberal Happiness, that the Divine Love and Goodness might more freely spread
it self in it, and unite it to it self. And accordingly when it misseth of God,
it must feel so much the more the fury and pangs of Misery, and find a severe
Nemesis arising out of its guilty conscience, which like a fiery Scorpion will
fasten its stings within it. And thus as Heaven, Love, Joy, Peace, Serenity,
and all that which Happiness is, buds and blossoms out of holy and God-like
spirits: so also Hell and Misery will perpetually spring out of impure Minds,
distracted with Envy, Malice, Ambition, Self-will or any inordinate loves to
any particular thing.

This is that (...) that Plato speaks of, that fatal Law that is first made in
Heaven's Consistory, That Purity and Holiness shall be happy, and all Vice and
Sin miserable. Holiness of Mind will be more and more attracting God to it
self, as all Vice will lapse and slide more and more from him. The more pure
our Souls are and abstracted from all mundane things, the more sincerely will
they endeavor the nearest union that may be with God, the more they will pant
and breathe after him alone, leaving the chase of any other delight. There is
such a noble and freeborn spirit in true Goodness seated in Immortal natures,
as will not be satisfied merely with Innocence, nor rest it self in this mixed
Bodily state, though it could converse with Bodily things without sinking to a
vicious love of them; but would always be returning to a more intimate union
with that Being from whence it came, and which will be drawing it more and more
to it self: and therefore it seems very reasonable to believe that if Adam had
continued in a state of Innocence, he should have been raised by God to a
greater fruition of him, and his nature should have been elevated to a more
transcendent condition. And if there was any Covenant made with Adam in
Paradise, I think we cannot understand it in any other sense but this: the
Scripture speaks not of any other terms between God and Man. And this Law of
life, which we have spoken of, is Eternal and Immutable; nor does the
Dispensation of Grace by Christ Jesus at all abrogate or disannull, but rather
enforce, it: for so we find that the Law of Christ, that which he gave out to
all his Disciples, was this Law of perfection that carries true Happiness along
in the Sense of it, which, as the great Prince of Souls, he dispenses by his
Eternal Spirit in a vital way unto the Minds of men.

CHAP. VII.
A Fourth Deduction.

4. The Fourth Deduction acquaints us with the true Notion of the Divine
Justice, That the proper scope and design of it, is to preserve Righteousness,
to promote and encourage true Goodness. That it does not primarily intend
Punishment, but only takes it up as a mean to prevent Transgression. True
Justice never supplants any that it self may appear more glorious in their
ruins. How Divine Justice is most advanced.

IN the fourth place, we may further collect How rightly to state the Notion of
the Divine Justice, the scope whereof is nothing else but to assert and
establish Eternal Law and Right, and to preserve the integrity thereof; it is
no design of Vengeance, which though God takes on wicked men, yet he delights
not in it. The Divine Justice first prescribes that which is most conformable
to the Divine Nature, and mainly pursues the conservation of Righteousness. We
would not think him a good Ruler that should give out Laws to ensnare his
Subjects, with an even indifferency of Mind whether his Laws be kept, or
Punishments suffered; but such a one who would make the best security for Right
and Equity by wholesome Laws, and annexing Punishments as a mean to prevent
transgression, and not to manifest Severity. The proper scope of Justice seems
to be nothing else but the preserving and maintaining of that which is Just and
Right: the scope of that Justice which is in any Righteous Law, is properly to
provide for a righteous execution of that which is just and fit to be, without
intending punishment; for to intend that properly and directly, might rather
seem Cruelty then Justice: and therefore Justice takes not up Punishment, but
only for a security of performance of Righteous Laws, viz. either for the
amendment of the person transgressing, or a due example to others to keep them
off from transgression. For I would here suppose a Good and Righteous man, who
in some desolate place of the World should have the command of a 100 more, and
himself be Supreme and under no command. He prescribes Laws to this company,
makes it death for any one to take away another's life. But now one proves a
Murderer, kills one of his fellows; afterward repents heartily, and is like
to prove useful among the rest of his fellows: they all are so heartily
affected one to another, that there is no danger, upon sparing this Penitent's
life, that any one of them should be encouraged to commit the like evil. The
Case being thus stated, it will not seem difficult to conclude that the Justice
of this Righteous and Good Commander would spare this poor Penitent: for his
Justice would have preserved that life which is lost, and seeing there is
nothing further that it can obtain in taking away this, it will save this which
may be saved; for it affects not any blood; and when it destroies, it is out of
necessity, to take away a destructive person, and to give example, which in the
Case stated falls not out.

Again, Justice is the Justice of Goodness, and so cannot delight to punish; it
aims at nothing more then the maintaining and promoting the Laws of Goodness,
and has always some good end before it, and therefore would never punish
except some further good were in view.

True Justice never supplants any that it self might appear more glorious in
their ruins; for this would be to make Justice love something better then
Righteousness, and to advance and magnify it self in something which is not it
self, but rather an aberration from it self: and therefore God himself so
earnestly contends with the Jews about the Equity of his own ways, with
frequent asseverations that his Justice is thirsty after no man's blood, but
rather that Sinners would repent, turn from their evil ways, and live. And
then Justice is most advanced, when the contents of it are fulfilled; and
though it does not, and will not, acquit the guilty without Repentance, yet the
design of it is to encourage Innocence and promote true Goodness.

CHAP. VIII.
The Fifth and last Deduction.

5. That seeing there is such an Intercourse and Society as it were between God
and Men, therefore there is also some Law between them, which is the Bond of
all Communion. The Primitive rules of God's Economy in this world, not the
sole Results of an Absolute Will, but the sacred Decrees of Reason and
Goodness, God could not design to make us Sinful or Miserable. Of the Law of
Nature embosom'd in Man's Soul, how it obliges man to love and obey God, and to
express a Godlike spirit and life in this world. All Souls the Offspring of
God; but Holy Souls manifest themselves to be, and are more peculiarly, the
Children of God.

THE former Deduction leads me to another akin to it, which shall be my last,
and it is that which Tully intimates in his De legibus, viz. That seeing there
is such an Intercourse and Society as it were between God and Men, therefore
there is also some Law between them, which is the Bond of all Communion. God
himself, from whom all Law takes its rise and emanation, is not Exlex and
without all Law, nor, in a sober sense, above it. Neither are the Primitive
rules of his Economy in this world the sole Results of an Absolute will, but
the Sacred Decrees of Reason and Goodness. I cannot think God to be so
unbounded in his Legislative power, that he can make any thing Law, both for
his own Dispensations and our Observance, that we may sometime imagine. We
cannot say indeed that God was absolutely determined from some Law within
himself to make us; but I think we may safely say, when he had once determined
to make us, he could neither make us sinful, seeing he had no Idea nor shadow
of Evil within himself, nor lap us those dreadful fates within our Natures, or
set them over us, that might arcana inspiratione (as some are pleased to phrase
it) secretly work our ruin, and silently carry us on, making use of our own
natural infirmity, to eternal misery. Neither could he design to make his
creatures miserable, that so he might show himself Just. These are rather the
by-waies of Cruel and Ambitious men, that seek their own advantage in the
mischiefs of other men, and contrive their own Rise by their Ruins: this is
not Divine Justice, but the Cruelty of degenerated men.

But as the Divinity could propound nothing to it self in the making of the
World but the Communication of its own Love and Goodness; so it can never
swerve from the same Scope and End in the dispensation of it self to it.
Neither did God so boundlesly enlarge the appetite of Souls after some
All-sufficient Good, that so they might be the more unspeakably tortured in the
missing of it; but that they might more certainly return to the Original of
their Beings. And such busie-working Essences as the Souls of men are, could
neither be made as dull and senseless of true Happiness as Stocks and Stones
are, neither could they contain the whole sum and perfection of it within
themselves: therefore they must also be informed with such Principles as might
conduct them back again to Him from whom they first came. God does not make
Creatures for the mere sport of his Almighty arm, to raise and ruin and toss
up and down at mere pleasure. No, that (...) or good pleasure of that Will that
made them is the same still, it changes not, though we may change, and make our
selves incapable of partaking the blissfull fruits and effects of it.

And so we come to consider that Law embosom'd in the Souls of men which ties
them again to their Creator, and this is called The Law of Nature; which
indeed is nothing else but a Paraphrase or Comment upon the Nature of God as it
copies forth it self in the Soul of Man.

Because God is the First Mind and the First Good, propagating an Imitation of
himself in such Immortal Natures as the Souls of Men are, therefore ought the
Soul to renounce all mortal and mundane things, and preserve its Affections
chaste and pure for God himself; to love him with a most Universal and
Unbounded Love; to trust in him and reverence him; to converse with him in a
free and cheerful manner, as One in whom we live and move and have our Beings,
being perpetually encompassed by him, and never moving out of him; to resign
all our Ways and Wills up to him with an equal and indifferent mind, as
knowing that he guides and governs all things in the Best way; to sink our
selves as low in Humility, as we are in Self-nothingness.

And because all those scattered Rays of Beauty and Loveliness which we behold
spread up and down all the World over, are only the Emanations of that
inexhausted Light which is above; therefore should we love them all in that,
and climb up always by those Sunbeams unto the Eternal Father of Lights: we
should look upon him and take from him the pattern of our lives, and always
eying of him should (...), etc. (as Hierocles speaks) polish and shape our
Souls into the clearest resemblance of him; and in all our behavior in this
World (that Great Temple of his) deport our selves decently and reverently,
with that humility, meekness and modesty that becomes his house. We should
endeavor more and more to be perfect, as he is; in all our dealing with men,
doing good, showing mercy and compassion, advancing justice and righteousness,
being always full of charity and good works; and look upon our selves as
having nothing to do here but to display and blazon the glory of our heavenly
Father, and frame our hearts and lives according to that Pattern which we
behold in the Mount of a holy Contemplation of him. Thus we should endeavor to
preserve that Heavenly fire of the Divine Love and Goodness (which issuing
forth from God centres it self within us, and is the Protoplastick virtue of
our Beings) always alive and burning in the Temple of our Souls, and to
sacrifice our selves back again to him. And when we fulfill this Royal Law
arising out of the heart of Eternity, then shall we here appear to be the
Children of God, when he thus lives in us, as our Savior speaks Matthew. 5. And
so we shall close up this Particular with that High privilege which Immortal
Souls are invested with: they are all the Offspring of God, for so S. Paul
allows the Heathen Poet to call them: they are all royally descended, and have
no Father but God himself, being originally formed into his image and likeness;
and when they express the purity and holiness of the Divine Life in being
perfect as God is perfect, then they manifest themselves to be his Children,
Matthew. 5. And in Matthew. 7. Christ encourages men to seek and pray for the
Spirit, (which is the best gift that God can give to men) because he is their
Heavenly Father, much more bountiful and tender to all helpless Souls that
seek to him, then any earthly parent, whose Nature is degenerated from that
primitive goodness, can be to his children. But those Apostate Spirits that
know not to return to the Original of their Beings, but implant themselves
into some other stock, and seek to incorporate and unite themselves to another
line by sin and wickedness, cut themselves off from this divine privilege, and
lose their own birthright; they do (...) (if I may borrow that phrase) and
lapse into another nature. All this was well expressed by Proclus, (...) Lib.
4. in Tinaeum.
(...), All Souls are the Children of God, but all of them know not their God;
but such as know him and live like to him, are called the Children of God.

CHAP. IX.
An APPENDIX concerning the Reason of Positive Laws.

BUT here, as an Appendix to the two former Deductions, it may be of good use
to enquire into the Reason of such Laws as we call Positive, which God has in
all times, as is commonly supposed, enjoined obedience to; which are not the
Eternal dictates and Decretals of the Divine Nature communicating it self to
Immortal Spirits, but rather deduce their Original from the free will and
pleasure of God.

To solve this Difficulty, that of S. Paul may seem a fit Medium, who tells us,
Gal. 3.
The Law was added because of transgression; though I doubt not but he means
thereby the Moral Law as well as any other. The true intent and scope of these
Positive laws, (and it may be of such an external promulgation of the Moral)
seems to be nothing else but this, to secure the Eternal Law of Righteousness
from transgression. As the Jews say of their decreta sapientum, that they were
(...), an hedge to the Law; so we may say of these Divine Decretals, they were
but cautionary and preventive of disobedience to that Higher Law: and therefore
Saint Paul tells us why the Moral Law was made such a Political business by an
external promulgation, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 9. not so much because of righteous men,
in whom the Law of Nature lives, who perform the (...) without any outward Law,
but it was given for the lawless and disobedient, etc. And therefore I doubt
not but we may safely conclude, that God gave not those Positive Laws merely
pro imperio, if I may use that expression; it was not merely to manifest his
Absolute Dominion and Sovereignty, as some think, but for the good of those
that were enjoined to obey; and this belief Moses endeavors almost throughout
the whole Book of Deuteronomy to strengthen the Israelites in: and therefore
God was so ready upon all occasions to dispense with these Laws, and requires
the Jews to omit the observance of them, when they might seem to justle with
any other Law of Moral duty or Humane necessity, as may be observed in many
Instances in Scripture.

But for a more distinct unfolding of this point, we may take notice of this
difference in the notion of Good and Evil, as we are to converse with them.
Some things are so absolutely, and somethings are so only relatively. That
which is absolutely good, is every way Superior to us, and we ought always to
be commanded by it, because we are made under it: But that which is relatively
good to us, may sometime be commanded by us. Eternal Truth and Righteousness
are in themselves perfectly and absolutely good, and the more we conform our
selves to them, the better we are. But those things that are only good
relatively and in order to us, we may say of them, that they are so much the
better, by how much the more they are conformed to us, I mean, by how much the
more they are accommodated and fitted to our estate and condition, and may be
fit means to help and promote us in our pursuit of some Higher good: and such
indeed is the matter of all Positive Laws, and the Symbolicall or Rituall part
of Religion. And as we are made for the former, viz. what is absolutely good,
to serve that; so are these latter made for us, as our Savior has taught us
when he tells us that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath: and as sincere and real Christians grow up toward true perfection,
the less need have they of Positive precepts or External helps. Yet I doubt
it is nothing else but a wanton fastus and proud temper of spirit in our times
that makes so many talk of being above Ordinances, who, if their own arrogance
and presumption would give them leave to lay aside the flattering glass of
their own Self-love, would find themselves to have most need of them.

What I have observed concerning the Things absolutely good, I conceive to be
included in that (...) mentioned Dan. 9. everlasting righteousness, which the
Prophet there says should be brought in and advanced by Messiah: this (...) is
the Righteousness which is of an eternal and immutable nature, as being a
conformity with Eternal and Unchangeable Truth: For there is a Righteousness
which thus is not Eternal, but Positive and at the pleasure of God that
dictates it: and such was the Righteousness which Christ said it became him to
fulfill when he was baptized; there Matthew. 3.
was no necessity that any such thing should become due. But the Foundation of
this Everlasting righteousness is something unalterable. To speak more
particularly, That the Highest good should be loved in the Highest degree; That
dependant creatures, that borrow all they have from God, should never glory in
themselves, or admire themselves, but ever admire and adore that unbounded
Goodness which is the Source of their Beings and all the Good they partake of;
That we should always do that which is just and right, according to the
measure we would others should do with us: these, and some other things which
a rectified Reason will easily supply, are immutably true and righteous; so
that it never was nor can be true, that they are unnecessary. And whosoever has
his Heart molded into a delight in such a Righteousness and the practice
thereof, has this Eternal righteousness brought into his Soul, which
Righteousness is also true and real, not like that imaginary External
righteousness of the Law which the Pharisees boasted in.

CHAP. X.
The Conclusion of this Treatise concerning the Existence and Nature of God,
showing how our Knowledge of God comes to be so imperfect in this State, while
we are here in this Terrestrial Body. Two ways observed by Plotinus, whereby
This Body does prejudice the Soul in her Operations. That the Better
Philosophers and more Contemplative Jews did not deny the Existence of all
kind of Body in the other state. What meant by Zoroaster's (...). What kind of
knowledge of God cannot be attained to in this life. What meant by Flesh and
Blood, 1 Cor. 15.

FOR the concluding of this Discourse, as a Mantissa to what has been said, we
shall a little consider how inconsistent a thing a Perfect knowledge of God is
with this Mundane and Corporeal state which we are in here. While we are in
the Body, we are absent from the Lord, as S. Paul speaks, and that (I think)
without a mystery: Such Bodies as ours are being fitted for an Animal state,
and pieces of this whole Machina of Sensible Matter, are perpetually drawing
down our Souls, when they would raise up themselves by Contemplatior of the
Deity; and the caring more or less for the things of this Body, so exercises
the Soul in this state, that it cannot attend upon God (...) without
distraction. In the ancient Metaphysics such a Body as this is we carry about
us, is called (...), etc. the dark Den and Sepulcher in which Souls are
imprisoned and entombed, with many other expressions of the like importance;
and Proclus tells us that the Commoration of the Soul in such a Body as this,
is, according to the common vote of Antiquity, nothing else but (...), a
dwelling or pitching its Tabernacle in the Valley of Oblivion and Death. But
Enn. 4. l. 8.
Plotinus, in his (...), seems not to be easily satisfied with Allegorical
descriptions, and therefore searching more strictly into this business, tells
his own and their meaning in plainer terms, that This Body is an occasion of
Evil to the Soul two ways; 1. (...), as it hinders its Mental operations,
presenting its Idola specus continually to it: 2. (...), as it calls forth its
advertency to its own Passions, which while it exercises it self about too
earnestly, it falls into a sinful inordinacy.

Yet did not the Platonists nor the more Contemplative Jews deny the Existence
of all kind of Body in the other State, as if there should be nothing residing
there but naked Souls totally divested of all Corporeal Essence; for they held
that the Soul should in the other World be united with a Body, not such a one
as it did act in here, (which was not without disturbance) but such as should
be most agreeable to the Soul, which they called (...) the Spiritual Vehicle
of the Soul, and by Zoroaster it was called (...), a kind of Umbra or Aereal
Mantle in which the Soul wraps her self, which, he said, remained with her in
the state of glory, (...) and in the Jewish language it is (...) indumentum
quoddam interius, as Gaulmin has observed in his De vita and morte Mosis.

But to return; the Platonists have pointed out a threefold knowledge of God,
1. one (...), 2. the second (...), 3. the last (...) and this last they
affirmed to be unattainable by us, it being that ineffable Light whereby the
Divinity comprehends its own Essence penetrating all that Immensity of Being
which it self is. The First may be attained to in this life; but the Second in
its full perfection we cannot reach here in this life, because this knowledge
arises out of a blissfull Union with God himself, which therefore they are
wont to call (...) a Contact of Intellectual Being, and sometimes (...) or
(...), that is, that I may phrase it in the Scripture words, a beholding of God
face to face, which is that (...) Arcanum facierum the Jewish writers speak of,
which we cannot attain to while we continue in this concrete and bodily state.
And so when Moses desired to behold the face of God, that is, as the Maimon. de
fundam. legis, cap. 1.
Jews understand it, that a distinct Idea of the Divine Essence might be
imprinted upon his Mind, God told him, Exodus 33. 20.
No man can see me, and live; that is, no man in this corruptible state is
capable of attaining to this (...) or visio facierum, as Maimonides expounds
it, (...), The Understanding of the living man, who is compounded of Body and
Soul, is utterly unable clearly to apprehend the Divine Essence, to see it as
it is. And so S. Paul distinguishes the knowledge of this life as taken in
this complex sense, and of the life to come: that now we see (...) in a glass,
which is continually sullied and darkened, while we look into it, by the
breathing of our Animal fancies, passions and imaginations upon it; and (...)
darkly: but we shall see then (...) face to face; which is the translation of
that Hebrew phrase (...). And in the like manner does a Greek Philosopher
compare these two sorts of Knowledge which the Soul has of God in this life
and in that to come, (...), The Soul will reckon all this knowledge of God
which we have here by way of Science but like a fable or parable, when once it
is in conjunction with the Father, feasting upon Truth it self, and beholding
God in the pure rays of his own Divinity. I shall conclude all with that which
S. Paul expressly tells us, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God; where, by Flesh and Blood he seems to mean nothing else but
Man in this complex and compounded state of Soul and Body, I mean corruptible,
earthy Body: and it was a common Periphrasis of this (...) amongst the Jews,
(...): in the like sense is (...), Flesh and Blood, in those and other places
in the New Testament used, where this phrase occurs, viz. Matthew. 16. 17. Gal.
1. 16. Ephesians. 6. 12. Heb. 2. 14. But in opposition to this gross earthy Body,
the Apostle speaks of (...), a Spiritual Body, v. 44. such as shall put on
incorruption and immortality, v. 53. and consequently differing from that Body
which here makes up this compounded animal Being: and accordingly our Savior
speaks of the children of the Resurrection, that they Luke 20.
neither marry nor are given in marriage, nor can they die any more, but are
(...), or, as it is in S. Matthew and Mark, (...), as the Angels of God; and so
the Jewish writers are wont to use the same phrase to express the state of
Glory by, viz. that then good men shall be (...) sicut Angeli ministerii.

OF PROPHECY: OR, A DISCOURSE Treating of

The Nature of Prophecy. The Different degrees of the Prophetical Spirit. The
Difference of Prophetical Dreams from all other Dreams recorded in Scripture.
The Difference of the True Prophetical Spirit from Enthusiasticall Imposture.
What the meaning of those Actions is that are frequently in Scripture
attributed to the Prophets, whether they were Real or only Imaginary. The
Schools of the Prophets. The Sons, or Disciples of the Prophets. The
Dispositions antecedent and preparatory to Prophecy. The Periods of Time when
the Prophetical Spirit ceased in the Jewish and Christian Churches. Rules for
the better understanding of Prophetical Writ.
2 Pet. 1. 21. For Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy
men of God spoke being moved by the Holy Ghost.

Philo Jud. (...). (...).

OF PROPHECY.
CHAP. I.
That Prophecy is the way whereby Revealed Truth is dispensed and conveyed
to us. Man's Mind capable of conversing and being acquainted as well with
Revealed or Positive Truth, as with Natural Truth. Truths of Natural
inscription may be excited in us and cleared to us by means of Prophetical
Influence. That the Scripture frequently accommodates it self to vulgar
apprehension, and speaks of things in the greatest way of condescension.

HAving spoken to those Principles of Natural Theology which have the most
proper and necessary influence into Life and Practice, and are most pregnant
with moral goodness; we come now to consider Those pieces of Revealed Truth
which tend most of all to foment and cherish true and real Piety.

But before we fall pressly into any strict Enquiry concerning them, it may not
be amiss to examine How and in what manner This kind of Truth, which depends
solely upon the Free will of God, is manifested unto mankind; and so treat a
little concerning Prophecy, which indeed is the only way whereby This kind of
Truth can be dispensed to us. For though our own Reason and Understanding carry
all Natural Truth necessary for Practice in any sort, engraven upon themselves,
and folded up in their own Essences more immediately, as being the first
participations of the Divine Mind considered in its own Eternal nature: yet
Positive Truth can only be made known to us by a free influx of the Divine Mind
upon our Minds and Understandings. And as it arises out of nothing else but
the free pleasure of the Divinity, so without any natural determination it
freely shines upon the Souls of men where and when it lifts, hiding its light
from them or displaying it forth upon them, as it pleases.

Yet the souls of men are as capable of conversing with it, though it do not
naturally arise out of the fecundity of their own Understandings, as they are
with any Sensible and External Objects. And as our Sensations carry the notions
of Material things to our Understandings which before were unacquainted with
them; so there is some Analogical way whereby the knowledge of Divine Truth may
also be revealed to us. For so we may call as well that Historical Truth of
Corporeal and Material things, which we are informed of by our Senses, Truth of
Revelation, as that Divine Truth which we now speak of: and therefore we may
have as certain and infallible a way of being acquainted with the one, as with
the other. And God having so contrived the nature of our Souls, that we may
converse one with another, and inform one another of things we knew not before,
would not make us so deaf to his Divine voice that breaks the rocks, and rends
the mountains asunder; He would not make us so undisciplinable in Divine
things, as that we should not be capable of receiving any Impressions from
himself of those things which we were before unacquainted with. And this way of
communicating Truth to the Souls of men is originally nothing else but
Prophetical or Enthusiastical; and so we may take notice of the General nature
of Prophecy.

Though I would not all this while be mistaken, as if I thought no Natural
Truth might be by the means of Prophetical influence awakened within us, and
cleared up to us, or that we could not lumine prophetico behold the Truths of
Natural inscription; for indeed one main end and scope of the Prophetical
Spirit seems to be the quickening up of our Minds to a more lively converse with
those Eternal Truths of Reason, which commonly lie buried in so much fleshly
obscurity within us, that we discern them not. And therefore the Scripture
treats not only of those Pieces of Truth which are the Results of God's free
Counsels, but also of those which are most akin and allied to our own
Understandings, and that in the greatest way of Condescension that may be,
speaking to the weakest sort of men in the most vulgar sort of dialect: which
it may not be amiss to take a little notice of.

Divine Truth has its Humiliation and Exinanition, as well as its Exaltation.
Divine Truth becomes many times in Scripture incarnate, debasing it self to
assume our rude conceptions, that so it might converse more freely with us, and
infuse its own Divinity into us. God having been pleased herein to manifest
himself not more jealous of his own Glory, then he is (as I may say) zealous of
our good. Nos non habemus aures, sicut Deus habet linguam. If he should speak
in the language of Eternity, who could understand him, or interpret his
meaning? or if he should have declared his Truth to us only in a way of the
purest abstraction that Humane Souls are capable of, how should then the more
rude and illiterate sort of men have been able to apprehend it? Truth is
content, when it comes into the world, to wear our mantles, to learn our
language, to conform it self as it were to our dress and fashions: it affects
not that State or Fastus which the disdainful Rhetorician sets out his style
withal, Non Tarentinis aut Siculis haec scribimus; but it speaks with the most
Idiotical sort of men in the most Idiotical way, and becomes all things to all
men, as every son of Truth should do, for their good. Which was well
observed in that old Cabbalistical Axiom among the Jews, Lumen supernum
nunquam descendit sine indumento. And therefore (it may be) the best way to
understand the true sense and meaning of the Scripture is not rigidly to
examine it upon Philosophical Interrogatories, or to bring it under the
scrutiny of School-Definitions and Distinctions. It speaks not to us so much in
the tongue of the learned Sophies of the world, as in the plainest and most
vulgar dialect that may be. Which the Jews constantly observed and took notice
of, and therefore it was one common Rule among them for a true understanding of
the Scripture, (...), Lex loquitur lingua filorum hominum. Which Maimonides
expounds thus, in More Nevoch. Par. 1. C. 26. Quicquid homines ab initio
cogitationis suae intelligentia and imaginatione sua possunt assequi, id in
Scriptura attribuitur Creatori. And therefore we find almost all Corporeal
properties attributed to God in Scripture, quia vulgus hominum ab initio
cogitationis Entitatem non apprehendunt, nisi in rebus corporeis, as the same
Author observes. But such of them as sound Imperfection in vulgar ears, as
Eating and Drinking, and the like, these (says he) the Scripture no where
attributes to him. The reason of this plain and Idiotical style of Scripture it
may be worth our farther taking notice of, as it is laid down by the forenamed
Author C. 33. Haec causa est propter quam Lex loquitur lingua filiorum hominum,
etc. For this reason the Law speaks according to the language of the sons of
men, because it is the most commodious and easy way of initiating and teaching
Children, Women, and the Common people, who have not ability to apprehend
things according to the very nature and essence of them. And in C. 34. Et si
per Exempla and Similitudines non deduceremur, etc. And if we were not led to
the knowledge of things by Examples and Similitudes, but were put to learn and
understand all things in their Formal notions and Essential definitions, and
were to believe nothing but upon preceding Demonstrations; then we may well
think that (seeing this cannot be done but after long preparations) the greater
part of men would be at the conclusion of their days, before they could know
whether there be a God or no, etc. Hence is that Axiom so frequent among the
Jewish Doctors, Magna est virtus vel fortitudo Prophetarum, qui assimilant
formam cum formante eam, i. e. Great is the power of the Prophets, who while
they looked down upon these Sensible and Conspicable things, were able to
furnish out the notion of Intelligible and Inconspicable Beings thereby to the
rude Senses of Illiterate people.

The Scripture was not writ only for Sagacious and Abstracted minds, or
Philosophical heads; for then how few are there that should have been taught
the true Knowledge of God thereby? Vidi filios coenaculi, and erant pauci, was
an ancient Jewish proverb. We are not always rigidly to adhere to the very
Letter of the Text. There is a (...) and a (...) in the Scripture, as the
Jewish interpreters observe. We must not think that it always gives us Formal
Definitions of things, for it speaks commonly according to Vulgar apprehension:
as when it tells of the Ends of the heaven, which now almost every Idiot knows
has no ends at all. So Psalm. 19. Mat. 24.
when it tells us Genesis 2. 7. that God breathed into man the breath of life, and
man became a living soul; the expression is very Idiotical as may be, and seems
to comply with that vulgar conceit, that the Soul of Man is nothing else but a
kind of Vital breath or Air: and yet the Immortality thereof is evidently
insinuated in setting forth a double Original of the two parts of Man, his Body
and his Soul; the one of which is brought in as arising up out of the Dust of
the earth, the other as proceeding from the Breath of God himself.

So we find very Vulgar expressions concerning God himself, besides those which
attribute Sensation and Motion to him, as when he is set forth as riding upon
the wings of the Wind, riding upon the Clouds, sitting in Heaven, and the like,
which seem to determine his indifferent Omnipresence to some peculiar place:
whereas indeed such passages as these are can be fetched from nothing else but
those crass apprehensions which the generality of men have of God, as being
most there, from whence the objects of dread and admiration most of all smite
and insinuate themselves into their Senses, as they do from the Air, Clouds,
Winds or Heaven. So the state of Hell and Misery is set forth by such
denominations as were most apt to strike a terror into the minds of men, and
accordingly it is called Coetus Gigantum, the place where all those old Giants,
whom divine vengeance pursued in the general Deluge, were assembled together,
as it is well observed by a late Author of our own upon Proverbs 21. 16. The
Mr. Mede in Diatrib. first part.
man that wandreth out of the way of understanding, in coetu Gigantum
commorabitur. And accordingly we find the state and condition of these
expressed Job 26. 5. Gigantes gemunt sub aquis; and qui habitant cum iis. Nudus
est infernus coram illo, and nullum est operimentum perditioni, as the Vulgar
Latin renders it, The Giants groan under the waters, and they that dwell with
them. Hell is naked before him, (that is, God,) and destruction has no
covering. In like manner our Savior sets forth Hell as a great valley of fire
like that of Hinnom, which was prepared with a great deal of skill, to torture
and torment the Devils in. Again we find Heaven set forth sometimes as a place
of continual banqueting, where, according to the Jewish customs, they should
lie down in one another bosoms at a perpetual Feast: Sometimes as a Paradise
furnished with all kinds of delight and pleasure. Again, when the Scripture
would infinuate God's seriousness and realitie in any thing, it brings him in
as ordering it a great while ago before the foundation of the world was laid,
as if he more regarded that then the building of the world.

I might instance in many more things of this nature, wherein the Philosophical
or Physical nature and Literal verity of things cannot so reasonably be
supposed to be set forth to us, as the Moral and Theological. But I shall leave
this Argument, and now come more precisely to consider of the nature of
Prophecy, by which God flows in upon the Minds of men extrinfecally to their
own proper operations, and converghs truth immediately from himself into them.

CHAP. II.
That the Prophetical Spirit did not always manifest it self with the same
clearness and evidence. The Gradual difference of Divine illumination between
Moses, the Prophets, and the Hagiographi. A general survey of the Nature of
Prophecy properly so called. Of the joint impressions and operations of the
Understanding and Fancy in Prophecy. Of the four degrees of Prophecy. The
difference between a Vision and a Dream.

BUT before we do this, we shall briefly premise something in general
concerning that Gradual variety whereby these Divine Enthusiasms were
discovered to the Prophets of old. The Prophetical Spirit did not always
manifest it self eodem vigore luminis, with the same clearness and evidence, in
the same exaltation of its light: But sometimes that light was more strong and
vivid, sometimes more wan and obscure; which seems to be insinuated in that
passage, Heb. 1. 1. God who in time past spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets
(...). So we find an evident difference of Prophetical illumination asserted in
Scripture between Moses and the rest of the Prophets, Deuteronomy. 34. 10. And there
arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to
face: which words have a manifest reference to that which God himself in a more
public and open way declared concerning Moses, upon occasion of some arrogant
speeches of Aaron and Miriam, who would equalize their own Degree of Prophecy
to that of Moses, Numb. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8. And the Lord came down in the pillar of
the cloud, and stood in the door of the Tabernacle, and called Aaron and
Miriam; and they both came forth: And he said, Hear my words; If there be a
Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and
will speak unto him in a Dream: My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in
all mine house; with him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not
in dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold. Wherefore
then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? In which words that
degree of Divine illumination whereby God made himself known to Moses seems to
be set forth as something transcendent to the Prophetical illumination: and so
the phrase of the New Testament is wont to distinguish between Moses and the
Prophets, as if indeed Moses had been greater then any Prophet. But besides
this Gradual difference between Moses and the Prophets, there is another
difference very famous amongst the Jewish Writers between the Prophets and the
Hagiographi, which Hagiographi were supposed by them to be much inferior to the
Prophets. But what this difference between them was, we shall endeavor to show
more fully hereafter.

Having briefly premised this, and glanced at a Threefold Inspiration relating
to Moses, the Prophets, and the Hagiographi; we shall first of all enquire into
the Nature of that which is peculiarly amongst the Jews called Prophetical. And
this is thus defined to us by Maimonides in Par. 2. c. 36. of his More
Nevochim, Veritas and quidditas Prophetiae nihil aliud est quam Influentia a
Deo Optimo Maximo, mediante intellectu Agente, super facultatem Rationalem
primo, deinde super facultatem Imaginatricem influens. i. e. The true essence
of Prophecy is nothing else but an Influence from the Deity upon the Rational
first, and afterward the Imaginative Faculty, by the mediation of the Active
intellect. Which Definition belongs indeed to Prophecy as it is Technicallie
so called, and distinguished by Maimonides both from that degree of Divine
illumination which was above it, which the Masters constantly attribute to
Moses, and from that other degree inferior to it, which they call (...),
Spiritus Sanctus, that Holy Spirit that moved in the Souls of the Hagiographi.

But Rabbi Joseph Albo in Maam 3. c. 8. De fundamentis fidei, has given us a
more large description, so as to take in also the gradus Mosaicus, (...), i. e.
Prophecy is an influence from God upon the Rational faculty, either by the
Mediation of the Fancy or otherwise: and this influence, whether by the
ministry of an Angel or otherwise, makes a man to know such things as by his
Natural abilities he could not attain to the knowledge of. Though here our
Author seems too much to have straightened the latitude of Prophetical
influence, whereby (as we intimated before) not only those pieces of Divine
truth may be communicated to the Souls of men which are not contained within
their own Ideas, but also those may be excited which have a necessary
connection with and dependence upon Reason.

But the main thing that we shall observe in this description is, that Faculty
or Power of the Soul upon which these Extraordinary impressions of Divine
light or influence are made; which in all proper Prophecy is both the Rational
and Imaginative power. For in this Case they supposed the Imaginative power to
be set forth as a Stage upon which certain Visa and Simulacra were represented
to their Understandings, just indeed as they are to us in our common Dreams;
only that the Understandings of the Prophets were always kept awake and
strongly acted by God in the midst of these apparitions, to see the
intelligible Mysteries in them, and so in these Types and Shadows, which were
Symbols of some spiritual things, to behold the Antitypes themselves: which is
the meaning of that old Maxim of the Jews which we formerly cited out of
Maimonides, Magna est virtus seu fortitudo Prophetarum qui assimilant formam
cum formante eam. But in case the Imaginative faculty be not thus set forth as
the Scene of all Prophetical illumination, but that the Impressions of things
nakedly without any Schemes or Pictures be made immediately upon the
Understanding it self, then is it reckoned to be the gradus Mosaicus, wherein
God speaks as it were face to face; of which more hereafter.

Accordingly R. Albo, in the Book before cited and 10th Chapter, has
distinguished Prophecy into these four degrees. The first and lowest of all
is, when the Imaginative power is most predominant, so that the impressions
made upon it are too busy, and the Scene becomes too turbulent for the
Rational faculty to discern the true Mystical and Anagogical sense of them
clearly; and in this case the Enthusiasms spend themselves extremely in
Parables, Similitudes and Allegories, in a dark and obscure manner, as is very
manifest in Zachary, and many of Ezechiel his Prophesies, as also those of
Daniel: where though we have first the outward frame of things Dramatically set
forth so potently in the Prophet's fancy, as that his Mind was not at the
same time capable of the mystical meaning, yet that was afterward made known to
him, but yet with much obscurity still attending it.

This declining state of Prophecy the Jews supposed then principally to have
been, and this Divine illumination to have been then setting in the Horizon of
the Jewish Church, when they were carried captive into Babylon. All which we
may take a little more fully from our Author himself in his 3. Book and 17.
Chapter, (...), i. e. Every Prophet that is of a strong, fagacious and piercing
Understanding, will apprehend the thing nakedly without any Similitude, whence
it comes to pass that all his sayings prove distinct and clear, and free from
all obscurity, having a literal truth in them: But a Prophet of an inferior
rank or degree, his words are obscure, enwrapp'd in Riddles and Parables, and
therefore have not a Literal but Allegorical truth contained in them. Thus he.
And so afterward, according to the general opinion of the Jewish Masters, he
tells us that after the Captivity, in the twilight of Prophecy, Ezekiel began
to speak altogether in Riddles and Parables; and so he himself complains to
God, Chap. 20. 49.
Ah Lord God, they say of me, Does he not speak Parables?

The second degree which our forementioned Author makes of Prophecy is, when
the strength of the Imaginative and Rational powers equally balance one
another.

The third is, when the Rational power is most predominant; in which case (as
we heard before) the Mind of the Prophet is able to strip those things that
are represented to it in the glass of Fancy of all their materiality and
sensible nature, and apprehend them more distinctly in their own naked Essence.

The last and Highest is the gradus Mosaicus, in which all Imagination cease,
and the Representation of Truth descends not so low as the Imaginative part,
but is made in the highest stage of Reason and Understanding.

But we shall hereafter speak more fully concerning the several degrees of
Prophetical Inspiration, and discourse more particularly of the Ruach
hakkodesh, the highest degree of Prophecy or gradus Mosaicus, and Bath col or
the lowest degree of Prophecy.

Seeing then that generally all Prophecy or Prophetical Enthusiasm lies in the
joint-impressions and operations of both these forementioned faculties, the
Jews were wont to understand that place Numb. 12. 6, etc. as generally
decyphering that State or Degree of Prophecy by which God would discover
himself to all those Prophets that ever should arise up amongst them, or ever
had been, except Moses and the Messiah. And there are only these In is it is
duabus partibus, Somnio and Visione, continentur omnes Prophetiae gradus.
Maimon. in More Nev. p. 2. c. 36.
Two ways declared whereby God would reveal himself to every other Prophet,
either in a Vision or a Dream; both which are perpetually attended with those
Visa and Simulacra sensibilia as must needs be impressed upon Common sense or
Fancy, whereby the Prophets seemed to have all their Senses waking and
exercising their several functions, though indeed all was but Scenicall or
Dramatical. According to this Twofold way of Divine inspiration, the Chap. 2.
28.
Prophet Joel foretells the Nature of that Prophetical Spirit that should be
powered out in the latter times; and in Jeremy 14. 14. we have the false
prophets brought in as endeavoring apishly to imitate the true Prophets of
God, in fortifying their Fancies by the power of Divination, that they might
talk of Dreams and Visions when they came among the people.

Now for the Difference of these two, a Dream and a Vision, it seems rather to
lie in Circumstantials then in any thing Essential; and therefore Maim. part.
2. More Nev. cap. 45. tells us that in a Dream a voice was frequently heard,
which was not usual in a Vision. But the representation of Divine things by
some Sensible images or some Narrative voice must needs be in both of them. But
yet the Jews are wont to make a Vision superior to a Dream, as representing
things more to the life, which indeed seizes upon the Prophet while he is
awake, but it no sooner surpriseth him but that all his external senses are
bound; and so it often declines into a true Dream, as Maimon. in the place
forenam'd proves by the example of Abraham, Genesis 15. 12. where the Vision in
which God had appeared to him (as it is related ver. 1.) passed into a Sleep.
And when the Sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abraham, and lo an
horror of great darkness fell upon him. Which words seem to be nothing else but
a description of that passage which he had by Sleep out of his Vision into a
Dream.

Now these Ecstatical impressions whereby the Imagination and Mind of the
Prophet was thus ravished from it self, and was made subject wholly to some
Agent intellect informing it and shining upon it, I suppose S. Paul had respect
to 1 Cor. 13. Now we see (...), by a glass, in riddles or parables; for so he
seems to compare the Highest illuminations which we have here, with that
constant Irradiation of the Divinity upon the Souls of men in the life to come:
and this glassing of Divine things by Hieroglyphics and Emblems in the Fancy
which he speaks of, was the proper way of Prophetical inspiration.

For the further clearing of which I shall take notice of one passage more out
of a Jewish writer, that is, R. Bechai, concerning this present argument, which
I find Com. in Number. 12. 6. (...), Voluit Deus assimilare Prophetiam reliquorum
Prophetarum homini speculum inspicienti, prout innuunt Rabbini nostri illo
axiomate proverbiali, Nemo inspiciat speculum Sabbato: illud speculum est
vitreum, in quo reflectitur homini sua ipsius forma and imago per vim
reflexivam speculi, cum revera nihil ejusmodi in speculo realiter existat.
Talis erat Prophetia reliquorum Prophetarum, eo quod contuebantur sacras and
puras imagines and lumina superna, ex medio splendoris and puritatis istorum
luminum realium, visae sunt illis similitudines, visae sunt illis tales formae
quales sunt formae humanae. By which he seems to refer to those images of the
living Creatures represented in a Prophetical vision to Esaias and EZekiel; but
generally intimates thus much to us, That the light and splendour of Prophetical
illumination was not so triumphant over the Prophets fancy, but that he viewed
his own Image, and saw like a man, and understood things after the manner of
men in all these Prophetical visions.

CHAP. III.
How the Prophetical Dreams did differ from all other kinds of Dreams recorded
in Scripture. This further illustrated out of several passages of Philo Judaeus
pertinent to this purpose.

WE have now taken a General survey of the Nature of Prophecy, which is
always attended (as we have showed) with a Vision or a Dream, though indeed
there is no Dream properly without a Vision. And here before we pass from
hence, it will be necessary to take notice of a man Distinction the Hebrew
Doctors are wont to make of Dreams, lest we mistake all those Dreams which we
meet with in Scripture, and take them all for Prophetical, whereas many of them
were not such. For though indeed they were all (...) sent by God, yet many were
sent as Monitions and Instructions, and had not the true force and vigor of
Prophetical Dreams in them; and so they are wont commonly to distinguish
between (...) and (...). There are somnia vera* and somnia Prophetica: and
these Maimonides in More Nev* Par. 2. Cap. 41. has thus generally
characterized, Quando dicitur, Deus venit ad N, in somnio noctis, id Prophetia
minime nuncupari potest, neque vir talis, Propheta, etc. When it is said in
Holy writ, That God came to such a man in a Dream of the night, that cannot be
called a Prophecy, nor such a man a Prophet; for the meaning is no more then
this, That some Admonition or Instruction was given by God to such a man, and
that it was in a Dream. Of this sort He and the rest of the Hebrew Writers hold
those Dreams to be which were sent to Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Abimelech and
Laban; upon which two last our Author observes the great Caution of Onkelos the
Proselyte (who was instructed in the Jewish learning by R. Eleazar and R.
Joshua, the most famous Doctors of that age) that in his Preface to those
Dreams of Laban and Abimelech he says, Et venit verbum a Domino: but does not
say (as when the Dreams were Prophetical) Et revelavit se Dominus. Besides, a
main reason for which they deny those Dreams to be Prophetical is, for that
they that were made partakers of them were unsanctified men; whereas it is a
tradition amongst them, that the Spirit of Prophecy was not communicated to
any but good men.

But indeed the main difference between these two sorts of Dreams seems to
consist in this, That such as were not Prophetical were much weaker in their
Energy upon the Imagination then the Other were, in so much that they wanted
the strength and force of a Divine evidence, so as to give a plenary assurance
to the Mind of him who was the subject of them, of their Divine original; as we
see in those Dreams of Solomon, 1 Kings 3. v. 5; 15. and chapter 9. 2. where it is
said of him, when he awaked he said, Behold it was a Dream; as if he had not
been effectually confirmed from the Energy of the Dream it self that it was a
true Prophetical influx.

But there is yet another difference they are wont to make between them, which
is, That these somnia vera or (...) ordinarily contained in them (...),
something that was (...) or void of reality: as in that Dream of Joseph
concerning the Sun, the Moon, and the eleven Stars bowing down to him; whereas
his Mother, which should there have been signified by the Moon, was dead and
buried before, and so incapable of performing that respect to him which the
other at last did. Upon occasion of which Dream the Gemarist. Doctors in
Berachoth c. 9. have framed this Axiom, (...), As there is no corn without
straw, so neither is there any mere Dream without something that is (...), void
of reality, and insignificant. Accordingly Rab. Albo in Maam. 3. c. 9. has
framed this distinction between them, (...), There is no mere Dream without
something in it that is (...), but Prophecy is a thing wholly and most exactly
true.

The general difference between Prophetical Dreams and those that are merely
Nouthetical or Monitorie, and all else which we find recorded in Scripture,
Philo Jud. in his Tract (...), and elsewhere, has at large laid down. The
proper character of those that were Prophetical he clearly insinuates to be
that Ecstatical rapture whereby in all Prophetical Dreams some more potent
cause, acting upon the Mind and Imagination of the Prophets, snatched them from
themselves, and so left more potent and evident impressions upon them.

I shall the more largely set down his Notion, because it tends to the clearing
of this business in hand, and is, I think, much obscured, if not totally
corrupted by his translator Gelenius. His design is indeed to show that Moses
taught these several ways whereby Dreams are conveyed from Heaven, that so his
sublime and recondite doctrine might be the better hid up therein; and
therefore sailing between Cabbalisme and Platonisme he gropes after an
Allegorical and Mystical meaning in them all. His first sort of Divine Dreams
he thus defines, (...), The first kind was when God himself did begin the
motion in the Fancy, and secretly whispered such things as are unknown indeed
to us, but perfectly known to himself. And of this sort he makes Joseph's
dreams, the sense whereof was unknown to Joseph himself at first, and then runs
out into an Allegorical exposition of them in the Book entitled Joseph.

The second kind is this, (...) (...).
(...), etc. When our Rational faculty being moved together with the Soul of
the World, and filled with a divinely-inspired fury, does predict those things
that are to come. In which words by his (...) he means the same thing with that
which in a former Book about the same Argument he had called (...) the Mind of
the Universe, which mingling its influence with our Minds begets these (...) or
previsions. And this is nothing else but that which others of his tribe call
(...) or Intellectus agens, which it seems he understood to be the same with
Anima Mundi or Universal Soul, as it is described by the Pythagoreans and
Platonists. Of this sort of Dreams he makes those of Jacob's Ladder and of
Laban's Sheep. And these kinds of Dreams, viz. that wherein the Intellectus
agens does simply act upon our Minds as patients to it, and that wherein our
Minds do cooperate with the Universal Soul, and so understand the meaning of
the influx, he thus compares together; (...), etc. In which words it is to be
observed that he calls the matter of the first sort of Dreams (...), which
Gelenius has mistook whilst he translates it Dei oraculis certis convenientia.
With his leave therefore I should thus interpret that whole passage, Quare
Moses sacer Antistes indigitans illas phantasias quae oboriuntur secundum
primam speciem, eas perspicue and admodum manifest indicavit; (i. e. by adding
an Explication of those aenigmata of Joseph's Sun, Moon, Stars and Sheaves,
which he himself in his Dream understood not; which Explication is not made in
the examples of the second sort) quippe Deus subjecit illas phantasias per
somnia quae similes sunt veris Prophetiis, (i. e. (...), perfectae Prophetiae,
sive (...), somniis Propheticis, uti loqui amant Magistri.) Secundi vero
generis somnia nec plane dilucide nec valde obscure indigitavit; qualia erant
Somnia de Scala coelesti, etc. Now these Dreams of Joseph though they contained
matter of a like nature to Prophetical inspiration, yet were they indeed not
such, and therefore are accounted of by all the Jewish writers only as Somnia
vera; and so our Author endeavors to prove very fitly to our purpose, though
indeed upon a mistake which he took out of the Version of the Though he was a
Jew, yet was he trained up amongst the Greeks, and not well acquainted with the
Hebrew language.
Seventy, Genesis 37. 7. (...), etc. Joseph said, [ Which word is not in the
Hebrew.
Me-thought we were binding sheaves] That word [Me-thought] is the language of
one that is uncertain, dubious, and obscurely surmising; not of one that is
firmly assured, and plainly sees things: indeed it very well befits those who
are newly awaked out of a sound sleep, and have scarce ceased to dream, to say
[Me-thought;] not those who are fully awake, and behold all things clearly. But
Jacob, who was more exercised in divine things, has no such word as
[Me-thought] when he speaks of his Dream, but, says he, Behold, a ladder set
upon the earth, and the top of it reached up to heaven, etc. After the same
manner almost does Maimonides in his More Nev. distinguish between Somnia vera
and Prophetica, making Jacobs Dreams (as all the Jewish writers do) to be
Prophetical.

The third kind of Dreams mentioned by Philo is thus laid down by him, (...),
i. e. The third kind is, when in sleep the Soul being moved of it self, and
agitating it self, is in a kind of rapturous rage, and in a divine fury does
foretell future things by a prophetic faculty. And then, which is more to our
purpose, he thus sets forth the nature of those fancies which discover
themselves in these kind of Dreams. (...), i. e. The phantasms which belong to
the third kind are more plainly declared by Moses then the former; for they
containing a very profound and dark meaning, they required to the explaining of
them a knowledge of the Art of interpreting Dreams: as those Dreams of Pharaoh
and his Butler and Baker, and of Nebuchadnezzar, who were only amazed and
dazzled with those strange Apparitions that were made to them, but not at all
enlightened by them. These are of that kind which Plato sometimes speaks of,
that cannot be understood without a Prophet; and therefore he would have some
Prophet or Wise man always set over this (...). Thus we have seen these Three
sorts of Dreams according to Philo, the First and Last whereof the Jewish
Doctors conjoin together, and constantly prefer the Oneirocriticks of them to
the Dreamers themselves: and therefore whereas they depress the notion of them
considered in themselves below any Degree of Prophecy, yet the Interpretation
of them they attribute to the (...) or Holy Spirit; except there be an
Interpretation of the Dream in the Dream it self, so as that the Mind of the
Dreamer be fully satisfied both in the meaning and divinity thereof; for then
it is truly Prophetical. And thus much for this Particular.

CHAP. IV.
A large Account of the Difference between the true Prophetical Spirit and
Enthusiastical impostures. That the Pseudo-Prophetical Spirit is seated only in
the Imaginative Powers and Faculties inferior to Reason. That Plato and other
Wise men had a very low opinion of this Spirit, and of the Gift of Divination,
and of Consulting the Oracles. That the True Prophetical Spirit seats it self
as well in the Rational Powers as in the Sensitive, and that it never alienates
the Mind, but informs and enlightens it. This further cleared by several
Testimonies from Gentile and Christian Writers of old. An Account of those
Fears and Consternations which often seized upon the Prophets. How the Prophets
perceived when the Prophetical influx seized upon them. The different Evidence
and Energy of the True and false Prophetical Spirit.

FRom what we have formerly discoursed concerning the Stage of Fancy and
Imagination upon which those Visa presented themselves to the Mind of the
Prophet, in which he beheld the real objects of Divine truth in which he was
inspired by this means; it may be easily apprehended how easy a matter it
might be for the Devils Prophets many times, by an apish imitation, to
counterfeit the True Prophets of God, and how sometimes Melancholy and turgent
Phansies, fortified with a strong power of Divination, might unfold themselves
in a semblance of true Enthusiasms. For indeed herein the Prophetical influx
seems to agree with a mistaken Enthusiasm, that both of them make strong
impressions upon the Imaginative powers, and require the Imaginative faculty
to be vigorous and potent: and therefore Maimonides tells us that the gift of
Divination, which consisted in a mighty force of Imagination, was always given
to the Prophets, and that This and a Spirit of Fortitude were the main Bases of
Prophecy; More Nev. part. 2. c. 38. Duas istas facultates, Fortitudinis
scilicet and Divinationis, in Prophetis fortissimas and vehementissmas esse
necesse est, etc. i. e. It is necessary that these two Faculties of Fortitude
and Divination should be most strong and vehement in the Prophets: whereunto if
at any time there was an accession of the influence of the Intellect, they were
then beyond measure corroborated; in so much that (as it is well known) it has
come to this, that one man by a naked Staff did prevail over a potent King,
and most manfully delivered a whole Nation from bondage, viz. after it was said
to him Exodus 3. 12. I will be with thee. And though there be different Degrees
of these in men, yet none can be altogether without that Fortitude and
Magnanimity. So it was said to Jeremy Chap. 17. 18. Be not dismayed at their
faces, etc. Behold I have made thee this day a defenced City; and so to Ezekiel.
Chapter 2. 6. Be not afraid of them nor their words: and generally in all the
Prophets we shall find a great Fortitude and Magnanimity of Spirit. But by the
excellency of the gift of Divining they could on a sudden and in a moment
foretell future things; in which Faculty notwithstanding there was great
diversity. Thus he.

It will not be therefore any great Digression here, awhile to examine the
Nature of this False light which pretends to Prophecy, but is not; as being
seated only in the Imaginative power, from whence the first occasion of this
delusion arises, seeing that Power is also the Seat of all Prophetical vision.
For this purpose it will not be amiss to premise that Threefold degree of
Cognitive influence pointed out by Maimonides, part. 2. cap. 37. More Nev. The
first is wholly Intellectual, descending only into the Rational faculty, by
which that is extremely fortified and strengthened in the distinct apprehension
of Metaphysicall Truths, from whence, as he tells us, arises the Sect of
Philosophers, and Contemplative persons. The second is jointly into the
Rational and Imaginative faculty together, and from thence springs the Sect of
Prophets. The third into the Imaginative only, from whence proceeds the Sect of
Politicians, Lawyers and Lawgivers (whose Conceptions only run in a secular
channel,) as also the Sect of Diviners, Inchanters, Dreamers and Soothsayers.

We shall copy out of him a Character of some of this Third sort, the rather
because it so graphically delineates to us many Enthusiastical Impostors of our
Age. His words are these, Hic vero monendus es, ex tertio genere esse quasdam,
quibus Phantasiae, Somnia and Ecstases, quales in Prophetiae Visione esse
solent, ita mirabiles obveniunt, ut plane sibi persuadeant se Prophetas esse,
etc. i. e. But here I must advertise thee, that there are some of this Third
sort who have sometimes such strange Phansies, Dreams and Ecstasies, that they
take themselves for Prophets, and much marvel that they have such Phansies and
Imaginations; conceiting at last that all Sciences and Faculties are without
any pains or study infused into them. And hence it is that they fall into great
confusions in many Theoretical matters of no small moment, and do so mix true
notions with such as are merely seeming, and imaginary, as if Heaven and Earth
were jumbled together. All which proceeds from the too-great force of the
Imaginative faculty and the imbecility of the Rational, whence it is that
nothing in it can pass forth into act. Thus he. This delusion then in his sense
of those (...) which pretend to Revelations, arises from hence, that all this
foreign force that is upon them serves only to vigorate and impregnate their
Phansies and Imaginations, but does not inform their Reasons, nor elevate them
to a true understanding of things in their coherence and contexture; and
therefore they can so easily embrace things absurd to all true and sober
Reason: Whereas the Prophetical Spirit acting principally upon the Reason and
Understanding of the Prophets, guided them consistently and intelligibly into
the understanding of things. But this Pseudo-prophetical Spirit being not able
to rise up above this low and dark Region of Sense or Matter, or to soar aloft
into a clear Heaven of Vision, endeavored always as much as might be to
strengthen it self in the Imaginative part: and therefore the Wizzards and
false prophets of old and later times have been wont always to heighten their
Phansies and Imaginations by all means possible; which R. Albo insinuates Maam.
3. cap. 10. (...). There are some men whose Imaginative faculty is strong,
either by Nature, or by some Artifice which they use to fortify this
Imaginative faculty with; and for such purpose are the artifices which Witches
and such as have familiar Spirits do use, by the help whereof the similitudes
of things are more easily excited in the Imagination. Accordingly Wierus Lib.
3. Cap. 17. de Praestigiis Daemonum (who was a man (as some think) too well
acquainted with these mysteries, though he himself seems to defy them) speaks
to the same purpose concerning Witches, how that, so they may have more
pregnant Phansies, they anoint themselves, and diet themselves with some such
food as they understand from the Devil is very fit for that purpose. And for
further proof hereof he there quotes Baptista Porta, Lib. 2. and Cardan de
Subtle. Cap. 18. But we shall not over-curiously any further pry into these
Arts.

This kind of Divination resting merely in the Imaginative faculty seemed so
exactly to imitate the Prophetical Energy in this part of it, that indeed it
has been by weaker minds mistaken for it, though the Wiser sort of the
Heathens have happily found out the lameness and delusiveness of it. We have it
excellently set forth by Plato in his Timaeus, where speaking of God's
liberality in constituting of Man, he thus speaks of this Divination, (...),
etc. i. e. As for our worser part, that it might in some sort partake of Truth,
God has seated in it the power of Divining: and it is a sufficient sign that
God has indulged this faculty of Divining to the foolishness of men; for there
is no sober man that is touched with this Power of Divination, unless in Sleep,
when his Reason is bound, or when by Sickness or Enthusiasm he suffers some
alienation of Mind. But it is then for the Wise and Sober to understand what is
spoken or represented in this Fatidical passion. And so it seems Plato, who was
no careless observer of these matters, could no where find this Divining spirit
in his time, except it were joined some way or other cum mentis alienatione;
and therefore he looks upon it as that which is inferior to Wisdom, and to be
regulated by it: for so he further declares his mind to the same purpose,
(...), etc. that is, Wherefore it is a law that Prophets should be set as it
were Judges over these Enthusiastic Divinations, which Prophets some
ignorantly and falsely call Diviners. For indeed these Prophets in his sense to
whom he gives the preeminence, are none else but Wise and prudent men, who by
reason of the sagacitie of their Understandings were able to judge of those
things which were uttered by this dull Spirit of Divination, which resided only
in Faculties inferior to Reason. So in his Charmides, (...), etc. i. e. But, if
you will, we will grant the Gift of Divination to be a knowledge of what is to
come: but withal that it is fit that Wisdom and Sobriety should be Judge and
Interpreter. But further, that his age was acquainted with no other Divinations
then that which arises from a troubled Fancy, and is conceived in a dark
Melancholy imagination, he confirms to us in his Phaedrus, where he rightly
gives us the true Etymon of this (...), that it was called so (...), from rage
and fury, and therefore says it was anciently called (...). However he grants
that it happened to many (...) by Divine allotment; yet it was most vulgarly
incident to Sick and Melancholy men, who oftentimes by the power thereof were
able to presage by what Medicines their own distempers might be best cured, as
if it were nothing else but a discerning of that sympathizing and symbolizing
complexion of their own Bodies with some other Bodies without them. And
elsewhere he tells us that these (...) never, or very rarely, understood the
meaning and nature of their own Visa.

And therefore indeed the Platonists generally seemed to reject or very much to
slight all this kind of Revelation, and to acknowledge nothing transcendent to
the naked Reason and Understanding of Man. So Maximus Tyrius in Dissert. 3.
(...), It Is a bold assertion, yet I shall not doubt to say, that God's Oracles
and Men's Understandings are of a near alliance. And so according to
Porphyrius, lib. 2.. 52. (...), a Good man is (...), one that needs not
soothsaying, being familiarly and intimately acquainted with God himself.

Likewise the Stoics will scarce allow their Wise man at any time to consult
an Oracle, as we may learn from Arrian, l. 2. c. 7. and Epictetus, c. 39. and
Simplicius his Comment thereupon: where that great Philosopher making a
scrupulous search what those things were which it might be fit to consult the
Oracle about, at last brings them into so narrow a compass, that a Wise man
should never find occasion to honor the Oracle with his presence. A famous
instance whereof we have in Lucan lib. 9. where Cato being advised to consult
Jupiter Hammon his Oracle after Pompey's death, answers,

Estne Dei seeds nisi Terra and Pontus and Aer
Et Coelum and Virtus? Superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris.
Sortilegis egeant dubii semperque futuris
Casibus ancipites; me non Oracula certum,
Sed mors certa facit --
But enough of this Particular; and I hope by this time I have sufficiently
unfolded the true Seat of Prophecy, and showed the right Stage thereof: as
also how lame and delusive the Spirit of Divination was, which endeavored to
imitate it.

Now from what has been said arises one main Characteristical distinction
between the Prophetical and Pseudo-prophetical spirit, viz. That the
Prophetical spirit does never alienate the Mind, (seeing it seats it self as
well in the Rational powers as in the Sensitive,) but always maintains a
consistency and clearness of Reason, strength and soliditie of Judgment, where
it comes; it does not ravish the Mind, but inform and enlighten it: But the
Pseudo-prophetical spirit, if indeed without any kind of dissimulation it
enters into any one, because it can rise no higher then the Middle region of
Man, which is his Phansy, it there dwells as in storms and tempests, and being
(...) in it self, is also conjoined with alienations and abreptions of mind.
For whenever the Phantasms come to be disordered and to be presented
tumultuously to the Soul, as it is either in a (...) Fury, or in Melancholy,
(both which Kinds of alienation are commonly observed by Physicians) or else by
the Energy of this Spirit of Divination, the Mind can pass no true Judgment
upon them; but its light and influence becomes eclipsed. But of this alienation
we have already discoursed out of Plato and others. And thus the Pythian
Prophetess is described by the Scholiast upon Aristophanes his Plutus, and by
Lucan, lib. 5. as being filled with inward fury, while she was inspired by the
Fatidical spirit, and uttering her Oracles in a strange disguise with many
Antic gestures, her hair torn, and foaming at her Mouth. As also Cassandra is
brought in prophesying in the like manner by Lycophron. So the Sibyll was noted
by Heraclitus (...), as one speaking ridiculous and unseemly speeches with her
furious mouth. And Ammianus Marcellinus in the beginning of his 21th book has
told us an old Observation concerning the Sibylls, Sibyllae crebro se dicunt
ardere, torrente vi magna flammarum.

This was cautelously observed by the Primitive Fathers, who hereby detected
the Impostures of the Montanists that pretended much to Prophecy, but indeed
were acquainted with nothing more of it then Ecstasies or abreptions of mind:
For that is it which they mean by Ecstasies. I shall first mention that of
Strom. 1.
Clem. Alexandr. (...), that is, The false prophets mingled Truth sometimes
with Falsehood: and indeed when they were in an Ecstasie, they prophesied, as
being servants to that grand Apostate the Devil. Eusebius mentions in Histor.
Eccles. lib. 5. c. 17. a Discourse of Miltiades to this purpose, (...).
Tertullian, who was a great Friend to Montanus and his prophetical Sisters
Maximilla and Priscilla, speaking of them endeavors to alleviate this
business: and though he grants they were Ecstatical in their Prophesies, that
is, only transported by the power of a Spirit more potent then their own, as he
would seem to implie; yet he denies that they used to fall into any rage or
fury, which he says is the Character of every false Prophet; and so Montanus
excused himself. But yet for all this, they could not avoid the lash of Jerome,
who thought he saw through this Ecstasie, and that indeed it was a true
alienation, seeing they understood not what they spoke. Neque vero (ut Montanus
cum insanis foeminis somniat) Prophetae in Ecstasi locuti sunt, ut nescirent
quid loquerentur; and cum alios erudirent, ipsi ignorarent quid dicerent, The
Prophets did not (as Montanus together with some mad women dreams) speak in
Ecstasies, nor did they speak they knew not what; nor were they, when they went
about to instruct others, ignorant of what they said themselves. So he in his
Preface to Esaias. This also he otherwhere brands the Montanists withal; as in
his Praoemium to Nahum, Non loquitur Propheta (...), ut Montanus and Prisca
Maximillaque delirant; sed quod prophetat, liber est intelligentis quae
loquitur. And in his Preface to Habakuk, -- Prophetae visio est, and adversum
Montani dogma perversum intelligit quod videt, nec ut amens loquitur, nec in
morem insanientium foeminarum dat sine mente sonum. I shall add but one Author
more, and that is Chrysostom, who has very fully and excellently laid down
this difference between the true and false Prophets, Hom. 29. on the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. (...), It Is the property of a Diviner to be
Ecstaticall, to undergo some violence, to be tossed and hurried about like a
mad man: (...), But it is otherwise with a Prophet, whose understanding is
awake, and his mind in a sober and orderly temper, and he knows every thing
that he says.

But here we must not mistake the business, as if there were nothing but the
most absolute Clearness and Serenitie of thoughts lodging in the Soul of the
Prophet amidst all his Visions: And therefore we shall further take notice of
that Observation of the Jews, which is vulgarly known by all acquainted with
their Writings, which is concerning those Panick fears, Consternations and
Affrightments and Tremblings, which frequently seized upon them together with
the Prophetical influx. And indeed by how much stronger and more vehement those
Impressions were which were made by those unwonted Visa which came in to act
upon their Imaginative faculty, by so much the greater was this Perturbation
and Trouble: and by how much the more the Prophets Imagination was exercised by
the laboriousness of these Phantasms, the more were his natural strength and
Spirits exhausted, as indeed it must needs be. Therefore Daniel being wearied
with the toilsome work of his Fancy about those Visions that were presented
to him, Chap. 10. 8. etc. complains that there was no strength left in him;
that his comeliness was turned into corruption, and he retained no strength;
that when he heard the voice, he was in a deep sleep, and his face toward the
ground; that his sorrows were turned upon him, and no breath was left in him.
So Genesis 15. 12. when the Vision presented to Abraham passed into a Prophetical
Dream, it is said, a deep sleep fell upon Abraham, and a horror of great
darkness fell upon him. Upon which passage Maimonides, in the 2d Part, and 41.
Chapter of his More Nevochim, thus discourses; Quandoque autem Prophetia incipit
in Visione Prophetica, and postea multiplicatur terror and passio illa
vehemens, quae sequitur perfectionem operationum facultatis Imaginatricis, and
tum demum venit Prophetia, sicuti contigit Abrahamo. In principio enim
Prophetiae illius dicitur, (Genesis 15. 1.) Et fuit verbum Domini ad Abrahamum in
Visione; et in fine ejusdem (verse. 12.) Et sopor irruit in Abrahamum, etc. And
in like manner he speaks of those Fatigations that Daniel complains of, Est
autem terror quidam Panicus qui occupat Prophetam inter vigilandum, ficut ex
Daniele patet, quando ait, Et vidi Visionem magnam hanc, neque remansit in me
ulla fortitudo, and vis mea mutata est in corruptionem, nec retinui
fortitudinem ullam. Et fui lethargo oppressus super faciem meam; and facies mea
ad terram. And thus this whole business is excellently decyphered unto us by R.
Albo in his Third book and tenth chapter, (...), Behold, by reason of the
strength of the Imaginative faculty and the precedencie of the Influence upon
that to the influence upon the Rational, the Influx does not remain upon the
Prophet without Terror and Consternation; insomuch that his members shake and
his joints are loosned, and he seems like one that is ready to give up the
ghost by reason of his great astonishment: After all which perturbation the
Prophetical influx settles it self upon the Rational Faculty.

From this Notion perhaps we may borrow some light for the clearing of Jeremie
23. 9. Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets, all my bones
shake: I am like a drunken man (and like a man whom Wine has overcome) because
of the Lord, and because of the words of his Holiness. The importance of which
words is, That the Energy of Prophetical vision wrought thus potently upon his
Animal part. Though I know R. Solomon seems to look at another meaning: But
Abarbanel is here full for our present purpose, (...), When Jeremy saw those
false prophets eating and drinking and faring deliciouslie, he cried out and
said, My heart is broken within me because of the Prophets; For while I behold
their works, my heart is rent asunder with the extremity of my Sorrow, and
because of the Prophetical influx residing upon me, my bones are all rotten,
and I am like a drunken man that neither sees nor hears. And all this has
befell me because of the Lord, that is, because of the divine influx that
seized upon me, and because of the words of his Holiness, which have wrought
such a conturbation within me, that all my senses are stupefied thereby. And
thus I suppose is also that passage in Ezechiel 3. 14. to be expounded, where
the Prophet describes the Energie and dominion which the Prophetical spirit had
over him, when in a Prophetical Vision he was carried by way of Imagination a
tedious journey to those of the Captivity that dwelt by the river Chebar. The
Spirit of the Lord lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness,
and in the heat (or hot chafing and anger) of my spirit; but the hand of the
Lord was strong upon me. So Habak. 3. 2. O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and
was afraid; that is, the Prophetical voice heard by him, and represented in
his Imagination, was so strong that it struck a Panick fear (as Maimon.
expresses it) into him. And it may be the same thing is meant Esaias 21. 3.
where the Prophet describes that inward conturbation and consternation that his
Vision of Babylon's ruin was accompanied withal. Therefore are my loins
filled with pain, pangs have taken hold upon me as the pangs of a woman that
travaileth: I was bowed down at the hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing
of it. Though I know there may be another meaning of that place not improper,
viz. that the Prophet personates Babylon in the horror of that anguish that
should come upon them, whereby he sets it forth the more to the Life, as
Jonathan the Targumist and others would have it; though yet I cannot think this
the most congruous meaning.

But I have now done with this Particular, and I hope by this time have gained
a fair advantage of solving one Difficulty, which though it be not so much
observed by our own as it is by the Jewish writers, yet it is worth our
scanning, viz. How the Prophets perceived when the Prophetical inspiration
first seized upon them. For (as we have before showed) there may be such Dreams
and Visions which are merely delusive, and such as the false prophets were
often partakers of; and besides the true Prophets might have often such Dreams
as were merely vera somnia, True dreams, but not Prophetical.

For the full Solution of this knot we have before showed how this
Pseudo-prophetical Spirit only flutters below upon the more terrene parts of
man's Soul, his Passions and Fancy. The Prince of darkness comes not within
the Sphere of Light and Reason to order affairs there, but that is left to the
sole Economy and Sovereignty of the Father of Lights. There is a clear and
bright heaven in man's Soul, in which Lucifer himself cannot subsist, but is
tumbled down from thence as often as he assayes to climb up into it.

But to come more pressely to the business; The Hebrew Masters here tell us
that in the beginning of Prophetical inspiration the Prophets use to have some
Apparition or Image of a Man or Angel presenting itself to their Imagination.
Sometimes it began with a Voice, and that either strong and vehement, or else
soft and familiar. And so God is said first of all to appear to Samuel, 1 Samuel
3. 7. who is said not yet to have known the Lord, that is, as Maimon. in Part.
2. c. 44. of his More Nevochim expounds it, Ignoravit adhuc tunc temporis Deum
hoc modo cum Prophet is loqui solere, and quod hoc mysterium nondu^ fuit ei
revelatum. In the same manner R. Albo, Maam. 3. cap. 11. For otherwise we must
not think that Samuel was then ignorant of the true God, but that he knew not
the manner of that Voice by which the Prophetical spirit was wont to awaken the
attention of the Prophets.

And that this was the ancient opinion of the Jews R. Solomon tells us out of
the Massecheth Tamid, where the Doctors thus gloss upon this place, (...), i.
e. as yet he knew not the Lord, that is, he knew not the manner of the
Prophetical voice. This is that soft and gentle voice whereby the Sense of the
Prophet is sometimes attempted, but sometimes this Voice is more vehement. It
will not be amiss to hear Maimonides his words, Part. 2. c. 44. of his More
Nev. Nonnunquam fit ut Verbum illud quod Propheta audit in Visione Prophetiae,
ei videatur fieri voce robustissima, etc. i. e. It sometims happens that the
Word which the Prophet hears in a Prophetical Vision, seems to strike him with
a more vehement noise; and accordingly some dream that they hear Thunder and
Earthquake or some great Clashing; and sometimes again with an ordinary and
familiar noise, as if it was close by him. We have a famous Instance of the
last in that Voice whereby God appeared unto Adam after he had sinned, and of
the former in Job and Elijah. That instance of Adam is set down Genesis 3. 8, 9.
And they heard the voice of the Lord walking in the Garden in the cool of the
day, and Adam hid himself from the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden:
and the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? Where
those words (...), which we render the cool of the day, the Jews expound of a
gentle vocal air, such an one as breathed in the daytime more pacately. For
this appearance of God to him they suppose to be in a Prophetical Vision; and
so Nachmanides comments upon those words, (...) The sense of this [(...) in the
gale of the day] is, that ordinarily in the manifestation of the Shechina or
divine presence, there comes a great and mighty wind to usher it in, according
to what we read of Elijah, 1 Kings 19. 11. And behold, the Lord passed by, and
a great and strong wind rent the Mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks
before the Lord: and in Psalm 18. and elsewhere, He flew upon the wings of the
wind: Accordingly it is written concerning Job, c. 38. v. 1. that the Lord
answered Job out of the whirlwind. Wherefore by way of distinction it is said
in this place, that they heard the voice of the Lord, that is, that the Divine
Majesty was revealed to them in the garden, as approaching to them, in the
gale of the day. For the wind of the day blew according to the manner of the
daytime in the garden; not as a great and strong wind in this Vision (as it
was in other Prophetical approaches) lest they should fear and be dismayed.
This mighty voice we also find recorded as rowzing up the attention of
Ezechiel, chap. 9. 1. He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying,
etc. So that all these Schemes are merely Prophetical, and import nothing else
but the strong awakening and quickening of the Prophets mind into a lively sense
of the Divine majesty appearing to him.

And of these the Apocalypse is full, there being indeed no Prophetical writ,
where the whole Dramatical series of things, as they were acted over in the
Mind of the Prophet, are more graphicallie and to the Life set forth. So we
have this Vox praecentrix to the whole Scene sometimes sounding like a Trumpet,
Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great
voice as of a trumpet. And chap. 4. upon the beginning of a new Vision we find
this Prologue, I looked, and behold a door was opened in heaven: and the first
voice which I heard was as it were the sound of a Trumpet, talking with me,
which said, Come up hither, etc. And when a new Act of opening the Seals
begins, chap. 6. 1. he is excited by another voice sounding like Thunder. And I
saw when the Lamb opened one of the Seals, and I heard as it were the noise of
thunder, one of the four Beasts saying, Come and see. And chap. 8. ver. 5.
voices and thunders and lightnings and an earthquake are the Prooemium to the
Vision of the Seven Angels with seven trumpets. Lastly, to name no more,
sometimes it is brought in sounding like the roaring of a Lion. So when he was
to receive the little Book of Prophecy chap. 10. 3. An Angel cried with a loud
voice, as when a Lion roareth; and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered
their voices. Hence it is that we find the Prophets ordinarily prefacing to
their Visions in this manner, The hand of the Lord was upon me; that is indeed
some potent force rouzing them up to a lively sense of the Divine majesty, or
some heavenly Ambassador speaking with them. And that the sense hereof might be
the more Energetical, sometimes in a Prophetical Vision they are commanded to
eat those Prophetic rolls given them, which are described with the greatest
contrariety of taste that may be, sweet as honey in their mouths, and in their
bellies as bitter as gall, Rev. 10. 9. Ezekiel. 2. 8.

Thus we have seen in part how those Impressions, by which the Prophets were
made partakers of Divine inspiration, carried a strong evidence of their
Original along with them, whereby they might be able to distinguish them both
from any hallucination, as also from their own True dreams, which might be
(...) sent by God, but not Prophetical: which yet I think is more universally
unfolded Jeremie 23. where the difference between true Divine inspiration and
such false Dreams and Visions as sometimes a lying Spirit breathed into the
false prophets is on set purpose described to us from their different Evidence
and Energy. The Pseudo-prophetical spirit being but Ver. 28.
chaff* as vain as vanity it self, subject to every wind: the matter it self
indeed which was suggested in such tending to nourish immorality and
profaneness; and besides for the manner of inspiration, it was more dilute and
languid. Whereas true Prophecy entered upon the Mind as a Ver. 29.
fire, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces: and therefore the
true Prophets might know themselves to have received command from heaven, when
the false might, if they would have laid aside their own fond self-conceit,
have known as easily that God sent them not. For so I think those words are
spoken by way of conviction, and to provoke a self-condemnation, verse 32.
Behold I am against those that prophecy false dreams, says the Lord, and do
tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies and by their lightness,
yet I sent them not, neither commanded them. And this might be evident to them
from the feeble nature of those Inspirations which they boasted of, as it is
insinuated verse 28, 29. The prophet that has a dream, etc. And thus Abarbanel
expounds this place, whose sense I shall a little the more pursue, because he
from hence undertakes to solve the difficulty of that Question which we are
now upon, and thus speaks of it as a Question of very great moment. (...) i.
e. Certainly it is one of the profoundest questions that are made concerning
Prophecy, and I have enquired after the opinion of the wise men of our Nation
about it. What answer they gave to this Question which he anxiously enquired
after, it seems he tells us not, but his own answer which he adheres to he
founds upon those words, verse 28. (...), What is the chafe to the wheat? And
upon this occasion he says that old Rule of the Jews was framed which we
formerly spoke of, As there is no Wheat without chafe, so neither is there any
Dream without something that is (...), void of reality and insignificant.
Maimonides here in a general way resolves the business, (...), i. e. All
Prophecy makes it self known to the Prophet that it is Prophecy indeed. Which
general solution Abarbanel having a little examined, thus collects the sense of
it, (...), i. e. A Prophet when he is asleep may distinguish between a
Prophetical Dream and that which is not such, by the vigor and liveliness of
the perception whereby he apprehends the thing propounded, or else by the
imbecillitie and weakness thereof. And therefore Maimon. has said well, All
Prophecy makes it self known to the Prophet that it is Prophecy indeed, that
is, it makes it self known to the Prophet by the strength and vigor of the
perception, so that his Mind is freed from all scruple whatsoever about it. And
this he concludes to be the true meaning of Jer. 23. 29. Is not my word like a
fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? which
he thus glosses upon, (...), Such a thing is the Prophetical Spirit, by reason
of the strength of its impression and the forcibleness of its operation upon
the heart of the Prophet; it is even like a thing that burns and tears him: and
this happens to him either amidst the Dream it self, or afterward when he is
fully awaken and roused out of that Prophetical dream. But those Dreams which
are not Prophetical, although they be True, are weak and languid things, easily
blasted as it were with the East wind: And, as he further goes on by way of
allusion, like those Dreams that the Prophet Esaias speaks of, when a hungry man
dreams he eats, but when he awakes, behold he is still hungry; and as when a
thirsty man dreams he drinks, but when he is awake he is still thirsty. And
thus also the Chaldee Paraphrast Jeremy 23. 29. (...), Nonne omnia verba mea
sunt fortia sicut ignis, etc. But we have yet another evident demonstration of
this Notion which may not be omitted, which is Jer. 20. 9. Then I said, I will
not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name: But his word was in
mine heart as a burning fire shut up within my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not stay. And verse 11. The Lord is with me as a
mighty terrible one. With reference to which Paragraph, R. Solomon thus
glosseth on the formerly-quoted Chap. 23. 29. (...), The word of Prophecy when
it enters into the Mouth of the Prophet in its strength, it comes upon him like
a fire that burns, according to what is said [in Jer. 20. 9.] And it was in
my heart as a burning fire; [and in Ezekiel. 3. 14.] And the hand of the Lord was
strong upon me.

I have now done with the main Characteristical Nature of Prophecy, and given
those (...) of it which most properly belong to True Prophecy; though yet the
other Two degrees of Divine influx (of which hereafter) may also have their
share in them.

CHAP. V.
An Enquiry concerning the Immediate Efficient that represented the Prophetical
Visions to the Fancy of the Prophet. That these Representations were made in
the Prophet's Fancy by some Angel. This cleared by several passages out of
the Jewish Monuments, and by Testimonies of Scripture.

BEfore I conclude this present Discourse concerning Prophecy properly so
called, I think it may be useful to treat a little of Two things more that
most commonly are to be considered in this Degree of Divine Inspiration, which
we call Prophecy.

The First whereof is to enquire what that Intellectus 1.
agens was, or, if you will, that Immediate Efficient that represented the
Prophetical Visions to the Fancy of the Prophet.

Secondly, What the meaning of those Actions is that 2.
are frequently attributed to the Prophets, whether they were Real, or only
Imaginary and Scenical.

I shall begin with the First, and enquire By whom these Representations were
made in the Prophet's Imagination, or who ordered the Prophetical scene, and
brought up all those Idolums that therein appeared upon the Stage. For though
there be no question but that it was God himself by whom the whole Frame of
Prophecy was disposed and originally dispensed, seeing the scope thereof was
to reveal his Mind and Will; yet the Immediate Efficient seems not to be God
himself, as perhaps some may think, but indeed an Angel: And so the generality
of all the Jewish Writers determine. Maimon. his sense is full for this purpose,
both in his De Fundament is Legis and his More Nevochim. And perhaps he has
too universally determined that every Apparition of Angels imports presently
some Prophetical dispensation: which has made some of his Countrymen by an
(...) to fall too much off from him into a contrary assertion. His words are
these, More Nev. Part. 2. c. 41. Scito quod omnium eorum Prophetarum qui
Prophetiam sibi factam esse dicunt, quidam eam Angelo alicui, quidam vero Deo
Opt. Max* ascribant and attribuant, licet per Angeli ministerium quoque ipsis
obtigerit: de quo Sapientes nostri nos erudierunt quando aiunt, Et dixit
Dominus ad eam (scilicet (...), h. e. per manus Angeli) Genesis 25. 23. For so it
seems the Masters expounded this place (where God reveals to Rebekah her future
conception and progeny) of a Prophetical apparition by some Angel; though yet
all agree not in it. But it may be worth our while to hear out Maimon. who
pleads the authority of all Jewish antiquity for this opinion that we have
now laid down. Insuper, de quocunque scriptum occurrit, quod Angelus cum eo
locutus, aut quod aliquid ipsi a Deo revelatum sit, id nullo alio modo quam in
Somnio aut Visione Prophetica factum esse noveris, etc. Moreover, of whomsoever
you read that an Angel spoke with him, or that something was revealed to him by
God, you are to understand that it was performed no other way then by a Dream
or a Prophetical Vision. Our Wise men have a discourse about the Word that came
to the Prophets, according to what the Prophets themselves have declared (that
is, concerning the several ways (as Buxtorf expounds it) by which the Prophets
say the Word of God came to them.) Now this was (say they) four ways. The
first is, when the Prophet declares he received the word from an Angel in a
Dream or in a Vision. Secondly, when he only mentions the words of the Angel,
without declaring that they came to him in a Dream or in a Vision; relying upon
this known Fundamental, viz. That there is no Prophecy revealed but by one of
these two ways, whereof God makes mention, saying, I will make my self known
in a Vision, and speak to him in a Dream. Thirdly, when he makes no mention of
the Angel, but ascribes all to God, as if he alone had conveyed it; yet with
this addition, that it came in a Vision or in a Dream. Fourthly, when the
Prophet says absolutely, that God speak with him, or said unto him, Do this,
or, Speak this, making no mention at all either of Angel, or Vision, or Dream;
and that because of this known Principle and Fundamental truth, That there is
no Prophecy but either in a Dream or Vision, or by the ministry of an Angel.
Thus Maimonides, who, as we see, pretends this to be a known thing and
generally agreed upon by all Jewish antiquity.

But before we go on to any Confirmation of it, it will be requisite a little
to see what Nachmanides, his great adversary in this business, alleges
against him, which I find in his Comment upon Genesis 18. which Chap.
Maimonides makes to relate nothing else but a Prophetical apparition of three
Angels to Abraham which promised a Son: they are said to eat and drink with
him, and two of them to depart from him to Sodom, to be there entertained by
Lot, whom they rescued from the violence of his neighbour-Citizens, and led him
the next day out of the City, before they brought down fire and brimstone from
heaven upon it. All which passages seem to make it evident that this Apparition
of Angels was Real and Historical, and not merely Prophetical and Imaginary.
Wherefore Nachmanides having got this unhappy advantage of his adversary,
pursues this mistake of his with another of his own as gross in an opposite
way. His words are these, (...) He that beholds an Angel, or has any
conference with one, is not a Prophet: For the business is not so as Maimonides
has determined it, namely, That every Prophet receives his Prophecy by the
ministry of an Angel, our Master Moses only excepted: for our Rabbis have
told us concerning Daniel and his companions, that they were upon this account
more excellent then he, because they were Prophets, and he none. And therefore
his Book is not reckoned amongst the Prophets, because he had to do with the
Angel Gabriel, although he both beheld him, and had conference with him when he
was awake. Thus we see Nachman. as clearly expungeth all those out of his
Catalogue of the Prophets to whom any Apparition of Angels was made, as Maimon.
had put them in: and pretends for this the Authority of the Talmudists; who
for this cause exclude Daniel from the number of the Prophets, and, as he would
have us believe, reckoned his Book among the Hagiographa, because of his
converse with the Angel Gabriel: But all this is gratis dictum, and scarce bona
fide; for it is manifest that all Antiquity reckoned upon Zachary as a
Prophet, notwithstanding all his Visions are perpetually represented by Angels.

But we shall a little examine that sentence of the Talmudists which Nachman.
founds his Opinion upon, which I find set down Massecheth Megillah, cap. 1. in
the Gemara, where the Masters gloss on that Dan. 10. 7. And I Daniel alone saw
the Vision: for the men that were with me saw not the Vision; but a great
quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves. Here they enquire
who those Companions of Daniel were, and then pass their Verdict upon him and
them. (...), What are those men that were with Daniel? R. Jeremie said, They
were Haggai, Zachary and Malachie. They excelled Daniel, and he also excelled
them. Herein they excelled him, because they were Prophets, and he none; and in
this he excelled them, that he beheld a Vision, and they none. Thus those
Masters; who indeed deny Daniel to be a Prophet, and accordingly his Book was
by them reckoned among the Hagiographa, yet they here give no reason at all for
it. But whereas Nachman, says that the Visions of Angels which Daniel
conversed with were Real, and not Imaginary or Prophetical, it is a manifest
Elusion, and contrary to the express words of the Text, which relates these
Apparitions to have been in his sleep, Chap. 10. verse 9. And when I heard the
voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep upon my face, and my face
toward the ground. And Chap. 8. 18. Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a
deep sleep. This sleep was upon the Verse 15.
Exit of his Vision: For so (as we have showed before) there was a frequent
(...) from a Vision which begun upon the Prophets while they were awake into a
Prophetical Dream. So Chap. 7. verse 1. In the first year of Belshazzar King of
Babylon, Daniel had a Dream, and Visions of his head upon his bed; and in this
Dream and night-Vision, as in the other before mentioned, a Man or Angel comes
in to expound the matter, verse 15, 16. I Daniel was grieved in my Spirit in
the midst of my body, and the Visions of my head troubled me. I came near to
one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this: so he told me,
and made me know the interpretation of the things.

But that the Talmudists do maintain True Prophecy to have been communicated
by Angels, we shall further confirm from one place which is in Gemara Beracoth
cap. 9. where the Doctors are brought in comparing Two places of Scripture,
which seem contradictory. One of them is Numb. 12. 6. In a Dream will I speak
unto him; the other is Zech. 10. 2. They have told false dreams: which they
solve thus. R. Rami said, It is written, (...). I will speak to him in a dream,
and again, They have told false dreams. Now there is no difficulty at all in
this: For the first sort of Dreams came (...)
by the hand of an Angel; and the other (...)
by an evil Genius. And this Opinion is generally followed by the rest of the
Jewish writers, Commentators and others, who thus compound the difference
between those two famous adversaries Nachman. and Maimon. by granting a twofold
appearance of Angels, the one Real, and the other Imanarie. And so they say
this Real vision of Angels is a Degree inferior to the Prophetical vision of
them. As we are told by R. Jehudah in the Book Cosri; where having disputed,
Maam. 3. what hallowed minds they ought to have who maintain commerce with the
Deity, he thus goes on, (...), If a man be very pious, and be in those places
where the Divine influence uses to manifest it self, the Angels will accompany
him with their Real presence, and he shall see them face to face; yet in an
inferior way to that Vision of Angels which accompanies the Prophetical
degree. Under the Second temple, according as men were more endowed with
wisdom, they beheld Apparitions and heard the Bath Col, which is a degree of
Sanctity, but yet inferior to the Prophetical. To conclude, R. Bechai makes it
an Article of faith to believe the Existence of Angels for this reason, that
Angels were the furnishers of the Prophetical scene, and therefore to deny
them was to deny all Prophecy; so he in Parasha Terumah (...), because (says
he) the Divine influx comes by the ministry of Angels, who order and dispose
the word in the mouth of the Prophet according to the mind of God: And if (...)
were not so, there would be no Prophecy; and if no Prophecy, no Law. So Jos.
Albo, we may remember, defined Prophecy by the immediate orderers of it, the
Angels.

But it is best to consult the Scripture it self in this business, which
declares all that way by which it descended from God to the sons of men. The
first place which Maimon. in More Nev. Part. 2. cap. 42. brings for
confirmation of this opinion is that of Genesis 18. v. ^. with the exposition
of R. Chija, which he leaves as a great secret. But that which is more for his
and our purpose, is Genesis 32. 24. where Jacob wrestled all night with the Angel;
for so that man was, as Hosea tells us; and verse 1. The Angels of God met
Jacob. Neither does this Interpretation of that Lucta between the Angel and
Jacob to have been only in a Prophetical Vision, at all prejudice the
Historical truth of that Event of it, which was Jacobs halting upon his thigh:
For that is no very unusual thing at other times to have some Real passions in
our bodies represented to us in our dreams then when they first begin. Another
place is Jos. 5. 13. Joshua lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold a man
stood over against him. Again, Judges 5. 23. Deborah attributes the command she
had to curse Meroz, to an Angel. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord:
which words Kimchi would have to be understood in a literal sense, (...), for
Deborah was a Prophetess, and so spoke according to Prophetical inspiration;
and so Rabbi Levi Ben Gersom also expounds it: Onkelos and Rasi, with less
reason I think, make this Angel to be none else but Baruch. Though I am not
ignorant that sometimes the Prophets themselves are called Angels of God, and
thence Malachie the last of them had his Name; yet we have no such testimony
concerning Baruch, that ever he was any Prophet, but only a Judge or Commander
of the military forces. In the first Book of Kings chap. 19. ver. 11, 12. we
have a large description of this Imaginary appearance of Angels in the several
modes of it; Behold the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
Mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not
in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake, and after the earthquake a fire,
etc. All which Appearances Jonathan the Targumist expounds by (...) Armies of
Angels, which were attended with those terrible Phenomenon. And the still voice
in which the Lord was, he renders answerably to the rest by (...), the voice of
Angels praising God in a gentle kind of Harmony. For though it be there said
that the Lord was in the soft voice, yet that Paraphrast seems to understand it
only of his Ambassador: which in some other places of Scripture is very
manifest; as in 2 Kings chap. 1. ver. 3, 15, 16. where verse 3. we find the
Angel delivered to Elijah the Message to Ahaziah King of Israel, who sent to
Baal-Zebub the God of Ekron to enquire about his disease; But the Angel of the
Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the
King of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it not because there is not a God in
Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal-Zebub. And verse the 16, we have all
this message attributed to God himself by the Prophet, as if he had received
the dictate immediately from God himself? And in Daniel, the Apocalypse, and
Zachary, we find all things perpetually represented and interpreted by Angels.
And Abarbanel upon Zachary 2. tells us that several Prophets had several
Angels that delivered the heavenly Embassy to them, for that every Prophet was
not so well fitted to converse with any kind of Angel: (...), Every Prophet was
not in a fit capacity of receiving Prophetical influence from any Angel
indifferently; but according to the disposition of the Receiver the degree and
quality of the Angel was accommodated. But I shall not further pursue this
Argument. In the general, that the Prophetical scene was perpetually ordered
by some Angel, I think it is evident from what has been already said, which I
might further confirm from Ezekiel, all whose Prophesies about the Temple are
expressly attributed to a man as the Actor of them, that is indeed an Angel; for
so they used constantly to appear to the Prophets in an humane shape. And
likewise Genesis 28. 18. in Jacob's Vision of a Ladder that reached up to heaven
we find the Angels ascending and descending, to intimate that this Scala
prophetica whereby Divine influence descended upon the Mind of the Prophet is
always filled with Angels. From this place compared with Genesis 31. 11. Jacob's
Vision of Laban's sheep presented to him by an Angel, Philo thus determines in
his book (...), (...), You see how the Scripture represents such Dreams as sent
of God, not only those that proceed from the first Cause [God,] but such also
as come by his Ministers, the Angels. But S. Jerome has given us a more full
and ample Testimony in this matter, in his Comment on Gal. 3. 19. The Law was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. His words are these; Quod autem
ait, Lex ordinata per Angelos, hoc vult intelligi, quod in omni Veteri
Testamento, ubi Angelus primum visus refertur, and postea quasi Deus loquens
inducitur, Angelus quidem vere ex ministris pluribus quicumque sit visus, sed
in illo Mediator [Christus] loquatur qui dicat, Ego sum Deus Abraham, Deus
Isaac, and Deus Jacob. Nec mirum si Deus loquatur in Angelis, cum etiam per
Angelos qui in hominibus sunt loquatur Deus in Prophetis; dicente Zacharia, Et
ait Angelus qui loquebatur in me, ac deinceps inferente, Haec dicit Dominus
Omnipotens.

We might further add to all this those Visions which we meet with in the New
Testament, which, as a thing vulgarly known, were attributed to Angels. So
Acts 27. 23. There stood by me the Angel of God this night, that is, in a
Prophetical dream. And Acts 12. when the Angel of God did reallie appear to
Peter, and bring him out of prison, he could scarce be persuaded of a long time
but that all this was a Vision, this indeed being the common manner of all
Prophetical Vision. And Acts 23. when the Pharisees would describe S. Paul as a
Prophet that had received some Vision or Revelation from heaven, they phrase it
by the speaking of an Angel or Spirit unto him, ver. 9. We find no evil in this
man; but if an Angel or Spirit has spoken to him, let us not fight against God.

CHAP. VI.
The Second Enquiry, What the meaning of those Actions is that are frequently
attributed to the Prophets, whether they were Real, or only Imaginary and
Scenical. What Actions of the Prophets were only Imaginary and performed upon
the Stage of Fancy. What we are to think of several Actions and res gestae
recorded of Hosea, Jeremie and Ezekiel in their Prophesies.

THus we have done with our first Enquiry concerning the Contriver and Orderer
of the Prophetical Stage: That which was acted upon it, no doubt, every one
will grant to have been a Masking or Imaginary business. But there are many
times in the midst of Prophetical Narrations some things related to be done by
the Prophets themselves upon the command of the Prophetic Voice, which have
been generally conceived to have been acted really, the grossest of all not
excepted, as Hosea his taking a harlot for his Wife and begetting Children,
etc. Which conceit Mr. Calvin has in part happily undermined. But we shall not
here doubt to conclude both of That and all other actions of the Prophets which
they were enjoined upon the Stage of Prophecy, that they were only Scenical
and Imaginary; except indeed they were such as of their own Nature must have
an Historical meaning, in which an Imaginary performance would not serve the
turn. For this purpose it may be worth our while to take notice of what
Maimonides has well determined in this Case, More Nev. Part. 2. cap. 46. Scias
ergo, quemadmodum in somnio accidit, etc. Know therefore, that as it is in a
Dream, a man thinks that he has been in this or that Country, that he has
married a Wife there, and continued there for some certain time, that by this
Wife he has had a Son of such a name, of such a disposition, and the like; Know
(says he) that even just so it is with the Prophetical Parables as to what the
Prophets see or do in a Prophetical Vision. For whatsoever those Parables
inform us concerning any Action the Prophet does, or concerning the space of
time between one Action and another, or going from one place to another; all
this is in a Prophetical Vision: neither are these Actions real to sense,
although some particularities may be precisely reckoned up in the writings of
the Prophets. For because it was well known that it was all done in a
Prophetical Vision; it was not necessary in the rehearsing of every
particularitie to reiterate that it was in a Prophetical Vision; as it was also
needless to inculcate that it was in a Dream. But now the Vulgar sort of men
think that all such Actions, Journies, Questions and Answers were really and
sensibly performed, and not in a Prophetical Vision. And therefore I have an
intention to make plain this business, and shall bring such things as no man
shall be able to doubt of; adding thereunto some Examples, by which you may be
able to judge of the rest which I shall not for the present mention. Thus we
see how Maimon. rejects it as a vulgar error to conceive that those Actions
which are commonly attributed to the Prophets in the current of their
Prophecy, their travailing from place to place, their propounding questions
and receiving answers, etc. were real things to sense; whereas they were only
Imaginary, represented merely to the Fancy.

But for a more distinct understanding of this business, we must remember what
has been often suggested, That the Prophetical scene or Stage upon which all
apparitions were made to the Prophet, was his Imagination; and that there all
those things which God would have revealed unto him were acted over
Symbolicallie, as in a Masque, in which diverse persons are brought in, amongst
which the Prophet himself bears a part: And therefore he, according to the
exigencie of this Dramatical apparatus, must, as the other Actors, perform his
part, sometimes by speaking and reciting things done, propounding questions,
sometimes by acting that part which in the Drama he was appointed to act by
some others; and so not only by Speaking, but by Gestures and Actions come in
in his due place among the rest; as it is in our ordinary Dreams, to use
Maimonides his expression of it. And therefore it is no wonder to hear of those
things done which indeed have no Historical or Real verity; the scope of all
being to represent something strongly to the Prophets Understanding, and
sufficiently to inform it in the Substance of those things which he was to
instruct that People in to whom he was sent. And so sometimes we have only the
Intelligible matter of Prophesies delivered to us nakedly without the
Imaginary Ceremonies or Solemnities. And as this Notion of those Actions of
the Prophet that are interweav'd with their Prophesies is most genuine and
agreeable to the general nature of Prophecy, so we shall further clear and
confirm it in some Particulars.

We shall begin with that of Hosea his marrying of Gomer a common harlot, and
taking to himself children of whoredoms, which he is said to do a first and
second time, Chap. 1. and Chap. 3. Which kind of Action however it might be
void of true Vice, yet it would not have been void of all Offense, for a
Prophet to have thus unequally yoaked himself (to use S. Paul's expression)
with any such Infamous persons, though by way of lawful wedlock, if it had been
done really. I know that this way of interpreting both This and other
Prophetical actions displeases Abarbanel, who thinks the Literal sense and
Historical verity of all ought to be entertained, except it be (...) expressed
to have been done in a Vision; and the general current of our Christian writers
till Calvin's time have gone the same way. And to make the Literal
interpretation here good, R. Solomon and our former Author both tell us, that
the ancient Rabbis have determined those Prophetical narrations of Hosea to be
understood (...) literally. The place they refer to is Gem. Pesac. cap. 8.
where yet I find no such thing positively concluded by the Talmudists. Indeed
they there, after their fashion, expound the place by inserting a long dialogue
between God and the Prophet about this matter, but so as that without R. Sol.
or Abarbanel's gloss we could no more think their scope was to establish the
Literal sense, then I think that the Prophet himself intended to insinuate the
same to us. We shall therefore choose to follow Abenezra as a more genuine
Commentator, who in this place and others of the like nature follows Maimonides
(...), making all those Transactions to have been only Imaginary. For though
it be not always positively laid down in these Narrations, that the Res gesta
was in a Vision; yet the Nature and Scope of Prophecy so requiring that things
should thus be acted in Imagination, we should rather expect some Positive
declaration to assure us that they were performed in the History, if indeed it
were so.

And therefore in these recitals of Prophetical Visions, we find many times
things less coherent then can agree to a true History; as in the narrative of
Abraham's Vision, Genesis 15. (for so the Rabbis in Pirke R. Eliezer expound that
whole Chapter to be nothing else) we find v. 1. that God appeared to Abraham in
a Vision, and v. 5. God brings him into the field as if it were after the
shutting up of evening, and shows him the Stars of Heaven: and yet for all this
ver. 12. it was yet daytime, and the Sun not gone down: And when the Sun was
going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abraham; and verse 17. And it came to pass
that when the Sun went down and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a
burning lamp that passed between those pieces. From whence it is manifest that
Abraham's going out into the field before to take a view of the Stars of
Heaven, and his ordering of those several living Creatures, ver. 9, 10. for a
Sacrifice, was all performed in a Prophetical Vision, and upon the Stage of his
Imagination: It being no strange thing to have incoherent junctures of time
made in such a way.

So Jeremie 13. we have there a very precise Narrative of Jeremiah's getting a
linen girdle, and putting it upon his loins; and after a while he must needs
take a long journey to Euphrates, to hide it there in a hole of the rock; and
then returning, after many days makes another weary journie to the same place
to take it out again after it was all corrupted: all which could manifestly be
nothing else but merely Imaginary; the scope thereof being to imprint this
more deeply upon the Understanding of the Prophet, That the House of Judah and
Israel, which was nearly knit and united to God, should be destroyed and ruined.

The same Prophet Chap. 18. is brought in going to the house of a Potter, to
take notice how he wrought a piece of work upon the wheel; and when the Vessel
he intended was all marred, that then he made of his clay another Vessel. And
Chap. 19. he is brought in as taking the Ancients of the people and the
Ancients of the Priests along with him into the valley of the Son of Hinnom,
with a Potter's earthen bottle under his arm, and there breaking it in pieces
in the midst of them.

In this last Chapter it is very observable how the Scheme of speech is altered,
when the Prophet relates a Real History concerning himself, ver. 14. speaking
of himself in the Third person, as if now he were to speak of some body else,
and not of a Prophet or his Actions; for so we read ver. 14. Then came Jeremiah
from Tophet, etc. The like change of the person we find Chap. 28. ver. 10.
where a formal story is told of some things that passed between Jeremiah and
Hananiah the false prophet, who in the presence of all the people broke
Jeremiah's yoke from off his neck: For it seems to have been a wonted thing for
the Prophets by Bonds and Yokes to type out unto the people Victory or
Captivity in war. Not unlike is that we read of Zedekiah the false prophet, 1
Kings 22. who made himself horns of iron, when he prophesied to Ahab his
prosperity against the Syrians at Ramoth-Gilead, vulgarly to represent to him
the success he should have against his Enemies. But in all this business the
Mode of Jeremiah's language insinuates a Literal sense, by speaking altogether
in the Third person, as if the relation concerned some body else, and not
himself, and so must be of some real thing, and that which to Sense and
Observation had it is realitie, and not only a realitie in Apprehension or
Imagination. So Chap. 32. we seem to have an insinuation of a real History in
Jeremiah's purchase of a Field of Hanameel his Uncles Son, from the Mode of
expression which is there observable.

But other-times we meet with things graphically described with all the
Circumstantial pomp of the business, when yet it could be nothing else but a
Dramatical thing; as Chap. 35. where the Prophet goes and finds out the chief
of the Rechabites particularly described, and brings them into such a
particular chamber as is there set forth by all it is bounds, and there sets
pots and cups full of wine before them, and bids them drink wine. Just in the
same mode with this we have another story told, Chap. 25. 15, and 17, etc. of
his taking a wine-cup from God, and his carrying it up and down to all nations
far and near, Jerusalem and the Cities of Judah, and the Kings and Princes
thereof; to Pharaoh King of Egypt, and his Servants, Princes, People; to all
the Arabians, and Kings of the Land of UZ; to the Kings of the Land of the
Philistines, Edom, Moab, Ammon; the Kings of Tire and Sidon and of the Isles
beyond the Sea, Dedan, Tema, Buz; the Kings of Zimri, of the Medes and
Persians, and all the Kings of the North: and all these he said he made to
drink of this Cup. And in this fashion Chap. 27. he is sent up and down with
Yokes, to put upon the necks of several Kings: all which can have no other
sense then that which is merely Imaginary, though we be not told that all this
was acted only in a Vision, for the nature of the thing would not permit any
real performance thereof.

The like we must say of Ezekiel's res gestae, his eating a roll given him of
God, Chap. 3. And Chap. 4. it is especially remarkable how ceremoniously all
things are related concerning his taking a Tile, and pourtraying the City of
Jerusalem upon it, his laying siege to it; all which I suppose will be evident
to have been merely Dramatical, if we carefully examine all things in it,
notwithstanding that God tells him he should in all this be a Sign to the
people. Which is not so to be understood, as if they were to observe in such
real actions in a sensible way what their own Fates should be: for he is here
commanded to lie continually before a Tile 390 days, which is full 13 Months,
upon his left side, and after that 40 more upon his right, and to bake his
bread that he should eat all this while with dung, etc.

So Chap. 5. he is commanded to take a Barbers rasour, and to shave his head
and beard, then to weigh his hair in a pair of Scales, and divide it into three
parts; and after the days of his Siege should be fulfilled, spoken of before,
then to burn a third part of it in the midst of the City, and to smite about
the other third with a knife, and to scatter the other third to the wind. All
which as it is most unlikely in it self ever to have been really done, so was
it against the Law of the Priests to shave the corners of their heads and the
corners of their beards, as Maimonides observes. But that Ezekiel himself was a
Priest, is manifest from Chap. 1. ver. 3. Upon these passages of Ezekiel
Maimonides has thus soberly given his judgment, More Nev. Part. 2. c. 46.
Absit ut Deus Prophetas suos stultis vel ebriis similes reddat, eosque
stultorum aut furiosorum actiones facere jubeat: praeterquam quod praeceptum
illud ultimum Legi repugnasset, etc. Far be it from God to render his Prophets
like to fools and drunken men, and to prescribe them the actions of fools and
mad men: besides that this last injunction would have been inconsistent with
the Law; for Ezekiel was a great Priest, and therefore obliged to the
observation of those two Negative precepts, viz. of not shaving the corners of
his head and corners of his beard: And therefore this was done only in a
Prophetical Vision. The same sentence likewise he passes upon that story of
Esaiah, Chap. 20. 3. his walking naked and barefoot, wherein Esaiah was no
otherwise a Sign to Egypt and Aethiopia, or rather Arabia, where he dwelt
not, and so could not more literally be a Type therein, then Ezekiel was here
to the Jews.

Again Chap. 12. we read of Ezekiel's removing his household stuff in the night,
as a Type of the Captivity, and of his digging with his hands through the wall
of his house, and of the peoples coming to take notice of this strange action,
with many other uncouth ceremonies of the whole business which carry no show of
probability: and yet ver. 6. God declares upon this to him, I have set thee
for a sign to the house of Israel; and ver. 9. Son of man, has not the house
of Israel, the rebellions house, said unto thee, What do thou? As if all
this had been done really; which indeed seems to be nothing else but a
Prophetical Scheme. Neither was the Prophet any real Sign, but only Imaginary,
as having the Type of all those Fates symbolically represented in his fancy
which were to befall the Jews: which sense Kimchi, a genuine Commentator,
follows, with the others mentioned. And it may be according to this same notion
is that in Chap. 24. to be understood of the death of the Prophet's Wife, with
the manner of those funeral solemnities and obsequies which he performed for
her.

But we shall proceed no farther in this Argument, which I hope is by this time
sufficiently cleared, That we are not in any Prophetical narratives of this
kind to understand any thing else but the History of the Visions themselves
which appeared to them, except we be led by some farther argument of the
realitie of the thing in a way of sensible appearance to determine it to have
been any sensible thing.

CHAP. VII.
Of that Degree of Divine inspiration properly called Ruach hakkodesh, i. e.
The Holy Spirit. The Nature of it described out of Jewish Antiquities. Wherein
this Spiritus Sanctus differed from Prophecy strictly so called, and from the
Spirit of Holiness in purified Souls. What Books of the Old Testament were
ascribed by the Jews to Ruach hakkodesh. Of the Urim and Thummim.

THus we have done with that part of Divine inspiration which was more
Technically and properly by the Jews called Prophecy. We shall now a little
search into that which is Hagiographical, or, as they call it, The Dictate of
the Holy Spirit; in which the Book of Psalms, Job, the works of Solomon and
others are comprised. This we find very appositely thus defined by Maimonides,
More Nev. Part. 2. c. 45. Cum homo in se sentit rem vel facultatem quampiam
exoriri, and super se quiescere, quae eum impellit ad loquendum, etc. When a
man perceives some Power to arise within him, and rest upon him, which urges
him to speak, so that he discourse concerning the Sciences or Arts, and utter
Psalms or Hymns, or profitable and wholesome Rules of good living, or matters
Political and Civil, or such as are Divine; and that whilst he is waking, and
has the ordinary vigor and use of his Senses; this is such a one of whom
it is said, that He speaks by the Holy Spirit. In this Definition we may seem to
have the strain of the Book of Psalms, Proverbs and Ecolesiastes fully
decyphered to us. In like manner we find this Degree of Inspiration described
by R. Albo, Maam. 3. c. 10. after he had set down the other Degrees superior
to it, (...), Now to explain to you what is that other Door of Divine influx,
through which none can enter by his own natural ability; it is when a man
utters words of Wisdom, or Song, or Divine praise, in pure and elegant
language, besides his wont: so that every one that knows him admires him for
this excellent knowledge and composure of words; but yet he himself knows not
from whence this faculty came to him, but is as a child that learns a tongue,
and knows not from whence he had this faculty. Now the excellence of this
Degree of Divine inspiration is well known to all, for it is the same with that
which is called The Holy Spirit. Or, if you please, we shall render these
Definitions of our former Jewish Doctors in the words of Proclus, who has very
happily set forth the nature of this piece of Divine inspiration, according to
their mind, in these words, lib. 5. in Plat. Tim. (...), This degree or
Enthusiastical character, shining so bright with the Intellectual influences,
is pure and venerable, receiving it is perfection from the Father of the Gods,
being distinct from humane conceptions, and far transcending them, always
conjoined with delightfulness and amazement, full of beauty and comeliness,
concise, yet withal exceeding accurate.

This kind therefore of Divine inspiration was always more pacate and serene
then the other of Prophecy, neither did it so much fatigate and act upon the
Imagination. For though these Hagiographi or Holy writers ordinarily expressed
themselves in Parables and Similitudes, which is the proper work of Fancy;
yet they seem only to have made use of such a dress of language to set off
their own sense of Divine things, which in it self was more naked and simple,
the more advantagiously, as we see commonly in all other kind of Writings. And
seeing there was no labor of the Imagination in this way of Revelation,
therefore it was not communicated to them by any Dreams or Visions, but while
they were waking, and their Senses were in their full vigor, their Minds
calm; it breathing upon them (...), as Plotinus describes his pious
Enthusiast, Enn. 6. l. 9. c. 11.
(...). For indeed this Enthusiastical Spirit seated it self principally in the
Higher and Purer faculties of the Soul, which were (...), that I may allude to
the ancient opinion of Empedo^les, who held there were two Suns, the one
Archetypal, which was always in the inconspicable Hemisphear of the World, but
the beams thereof shining upon this World's Sun were reflected to us, and so
further enlightened us.

Now this kind of Inspiration as it always acted pious Souls into strains of
Devotion, or moved them strongly to dictate matters of true piety and goodness,
did manifest it self to be of a Divine nature; and as it came in abruptly upon
the Minds of those holy men without courting their private thoughts, but
transported them from that Temper of Mind they were in before, so that they
perceived themselves captivated by the power of some Higher light then that
which their own understanding commonly poured out upon them, they might know it
to be more immediately from God.

For indeed that seems to be the main thing wherein this Holy Spirit differed
from that constant Spirit and frame of Holiness and Goodness dwelling in
hallowed minds, that it was too quick, potent and transporting a thing, and was
a kind of vital Form to that Light of divine Reason which they were perpetually
possessed of. And therefore sometimes it runs out into a Foresight or
Prediction of things to come, though it may be those Previsions were less
understood by the Prophet himself; as (if it were needful) we might instance
in some of David's prophesies, which seem to have been revealed to him not so
much for himself (as the Apostle speaks) as for us. But it did not always
spend it self in Strains of Devotion or Dictates of Virtue, Wisdom and
Prudence; and therefore (if I may take leave here to express my conjecture) I
should think the ancient Jews called this Degree Spiritus Sanctus, not because
it flows from the Third Person in the Trinity (which I doubt they thought not
of in this business) but because of the near affinity and alliance it has
with that Spirit of Holiness and true Goodness that always lodges in the
breasts of Good men. And this seems to be insinuated in an old proverbial
speech of the Jewish Masters, quoted by Maimonides in the fore-quoted place,
Majestas Divina habitat super eum, and loquitur per Spiritum Sanctum. Though
some think it might be so called as being the lowest Degree of Divine
Inspiration: for sometimes the ancientest Monuments of Jewish learning call all
Prophecy by the name of Spiritus Sanctus. So in Pirke R. Eliezer c. 39. R.
Phineas inquit, Requievit Spiritus Sanctus super Josephum ab ipsius juventute
usque ad diem obitus ejus, atque direxit eum in omnem sapientiam, etc. The Holy
Spirit rested upon Joseph from his youth till the day of his death, and guided
him into all wisdom, etc. Though it may be all that might be but an
Hagiographical Spirit: For indeed the Jews are wont, as we showed before, to
distinguish Joseph's dreams from Prophetical. But this Spiritus Sanctus in the
same chap. (to put all out of doubt) is attributed to Esaiah and Ezekiel, which
were known Prophets: and chap. 33. R. Phineas ait, Postquam omnes illi
interfecti fuerant, viginti annis in Babel requievit Spiritus Sanctus super
Ezekielem, and eduxit eum ex convalle Dora, and ostendit ei multa ossa, etc.
And among those five things that the Jews always supposed the Second Temple to
be inferior to the First in, one was the want of the (...) Spiritus Sanctus, or
Spirit of Prophecy.

But we are here to consider this Spiritus Sanctus more strictly, and as we
have formerly defined it out of Jewish antiquity. And here we shall first show
what Books of the Old Testament were ascribed to this Degree by the Jews. The
Old Testament was by the Jews divided into (...), the Law, the Prophets, and
the (...). And this division is insinuated in Luke 24. 44. And Jesus said unto
them, These are the words which I spoke unto you while I was yet with you, that
all things must be fulfilled which were written concerning me in the Law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms: where by the Psalms may seem to
be meant the Hagiographa; for the Writers of these Hagiographa might be termed
Psalmodists for some Reasons which we shall touch upon hereafter in this
Discourse. But to return; the Old Testament being anciently divided into these
parts, it may not be amiss to consider the Order of these parts as it is laid
down by the Talmudical Doctors in Gemara Bava Bathra, c. 1. toward the end,
(...) Our Doctors have delivered unto us this Order of the Prophets, Joshua,
Judges, Samuel, Kings, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Isaiah and the Twelve Prophets, the
First of which is Hosea, for so they understand those words in Hos. 1. 2.
(...), Deus inprimis locutus est per Hoseam. The same Gemarists go on to lay
down the Order of the (...) thus; Ruth, the Book of Psalms, Job, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Lamentations, Daniel, Esther, Ezra, the Chronicles:
And these the Jews did ascribe to the Ruach hakkodesh. But why Daniel should be
reckoned amongst the (...), and not amongst (...) the Prophets, I can see no
reason, seeing the strain of it wholly argues the nature of a Prophetical degree
spending it self in Dreams and Visions, though those were joined with more
obscurity (it being then the Crepusculum of the Prophetical day, which had long
been upon the Horizon of the Jewish Church) then in the other Prophets. And
therefore whatever the latter Jews here urge, for thus ranking up Daniel's
books with the other (...), yet seeing they give us no Traditional reason which
their Ancestors had for so doing, I should rather think it to have been first
of all some fortuitous thing which gave an occasion to this after-mistake, as I
think it is.

But to pass on, besides those Books mentioned, there were some things else
among the Jews usually attributed to this Spiritus Sanctus: And so Maimonides
in the forementioned place tells us that Eldad and Medad, and all the High
Priests who asked counsel by Urim and Thummim, spoke per Spiritum Sanctum, so
that it was a Character Enthusiastical whereby they gave judicial answers, by
looking upon the Stones of the High Priests breast plate, to those that came to
enquire of God by them. And so R. Bechai in Parash (...) speaks of one of the
Degrees of the Holy Spirit which was superior to Bath Kol (i. Filia Vocis) and
inferior to Prophecy. (...). It will not be amiss by a short digression to
show what this Urim and Thummim was: And we may take it out of our former
Author R. Bechai, who for the substance agrees with the generality and best of
the Jewish writers herein. It was, as he there tells us, done in this manner.
The High Priest stood before the Ark, and he that came to enquire of the Urim
and Thummim stood behind him, enquiring with a submisse voice, as if he had
been at his private prayers, Shall I do so, or so? Then the High Priest looked
upon the Letters which were engraven upon the Stones of the Breast Plate, and
by the concurrence of an Enthusiastical Spirit of Divination of his own (if I
may add thus much upon the former reasons to that which he there speaks) with
some modes whereby those letters appeared, he shaped out his answer. But for
those that were allowed to enquire at this Oracle, they were none else but
either the King or the whole Congregation, as we are told in Massec. Sotah,
(...), None may enquire of it but the congregation of the people, or the King;
by which it seems it was a Political oracle.

But to return to our Argument in hand, viz. What pieces of Divine writ are
ascribed to the (...) or Spiritus Sanctus; we must further know that the Jews
were wont to reckon all those Psalms or Songs which we any where meet with in
the Old Testament among the (...). For though they were penned by the Prophets,
yet because they were not the proper results of a Visum Propheticum, therefore
they were not true Prophecy: For they have a common Tradition, that the
Prophets did not always prophecy eodem gradu, but sometime in a higher,
sometime in a lower degree, as among others we are fully taught by Abarbinel in
Es. 4. upon occasion of that Song of Esaias, (...), The same Prophet prophesies
sometime in the form of the supreme Prophetical Degree, and sometime in a lower
Degree, (...) or by the Holy Spirit only. And thus having made his way, he
tells us that common notion they had amongst them, that all Songs were dictated
by this Spiritus Sanctus, (...) Every Song that is found in the Writings of the
Prophets, it was such a thing as was ordered or dictated by the Penmen
themselves together with the superintendency of the Holy Spirit: forasmuch as
they received them not in that higher way which is called Prophecy, as all
Visions were received, for all Visions were perfect Prophecy. But the Author
goes on further to declare his, and indeed the common opinion, concerning any
such Song, that it was not the proper work of God himself, but the work of the
Prophet's own Spirit, (...). Yet we must suppose the Prophet's Spirit enabled
by the conjunction of divine help with it, as he puts in the caution, (...),
the Spirit of God and his divine assistance did still cleave unto the Prophet,
and was present with him. For, as he tells us, the Prophets, being so much
accustomed to divine Visions as they were, might be able sometime per vigiliam,
without any Prophetical Vision, to speak excellently by the Holy Ghost, (...),
with very elegant language, and admirable similitudes. And this he there proves
from hence, that these Songs are commonly attributed to the Prophet himself,
and not to God, there being so much of the work of the Prophet's own Spirit in
them, (...) Wherefore the Scripture commonly attributes these Songs to the
Prophets themselves, and not unto God; and accordingly speaks of the Song at
the Red sea, Exodus 15.
Then Moses and the people of Israel sang this Song, that is, Moses and the
children of Israel did compose and order it. So in the Song at Beer-Elim Number.
21. 17.
, Then sang Israel this Song. So in Moses his Song in the later end of
Deuteronomy, which was to to be preserved as a Memorial, the Conclusion runs,
Deuteronomy. 32. 46.
Set your hearts upon all those words, (...), which I testify to you this day.
So all those Psalms which are supposed to have been composed by David, are
perpetually ascribed unto him, and the rest of them that were composed by
others are in like manner ascribed unto them; whereas the Prophetic strain is
very different, always intitling God to it, and so is brought in with such
kind of Prologues [The word of the Lord] or [The hand of the Lord] or the like.

But enough of that: yet seeing we are fallen now upon the Original Author of
these Divine Songs and Hymns, it will not be amiss to take a little notice of
the frequency of this Degree of Prophecy, which is by Songs and Hymns composed
by an Enthusiastical Spirit, among the Jews. We find many of these Prophets
besides David, who were Authors of sundry Psalms bound up together with his;
for we must not think all are his: as after the 72 Psalm we have eleven
together which are ascribed to Asaph, the 88 to Heman, the 89 to Ethan, some to
Jeduthun, and very many are incerti Authoris, as it seems, being anonymous.
Thus Kimchi in his Preface to the Psalms, and the rest of the Hebrew
Scholiasts, suppose diverse Authors to have come in for their particular Songs
in that Book.

And these divine Enthusiasts were commonly wont to compose their Songs and
Hymns at the sounding of some one Musical instrument or other, as we find it
often suggested in the Psalms. So Plutarch, lib. (...), describes the Dictate
of the Oracle anciently, (...), how that it was uttered in verse, in pomp of
words, Similitudes and Metaphors, at the sound of a Pipe. Thus we have Asaph,
Heman and Jeduthun set forth in this Prophetical preparation, 1 Chronicles. 25. 1.
Moreover David and the Captain of the h^ast separated to the service of the
Sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophecy with harps,
etc. Thus R. Sal. expounds the place, (...), When they played upon their
Musical instruments they prophesied, after the manner of Elisha, who said,
Bring me a Minstrel, 2 Kings 3. And in the forementioned place ver. 3. upon
those words [who prophesied with a harp] he thus glosseth, (...) As they
sounded upon the harp the Psalms of praise and the Hallelujahs, Jeduthun their
Father prophesied. And this sense of this place I think is much more genuine
then that which a late Author of our own would fasten upon it, viz. that this
Prophesying was nothing but singing of Psalms. For it is manifest that these
Prophets were not mere Singers, but Composers, and such as were truly called
Prophets or Enthusiasts: So ver. 5. Heman is expressly called the Kings Seer;
the like in 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. and chapter 35. 15. of Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun,
(...), upon which our former Commentator glosseth thus, (...), unusquisque
eorum erat Propheta. It Is true, the Poets are anciently called Vates, but that
is no good argument why a Singer should be called a Prophet: for it is to be
considered that a Poet was a Composer, and upon that account by the Ancients
called Vates or a Prophet, and that because they generally thought all true
Poets were transported. So Plato in his Phaedrus makes Three kinds of Fury,
viz. Enthusiastical, Amatorious, and Poetical. But of this matter we shall
speak more under the next head, which we are in a manner unawares fallen upon,
which is to enquire in general into the qualification of all kind of Prophets.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Dispositions antecedent and preparatory to Prophecy. That the
Qualifications which did fit a man for the Prophetical Spirit were such as
these, viz. Inward Piety, True Wisdom, a Pacate and Serene temper of Mind, and
a due cheerfulness of Spirit; in opposition to Vitiousness, Mental crazedness
and inconsistency, unsubdued Passions, black Melancholy and dull Sadness. This
illustrated by several Instances in Scripture. That Music was greatly
advantageous to the Prophets and Holy men of God, etc. What is meant by Readiness
Evil Spirit.

OUR next business is to discourse of those several Qualifications that were to
render a man fit for the Spirit of Prophecy: for we must not think that any
man might suddenly be made a Prophet: This gift was not so fortuitously
dispensed as to be communicated without any discrimination of persons. And this
indeed all sorts of men have generally concluded upon; and therefore the old
Heathens themselves, that only sought after a Spirit of Divination, were wont
in a solemn manner to prepare and fit themselves for receiving the influx
thereof, as R. Albo has truly observed, Maam. 3. c. 8. (...) The ancient
Gentiles made themselves Images, and offered prayers and frankincense to the
Stars, that by this means they might draw down a spiritual influence from some
certain Stars upon their Image. For this influence slides down from the body of
the Star upon the man himself, who is also corporeal, and by this means he
foretells what shall come to pass. And thus, as he further observes, the
Necromancers themselves were wont to use many solemn Rites and Ceremonies to
call forth the Souls of any dead men into themselves, whereby they might be
able to presage future things. But to come more closely to our present Argument.

The Qualifications which the Jewish Doctors suppose necessarily antecedent to
render any one habilem ad prophetandum are true Probity and Piety; and this was
the constant sense and opinion of all of them universally, not excluding the
vulgar themselves. Thus Abarbanel in praefat. in 12 Proph. (...), Pietas
inducit Spiritum Sanctum. The like we find in Maimonid. More Nev. par. 2. cap.
32. who yet thinks this was not enough; and therefore he reckons up this as a
vulgar error, which yet he says some of their Doctors were carried away
withal, Quod Deus aliquem eligat and mittat, nulla habita ratione an sit
sapiens, etc. That God may choose of men whom he pleases, and send him, it
matters not whether he be wise and learned, or unlearned and unskilful, old or
young; only that this is required, that he be a virtuous, good and honest man:
For hitherto there was never any that could say that God did cause the divine
Majesty to dwell in a vicious person, unless he had first reformed himself.

But Maimonid. himself rather preferrs the opinion of the wise Sages and
Philosophers of the Heathen then of these vulgar Masters, which required also
some Perfection in the nature of him that should be set apart for Prophecy,
augmented with study and industry; Whence it cannot be that a man should go to
bed no Prophet, and rise the next day a Prophet (as he there speaks)
quemadmodum homo qui inopinato aliquid invenit. And a little after he adds,
Fatuos and hujus terrae filios quod attinet, non magis, nostro judicio,
prophetare possunt, quam Asinus aut Rana.

These Perfections then which Maimonides requires as Preparaterie Dispositions
to render a man a Prophet, are of Three sorts, viz. 1. Acquisite or Rational;
2. Natural or Animal; lastly, Moral. And according to the difference of these
he distinguishes the Degrees of Prophecy, c. 36. Has autem Tres perfectiones
etc. As to these Three Perfections which we have here comprised, viz. the
Perfection of the Rational faculty acquired by study, the Perfection of the
Imaginative faculty by birth, and the Perfection of Manners or virtuous
Qualities by purifying and freeing the Heart and affections from all sensual
pleasures, from all pride, and from all foolish and pestilent desire of glory;
As to these, I say, It Is evident that they are differently, and not in the same
degree participated by men: And according to such different measures of
participation the degrees of the Prophets are also to be distinguished.

Thus Maimonides, who indeed in all this did but aim at this Technical notion
of his, That all Prophecy is the proper result of these Perfections, as a Form
arising out of them all as out of its elements compounded together. For it is
plain that he thought there was a kind of Prognostic virtue in Souls
themselves, which was in this manner to be excited; which was the opinion of
some Philosophers, among which Plutarch lays down his sense in this manner,
according to the minds of many others; Lib. (...).
(...), The Soul does not then first of all attain a Prophetical energie when
it leaves the Body as a cloud; but it now has it already; only she is blind of
this Eye, because of her concretion with this mortal body. This Philosopher's
opinion Maimonides was more then prone to, however he would dissemble it, and
therefore he speaks of an impotency to Prophecy, supposing all those Three
qualifications named before, as of the suspension of the act of some natural
Faculty. So Chap. 32. Meo judicio res hic se habet sicut in Miraculis, etc.
(i.) In my judgment (says he) the matter here is just so as it is in Miracles,
and bears proportion with them. For natural Reason requires, that he who by his
nature is apt to prophecy, and is diligently taught and instructed, and of fit
age, that such a one should prophecy; but he that notwithstanding cannot do
so, is like to one that cannot move his hand, as Jeroboam, or one that cannot
see, as those that could not see the Tents of the King of Syria (as it is in
the Story of Elisha.) And again Chap. 36. he further beats upon this String, Si
vir quidam ita comparatus fuerit, nullum dubium est, si facultas ejus
Imaginatrix (quae in summo gradu perfecta est, and Influentiam ab Intellectu
secundum perfectionem suam speculativam accipit) laboraverit and in operatione
fuerit, illum non nisi res divinas and admirandas apprehensurum, nihil praeter
Deum and ejus Angelos visurum, nullius denique rei scientiam habiturum and
curaturum, nisi earum quae verae sunt and quae ad communem hominum spectant
utilitatem. This Opinion of Maimonides I find not any where entertained, but
only by the Author of the Book Cozri. That which seems to have led him into
this conceit was his mistaken sense (it may be) of some Passages in the story
of the Kings that speak of the Schools of the Prophets, and the like, of which
more hereafter.

But I know no Reason sufficient to infer any such thing as the Prophetical
Spirit from the highest improvement of Natural or Moral endowments. And I
cannot but wonder how Maimonides could reconcile all this with the right Notion
of Prophecy, which must of necessity include a Divine inspiration, and
therefore may freely be bestowed by God where and upon whom he pleases. Though
indeed common Reason will teach us, that it is not likely that God would
extraordinarily inspire any men, and send them thus specially authorized by
himself to declare his mind authentically to them, and dictate what his Truth
was, who were themselves vicious and of unhallowed lives; and so indeed the
Apostle Peter 2 Epist. Chap. I. tells us plainly, They were holy men of God who
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Neither is it probable that those
who were any way of crazed Minds, or who were inwardly of inconsistent tempers
by reason of any perturbation, could be very fit for these Serene impressions.
A troubled Fancy could no more receive these Ideas of Divine Truth to be
impressed upon it, and clearly reflect them to the Understanding, then a cracked
glass or troubled water can reflect sincerely any image to be made upon them.
And therefore the Hebrew Doctors universally agree in this Rule, That the
Spirit of Prophecy never rests upon any but a Holy and Wise man, one whose
passions are allayed. So the Talmud Masses, Sanhedrin, as it is quoted by R.
Albo, Maam. 3. c. 10. (...) (i.) The Spirit of prophecy never resides but upon
a Man of Wisdom and Fortitude, as also upon a rich and great man.

The two last qualifications in this rule Maimonides in his Fundamenta legis
has left out, and indeed it is full enough without them. But those other two
qualifications of Wisdom and Fortitude are constantly laid down by them in
this argument. And so we find it ascribed to the Author of this Canon, who is
said to be R. Jochanan, c. 4. Gem. Nedar. (...), (i.) R. Jochanan says, God
does not make his Shechina to reside upon any but a rich and humble man, a man
of fortitude, all which we learn from the example of Moses our Master. Where by
Fortitude they mean nothing else but that Power whereby a good man subdues his
Animal part; for so I suppose I may safely translate that solution of theirs
which I have sometime met with, and I think in Pirke Avoth, (...), Who is the
man of fortitude? It is he that subdues his figmentum malum, by which they
meant nothing else but the Sensual or Animal part: of which more in another
Discourse. And thus they give us another Rule as it were paraphrastical upon
the former, which I find Gem. Schab. c. 2. where glancing at that contempt
which the Wise man in Ecclesiastes cast upon Mirth and Laughter, they
distinguish of a twofold Mirth, the one Divine, the other Mundane, and then sum
up many of these Mundane and Terrene affections which this Holy Spirit will not
reside with, (...), The Divine presence or Spiritus Sanctus does not reside
where there is grief and dull sadness, laughter and lightness of behavior,
impertinent talk or idle discourse; but with due and innocuous cheerfulness it
loves to reside, according to that which is written concerning Elisha, Bring me
now a Minstrel: and it came to pass when the Minstrel played, the hand of the
Lord was upon him, 2 Kings 3. Where we see that temper of Mind principally
required by them is a free Cheerfulness, in opposition to all Griefs, Anger, or
any other sad and Melancholy passions. So Gem. Pesac. c. 6. (...), Every man
when he is in passion, if he be a wise man, his wisdom is taken from him; if a
Prophet, his prophecy.

The first part of this Aphorism they there declare by the example of Moses,
who they say prophesied not in the wilderness after the return of the Spies
that brought an ill report of the land of Canaan, by reason of his Indignation
against them: And the last part from the example of the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings
3. 15. of which more hereafter. Thus in the Book Zohar, wherein most of the
ancient Jewish Traditions are recorded, col. 408. (...), Behold, we plainly see
that the divine presence does not reside with Sadness, but with Cheerfulness:
If there be no Cheerfulness, it will not abide there; as it is written
concerning Elisha, who said, Give me now a Minstrell. But from whence learn we
that the Spirit of God will not reside with Heaviness? From the example of
Jacob, for that all that while he grieved for Joseph, the Shechinah or the Holy
Spirit did forsake him. For so they had also a common Tradition, that Jacob
prophesied not that time while his grief for the loss of his son Joseph
remained with him. So L. Tosiphta, (...), The Spirit of Prophecy dwells not
with Sadness, but with Cheerfulness. I will not here dispute the Punctualness
of these Traditions concerning Moses and Jacob, though I doubt not but the main
Scope of them is true, viz. that the Spirit of Prophecy used not to reside
with any black or Melancholy passions, but required a serene and pacate temper
of Mind, it being it self of a mild and gentle nature; as it was well observed
concerning the Holy Ghost in another notion by Tertullian in his de
Spectaculis, Deus praecepit Spiritum Sanctum, utpote pro naturae suae bono
tenerum and delicatum, tranquillitate and lenitate, and quiet and pace
tractare; non furore, non bile, non ira, non dolor inquietare.

Now according to this notion I think we have gained some light for the further
understanding of some Passages in Psalm 51. which the Chaldee Paraphrast and
Hebrew Commentators also understand of the Spirit of Prophecy which was taken
from David in that time of his sorrow and grief of Mind, upon the reflection of
his shameful miscarriage in the matter of Uriah; and this is called ver. 12.
(...) a free Spirit, or a Spirit of alacrity and liberty of mind, acting by
generous and noble and free impulses upon it: and ver. 8. it is paraphrased by
Joy and Gladness, as being that Temper of Mind which it most liberally moved
upon and acted; as likewise ver. 12. a like Periphrasis is used of it, the joy
of God's salvation; and ver. 10. David thus prays for the restoration of it
to him, and the establishing him in the firm possession of it, Create in me a
clean heart, O God, (...), and renew a fixed Spirit within me. As if he had
said, Thy Holy Spirit of Prophecy dwells in no unhallowed Minds, hut with
purity and holiness; and when these are violated, that presently departs; the
holy and the impure Spirit cannot converse together: therefore cleanse my heart
of all pollution, that this divine guest being restored to me, may find a
constant habitation within me. And thus both Rasi and Abenezra gloss on this
place, but especially R. Kimchi, who pursues this sense very largely: and so
before them the Talmudists had expounded it, Gem. Joma. c. 2. where they thus
descant upon those words, ver. 11. Take not thy Holy Spirit from me, and tell
us how David was punished by Leprosy and double Excommunication; one from this
Spirit, (...), which words I find most corruptly translated by Vorstius in his
Comment upon Maimon. his Fundamenta legis. I should therefore thus render them
in their native and genuine sense, Per sex menses erat David leprosus (viz.
propter peccatum in negotio Uriae admissum,) and separabant se ab eo viri
Synagogae magnae, atque ablata est ab eo Shechinah (i. Spiritus Propheticus.)
Primum constat ex Psalm. 119. ubi dicitur, Revertantur ad me timentes te, and
scientes testimonia tua: alterum ex Psalm. 51. ubi dicitur, Fac revertatur ad
me laetitia salutis tuae.

But its now time to look a little into that place which the Masters constantly
refer to in this notion, viz. 1 Kings 3. where when the Kings of Israel and
Judah and Edom in their distress for water, upon their warlike expedition
against the King of Moab, came to Elisha to enquire of God by him, the Prophet
Elisha (ver. 14.) seems to have been moved with indignation against the King of
Israel, and so makes a very unwelcome address to him, Surely were it not that I
regard the presence of Jehosaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward
thee, nor see thee: and then it follows ver. 15. But now bring me a Minstrell:
and it came to pass when the Minstrell played, that the hand of the Lord came
upon him. Which words are thus expounded by R. D. Kimchi, out of the Rabbines,
(with which R. S. Jarchi and R. L. Ben Gersom agree for the substance of his
meaning) (...), Our Doctors tell us, that from that day wherein his Master
Elijah was took up into heaven, the Spirit of Prophecy remained not with him
for a certain time; for, for this cause he was very sorrowful, and the divine
Spirit does not reside with heaviness. Others say that by reason of the
indignation he conceived against the King of Israel, he was disquieted in his
mind; and touching this they say, That whenever a Prophet is disturbed
through anger or passion, the Holy Spirit forsakes him. From whence learn we
this? From the example of Elisha, who said, Give me a Minstrel.

Thus we may by this time see the Reason why Musical instruments were so
frequently used by the Prophets, especially the Hagiographi; which indeed seems
to be nothing else but that their Minds might be thereby put into a more
composed, liberal and cheerful temper, and so the better disposed and fitted
for the transportation of the Prophetical Spirit. So we have heard before out
of the 1 Chronicles. 25. how Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun composed their rapt and
Divine Poems at the sound of the Quire-Musick of the Temple. Another famous
place we find for this purpose 1 Samuel 10. which place (as well as the former)
has been (I think) much mistaken and misinterpreted by some of Singing;
whereas certainly it cannot be meant of any thing less then Divine Poetry, and
a Composure of Hymns excited by a Divine Energy inwardly moving the Mind. In
that place Samuel having anointed Saul King of Israel, to assure him that it
was so ordained of God, he tells him of some Events that should occur to him a
little after his departure from him; whereof this is one, that meeting with
some Prophets, he himself should find the Impulses of a Prophetical Spirit also
moving in him, ver. 5. These Prophets are thus described, After that, thou
shall come to the hill of God, etc. and it shall come to pass when thou art
come thither to the City, that thou shall meet a company of Prophets coming
down from the high place, with a Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and an
Harp before them; and they shall prophecy. And the Spirit of the Lord shall
come upon thee, and thou shall prophecy with them, and shall be turned into
another man. Where this Music which they were accompanied with, was to
vigorate and compose their Minds, as Kimchi comments upon the place, (...), And
before them was a Psalterie (or Lute) and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and an Harp:
for as much as the holy Spirit dwells no where but with alacrity and
cheerfulness: And they prophesied, that is, as Jonath the Targumist expounds
it, they praised God: As if he had said, Their Prophesies were Songs and
Praises to God, uttered by the Holy Ghost. Thus he.

Now as this Divine Spirit thus acted free and cheerful Souls, so the Evil
Spirit actuated sad, Melancholy Minds, as we heard before, and as we may see in
the Example of Saul. And indeed that Evil Spirit which is said to have
possessed him, seems to be nothing else originally but Anguish and grief of
Mind, however wrought upon by some tempting insinuations of an Evil Spirit. And
this sometime instigated him to prophecy after the fashion of such Melancholy
fury, 1 Samuel 18. 10. And it came to pass on the morrow, that the Evil Spirit
from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house; which
Jonathan renders by (...), insanivit in medio domus, or, as Kimchi expounds the
Paraphrast, (...), locutus est verba stultitiae. So also R. Solom. upon the
place expounds it to the same purpose.

So that according to the strain of all the Jewish Scholiasts, by this Evil
Spirit of Saul nothing else is here meant but a Melancholy kind of madness,
which made him prophecy or speak distractedly and inconsistently. To these we
may add R. L. B. Gersom, (...), He spoke in the midst of the house very
confusedly, by reason of that Evil Spirit. Now as this Evil Spirit was indeed
fundamentally, as I said, nothing else but a Sour and Distracted Temper of
Mind arising from the Terrene dregs of Melancholy, Grief and Malice, whereby
Saul was at that time vexed; so the proper Cure of it was the Harmony and
Melody of David's Music, which was therefore made use of to compose his Mind,
and to allay these turbulent passions. And that was the reason (as I hope by
this time it appears) why this Music was so frequently used, viz. to compose
the Animal part, that all kind of Perturbations being dispelled, and a fine
gentle (...) or Tranquillity ushered in, the Soul might be the better disposed
for the Divine breathings of the Prophetical Spirit, which enter not at random
into any sort of Men. (...), as Philo has well expressed it upon this
occasion; These Divine breathings enter only into those Minds that were fitly
disposed for them by Moral and Acquisite qualifications.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Sons or Disciples of the Prophets. An Account of several Schools of
Prophetical Education, as at Naioth in Rama, at Jerusalem, Bethel, Jericho,
Gilgal, etc. Several passages in the Historical Books of Scripture pertinent to
this Argument explained.

AND therefore we find also frequently such Passages in Scripture as strongly
insinuate to us that anciently many were trained so up in a way of
Schooldiscipline, that they might become Candidati Prophetiae, and were as
Probationers to these Degrees which none but God himself conferred upon them.
Yet while they heard others prophecy, there was sometime an afflatus upon them
also, their Souls as it were sympathizing (like Unisons in Music) with the
Souls of those which were touched by the Spirit. And this seems to be the
meaning of that story 1 Samuel 19. where all Readiness messengers sent to Naioth in
Rama to apprehend David (and at last he himself) are said to fall a
prophesying. For it is probable that the Prophesies there spoken of were
Anthems divinely dictated, or Doxologies with such elegant strains of Devotion
and Fancy as might also excite and stir up the Spirits of the Auditors: As
often we find that any admirable Discourses, in which there is a cheerful and
free flowing forth of a rich Fancy in an intelligible, and yet extraordinary,
way, are apt to beget a symbolizing quality of Mind in a stander-by.

And this notion we now drive is clearly suggested by the Jewish writers, who
tell us that this Naioth in Rama was indeed a School of Prophetical education,
and so the Targum expounds the word Naioth, (...), Domus doctrinae, i. e.
Prophetiae. And R. Levi B. G. (...), Our Masters say That there was a School
for the Prophets near the City of Ramah, to which the Prophets congregated: And
to the like purpose R. Solomon. And it is further insinuated that Samuel was the
President of this School or College; as disciplining those young Scholars, and
training them up to those preparatory qualifications which might more dispose
them for Prophecy; and also prophesying to them in sacred Hymns, or otherwise,
whereby their Spirits might receive some Tincture of a like kind. For so we
find it verse 20. And when they saw the company of the Prophets prophesying,
and Samuel standing as appointed over them, the Spirit of God was upon the
Messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied. Where the Chaldee Paraphrast
translates (...) or prophesying, by (...) praising God with sacred Hymns and
Hallelujahs, according to the common strain of the Prophetical degree which was
called Spiritus Sanctus. And so R. Kimchi and R. Levi B. G. here ascribe it
(...) to the Holy Spirit. Among these Prophets it is said Samuel stood as
appointed over them, that is, (...), He stood as a Teacher or Master over them,
as the Chaldee Paraphrast reads it. But R. Levi B. G. strains a little higher,
and perhaps too high, (...), He derived forth from himself, of his own
Prophetical Spirit, by way of Emanation, upon them. Though this kind of
language be very suitable to the Notions of those Masters who will needs
persuade us that almost all the Prophets prophesied by virtue of some influence
raying forth from the Spirit of some other Prophet into them: And Moses himself
they make the Common conduit through whom all Prophetical influence was
conveyed to the rest of the Prophets. A conceit, I think, a little too nice
and subtle to be understood.

But to return, Upon this Ground we have suggested, these Disciples of the
Prophets are called (...), Sons of the Prophets: and these are they which are
meant 1 Samuel 10. 5. (the place we named before) in those words, (...) a Company
of the Prophets, that is, as the Targum renders it, (...) Coetus Scribarum, a
Company of Scribes, (for so these young Scholars were anciently called;) or if
you please rather in Kimchi's language, (...), A company of Scribes, that is,
Scholars: For the Scholars of the Wise men were called Scribes: For they were
the Scholars of the greater Prophets, and these Scholars were called the Sons
of the Prophets. Now the greater Prophets which lived in that time from Eli to
David were Samuel, Gad, Nathan, Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun.

And thus we must understand the meaning of that Question ver. 12. Who is their
Father? which gave occasion to that Proverbial speech afterward used commonly
amongst the Jews [Is Saul also amongst the Prophets?] used of one that was
suddenly raised up to some dignity or perfection which by his education he was
not fitted for. And therefore the Chaldee Paraphrast minding the Scope of the
place renders (...) who is their Father, by (...) who is their Master? which
Kimchi approves, and accordingly expounds that Proverb in this manner, (...)
(...), When any one was mounted from a low state to any dignity, they used to
say, Is Saul also among the Prophets? But R. Solom. would rather keep the
Literal sense of those words, Who is their Father? and therefore supposes
something more then we here contend for, viz. That Prophecy was a kind of
Hereditary thing. For so he speaks, Don't wonder for that he is called the
Father of them, (...), that is, For Prophecy is an hereditary thing. But I
think we may content our selves with what our former Authors have told us, to
which we may add the testimony of R. Levi B. Gersom, who tells us that these
Prophets here spoken of were the Scholars of Samuel who trained them up to a
degree of Prophetical perfection, and so is called their Father, (...), because
that Samuel instructed them, and trained them up by his discipline to a degree
of Prophetical perfection.

Of these Disciples we find very frequent mention in Scripture; So 2 Kings 4.
we read of the Sons or Disciples of the Prophets in Gilgal. And chap. 6. Elisha
is there brought in as their Master, at whose command they were, and therefore
they ask leave to enlarge their dwellings. And Elisha himself was trained up by
Elijah, as his Disciple; and therefore in 2 Kings 3. it was thought a reason
good enough to prove that he was a Prophet, for that he had been Elijah's
Disciple, and powered water upon his hands, as all the Jewish Scholiasts
observe. And 2 Kings 9. 1. Elisha sends one of these his ministering Disciples
to anoint Jehu to be King of Israel. And 1 Kings 20. 35. The young Prophet
there sent to reprove Ahab for sparing Ben-hadad King of Syria is called by the
Chaldee Paraphrast (...) (...), One of the Sons, the Disciples of the Prophets.
And hence it was that Amos urges the extraordinariness of his commission from
God, Chapter 7. 14. I was no Prophet, nor was I a Prophets Son. (...), He was not
prepared for Prophecy, or trained up so as to be fitted for a Prophetical
function by his discipleship, as Abarbanel glosseth upon the place. And
therefore Divine inspiration found him out of the ordinary road of Prophets,
among his Herds of cattle, and in an extraordinary way moved him to go to
Bethel, there to declare God's judgments against King and people, even in the
King's Chapel. To conclude, In the New Testament, when John Baptist and our
Savior called Disciples to attend upon them and to learn divine Oracles from
them, it seems to have been no new thing, but that which was the common custom
of the old Prophets.

Now of these Prophets there were several Schools or Colleges, as the Jews
observe, in several Cities, according as occasion was to employ them. So we
read of a College in Jerusalem 2 Kings 22. 14. where Huldah the Prophetess
lived, which is called (...) in the Original, and by the Chaldee Paraphrast
translated (...), Domus Doctrinae; by Kimchi (...) a School. So 2 Kings chapter 2,
and 4. we meet with diverse places set down as those where the residence of
those young Prophets was, as Bethel and Jericho and Gilgal, etc. So Kimchi
observes upon the place (...), As the Sons of the Prophets were in Bethel and
Jericho, so were there also of them in several other places. And the main
reason why they were thus dispersed in many of the Cities of Israel was this,
that they might reprove the Israelites that were there: and their Prophecy was
wholly according to the exigencie of those times; and therefore it was that
their Prophecy was not committed to writing. From hence some of the Jewish
writers tell us of a certain (...) of Prophecy, one continually like an
Evening-star shining upon the conspicable Hemisphere, when another was set.
Kimchi tells us of this Mystical gloss upon those words 1 Samuel 3. 3. Ere the
Lamp of God went out, (...), This is spoken Mystically concerning the light of
Prophecy, according to that saying amongst our Doctors [the Sun rises and the
Sun sets,] that is, Ere God makes the Sun of one righteous man to set, he
makes the Sun of another righteous man to rise.

CHAP. X.
Of Bath Kol, i. e. Filia Vocis: That it succeeded in the room of Prophecy:
That it was by the Jews counted the Lowest degree of Revelation. What places in
the New Testament are to be understood of it.

WE should come now briefly to speak of the Highest degree of Divine
Inspiration or Prophecy taken in a general sense, which was the Mosaical. But
before we do that, it may not be amiss to take notice of the Lowest degree of
Revelation among the Jews, which was inferior to all that which they call by
the name of Prophecy: and This was their (...), Bath Ko^, Filia vocis, which
was nothing else but some Voice which was heard as descending from Heaven,
directing them in any affair as occasion served: which kind of Revelation might
be made to one (as Maimon. par. 2. c. 42. More Nevoch. tells us) that was no
way prepared for Prophecy.

Of this Filia Vocis we have mention made in one of the Ancientest monuments of
Jewish learning, which is Pirke R. Eliezer c. 44. and otherwhere very
frequently among the Jewish writers, as that which was a frequent thing after
the ceasing of Prophecy among the Jews; of which more afterward. Josephus
Archaeol. lib. 13. c. 18.
tells a story of Hircanus the High Priest, how he heard this Voice from
Heaven, which told him of the victory which his Sons had got at Cyzicum against
Antiochus the same day the battle was fought; and this (he says) while he was
offering up incense in the Temple, (...), he was made partaker of a vocal
converse with God, that is by a (...).

This R. Isaac Angarensis L. Cosri strongly urges against the Karraei or
Scripturarii, (a sort of Jews that reject all Talmudical Traditions) that the
grand Doctors of the Jews received such Traditions from the Lxxii Senators, who
were guided either by a (...), or something answerable to it, in the truth of
things, after all Prophecy was ceased, Maam. 3.. 41. (...), (i.) There is a
Tradition that the men of the great Sanhedrim were bound to be skilled in the
knowledge of all Sciences, and therefore it is much more necessary that
Prophecy should not be taken from them, or that which should supply its room,
viz. the Daughter of Voice, and the like. Thus he, according to the Genius of
Talmudical learning, is pleased to expound the place Esaias 2. where it is said,
that a law shall go forth out of Sion, of the Consistorial Decrees of the
Judges, Rulers and Priests of the Jews, and the great Senate of Lxxii Elders,
whom he would needs persuade us to be guided infallibly by this (...), or in
some other way (...) by some divine virtue, power or assistance always
communicated to them, as supposed at least that such an Heroical Spirit as that
Spirit of Fortitude which belonged to the Judges and Kings of Israel, and is
called the Spirit of God, (as Maimonides in More Nev. tells us) had perpetually
cleaved to them.

But we shall here leave our Author to his Judaical superstition, and take
notice of Two or Three places in the New Testament which seem to be understood
perfectly of this Filia vocis, which the constant Tradition of the Jews assures
us to have succeeded in the room of Prophecy. The first is John 12. where this
Heavenly voice was conveyed to our Savior as if it had been the noise of
Thunder, but was not well understood by all those that stood by, who therefore
thought that either it thundered, or that it was a mighty voice of some Angel
that spoke to him: ver. 28, 29. Then came there a voice from Heaven, saying, I
have both glorified my name, and will glorify it again. The people therefore
that stood by and heard it, said it thundered: others said that an Angel spoke
to him. So Matt. 3. 17. after our Saviors Baptism, upon his coming out of the
water, the Evangelist tells us that the Heavens were opened, and that the
Spirit of God descended upon him in the shape of a Dove, and lo, a voice from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And last of
all we meet with this kind of Voice upon our Savior's Transfiguration, Matthew.
17. 5, 6. which is there so described as coming out of a Cloud, as if it had
been loud like the noise of Thunder, Behold a bright cloud overshadowed them,
and behold a Voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased: which Voice it is said the three Disciples that were then
with him in the Mount heard, as we are told in the following verse, and also 2
Pet. 1. 17, 18. From whence we are fully informed, that it was this Filia Vocis
we speak of which came for the Apostles sakes that were with him, as a
Testimony of that glory and honor with which God magnified his Son; which
Apostles were not yet raised up to the Degree of Prophecy, but only made
partakers of a Voice inferior to it. The words are these, He received from God
the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the
excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And this
voice which came from Heaven we heard when we were with him in the holy mount.
Now that this was that very (...) we speak of, which was inferior to Prophecy,
we may sufficiently learn from the next verse, We have also a more sure word of
Prophecy: For indeed true Prophecy was counted much more Authentical then
this (...), as being a Divine Inspiration into the Mind of the Prophet; which
this was not, but only a Voice that moved their Exterior Senses; and by the
mediation thereof informed their Minds. And thus we have done with this
Argument.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Highest Degree of Divine Inspiration, viz. the Mosaical. Four
Differences between the Divine Revelations made to Moses, and to the rest of
the Prophets. How the Doctrine of men Prophetically inspired is to approve it
self by Miracles, or by it is Reasonableness. The Sympathy and Agreeableness
between an Holy Mind and Divine Truth.

WE now come briefly to enquire into the Highest degree of Divine Inspiration,
which was the Mosaical, that by which the Law was given; and this we may best
do by searching out the Characteristical differences of Moses's Inspiration
from that which was Technically called Prophecy. And these we shall take out
of Maimon. his De Fund. Legis, c. 7. where they are fully described according
to the general strain of all the Rabbinical Doctrine delivered upon this
Argument.

The first is, That Moses was made partaker of these 1.
Divine Revelations per vigiliam, whereas God manifested himself to all the
other Prophets in a Dream or Vision when their Senses were (...), What is the
difference between the Prophecy of Moses and the Prophecy of all other
Prophets? All other Prophets did prophecy in a Dream or Vision: but Moses our
Master when he was waking and standing, according to what is written (Number. 7.
89.) And when Moses was gone into the Tabernacle of the Congregation to speak
with him, (i. e. God) then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him. By
which place in Numb. it appears he had free recourse to this Heavenly Oracle at
any time. And therefore the Talmudists have a Rule, (...) That Moses had never
any Prophecy in the nightime, (i.) in a Dream or Vision of the night, as the
other Prophets had.

The second difference is, That Moses prophesied 2.
without the mediation of any Angelical power, by an influence derived
immediately from God; whereas in all other Prophesies (as we have showed
heretofore) some Angel still appeared to the Prophet, (...), All Prophets did
prophecy by the help or ministry of an Angel, and therefore they did see that
which they saw in parables or under some dark representation; but Moses
prophesied without the ministry of an Angel. This he proves from Numbers 12.
8. where God says of Moses, I will speak with him mouth to mouth; and so Exodus
33. 11. The Lord spoke unto Moses face to face.

But we must not here so much adhere to that Exposition which Maimonides and
the rest of his Countrymen give us of this place, as to forget what we are
told in the New Testament concerning the Ministry of Angels which God used in
giving the Law it self: And so S. Stephen discourses of it, Acts 7. 53. and S.
Paul to the Galatians chapter 3. tells us, the Law was given by the disposition of
Angels in the hands of a Mediator, that is, Moses, the Mediator then between
God and the people. And therefore I should rather think the meaning of those
words [Face to face] to import the clearness and evidence of the Intellectual
light wherein God appeared to Moses, which was greater then any of the Prophets
were made partakers of. And therefore the old tradition goes of them, that they
saw (...) in Speculo non lucido, whereas Moses saw in Speculo lucido, (...), as
Philo tells us (together with Maimonides) in his Book, Quis Rerum divin. haeres
sit, that is, without any impressions or Images of things in his Imagination in
an Hieroglyphical way, as was wont to be in all Dreams and Visions; but by
characterizing all immediately upon his Understanding: though otherwise much of
the Law was indeed almost little more for the main scope and aim of it but an
Emblem or Allegory.

But there may be yet a farther meaning of those words [Face to face,] and that
is the friendly and amicable way whereby all divine Revelations were made to
Moses; for so it is added in the Text, As a man speaks unto his friend.

And this is the third difference which Maimonides assigns, 3.
viz. (...), All the other Prophets were afraid and troubled and fainted; but
Moses was not so: for the Scripture says, God spoke to him as a man speaks to
his friend; that is to say, As a man is not afraid to hear the words of his
friend, so was Moses able to understand the words of Prophecy without any
disturbance and astonishment of Mind.

The fourth and last difference is the Liberty of Moses's 4.
Spirit to prophecy at all times, as we heard before out of Numb. 7. 89. He
might have recourse at any time to the sacred Oracle (in the Tabernacle) which
spoke from between the Cherubins: and so Maimonides lays down this difference,
(...), None of the Prophets did prophecy at what time they would, save Moses,
who was clothed with the Holy Spirit when he would, and the Spirit of Prophecy
did abide upon him: neither had he need to predispose his Mind or prepare
himself for it, for he was always disposed and in readiness as a ministering
Angel; and therefore could he prophecy at what time he would, according to
that which is spoken in Numb. 9. 8. Tarry you here a little, and I will hear
what the Lord will command concerning you. Thus Maimonides, who, I think, here
somewhat hyperbolizeth, and scarce speaks consistently with the rest of the
Hebrew Masters. For we may remember what we heard before concerning the
Talmudical Tradition, that Moses's mind was indisposed for Prophecy when he
was transported with indignation against the Spies; though I think it is most
probable that he had a greater liberty of prophesying then any other of the
Prophets had.

Now this clear distinct kind of Inspiration made immediately upon an
Intellectual faculty in a familiar way, which we see was the gradus Mosaicus,
was most fit and proper for Laws to be administered in: which was excellently
took notice of by Plutarch in that Discourse of his, (...), where he tells us
the Poetry that was usually interlaced with Riddles and Parables was taken
away in his time, and a more familiar way of Prophecy brought in; though he by
a Gentile superstition applies that to his Pythia; (...), etc. God has now
taken away from his Oracles Poetry, and the variety of dialect, and
circumlocution, and obscurity; and has so ordered them to speak to those that
consult them, as the Laws do to the Cities under their subjection, and Kings
to their people, and Masters to their Scholars, in the most intelligible and
porswasive language. But by Plutarch's leave this character agrees neither to
his Pythia, nor indeed to Moses himself (who put a veil upon his face in giving
the Law it self to the people) but to our Savior alone, the Dispenser of the
true Law of God inwardly to the Souls of Men; and therein conversing with them,
not so much (...), not so much Face to Face as Mind to Mind.

We have now seen what is this gradus Propheticus Mosaicus, which indeed was
necessary should be transcendent and extraordinary, because it was the Basis
of all future Prophecy among the Jews: For all the Prophets mainly aim at that
to establish and confirm the Law of Moses, as to the practical observation of
it; and therefore it was also so strongly manifested to the Israelites by Signs
and Miracles done in the sight of all the people, and his familiarity and
acquaintance with Heaven testified to them all, the divine voice being heard by
them all at Mount Sinai; which dispensation amounted at least to as much as a
(...) to the very lowest of the people. All which Considerations put R. Phineas
into such an admiration of this (...) or Statio montis Sinai, (as the Doctors
are wont to call it) that he determines in Pirke Eliezer, That all this
Generation that heard the voice of the Holy Blessed God, was worthy to be
accounted as the ministering Angels. But what That Voice was which they heard,
the later Jews are scarce well agreed: but Maimonides, according to the most
received opinion, in More Nev. p. 2. c. 33. tells that they only heard those
first words of the Law distinctly, viz. I am the Lord thy God, and, Thou shall
have none other gods, etc. and but only the sound of all the rest of the words
in which the remainder of the Law was given: and this, as he says, was the
great Mystery of that Station, so much spoken of by the Ancients.

And here by the way we may take notice, That that divine Inspiration which is
conveyed to any one man, primarily benefits none but himself; and therefore
many times, as Maimonides tells us, it rested in this private use, not
profiting any else but those to whom it came. And the reason of this is
manifest, for that an Inspiration abstractly considered can only satisfy the
mind of him to whom it is made, of its own Authority and Authenticalness (as
we have showed before:) And therefore that one man may know that another has
that Doctrine revealed to him by a Prophetical spirit which he delivers, he
must also either be inspired, and so be in gradu Prophetico in a true sense, or
be confirmed in the belief of it by some Miracle, whereby it may appear that
God has committed his Truth to such an one, by giving him some signal power in
altering the course of Nature; which indeed was the way by which the Prophets
of old ordinarily confirmed their Doctrine, when they delivered any thing new
to the people; which course our Savior himself and his Disciples also took to
confirm the Truth of the Gospel: Or else there must be so much Reasonableness
in the thing it self, as that by Moral arguments it may be sufficient to beget
a belief in the Minds of sober and good men.

And I wish this last way of becoming acquainted with Divine Truth were better
known amongst us: For when we have once attained to a true sanctified frame of
Mind, we have then attained to the End of all Prophecy, and see all divine
Truth that tends to the salvation of our Souls in the Divine light, which
always shines in the Purity and Holiness of the New Creature, and so need no
further Miracle to confirm us in it. And indeed that God-like glory and majesty
which appears in the naked simplicity of true Goodness, will by its own
Connateness and Sympathy with all saving Truth friendly entertain and embrace
it.

CHAP. XII.
When the Prophetical Spirit ceased in the Jewish Church. The Cessation of
Prophecy noted as a famous Epoch by the Jews. The restoring of the
Prophetical Spirit by Christ. Some passages to this purpose in the New
Testament explained. When the Prophetical Spirit ceased in the Christian
Church. That it did not continue long, proved by several Testimonies of the
Ancient Writers.

THus we have now done with all those sorts of Prophecy which we find any
mention of: And as a Coronis to this Discourse we shall farther enquire a
little what Period of time it was in which this Prophetical Spirit ceased both
in the Jewish and Christian Church. In which business because the Scripture it
self is in a manner silent, we must appeal to such Histories as are like to be
most Authentical in this business.

And first for the Period of time when it ceased in the Jewish, I find our
Christian writers differing. Justin Martyr would needs persuade us that it was
not till the Era Christiana. This he inculcates often in his Dialogue with
Trypho the Jew, (...), There never ceased in your Nation either Prophet or
Prince, till Jesus Christ was both born and had suffered. And so he often there
tells us that John the Baptist was the last Prophet of the Jewish Church; which
conceit he seems to have made so much of, as thinking to bring in our Savior
lumine Prophetico, with the greater evidence of Divine authority, as the
promised Messiah into the world. But Clemens Alexandrinus has much trulier,
with the consent of all Jewish Antiquity, resolved us, that all Prophecy
determined in Malachy, in his Strom. lib. 1. where he numbers up all the
Prophets of the Jews, Thirty five in all, and Malachy as the last. Though
indeed the Talmudists reckon up Fifty five Prophets and Prophetesses together,
Gem. Mass. Megil. (...), The Rabbis say that there were 48 Prophets and 7
Prophetesses that did prophecy to the Iraelites: Which after they had reckoned
almost up, they tell us that Malachy was the last of them, and that he was
contemporary with Mordecai, Daniel, Haggai, Zachary, and some others (whose
Prophesies are not extant) whom for their number sake they there reckon up, who
all prophesied in the second year of Darius. But commonly they make only these
Three, Haggai, Zachary and Malachy, to be the last of the Prophets, and so
call them (...); so Massec. Sotah chapter last, where the Misnical Doctors tell us,
that from the time in which all the first Prophets expired, the Urim and
Thummim ceased; and the Gemarists say that they are called (...), the First
Prophets, (...), in opposition to Haggai, Zachary and Malachy, which are the
Last. And so Maimon. and Bartenor. tell us that the Prophetae priores were so
called, because they prophesied in the times (...) of the first Temple, and the
Posteriores, because they prophesied in the time of the second Temple: and when
these later Prophets died, then all Prophecy expired, and there was left, as
they say, only a Bath Kol to succeed some time in the room of it. So we are
told Gem. Sanhedrim c. 1.. 13. (...) Our Rabbis say, that from that time the
later Prophets died, the Holy Spirit was taken away from Israel; nevertheless
they enjoyed the Filia vocis: and this is repeated Massec. Joma c. 1. Now all
that time which the Spirit of Prophecy lasted among the Jews under the second
Temple, their Chronology makes to be but Forty years. So the Author of the
Book Cosri, Maam. 3.. 39. (...), (i.) The continuance of Prophecy under the
time of the second Temple was almost forty years. And this R. Jehuda his
Scholiast confirms out of an Historico-Cabbalistical Treatise of R. Abraham Ben
Dior. and a little after he tells us, that after forty years their Sapientes
were called Senators, (...), after forty years were passed, all the Wisemen
were called The Men of the great Synagogue. And therefore the Author of that
Book uses this Era of the Cessation of Prophecy; and so this is commonly
noted as a famous Epoch among all their Chronologers, as the Book Juchasin,
the Seder Olam Zuta, as R. David Gantz has summed them all up in his
chronological History put forth lately by Vorstius. The like may be observed
from 1 Maccab. 9. 27. and chap. 4. 46. and chap. 14. 41.

This Cessation of Prophecy determined as it were all that old Dispensation
wherein God has manifested himself to the Jews under the Law, that so that
growing old and thus wearing away, they might expect that new Dispensation of
the Messiah which had been promised so long before, and which should again
restore this Prophetical Spirit more abundantly. And so this Interstitium of
Prophecy is insinuated by Joel 2. in those words concerning the later times;
In those days shall your Sons and Daughters Prophecy, etc. And so S. Peter
Acts 2. makes use of the place to take off that admiration which the Jews were
possessed withal to see so plentiful an effusion of the Prophetical Spirit
again: And therefore this Spirit of Prophecy is called the Testimony of Jesus
in the Apocalypse, chapter 19.

According to this notion we must understand that passage in John 7. 39. The
Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified. To which
that in Ephesians. 4. He ascended up on high, and gave gifts unto men, plainly
answers: As likewise the Answer which the Christians at Ephesus made to Paul,
Acts 19. when he asked them whether they had received the Holy ghost, That they
knew not whether there was a Holy ghost (that is) whether there were any
Extraordinary Spirit, or Spirit of Prophecy restored again to the Church or
not, as has been well observed of late by some learned men. But enough of this.

We come now briefly to dispatch the second Enquiry, viz. What time the Spirit
of Prophecy, which was again restored by our Savior, ceased in the Christian
Church. It may be thought that S. John was the last of Christian Prophets, for
that the Apocalypse is the latest dated of any Book which is received into the
Canon of the New Testament. But I know no place of Scripture that intimates any
such thing, as if the Spirit of Prophecy was so soon to expire. And indeed if
we may believe the Primitive Fathers, it did not; though it overliv'd S. John's
time but a little. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3.. 37.
Eusebius tells us of one Quadratus (...), who together with the daughters of
Philip had the gift of Prophecy. So the report was. This Quadratus, as he
tells us, lived in Trajan's time, which was but at the beginning of the second
Century. And a little after, speaking of good men in that age, he adds, (...),
Many strange and admirable virtues of the Divine Spirit as yet showed forth
themselves by them. And the same Author lib. 4.. 18. tells us out of Justin
Martyr, who lived in the middle of the second Century, and then writ his
Apology for the Christians, That the Gift of Prophecy was still to be seen in
the Church, (...) Vide Justin. Martyr. in Dial. cum Tryphone Judaeo, (...).
. Yet not long afterward there is little or no remembrance of the Prophetical
spirit remaining in the Church. Hence the Montanists are by some of the Fathers
proved to be no better then Dissemblers when they pretended to the Gift of
Prophecy, for that it was then ceased in the Church. And so Eusebius tells us
lib. 5.. 3. and withal that Montanus and his Accomplices only took advantage of
that Virtue of working wonders which yet appeared (as was reported, though
doubtfully) in some places, to make a semblance of the Spirit of Prophecy;
(...). But then especially did Montanus, Alcibiades and Theodotus raise up in
many an opinion that they prophesied: And this belief was so much the more
increased concerning their prophesying, for that as yet in several Churches
were wrought many Miraculous and Stupendous effects of the Holy Spirit; though
yet there was no perfect agreement in their opinion about this.

To conclude this, (and to hasten to an End of this Discourse of Prophecy,)
There is indeed in Antiquity more frequent mention of some And that the Gift of
working Miracles was ceased in his time, S. Chrysostom does more then once
affirm, (...), l. 4. de Sacerdotio, etc. The like is affirmed by S. Austin.
Miracles wrought in the name of Christ; but less is said concerning the
Prophetical Virtue, especially after the second Century. That it was rare, and
to be seen but sometimes, and more obscurely in some few Christians only who
had attained to a good degree of Self-purification, is intimated by that of
Origin in his 7th Book against Celsus. (...).

CHAP. XIII.
Some Rules and Observations concerning Prophetical Writ in general.

WE should now shut up all this Discourse about Prophecy; only before we
conclude, it may not be amiss to add a few Rules for the better understanding
of Prophetical Writ in general.

1. The First, (which yet we shall rather put under debate,) is concerning the
Style and Manner of languaging all pieces of Prophecy; whether that was not
peculiarly the work of the Prophet himself; whether it does not seem that the
Prophetical Spirit dictated the Matter only or principally, yet did leave the
words to the Prophet himself. It may be considered that God made not use of
Idiots or Fools to reveal his Will by, but such whose Intellectuals were entire
and perfect; and that he imprinted such a clear copy of his Truth upon them, as
that it became their own Sense, being digested fully into their Understandings;
so as they were able to deliver and represent it to others as truly as any can
paint forth his own Thoughts. If the Matter and Substance of things be once
lively in the Mind, verba non invita sequentur: And according as that Matter
operates upon the Mind and Fantasy, so will the Phrase and Language be in
which it is expressed. And therefore I think to doubt whether the Prophets
might not mistake in representing the Mind of God in their Prophetical
Inspirations, except all their Words had been also dictated to them, is to
question whether they could speak Sense as wise men, and tell their own
Thoughts and Experiences truly or not. And indeed it seems most agreeable to
the nature of all these Prophetical Visions and Dreams we have discoursed of,
wherein the nature of the Enthusiasme consisted in a Symbolical and
Hieroglyphical shaping forth of Intelligible things in their Imaginations, and
enlightening the Understanding of the Prophets to discern the scope and meaning
of these Visa or Phantasmata; that those Words and Phrases in which they were
audibly expressed to the Hearers afterward or penned down, should be the
Prophets own: For the Matter was not (as seems evident from what has been
said) represented always by Words, but by Things. Though I know that sometime
in these Visions they had a Voice speaking to them; yet it is not likely that
Voice should so dilate and comment so largely upon things, as it was fit the
Prophet should do when he repeated the same things to vulgar ears.

It may also further be considered That our Savior and his Apostles generally
quote Passages out of the Old Testament as they were translated by the Lxx, and
that where the Lxx have not rendered them verbatim, but have much varied the
manner of phrasing things from the Original; as has been abundantly observed
by Philologers: Which it is not likely they would have done, had the Original
words been the very Dictate of the Spirit; for certainly that would seem not to
need any such Paraphrastical variations, as being of themselves full and clear
enough; besides herein they might seem to weaken the Authenticalness of the
Divine Oracles. And indeed has not the swerving from this Notion made some of
late conceit (though erroneously) the Translation of the Lxx to be more
Authentical then the Hebrew, which they would needs persuade us had been
corrupted by the Jews, our Savior declining the Phraseologie thereof?

Besides, we find the Prophets speaking every one of them in his own Dialect;
and such a Variety of Style and Phraseologie appears in their Writings, as may
argue them to have spoken according to their own proper Genius: which is
observed by the Jews themselves (who are most zealously, as is well known,
devoted to the very Letter of the Text) in all the Prophets except Moses, and
that part of Moses only which contains the Decalogue. And hence we have that
Rule Gem. Sanhedr. (...), The same form does not ascend upon two Prophets,
neither do both of them prophecy in the same form. Which Rule Cocceius
confesses he knows not the meaning of: But Abarbanel, who better understood
the Mind of his own Compatriots, in his Comment upon Jeremy chapter 49. gives us a
full account of it, upon occasion of some Phrases in that Prophecy concerning
Edom, parallel to what we find in Obadiah. From this congruencie of the Style
in both he thus takes occasion to lay down our present Notion as the Sense of
that former Theorem, (...), The Prophets did not prophecy in the same manner
as Moses did: For he prophesied from God immediately, from whom he received not
only the Prophecy, but also the very Words and Phrases; and accordingly as he
heard them, so he wrote them in the Book of the Law, in the very same words
which he heard from God: but as for the rest of the Prophets, they beheld in
their Visions the things themselves which God made known to them, and both
declared and expressed them in their own Phraseologie.

Thus we see he ascribes the Phrase and Style every where to the Prophet
himself, except only in the Law, which he supposes to have been dictated
totidem verbis: which is probable enough, if he means the Law strictly so
taken, viz. for the Decalogue, as it is most likely he does. And again a little
after, (...) The things themselves they saw in Prophecy, but they themselves
did explain and interpret them in that Dialect which was most familiar to them.
And this, as he there tells, was the reason why the same kind of Phraseologie
occurred not among the Prophets, according to the sense of the Talmudists
Maxim we mentioned. The like the Jewish Scholiasts observe upon those false
Prophets who did all uno ore bid Ahab ascend up to Ramoth-Gilead and prosper,
(...), Unus idemque loquendi modus nunquam reperitur in duobus Prophetis: And
therefore they made it an argument that these were false Prophets, because they
did idem Canticum canere, for they all said, Go up and prosper. And thus the
Heathenish Philosopher Plutarch, in his (...), thought likewise concerning his
Oracle, telling us, That all Enthusiasme is a mixture of two Motions, the one
is impressed upon the Soul which is Gods Organ, the other arises from it; and
therefore he says, (...), All Prophetical Enthusiasme, like as also that which
is Amatorious, does make use of the subject faculty, and moves every Recipient
according to it is disposition and nature. And thence he thus excuses the rough
and unpolished language in which the Oracles were sometime delivered, most
fitly to our purpose describing Prophetical Inspiration, (...), For neither the
voice, nor sound, nor phrase, nor meter is from God, but from Pythia her self;
God only suppeditates the phantasms, and kindles a light in the Soul to
signify future things: For all Enthusiasme is after this manner. Hence was
that old saying of Heraclitus, (...), That the King whose Oracle is at Delphi,
neither plainly expresses, nor conceals, but only obscurely intimates by signs.
But to conclude this first Particular, I shall add by way of caution, We must
not think that we can vary Scripture-expression so securely with retaining the
true meaning, except we likewise had as real an understanding of the Sense it
self as the Prophets had, over whom God also did so far superintend in their
copying forth his Truth, as not to suffer them to swerve from his meaning. And
so we have done with that Particular.

2. In the next place, for the better understanding all Prophetical writ, we
must observe That there is sometimes a seeming inconsistence in things spoken
of, if we shall come to examine them by the strict Logical rules of Method: we
must not therefore in the matter of any Prophetical Vision look for a constant
Methodical contexture of things carried on in a perpetual coherence. The
Prophetical Spirit does not tie it self to these Rules of Art, or thus knit up
its Dictates Systematically, fitly framing one piece or member into a
combination with the rest, as it were with the joints and sinews of Method: For
this indeed would rather argue an humane and artificial contrivance then any
Inspiration, which as it must beget a Transportation in the Mind, so it must
spend it self in such Abrupt kind of Revelations as may argue indeed the
Prophet to have been inspired. And therefore Tully lib. 2. de Divinat.
judiciously excepts against the Authenticalness of those Verses of the Sibylls
which he met with in his time, (and which were the same perhaps with those we
now have) because of those Acrosticks and some other things which argued an
elaborate artifice, and an affected diligence of the Writer, and so indeed non
furentis erant, sed adhibentis diligentiam, as he speaks. Lumen Propheticum est
lumen abruptum, as was well noted anciently by the Jews. And therefore the
Masters of Jewish Tradition have laid down this Maxim, (...), Non est prius
and posterius in Lege, We must not seek for any Methodical concatenation of
things in the Law, or indeed in any other part of Prophetical writ; it being a
most usual thing with them many times (...) to knit the Beginning and End of
Time together. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus Sancti gratia, is true also of
the Grace or Gift of Prophecy. We find no curious Transitions, nor true
dependence many times of one thing upon another; but things of very different
natures, and that were cast into periods of time secluded one from another by
vast intervals, all couched together in the same Vision; as Jerome has
observed in many places, and therefore tells us, Non curae fuit Spiritui
prophetali historiae ordinem sequi. And thus he takes notice in Daniel 11. 2.
that whereas there were Thirteen Kings between Cyrus and Alexander the Great,
the Prophet speaks of but Four, skipping over the rest, as if the other Nine
had filled up no part of the interval. The like he observes upon Jeremy 21. 1.
and otherwhere; as likewise sudden and abrupt Introductions of persons,
Mutations of persons, (Exits and Intrats upon this Prophetical stage being made
as it were in an invisible manner) and Transitions from the voice of one person
to another. The Prophetical Spirit though it make no noise and tumult in its
motions, yet it is most quick, spanning as it were from the Center to the
Circumference; it moves most swiftly, though most gently. And thus Philo's
observation is true, (...). There must be some kind of (...) in all Prophecy,
as In his Quis rerum Divinarum haeres sit.
Philo tells us, (...), When divine light arises upon the Horizon of the Soul
of Man, his own humane light sets: It must at least hide it self as a lesser
light, as it were by an Occasus Heliacus, under the beams of the greater, and
be wholly subject to the irradiations and influences of it. (...), as he goes
on, Therefore the setting of a man's own Discursive faculty and the eclipsing
thereof begets an Ecstasis and a divine kind of Mania.

3. The last Rule we shall observe is, That no piece of Prophecy is to be
understood of the state of the World to come or the Mundus animarum: For indeed
it is altogether impossible to describe that, or to comprehend it in this life.
And therefore all divine Revelation in Scripture must concern some state in
this world. And so we must understand all those places that treat of a new
Heaven and a new Earth, and such like. And so we must understand the new
Jerusalem mentioned in the New Testament, in that Prophetical book of the
Apocalypse, chapter 21. And thus the Jews were wont universally to understand them,
according to that Maxim we now speak of ascribed to R. Jochanan in Massec.
Berac. c. 5. (...) All the Prophets prophesied to the days of the Messiah; but
as for the world to come, Eye has not seen it. So they constantly expound that
passage in Esaias 64. 4. Since the beginning of the world Men have not heard, nor
perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him. And according to this Aphorism our
Savior seems to speak, when he says, All the Prophets and the Law prophesied
until John, Mat. 11. 13. (...), i. e. They prophesied to or for that
Dispensation which was to begin with John, who lived in the time of the
twilight as it were between the Law and the Gospel. They prophesied of those
things which should be accomplished within the period of Gospel Dispensation
which was ushered in by John.

As for the state of Blessedness in Heaven, it is major Mente humana, much more
is it major Phantasia. But of this in part heretofore.

An Advertisement.
THE Reader may remember That our Author in the beginning of his Treatise of
the Immortality of the Soul, propounded these Three great Principles of
Religion to be discoursed of; 1. The Immortality of the Soul, 2. The Existence
and Nature of God, 3. The Communication of God to Mankind through Christ. And
having spoken largely to the Two former Principles of Natural Theology, he
thought it fit (as a Preparation to the Third, which imports the Revelation of
the Gospel) to speak something concerning Prophecy, the way whereby Revealed
Truth is dispensed to us. Of this he intended to treat but a little (they are
his words in the beginning of the Treatise of Prophecy) and then pass on to
the Third and Last part, viz. Those Principles of Revealed Truth which tend
most of all to advance and cherish true and real Piety. But in his discoursing
of Prophecy so many considerable Enquiries offered themselves to his thoughts,
that by that time he had finished this Discourse (designed at first only as a
Preface) his Office of being Dean and Catechist in the College did expire.
Thus far had the Author proceeded in that year of his Office: and it was not
long after that Bodily distempers and weaknesses began more violently to seize
upon him, which the Summer following put a Period to his life here; (a life so
every way beneficial to those who had the happiness to converse with him.) Sic
multis ille bonis flebilis occidit. Thus he who designed to speak of God's
Communication of Himself to Mankind through Christ, was taken up by God into a
more inward and immediate participation of Himself in Blessedness. Had he lived
and had health to have finished the remaining part of his designed Method, the
Reader may easily conceive what a Valuable piece that Discourse would have
been. Yet that he may not altogether want the Authors labors upon such an
Argument, I thought good in the next place to adjoine a Discourse of the like
importance and nature, (delivered heretofore by the Author in some
Chappel-Exercises) from which I shall not detain the Reader by any more of
Preface.

A DISCOURSE Treating Of LEGAL Righteousness, EVANGELICAL Righteousness, Or The
Righteousness of FAITH; The Difference between the LAW and the GOSPEL, OLD and
NEW COVENANT; JUSTIFICATION and DIVINE ACCEPTANCE; The CONVEIGHANCE of the
EVANGELICAL Righteousness to us by FAITH.

Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 5. 20.
Having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof. 2 Timothy 3. 5. For the
Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did. Heb. 7. 19.
B. Macarius in Homil. 15. (...).

A Discourse Of LEGAL Righteousness, and of The Righteousness of FAITH, etc.
Romans 9. 31, 32. But Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has
not attained to the Law of righteousness: Wherefore? Because they sought it not
by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction, showing What it is to have a right Knowledge of Divine
Truth, and What it is that is either Availeable or Prejudicial to the true
Christian Knowledge and Life.

THE Doctrine of Christian Religion propounded to us by our Savior and his
Apostles, is set forth with so much simplicity, and yet with so much repugnancy
to that degenerate Genius and Spirit that rules in the hearts and lives of Men,
that we may truly say of it, it is both the Easiest and the Hardest thing: it
is a Revelation wrapped up in a Complication of mysteries, like that Book of the
Apocalypse, which both unfolds and hides those great Arcana that it treats of;
or as Plato sometimes chose so to explain the secrets of his Metaphysical or
Theological Philosophy, (...), that he that read might not be able to
understand, except he were a Son of Wisdom, and had been trained up in the
knowledge of it. The Principles of True Religion are all in themselves plain
and easy, delivered in the most familiar way, so that he that runs may read
them; they are all so clear and perspicuous, that they need no Key of
Analytical demonstration to unlock them: the Scripture being written doctis
pariter and indoctis, and yet it is Wisdom in a mystery which the Princes of
this world understand not; a sealed Book which the greatest Sophies may be most
unacquainted with: it is like that Pillar of Fire and of a Cloud that parted
between the Israelites and the Egyptians, giving a clear and comfortable light
to all those that are under the manuduction and guidance thereof, but being
full of darkness and obscurity to those that rebel against it. Divine Truth is
not to be discerned so much in a man's Brain, as in his Heart. Divine wisdom is
a Tree of life to them that find her, and it is only Life that can feelingly
converse with Life. All the thin Speculations and subtilest Discourses of
Philosophy cannot so well unfold or define any Sensible Object, nor tell any
one so well what it is, as his own naked Sense will do. There is a Divine and
Spiritual sense which only is able to converse internally with the life and
soul of Divine Truth, as mixing and uniting it self with it; while vulgar Minds
behold only the body and outside of it. Though in it self it be most
intelligible, and such that man's Mind may most easily apprehend; yet there is a
(...) (as the Hebrew writers call that (...)) incrustamentum immunditiei upon
all corrupt Minds, which hinders the lively taste and relish of it. This is
that thick and palpable Darkness which cannot comprehend that divine Light that
shines in the Minds and Understandings of all men, but makes them to deny that
very Truth which they seem to entertain. The World through wisdom (as the
Apostle speaks) knew not God. Those great Disputers of this world were too full
of nice and empty Speculations to know him who is only to be discerned by a
pacate, humble and self-denying mind: their Curiosity served rather to dazzle
their Eyes then to enlighten them; while they rather proudly braved themselves
in their knowledge of the Deity, then humbly subjected their own Souls to a
compliance with it; making the Divinity nothing else but as it were a
flattering Glass that might reflect and set off to them the beauty of their own
Wit and Parts the better: and while they seemed to converse with God himself,
they rather amorously courted their own Image in him, and fell into love with
their own Shape. Therefore the best acquaintance with Religion is (...), a
knowledge taught by God: it is a Light that descends from Heaven which is only
able to guide and conduct the souls of men to Heaven from whence it comes. The
Jewish Doctors use to put it among the fundamental Articles of their Religion,
That their Law was from heaven, (...): I am sure we may much rather reckon it
amongst the Principles of our Christian Religion in an higher way, That it is
an Influx from God upon the Minds of good men. And this is the great design
and plot of the Gospel, to open and unfold to us the true way of recourse to
God; a Contrivance for the uniting the Souls of men to him, and the deriving a
participation of God to men, to bring in Everlasting righteousness, and to
establish the true Tabernacle of God in the Spirits of men, which was done in a
Typical and Emblematical way under the Law. And herein consists the main
preeminence which the Gospel has above the Law, in that it so clearly unfolds
the Way and Method of Uniting humane nature to Divinity; which the Apostle
seems mainly to aim at in these words, But Israel which followed after the Law
of righteousness, etc.

CHAP. II.
An Enquiry into that Jewish Notion of a Legal Righteousness, which is opposed
by S. Paul. That their notion of it was such as this, viz. That the Law
externally dispensed to them (though it were, as a Dead letter, merely without
them) and conjoined with the power of their own Free Will, was sufficient to
procure them Acceptance with God, and to acquire Merit enough to purchase
Eternal Life, Perfection and Happiness. That this their Notion had these two
Grounds; First, An Opinion of their own Self-sufficiency, and that their
Free Will was so absolute and perfect, as that they needed not that God should
do any thing for them but only furnish them with some Law to exercise this
Innate power about. That they asserted such a Freedom of Will as might be to
them a Foundation of Merit.

FOR the unfolding whereof, we shall endeavor to search out, First, What the
Jewish Notion of a Legal righteousness was, which the Apostle here condemns. 1.


Secondly, What that Evangelical righteousness, or Righteousness of Faith, is,
which he endeavors to establish 2.
in the room of it.

For the First, That which the Apostle here blames the Jews for, seems to be
indeed nothing else but an Epitome or Compendium of all that which he
otherwhere disputes against them for: which is not merely and barely concerning
the Formal notion of Justification, as some may think, viz. Whether the Formal
notion of it respects only Faith, or Works in the Person justified, (though
there may be a respect to that also) it is not merely a subtle
School-controversie which he seems to handle; but it is of a greater latitude;
It is indeed concerning the whole Way of Life and Happiness, and the proper
scope of restoring Mankind to Perfection and Union with the Deity, which the
Jews expected by virtue of that Systeme and Pandect of Laws which were
delivered upon Mount Sinai, augmented and enlarged by the Gemara of their own
Traditions.

Which that we may the better understand, perhaps it may not be amiss a little
to traverse the Writings of their most approved ancient Authors, that so
finding out their constant received opinions concerning their Law and the Works
thereof, we may the better and more fully understand what S. Paul and the other
Apostles aim at in their disputes against them.

The Jewish notion generally of the Law is this; That in that Model of life
contained in that Body of Laws, distinguished ordinarily into Moral, Judicial
and Ceremonial, was comprised the whole Method of raising Man to his
perfection; and that they having only this Book of Laws without them, to
converse with, needed nothing else to procure Eternal life, Perfection and
Happiness: as if this had been the only means God had for the saving of Men and
making them happy, to set before them in an External way a Volume of Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, and so to leave them to work out and purchase to
themselves Eternal life in the observance of them.

Now this General notion of theirs we shall unfold in 2 Particulars.

First, as a Foundation of all the rest, They took up this as an Hypothesis or
common Principle, That Mankind had such an absolute and perfect Free Will, and
such a sufficient power from within himself to determine himself to Virtue and
Goodness, as that he only needed some Law as the Matter or Object to exercise
this Innate power about; and therefore needed not that God should do any thing
more for him then merely to acquaint him with his Divine will and pleasure.

And for this we have Maimonides speaking very fully and magisterially, That
this was one of their Radices fidei or Articles of their Faith, and one main
Foundation upon which the Law stood. His words are these in Halacah teshubah or
Treatise of Repentance, Chap. 5. (...), The Power of Free Will is given to
every man to determine himself (if he will) to that which is good, and to be
good; or to determine himself to that which is evil, and to be wicked, (if he
will.) Both are in his power, according to what is written in the Law, Behold,
Man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: that is to say, Behold this
sort of Creature, Man, is alone (and there is not a Second like to Man) in
this, viz. That Man from himself by his own proper knowledge and power knows
good and evil, and does what pleases him in an uncontrollable way, so as none
can hinder him as to the doing of either good or evil.

And a little after he thus interprets those words in the Lamentations, of the
repenting Church, chapter 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the
Lord, (...), Seeing that we who are endued with the power of Free Will, have
most wittingly and freely committed all our transgressions; it is meet and
becoming that we should convert our selves by repentance, and forsake all our
iniquities, forasmuch as this also is in our power: This is the importance of
those words, Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. And this
is a great Fundamental, the very Pillar of the Law and Precept, according to
what is written Deuter. 30. See, I have set before thee this day life and
death, good and evil.

Thus we see Maimonides, who was well versed in the ancientest Jewish learning,
and in high esteem among all the Jews, is pleased to reckon this as a main
Principle and Foundation upon which that Law stood; as indeed it must needs be,
if Life and Perfection might be acquired by virtue of those Legal precepts
which had only an External administration, being set before their External
Senses, and promulged to their Ears as the Statute-laws of any other
Commonwealth use to be. Which was the very notion that they themselves had of
these Laws. And therefore in Breshith Rabba (a very ancient Writing) the Jewish
Doctors taking notice of that passage in the Canticles, Let him kiss m with the
kisses of his mouth, they thus gloss upon it; At the time of the giving of the
Law, the Congregation of Israel desired that Moses might speak to them, they
being not able to hear the words of God himself: and while he spoke, they
heard, and hearing forgot; and thereupon moved this debate among themselves,
What is this Moses, a man of flesh and blood? and what is his law, that we so
soon learn, and so soon forget it? O that God would kiss us with the kisses of
his mouth! that is, in their sense, that God would teach them in a more vital
and internal way. And then (as they go on) Moses makes this answer, (...) That
this could not be then: But it should so come to pass in the time to come, in
the days of the Messiah, when the Law should be written in their hearts, as it
is said, Jer. 31. I will write it in their hearts.

By this we may see how necessary it was for the Jews, that they might be
consistent to their grand Principle of obtaining Life and Perfection by this
dead letter and a thing merely without themselves, (as not being radicated in
the vital powers of their own Souls) to establish such a power of Free Will as
might be able uncontrollably to entertain it, and so readily by its own
Strength perform all the dictates of it.

And that Maimonides was not the first of the Jewish writers who expound that
passage Genesis 3. [Behold, man is become like one of us, to know good and evil]
of Free Will, may appear from the several Chaldee Paraphrasts upon it, which
seem very much to intimate that Sense. Which by the way, (though I cannot allow
all that which the Jews deduce from it) I think is not without something of
Truth, viz. That that Liberty which is founded in Reason, and which Mankind
only in this lower world has above other Creatures, may be there also meant.
But whatever it is, I am sure the Jewish Commentators upon that place generally
follow the rigid sense of Maimonides.

To this purpose R. Bechai, a man of no small learning both in the Talmudick
and Cabalistical doctrine of the Jews, tells us, That upon Adam's first
transgression, that grand Liberty of Indifferency equally to Good or Evil began
first to discover it self; whereas before that he was (...) all Intellect and
wholly Spiritual, (as that common Cabalistical Notion was) being from within
only determined to that which was Good. But I shall at large relate his words,
because of their pertinency and usefulness in the Matter now in hand. (...),
that is, Adam before his sin, acted from a necessity of Nature, and all his
actions were nothing else but the issues of pure and perfect Understanding.
Even as the Angels of God, being nothing else but Intelligences, put forth
nothing else but acts of intelligence; just so was Man before he sinned, and
did eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil: But after this transgression,
he had the power of Election and Free Will, whereby he was able to will good or
evil. And a little after glossing on those words Genesis 3. 7. [And the eyes of
them both were opened] he adds, (...), They derived the power of Free Will
from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: And now they became endued with
this power of determining themselves to Good or Evil; and this Property is
divine, and in some respect a good Property. So that according to the mind of
our Author, the First original and pedigree of Free Will is to be derived not
so much from the Era of Creation, as from that after- Epoch of Man's
transgression or Eating of the forbidden fruit: so that the Indifferency of
man's Will to Good or Evil, and a Power to determine himself freely to either,
did then first of all unfold it self; whereas before he conversed like a pure
Intelligence with its First cause, without any propension at all to Material
things, being determined like a proper natural Agent solely to that which is
good: and these Propensions arising upon the First transgression to Material
things (which they supposed to be in men's power either so to correct and
castigate as to prevent any sin in them, or else to pursue in a way of vice)
are, if not the Form and Essence, yet at least the Original and Root of that
(...) which they speak so much of. But of this in another place.

All this we have further confirmed out of Nachmanides, an Author sufficiently
versed in all Matters concerning the Jewish Religion. His words are these in
his Comment upon Deuteronomy. 30. 13. (...) From the time of the Creation Man had a
power of Free Will within him to do Good or Evil according to his own choice,
as also through the whole time of the Law; that so he might be capable of Merit
in freely choosing what is Good, and of Punishment in electing what is Evil.
Wherein that he tells us that this Free Will has continued ever since the
Creation, we must not understand rigidly the very moment of man's Creation, but
that Epoch taken with some latitude, so that it may include the time of man's
First transgression: for he after suggests thus much, That before the First Sin
Adam's power to Good was a mere Natural power without any such Indifferency to
Evil; and therefore he makes that State of Adam the Model and platform of
future perfection which the most ancient Jewish Authors seem to expect in the
time of their Messiah, which he expresses in this manner, (...), He shall not
covet nor desire (after a Sensitive manner,) but Man shall return in the times
of the Messiah to that Primitive State he was in before the sin of the First
man, who naturally did whatsoever was good, neither was there any thing and its
contrary then in his choice. Upon which Ground he afterward concludes, That in
those times of the Messiah there shall neither be Merit nor Demerit, because
there shall be no Free Will, which is the alone Mother and Nurse of both of
them: But in the mean while, That Good or Evil are to men (that I may phrase it
in the language of the Stoic) (...). none prejudicing or in the least degree
hindering the exercise of this Liberty, neither from within nor from without,
none either in Heaven or in Earth (...). And thus the same Nachmanides expounds
that solemn Attestation, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. wherein Heaven and Earth are called to
witness That that day Life and Death were set before them; as if God himself
had now established such a Monarchical power in man which Heaven and Earth
should be in league withal and faithful to.

Hereupon R. Saadia Gaon (so called by way of Eminency) doubts not to tell us
that the common sense of all the Jewish Doctors was, That this Liberty to good
or evil was such an Absolute kind of authority established in a man's soul, that
it was in a sort Independent upon God himself; this being, as he says (in the
book called Sepher emunah) the meaning of that old and vulgar Maxim amongst
the Jews, sometimes mentioned in the Talmud, (...) Omnia sunt in manu Coeli (i.
Dei) excepto timore Dei.

I am not ignorant there is another Axiom of the Jews as common, which may
seem partly to cross this and what hitherto has been spoken, viz. (...), the
meaning of which is this, That assistence is perpetually afforded to all
endeavors both of Sanctity and Impiety. But Maimonides has somewhere told us
(and, as I remember, in his Sepher Hamedang) how they mince the matter, and
mean nothing else by it but this, That when men endeavor after the performance
of the Law, God in a way of providence furnishes them with External matter and
means, giving them peace and riches and other outward accommodations, whereby
they might have advantage and opportunity to perform all that good which their
own Free Will determines them to: whereas Wicked men find the like help of
External matter and means for promoting and accomplishing their wicked and
ungodly designs.

Thus we see how the Jews, that they might lay a Foundation of Merit, and build
up the stately and magnificent fabric of their Happiness upon the sandy
Foundation of a dead Letter without them, endeavor to strengthen it by as weak
a Rampart of their own Self-sufficiency and the Power of their own Free Will
able (as they vainly imagined) to perform all Righteousness, as being adequate
and commensurate to the whole Law of God in its most Extensive and
Comprehensive sense and meaning; rather looking upon the Fall of man as the
Rise of that Giant-like Free Will whereby they were enabled to bear up
themselves against Heaven it self, as being a great Accessory to their
happiness (rather then prejudicial to it) through the access of that multitude
of divine Laws which were given to them; as we shall see afterward. And so
they reckoned upon a more Triumphant and Illustrious kind of Happiness
victoriously to be achieved by the Merit of their own works, then that
Beggarly kind of Happiness (as they seem to look upon it) which comes like an
Alms from Divine bounty. Accordingly they affirm That Happiness (...) by way of
Reward is far greater and much more magnificent then that which is (...) by
way of Mercy.

CHAP. III.
The Second ground of the Jewish Notion of a Legal Righteousness, viz. That the
Law delivered to them on Mount Sinai was a sufficient Dispensation from God,
and all that needed to be done by him to bring them to Perfection and
Happiness: and That the Scope of their Law was nothing but to afford them
several ways and means of Merit. The Opinion of the Jewish Writers concerning
Merit and the Reward due to the Works of the Law. Their distinguishing of men
in order to Merit and Demerit into three sorts, viz. Perfectly righteous,
Perfectly wicked, and a Middle sort betwixt these. The Mercenary and Low Spirit
of the Jewish Religion. An account of what the Cabbalists held in this Point of
Legal Righteousness.

THE Second Ground of that Jewish Notion of a Legal Righteousness is this, That
the Law delivered to them upon Mount Sinai was a sufficient Dispensation from
God, and all that needed to be done by him for the advancing of them to a State
of Perfection and Blessedness; and That the proper Scope and End of their Law
was nothing but to afford them several ways and means of Merit. Which is
expressly delivered in the lib. Maccoth sect. ult.
Mishnah, (...). The meaning whereof is this, That therefore the precepts of
the Law were so many in number, that so they might single out where they
pleased, and in exercising themselves therein procure Eternal life; as Obadias
de Bartenora expounds it, That whosoever shall perform any one of the 613
Precepts of the Law (for so many they make in number) without any worldly
respects, for love of the Precept, (...), behold, this man shall merit thereby
everlasting life. For indeed they supposed a Reward due to the performance of
every Precept, which Reward they supposed to be increased according to the
secret estimation which God himself has of any Precept, as we find suggested
in the Mishnah, in the Book Pirke avoth, in the words of the famous R. Jehuda,
(...), Be careful to observe the lesser Precept as well as the greater,
because thou know not the Reward that shall be given to the observation of
the Precepts.

Here we must take notice that this was a great debate among the Jews, which
Precepts they were that had the greatest Reward due to the performance of them;
in which controversy Maimonides in his Comment upon this place thus resolves
us, That the measure of the Reward that was annexed to the Negative Precepts
might be collected from the measure of the Punishments that were consequent
upon the breach of them. But this knot could not be so well solved in reference
to the Affirmative Precepts, because the Punishments annexed to the breach of
them were more rarely defined in the Law: accordingly he expresses himself to
this sense, As for the Affirmative Precepts (...), it is not expressed what
Reward is due to every one of them; and all for this end, that we may not know
which Precept is most necessary to be observed, and which Precept is of less
necessity and importance. And a little after he tells us that for this reason
their Wise men said, (...), Qui operam dat praecepto, liber est a praecepto;
which he expounds to this sense, That whosoever shall exercise himself about
any one Precept, ought without haesitation or dispute to continue in the
performance of it, as being in the mean while freed from minding any other. For
if God had declared which Precepts himself had most valued and settled the
greatest revenue of happiness upon, then other Precepts would have been less
minded; and any one that should have busied himself in a Precept of a lower
nature, would presently have left that, when opportunity should have been
offered of performing a higher. And hence we have also another Talmudical Canon
for the performing of Precepts, of the same nature with the former quoted by
our foresaid Author, (...), It is not lawful to skip over Precepts, that is,
as he expounds it, When a man is about to observe one Precept, he may not skip
over and relinquish that, that so he might apply himself to the observation of
another. And thus, as the performance of any Precept has a certain Reward
annexed to it; so the Measure of the Reward they suppose to be increased
according to the Number of those Precepts which they observe, as it is defined
by R. Tarphon in the foresaid Mishnah, c. 2. (...), If thou have been much in
the study of the Law, thou shall be rewarded much: For faithful is thy Lord
and Master, who will render to thee a Reward proportionable to thy Work. And a
little before we have the same thing in the words of another of their Masters,
(...), Qui multiplicat legem, multiplicat vitam. And lest they should not yet
be liberal enough of God's cost, they are also pleased to distribute Rewards to
any Israelite that shall abstain from the breach of a Precept; for so we find
it in the Mishnah l. Kiddushin Whosoever keeps himself from the breach of a
Precept, (...), shall receive the Reward as if he had kept the Precept.

But this which has been said concerning the performance of any one Precept,
must be understood with this Caution, That the performance of such a Precept be
a continued thing, so as that it may compound and collect the performance of
many good works into it self; otherwise the single performance of any one
Precept is only available, according to the sense of the Talmudical Masters, to
cast the scale, when a man's Good works and Evil works equally balance one
another, as Maimonides tells us in his Comment upon the forenamed Mishnah l.
Kidd. cap. 1. Sect. 10. where the words of the Jewish Doctors are these, (...),
He that observes any one Precept, it shall be well with him, and his days shall
be prolonged, and he shall possess the Earth: But he that observes not any one
Precept, it shall not be well with him, nor shall his days be prolonged, nor
shall he inherit the Earth. Which words are thus expounded by Maimonides, He
that observes any one Precept, etc. that is, so as that by the addition of this
work to his other good works, his good works overweigh his evil works, and his
merits preponderate his demerits.

For the better understanding whereof we must know, That the Jewish Doctors are
wont to distinguish of Three sorts of Men, which are thus ranked by them, (...)
men perfectly righteous, (...) men perfectly wicked, and (...), a middle sort
of men betwixt them. Those they are wont to call perfectly righteous, who had
no transgression or demerits that might be counted fit to be put into the
balance against their Merits; and those they called simply (...) righteous,
whose Merits outweighed their demerits: Whereas on the other side the perfectly
wicked in their sense were such as had no Merits at all; and those simply (...)
wicked, whose demerits made the weightiest scale: And the Middle sort were such
as their good deeds and evil deeds equally balanced one another. Of this First
sort of Men, viz. the perfectly righteous, they supposed there might be many;
and such the Pharisees seem to have been in their own esteem, in our Saviors
time. And according to this Notion our Savior may seem to have shaped his
answer to that Young man in the Gospel, who asked him, What shall I do to
inherit eternal life? To which our Savior answers, Keep the Commandments:
which our Savior propounds to him in so great a latitude, as thereby to take
him off from his self-conceit, and that he might be convinced upon reflection on
himself, that he had fallen short of Eternal life, in failing of a due
performance of the Divine law. But he insisting upon his own Merit in this
respect, enquires of our Savior whether there be yet any thing wanting to make
him a (...) one perfectly righteous. To this our Savior replies, Matt. 19. 21.
If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, etc. The meaning of which
Reply may, as I conceive, be this, to convince him of his imperfect Obedience
to, and compliance with, the law of God, from his over-eager love of this
world. But secondly, for the Medii, or those that were in the middle rank of
men, the Jewish Doctors had diverse Rules, as, 1. In case a man's Evil works and
Good were equal, the addition of one either way might determine them to Eternal
life or misery. 2. That in case a man's Evil works should preponderate and weigh
down his Good, yet he may cast the scale by Repentance, if he will; or in the
other world by chastisements and punishments he may make expiation for them.
These and the like ways they have found out, lest any of their fraternity
should miscarry. To all which we must take in this Caution which they are
pleased to deliver to us, viz. That Men's Works have their different weight;
some Good works being so weighty that they may weigh in the balance against
many Evil works, and vice versa.

All which we shall find largely set down by R. Albo, l. de fundament is fidei;
and partly by R. Saadia: but especially by Maimonides in his Treatise of
Repentance, chap. 3. who also tells us of other Expedients provided by their
Law for the securing of Merit and Happiness, which I shall not here mention.
And indeed in fine they have found out so many artifices to entail a Legal
righteousness and Eternal happiness upon all the Israelites, that (if it be
possible) none might be left out of Heaven: as may partly appear by that
Question captiously proposed to our Savior, Master, are there few that shall
be saved? whereby they expected to ensnare him, they themselves holding a
General Salvation of all the Jews by virtue of the Law, however their
wickedness might abound. Which we find expressly set down by Maimonides in the
forenamed place, (...), All wicked ones whose Evil deeds exceed their Good
deeds, shall be judged according to the Measure of their Evil deeds so
exceeding; and afterward they shall have a portion in the World to come;
(...), for that all Israelites have a portion in the World to come, (...), and
this nowithstanding their Sins. Now that Maxim of theirs, All Israelites have
a portion in the world to come, is taken out of the Mishnah l. Sanhedr. c. 11.
where it is put down as the most Authentic opinion of the Jewish Doctors; only
some Few there are there recited who are excepted from this happiness;
otherwise their greatest Malefactors are not excepted from it: for so Obadias
de Bartenora unfoldeth their meaning, (...), even such as are judged by the
great Synedrium worthy of death for their wickedness, these have a portion
(...) in the world to come. I know here that the Notion of The World to come is
differently represented by Nachmanides and Maimonides, and their followers. But
whether Maimonides his sect or the other prevail in this point, it is not much
material as to our present business, seeing both sides conclude that this
Seculum futurum, or World to come, points out such a state of happiness, as
should not revolve or slide back again into Misery.

And by the way we may observe what a Lean and Spiritless Religion this of the
Jews was, and how it was nothing else but a Souleless and Liveless form of
External performances, which did little or nothing at all reach the Inward man,
being nothing but a mere Bodily kind of drudgery and servility: and therefore
our Savior when he modells out Religion to them Matthew. 5. he points them out
to Something fuller of inward life and spirit, and such a one as might make
them Perfect, as their Father in heaven is Perfect. Such dull heavy-spirited
Principles as this Talmudical doctrine we have quoted affords us, is very
like began to possess the Chair in Antigonus his time, who therefore put in
this Caution against part of it, That God was not to be served so much upon the
account of Merit and for hope of Wages, as out of Love; though his Disciples
Sadoc and Baithus, the founders of the sect of the Sadducees, straining that
sober Principle too far, might more strengthen that Mercenary belief amongst
the other Doctors which they had before entertained.

But before I leave this Argument, it may not be amiss to examine also what the
Cabbalistical Jews thought concerning this matter in hand; which in sum is
this, That the Law delivered upon Mount Sinai was a Device God had to knit and
unite the Jews and the Shechinah or Divine presence together. Therefore they
are pleased to style it in the Book Zohar (which is one of the ancientest
monuments we have of the Jewish learning) (...) the Treasures of life. And as
if the living God could be united to the Souls of men by such a dead letter as
this was, (as it is styled by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.) they are pleased to make
this External administration the great Vinculum Dei and hominis. And to this
purpose R. Simeon ben Jochai (the Compiler of the fore-quoted Book, which is a
mystical Comment upon the Pentateuch) discourses upon those words Deuteronomy. 30.
20. He is thy life, and the length of thy days, upon which he grounds this
Observation, (...), The Shechinah or Divine Presence is no where established
but by the Mediation of the Law: and a little after he thus magnifies the study
of the Law, (...), Whosoever does exercise himself in the Law, does merit the
possession of the upper inheritance which is in the holy kingdom above; and
does also merit the possession of an inheritance here below in this World.
Where by the way we may take notice that the ancient Jews looked upon the
Inheritances of the land of Canaan as being Typical and significative of an
higher inheritance in the kingdom of heaven; both which they supposed to be
the due rewards of men's works: and therefore they talk so much in the same
place of Guardian Angels which are continually passing to and fro between
Heaven and Earth, as the Heralds and Messengers of Men's good works to God in
Heaven. And further upon those words in Levit. 18. 5. Ye shall keep my statutes
and judgments; which if a man do, he shall live in them, he tells us, That the
portion of Israel is meritorious, because that the Holy Blessed One delights
in them above all the Idolatrous Nations; and out of his favor and goodness to
them gave them (...), the laws of Truth, and planted amongst them the Tree of
life; and the Schechinah was with them. Now what does all this signify? Thus
much, That since the Israelites are signed with the Holy seal in their flesh,
they are thereby acknowledged for the Sons of God: as on the contrary, They
that are not sealed with this mark in their flesh, are not the Sons of God, but
are the children of uncleanness: Wherefore it is not lawful to contract
familiarity with them, or to teach them the Words of the Law. Which afterward
is urged further by another of their Masters, Whosoever instructs any
uncircumcised person (...) though but in the least precepts of the Law, does
the same as if he should destroy the World, and deny the name of the Holy
Blessed One.

All which plainly amounts to thus much (as we had before out of the
Talmudists,) That the Law was given unto the Israelites for this purpose, To
enrich them with good works, and to augment their Merits, and so to establish
the foundations of Life and Blessedness amongst them; and to make it a Medium
of the Union betwixt God and Men, as R. Eliezer in the same Book speaks of
the near Union between these Three, the Holy Blessed One, the Law, and Israel.

There is one Passage more in our forenamed Author R. Simeon ben Jochai, at
the end of Parashah Jethro, which (though it be more Mystical then the rest,
yet) may be well worth our observing, as more fully hinting the Perfection of
the Law, and setting that forth as an absolute and complete Medium of rendering
a man Perfect; upon which R. Jos. Albo in his third Book de fundament is has
spent two or three Chapters. Thus therefore, as if the Law was the great
Magazine and Storehouse of Perfection, our foresaid Author there tells us,
That when the Israelites stood upon Mount Sinai, they saw God (...), eye to
eye, or face to face, and understood all Secrets of the Law, and all the arcana
superna and inferna, etc. and then he adds, That the same day in which the
Israelites stood upon Mount Sinai, (...), all uncleanness passed away from
them, and all their Bodies did shine in brightness like to the Angels of heaven
when they put on their bright shining Robes to fit themselves for the Embassy
upon which they are sent by God their Lord. And a little after, thus; And when
their uncleanness passed away from them, the bodies of the Israelites became
shining and clear without any defilement; and their Bodies did shine (...) as
the brightness of the Firmament. And then thus concludes all, When the
Israelites received the Law upon Mount Sinai, (...) the world was then perfumed
with a most aromatic smell, and Heaven and Earth were established, and the
Holy Blessed One was known above and below, and he ascended in his glory above
all things.

By all which Mystical and Allegorical Expressions our Author seems to aim at
this main Scope, viz. To set forth the Law as that which of it self was
sufficient, without any other Dispensation from God, for the perfecting of
those to whom it was dispensed; and to make them Comprehensours of all
Righteousness here and Glory hereafter: Which they are wont to set forth in
that transcendent state of Perfection which the Israelites were in at the
receiving of the Law; whence it has been an ancient Maxim amongst them, In
Statione montis Sinai Israelitae erant sicut Angeli ministerii.

And thus we have endeavored to make good that which we first propounded,
namely, to show That the grand Opinion of the Jews concerning the way to Life
and Happiness was this, viz.

That the Law of God externally dispensed, and only furnished out to them in
Tables of Stone and a Parchmentroll, conjoined with the power of their own
Free Will, was sufficient both to procure them acceptance with God, and to
acquire Merit enough to carry them with spread sails into the Harbor of
Eternal rest and blessedness.

So that by this time we may see that those Disputes which S. Paul and other
Apostles maintain against the Jews touching the Law and Faith, were not merely
about that one Question, Whether Justification formally and precisely respects
Faith alone; but were of a much greater latitude.

CHAP. IV.
The Second Enquiry, Concerning the Evangelical Righteousness or the
Righteousness of Faith, and the true difference between the Law and the Gospel,
the Old and the New Covenant, as it is laid down by the Apostle Paul. A more
General Answer to this enquiry, together with a General observation of the
Apostle's main End in opposing Faith to the Works of the Law, viz. To beat down
the Jewish proud conceit of Merit. A more particular and Distinct answer to the
Enquiry, viz. That the Law or Old Covenant is considered only as an External
administration, a dead thing in it self, a Dispensation consisting in an
Outward and Written Law of Precepts: But the Gospel or New Covenant is an
Internal thing, a Vital Form and Principle of Righteousness in the Souls of
men, an Inward manifestation of Divine life, and a living Impression upon the
Minds and Spirits of Men. This proved from several Testimonies of Scripture.

HAving done with the First Enquiry, we now come to the Second, which was this,
What the Evangelical Righteousness or the Righteousness of Faith is which the
Apostle sets up against that of the Law, and in what Notion the Law is
considered by the Apostle: Which in sum was this, viz. That the Law was the
Ministry of death, and in it self an External and Liveless thing, neither
could it procure or beget that Divine life and spiritual Form of Godliness in
the Souls of men, which God expects from all the heirs of Glory, nor that Glory
which is only consequent upon a true Divine life. Whereas on the other side the
Gospel is set forth as a mighty Efflux and Emanation of life and spirit freely
issuing forth from an Omnipotent source of Grace and Love, as that true
God-like vital influence whereby the Divinity derives it self into the Souls of
men, enlivening and transforming them into its own likeness, and strongly
imprinting upon them a Copy of its own Beauty and Goodness: Like the
Spermatical virtue of the Heavens, which spreads it self freely upon this Lower
world, and subtily insinuating it self into this benumbed feeble earthly
Matter, begets life and motion in it. Briefly, It is that whereby God comes to
dwell in us, and we in him.

But that we may the more distinctly unfold the Difference between That
Righteousness which is of the Law, and That which is of Faith, and so the
better show how the Apostle undermines that fabric of Happiness which the Jews
had built up for themselves; we shall observe First in general, That the main
thing which the Apostle 1.
endeavors to beat down was, that proud and arrogant conceit which they had of
Merit, and to advance against it the notion of the Divine grace and bounty as
the only Fountain of all Righteousness and Happiness. For indeed that which all
those Jewish notions, which we have before taken notice of, aim principally at,
was the advancing of the weakened Powers of Nature into such an height of
Perfection as might render them capable of Meriting at Gods hands: and that
Perfection which they speak so much of (as is clear from what has been said)
was nothing else but a mere sublimation of their own Natural Powers and
Principles, performed by the strength of their own Fancies. And therefore these
Contractors with Heaven were so pleased to look upon Eternal life as a fair
Purchase which they might make for themselves at their own charge; as if the
spring and rise of all were in themselves: their eyes were so much dazzled with
those foolish fires of Merit and Reward kindled in their own Fancies, that they
could not see that light of Divine grace and bounty which shone about them.

And this Fastus and swelling pride of theirs (if I mistake not) is that which
S. Paul principally endeavors to chastise in advancing Faith so much as he
does in opposition to the works of the Law. For which purpose he spends the
First and Second Chapters of this Epistle to the Romans in drawing up a charge
of such a nature both against Gentiles and Jews, but principally against the
Jews, who were the grand Justitiaries, that might make them bethink themselves
of imploring Mercy, and of laying aside all plea of Law and Justice; and so
chap. 3. 27. he shuts up all with a severe check to such presumptuous
arrogance, (...); Where then is boasting? This seems then to be the main End
which S. Paul every where aims at in opposing Faith to the works of the Law,
namely to establish the Foundation of Righteousness and Happiness upon the Free
mercy and grace of God: the glorifying and magnifying of which in the real
manifestations of it he holds forth upon all occasions, as the design and plot
of the Gospel-administration; seeing it is impossible for men by any Works
which they can perform to satisfy God's Justice for those Sins which they have
committed against him, or truly to comply with his Divine will, without his
Divine assistance. So that the Method of reconciling men to God, and reducing
of straying Souls back again to him, was to be attributed wholly to another
Original then that which the Jews imagined. But

Secondly, That Righteousness of Faith which the 2.
Apostle sets up against the Law, and compares with it, is indeed in its own
nature a Vital and Spiritual administration, wherein God converseth with Man;
whereas the Law was merely an External or Dead thing in it self, not able to
beget any true Divine life in the Souls of Men. All that Legal Righteousness
which the Jews boasted so much of, was but from the Earth, earthly; consisting
merely in External performances, and so falling extremely short of that
Internal and God-like frame of Spirit which is necessary for a true conjunction
and union of the Souls of Men with God, and making of them capable of true
Blessedness.

But that we may the more distinctly handle this Argument, we shall endeavor
to unfold the true Difference between the Law and the Gospel, as it seems
evidently to be laid down every where by S. Paul in his Epistles: and the
Difference between them is clearly this, viz. That the Law was merely an
External thing, consisting in such Precepts which had only an Outward
administration; but the Gospel is an Internal thing, a Vital Form and Principle
seating it self in the Minds and Spirits of Men. And this is the most proper
and formal Difference between the Law and Gospel, that the one is considered
only as an External administration, and the other as an Internal. And therefore
the Apostle 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7. calls the Law (...) and (...), the ministration of
the letter and of death, it being in it self but a dead letter; as all that
which is without a man's Soul must needs be. But on the other side he calls the
Gospel (because of the Intrinsecal and Vital administration thereof in living
impressions upon the Souls of men) (...), the Ministration of the Spirit, and
(...), the Ministration of righteousness. By which he cannot mean the History
of the Gospel, or those Credenda propounded to us to believe; for this would
make the Gospel it self as much an External thing as the Law was, and according
to the External administration as much a killing or dead letter as the Law was:
and so we see that the preaching of Christ crucified was to the Jews a
Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness. But indeed he means a Vital
efflux from God upon the Souls of men, whereby they are made partakers of Life
and Strength from him: and therefore (ver. 7.) he thus Exegetically expounds
his own meaning of that short description of the Law, namely, that it was (...)
which, I think, may be fitly thus translated, it was a dead (or liveless)
administration (for so sometimes by an Hebraisme the Genitive case in regimine
is put for the Adjective) or else an administration of death exhibited in
letters, and engraven in tables of Stone: and therefore he tells us (ver. 6.)
what the Effect of it was in those words, (...), The letter kills, as indeed
all External precepts which have not a proper vital radication in the Souls of
men, whereby they are able to secure them from the transgression of them, must
needs do. Now to this dead or killing letter he opposes (ver. 8.) a quickening
Spirit, or the (...), the ministration of the Spirit, which afterward (v. 9.)
he expounds by (...), the ministration of righteousness, that is, the
Evangelical administration. So that the Gospel or Evangelical administration
must be an Internal impression, a vivacious and Energetical Spirit and
Principle of Righteousness in the Souls of men, whereby they are inwardly
enabled to express a real conformity thereto. Upon this Ground the Apostle
further pursues the Effects of both these from the 14. verse to the end.

By all which the Apostle means to set forth to us How vast a Difference there
is between the External manifestations of God in a Law of Commandments, and
those Internal appearances of God whereby he discovers the mighty power of his
Goodness to the Souls of men.

Though the History and outward Communication of the Gospel to us in scriptis,
is to be always acknowledged as a special mercy and advantage, and certainly no
less Privilege to Christians then it was to the Jews to be the Romans 3. 2.
Depositaries of the Oracles of God: yet it is plain that the Apostle, where he
compares the Law and the Gospel, and in other places, does by the Gospel mean
something which is more then a piece of Book-learning, or an Historical
Narration of the free love of God in the several contrivances of it for the
Redemption of mankind. For if this were all that is meant properly by the
Gospel, I see no reason why it should not be counted as weak and impotent a
thing, as dead a letter as the Law was, (as we intimated before;) and so there
would be no such vast Difference between them as the Apostle asserts there is;
the one being properly an External declaration of Gods will, the other an
Internal manifestation of Divine life upon men's Souls: and therefore Gal. 3.
21. he so distinguishes between this double Dispensation of God, that this
Evangelical dispensation is a vital and quickening thing, able to beget a Soul
and Form of Divine goodness upon the Souls of men; which because the Law could
not do, it was laid aside, as being insufficient to restore man to the favor
of God, or to make him partaker of his righteousness. If there had been a Law
which could have given life, (...), verily Righteousness should have been by
the Law; where by (...) he seems to mean the same thing which he meant by it
when in his Epistle to the Corinthians he calls the Economy of the Gospel
(...), the ministration of righteousness, or as (...) is taken among the Jewish
writers for acceptance with God, and that Internal form of Righteousness that
qualifies the Soul for Eternal life: and so he takes it in a far more large and
ample sense then that External righteousness of Justification is: and indeed it
seems to express the Just state of those who are renewed by the Spirit of God,
and made partakers of that Divine life which is emphatically called the Seed of
God. For this (...) Righteousness, which he here speaks of, is the proper
result of an enlivening and quickening Law, which is this New Law of the Gospel
in opposition to that Old Law which was administered only in scriptis: and
therefore this New Law is called in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 8. 6.
etc. (...) the better Covenant, whereas the Old was faulty. In which place this
is put down as the Formal difference between the Legal and Evangelical
administration, or the Old and New Covenant, That the Old Covenant was only
externally promulged and wrapped up as it were in Ink and Parchment, or, as best,
engraven upon tables of Stone; whereas this New Covenant is set forth in living
characters imprinted upon the Vital powers of men's Souls, as we have ver. 10,
11. This is the Covenant that I will make, etc. I will put my Laws into their
Minds, and write them in their Hearts: and therefore the Old Covenant is v. 7.
said not to be (...) an unblamable or faultless thing, because it was not able
to keep off trangressions, or hinder the violation of it self, no more then an
Inscription upon some Pillar or Monument is able to inspire life into those
that read it and converse with it: the Old Law or Covenant being in this
respect no other then all other Civil Constitutions are, which receive their
efficacy merely from the willing compliance of men's Minds with them, so that
they must be enlivened by the Subject that receivs them, being dead things in
themselves. But the Evangelical or New Law is such a thing as is an Efflux of
life and power from God himself the Original thereof, and produces life
wheresoever it comes. And to this double Dispensation, viz. of Law and Gospel,
does S. Paul clearly refer 2 Cor. 3. 3. You are the Epistle of Christ,
ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God,
not in tables of Stone: which last words are a plain Gloss upon that mundane
kind of administering the Law in a mere External way, to which he opposes the
Gospel. And this Argument he further pursues in the 7 and 8 chapters of the
Epistle to the Romans, in which last chap. v. 2. he styles the Gospel (...) the
Law of the spirit of life, which was able to destroy the power of Sin, and to
introduce such a spiritual and heavenly frame of Soul into men, as whereby they
might be enabled to express a cheerful compliance with the Law of God, and
demonstrate a true heavenly conversation and God-like life in this world.

We read in Iamblichus and others, of the many preparatory Experiments used by
Pythagoras to try his Scholars whether they were fit to receive the more
sublime and sacred pieces of his Philosophy; and that he was wont to
communicate these only to Souls in a due degree purified and prepared for such
doctrine, (...) and what did all this signify but only this, that he might by
all these Methods work and mold the Minds of his Hearers into such a fit
Temper, as that he might the better stamp the Seal of his more Divine Doctrine
upon them, and that his Discourses to them (...), of things just and lovely and
good, might be written (...) truly and really in the Soul, that I may use
Plato's words in his Phaedrus, where he commends the Impressions of Truth which
are made upon men's Souls above all outward Writings, which he therefore
compares to dead pictures. By this we see what the wisest and best Philosophers
thought of this Internal writing; But it peculiarly belongs to God to write the
Laws of Goodness in the Tables of men's hearts. All the outward Teachings of men
are but dead things in themselves. But God's imprinting his Mind and Will upon
men's hearts is properly that which is called the Teaching of God, and then they
become living Laws written in the living Tables of men's Hearts fitted to
receive and retain Divine impressions. I shall only add that speech of a
Crollius
Chemist not impertinent in this place, Non tam discendo quam patiendo divina
perficitur Men's humana.

And that we may come a little nearer to these words upon which all this
present Discourse is built, this seems to be the Scope of his argument in this
place, where this (...) Law of righteousness may fairly be paralleled with that
which before he called (...) the law of the spirit, and which he therefore
calls (...) the righteousness of faith, because it is received from God in a
way of believing. For I cannot easily think that he should mean nothing else in
this place but merely the Righteousness of Justification, as some would
persuade us, but rather that his Sense is much more comprehensive, so as to
include the state of Gospel Dispensation, which includes not only Pardon of
sins, but an Inward spirit of Love, Power, and of a sound Mind, as he
expresses it 2 Timothy 1. 7. And this he thus opposes to the Law, Romans 10. 6,
etc. But the Righteousness of Faith speaks on this wise; Say not in thy
heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? etc. or, Who shall descend into the deep?
But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart,
that is, the word of faith which we preach. In which words Cunaeus in his De
Repub. Hebr. would have us to understand some Cabbala or Tradition amongst the
Jews for this meaning of that place, Deuteronomy. 30. 12. from which these words are
borrowed, which as they there stand, seem not to carry that Evangelical sense
which here S. Paul expounds them into; though yet Cunaeus has not given us any
reason for this opinion of his. But indeed the Jewish writers generally, who
were acquainted with the principles of the Cabbala, commenting upon that place
do wholly refer it to the Times of the Messiah, making it parallel with that
place of Jeremy which defines the New Covenant to be a writing of the Law of
God in men's hearts. And thus that Life and Salvation that results from the
Righteousness of Faith is all, as Faith it self is, deriving from God
gratuitously dispensing himself to the Minds of men: Whereas if Life could have
been by the Law, its Original and Principal must have been resolved into men
themselves who must have acted that dead matter without them, and have produced
that Virtue and Energy in it, by their exercising themselves therein, which of
it self it had not; as the Observance of any Law enables that Law it self to
dispense that Reward which is due to the observance of it: and therefore the
Righteousness of the Law was so defined, that he that did those things should
live in them. And thus the New Testament every where seems to present to us
this twofold Dispensation or Economy, the one consisting in an External and
written law of Precepts, the other in Inward life and power. Which S. Austin
has well pursued in his Book de Litera and Spiritu, from whom Aquinas (who
endeavors to tread in his footsteps) seems to have taken first of all an
occasion of moving that Question, Utrum Lex nova sit lex scripta, vel lex
indita; and thus resolves it, That the New Law or Gospel is not properly lex
scripta, as the Old was, but Lex indita: and that the Old Law is foris scripta,
the other intus scripta, written in the tables of the Heart.

Now from all this we may easily apprehend how much the Righteousness of the
Gospel transcends that of the Law, in that it has indeed a true command over
the inward man which it acts and informs; whereas the Law by all its menaces
and punishments could only compel men to an External observance of it in the
outward man; as the Schoolmen have well observed, Lex vetus ligat manum, Lex
nova ligat animum.

And herein S. Paul every where magnifies this Dispensation of the free mercy
and grace of God, as being the only sovereign remedy against all the inward
radicated maladies of sin and corruption, as that Panacea or Balsamum vitae
which is the universal restaurative of decayed and impotent Nature. So he tells
us Romans 6. Sin shall not have dominion, because we are not under the law, but
under grace. And this is that which made him so much extol his acquaintance
with Christ in the Dispensation of grace, and to despise all things as loss,
Philip. 3. where among his other Jewish privileges having reckoned up his
blamelesness in all points touching the Law, he undervalues them all, and
counts all but loss (...), for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus.
In which place the Apostle does not mean to disparage a real inward
righteousness and the strict observance of the Law; but his meaning is to show
how poor and worthless a thing all Outward observances of the Law are in
comparison of a true Internal conformity to Christ in the renovation of the
Mind and Soul according to his Image and likeness; as is manifest from v. 9,
10. etc. in which he thus delivers his own meaning of that knowledge of Christ
which he so much extolled, very emphatically, That I may be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. Where by the
way we may further take notice what this (...) and (...), the righteousness of
faith and the righteousness of God (which we have already spoke much of) is
according to his own true meaning, as he expounds himself, viz. a Christ-like
Nature in a man's Soul, or Christ appearing in the Minds of men by the mighty
power of his Divine Spirit, and thereby deriving a true participation of
himself to them: so we have it v. 10. That I may know the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death. And thus Christ and Moses are opposed, as Christ is the Dispenser of
Grace and Truth, of Gods free and gratuitous bounty, of Life and Substance:
whereas Moses was but the Minister of the Law, of Rites and Shadows.

But it may perhaps be questioned whether the same Internal dispensation of God
was not as well under the Law, as since our Savior's coming, and so
consequently that the Jews were equally partakers thereof; and so it could be
no new thing to them.

To all which I might reply, That this Dispensation of grace was then a more
Mystical thing, and not so manifested to the world as it has been since our
Saviors coming. Secondly, This dispensation of Free grace was not that which
properly belonged to the Nation of the Jews, but only a Type and shadow of it.

For the fuller understanding of which and all that has been spoken, we must
know, That before our Savior's coming the great Mysteries of Religion being
wrapped up in Hieroglyphics and Symbolical rites, (the unfolding of all which
was reserved for him who is the great Interpreter of Heaven and Master of
Truth) God was pleased to draw forth a Scheme or Copy of all that divine
Economy and Method of his commerce with mankind, and to make a draught of the
whole artifice thereof in External matter: and therefore he singled out a
Company and Society of men of the same common Extraction, marked out from all
other sorts of men by a character of Genealogical Sanctity (for so Circumcision
was) collected and united together by a common band of Brotherhood; and this he
set up as an Emblem of a divine and holy seed or society of men which are all
by way of Spiritual generation descended from himself. And hence it is that the
Jews (the whole Jewish nation universally considered) who were but a mere
Representative of this Spiritual fraternity and congregation, are called the
Holy seed or the Holy people. Then afterward amongst these he erects a
Government and Polity, and rules over them in the way and manner of a
Political prince, as has been long since well observed by Josephus, who
therefore properly calls the Jewish government (...), a Theocracy, or the
Government of God himself.

And thus in a Scheme or Figure he shadows forth that Spiritual kingdom and
government which he would establish amongst that Divine society of men, in
reference to which we have so much mention made of the Kingdom of heaven in
the Gospel, which is not generally and solely meant of the State of glory, much
less of any outward Church-rites, but mainly of that Idea and Exemplar of which
the Jewish Theocracy was an imitation. Lastly, as a Political Prince God draws
forth a Body of laws as the Political Constitutions and Rules of this
Government which he had set up, choosing Mount Sinai for the Theater whereon he
would promulge those Laws by which all his Subjects should be governed. And so
I doubt not but that Preface by which the Law is ushered in, Exodus 20. which
speaks of God's mercy in delivering them from the Egyptian thraldom, may very
well be allegorized and mystically expounded. And all this was to signify and
set forth that Law which was to go forth from mount Sion, the promulgation
whereof was to be in a Vital and Spiritual way among the Subjects of this
Spiritual Kingdom. To all which we may add those Temporal inheritances which he
distributed to the Jewish families, in imitation of that Eternal blessedness
and those Immortal inheritances which he shares out amongst his Spiritual Sons
and Subjects in Heaven. And this I the rather add, because here the Jews are
much perplexed about untying this knot, namely, what the Reason should be that
their Law speaks so sparingly of any Eternal reward, but runs out generally in
promises of Mundane and Earthly blessings in the land of Canaan. But by this we
may see the true Reason of that which the Apostle speaks concerning them, 2
Cor. 3. 14. Until this day (...) the same vail in the reading of the Old
Testament (...) remains untaken away. That Vail which was on Moses his face
was an Emblem of all this great Mystery: and this Vail was upon the face of the
Jews in their reading the Old Testament; they dwelling so much in a carnal
converse with these Sacramental Symbols which were offered to them in the
reading of the Law, that they could not see through them into the thing
signified thereby, and so embraced Shadows in stead of Substance, and made
account to build up Happiness and Heaven upon that Earthly Law to which
properly the Land of Canaan was annexed: whereas indeed this Law should have
been their Schoolmaster to have led them to Christ whose Law it prefigured;
which that it might do the more effectually, God had annexed to the breach of
any one part of it such severe Curses, that they might from thence perceive how
much need they had of some further Dispensation. And therefore this state of
theirs is set forth by a State of bondage or (...). For all External precepts
carry perpetually an aspect of austerity and rigor to those Minds that are not
informed by the internal sweetness of them. And this is it only which makes the
Gospel or the New Law to be a Free, Noble and Generous thing, because it is
seated in the Souls of men: and therefore Aquinas out of Austin has well
observed another difference between the Law and Gospel, Brevis differentia
inter Legem and Evangelium est Timor and Amor. This I the rather observe,
because the true meaning of that Spirit of Bondage which the Apostle speaks of
is frequently mistaken. We might further (if need were) for a confirmation of
this which we have spoken concerning the Typicalness of the whole Jewish
Economy appeal to the third and fourth chapters of the Epistle to the
Galatians, which cannot well be understood without this Notion, where we have
the Jewish Church, as a Type of the true Evangelical Church, brought in as a
Child in it is Minority in servitude under Tutors and Governors, shut up under
the Law till the time of that Emphatical revelation of the great Mystery of
God should come, till the Day should break, and all the shadows of the Night
flee away.

That I may return from this Digression to the Argument we before pursued, this
briefly may be added, That under the Old Covenant and in the time of the Law
there were amongst the Jews some that were Evangelized, that were re, non
nomine Christiani; as under the Gospel there are many that do Judaize, are of
as Legal and Servile Spirits as the Jews, children of the Bondwoman, resting
in mere External observances of Religion, in an outward seeming Purity, in a
Form of Godliness, as did the Scribes and Pharisees of old.

From what has hitherto been discoursed, I hope the Difference between both
Covenants clearly appears, and that the Gospel was not brought in only to hold
forth a new Platform and Model of Religion; it was not brought in only to
refine some Notions of Truth, that might formerly seem discolored and
disfigured by a multitude of Legal rites and ceremonies; it was not to cast our
Opinions concerning the Way of Life and Happiness only into a New mould and
shape in a Pedagogical kind of way: it is not so much a System and Body of
saving Divinity, but the Spirit and vital Influx of it spreading it self over
all the Powers of men's Souls, and quickening them into a Divine life: it is not
so properly a Doctrine that is wrapped up in ink and paper, as it is Vitalis
Scientia, a living impression made upon the Soul and Spirit. We may in a true
sense be as Legal as ever the Jews were, if we converse with the Gospel as a
thing only without us; and be as far short of the Righteousness of God as they
were, if we make the Righteousness which is of Christ by Faith to serve us only
as an Outward Covering, and endeavor not after an Internal transformation of
our Minds and Souls into it. The Gospel does not so much consist in Verbis as
in Virtute: Neither does Evangelical dispensation therefore please God so much
more then the Legal did, because, as a finer contrivance of his Infinite
understanding, it more clearly discovers the Way of Salvation to the Minds of
men; but chiefly because it is a more Powerful Efflux of his Divine goodness
upon them, as being the true Seed of a happy Immortality continually thriving
and growing on to perfection. I shall add further, The Gospel does not
therefore hold forth such a transcendent privilege and advantage above what
the Law did, only because it acquaints us that Christ our true High priest is
ascended up into the Holy of holies, and there in stead of the blood of Bulls
and Goats has sprinkled the Ark and Mercy-seat above with his own blood: but
also because it conveys that blood of sprinkling into our defiled Consciences,
to purge them from dead works. Far be it from me to disparage in the least the
Merit of Christ's blood, his becoming obedient unto death, whereby we are
justified. But I doubt sometimes some of our Dogmata and Notions about
Justification may puff us up in far higher and goodlier conceits of our selves
then God has of us; and that we profanely make the unspotted righteousness of
Christ to serve only as a Covering to wrap up our foul deformities and filthy
vices in; and when we have done, think our selves in as good credit and repute
with God as we are with our selves, and that we are become Heaven's darlings as
much as we are our own. I doubt not but the Merit and Obedience of our Savior
gain us favor with God, and potently move down the benign influences of Heaven
upon us: But yet I think we may sometimes be too lavish and wanton in our
imaginations, in fondly conceiting a greater change in the Esteem which God
has of us then becomes us, and too little reckon upon the Real and Vital
Emanations of his favor upon us.

Therefore for the further clearing of what has been already said, and laying
a ground upon which the next part of our Discourse (viz. Concerning the
Conveiance of this God-like righteousness to us by Faith) is to proceed, We
shall here speak something more to the business of Justification and Divine
Acceptance, which we shall dispatch in two Particulars.

CHAP. V.
Two Propositions for the better understanding of the Doctrine of Justification
and Divine Acceptance. 1. Prop. That the Divine judgment and estimation of
every thing is according to the truth of the thing; and God's acceptance or
disacceptance of things is suitable to his judgment. On what account S. James
does attribute a kind of Justification to Good works. 2. Prop. Gods justifying
of Sinners in pardoning their Sins carries in it a necessary reference to the
sanctifying of their Natures. This abundantly proved from the Nature of the
thing.

OUR first Proposition is this, The Divine judgment 1.
and estimation of every thing is according to the truth of the thing; and Gods
acceptance or disacceptance of things is suitable and proportionable to his
judgment. Thus S. Peter plainly tells us Act. 10. God is no respecter of
persons; But every one that works righteousness is accepted of him. And God
himself posed Cain (who had entertained those unworthy and ungrounded
suspicions of his partiality) with that Question, If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? Wheresoever God finds any stamps and impressions of
Goodness, he likes and approves them, knowing them well to be what they indeed
are, nothing else but his own Image and Superscription. Wherever he sees his
own Image shining in the Souls of men, and a conformity of life to that Eternal
Idea of Goodness which is himself, he loves it and takes a complacency in it,
as that which is from himself, and is a true Imitation of himself. And as his
own unbounded Being and Goodness is the Primary and Original object of his
Immense and Almighty Love: so also every thing that partakes of him, partakes
proportionably of his Love; all Imitations of him and Participations of his
Love and Goodness are perpetually adequate and commensurate the one to the
other. By so much the more acceptable any one is to God, by how much the more
he comes to resemble God. It was a common Notion in the old Pythagorean and
Platonic Theology, (...), etc. as Proclus phraseth it, That the Divinity
transformed into Love, and enamored with it is own unlimited Perfections and
spotless Beauty, delighted to copy forth and shadow out it self as it were in
created Beings, which are perpetually embraced in the warm bosom of the same
Love, which they can never swerve nor apostatize from, till they also prove
apostate to the estate of their Creation. And certainly it is true in our
Christian divinity, that that Divine light and goodness which flows forth from
God, the Original of all, upon the Souls of men, never goes solitary and
destitute of Love, Complacency and Acceptance, which is always lodged
together with it in the Divine Essence. And as the Divine Complacency thus
dearly and tenderly entertains all those which bear a similitude of true
Goodness upon them; so it always abandons from its embraces all Evil, which
never does nor can mix it self with it: The Holy Spirit can never suffer any
unhallowed or defiled thing to enter into it or to unite it self with it.
Therefore in a sober sense I hope I may truly say, There is no perfect or
through-reconciliation wrought between God and the Souls of men, while any
defiled and impure thing dwells within the Soul, which cannot truly close with
God, nor God with that. The Divine Love according to those degrees by which it
works upon the Souls of men in transforming them into its own likeness, by the
same it renders them more acceptable to it self, mingleth it self with and
uniteth it self to them: as the Spirit of any thing mixeth it self more or less
with any Matter it acts upon, according as it works it self into it, and so
makes a way and passage open for it self.

Upon this account I suppose it may be that S. James attributes a kind of
Justification to Good works, which unquestionably are things that God approves
and accepts, and all those in whom he finds them, as seeing there a true
conformity to his own Goodness and Holiness. Whereas on the other side he
disparageth that barren, sluggish and drowsy Belief, that a lazy Lethargy in
Religion began in his times to hugg so dearly, in reference to acceptance with
God. I suppose I may fairly thus gloss at his whole Discourse upon this
Argument: God respects not a bold, confident and audacious Faith, that is big
with nothing but its own Presumptions. It is not because our Brains swim with a
strong Conceit of God's Eternal love to us, or because we grow big and swell
into a mighty bulk with airy fancies and presumptions of our acceptance with
God, that makes us ere the more acceptable to him: It is not all our strong
Dreams of being in favor with Heaven that fills our hungry souls ere the more
with it: It is not a pertinacious Imagination of our Names being enrolled in
the Book of life, or of the Debt-books of Heaven being crossed, or of Christ
being ours, while we find him not living within us, or of the washing away of
our sins in his blood, while the foul and filthy stains thereof are deeply sunk
in our own Souls; it is not, I say, a pertinacious Imagination of any of these
that can make us ere the better: And a mere Conceit or Opinion as it makes us
never the better in reality within our selves; so it cannot render us ere the
more acceptable to God who judges of all things as they are. No, it must be a
true Compliance with the Divine will, which must render us such as the Divinity
may take pleasure in. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision
avails any thing (nor 1 Cor. 7. 19.
any Fancy built upon any other External privilege) but the keeping of the
Commandments of God. No, but If any man does the will of God, him will both the
Father John 14.
and the Son love; they will come in to him and make their abode with him. This
is the Scope and Mark which a true Heaven-born Faith aims at; and when it has
attained this End, then is it indeed perfect and complete in its last
accomplishment. And by how much the more ardency and intention Faith levels at
this mark of inward goodness and divine activity, by so much the more perfect
and sincere it is. This is that which God justifies, it being just and
correspondent to his own good pleasure: and in whomsoever he finds this, both
it and they are accepted of him. And so I come to the second Particular.

God's justifying of Sinners in pardoning and remitting 2.
their sins carries in it a necessary reference to the sanctifying of their
Natures; without which Justification would rather be a glorious name then a
real privilege to the Souls of men. While men continue in their wickedness,
they do but vainly dream of a device to tie the hands of an Almighty Vengeance
from seizing on them: No, their own Sins, like so many armed Giants, would
first or last set upon them, and rend them with inward torment. There needs no
angry Cherub with a flaming Sword drawn out every way to keep their unhallowed
hands off from the Tree of life: No, their own prodigious Lusts, like so many
arrows in their sides, would chase them, their own Hellish natures would sink
them low enough into eternal death, and chain them up fast enough in fetters of
darkness among the filthy fiends of Hell. Sin will always be miserable; and
the Sinner at last, when the empty bladders of all those hopes and expectations
of an aerie mundane Happiness, that did here bear him up in this life, shall be
cut, will find it like a Talent of Lead weighing him down into the bottomless
gulf of Misery. If all were clear toward Heaven, we should find Sin raising up
storms in our own Souls. We cannot carry Fire in our own bosoms, and yet not be
burnt. Though we could suppose the greatest Serenity without us, if we could
suppose our selves nere so much to be at truce with Heaven, and all divine
displeasure laid asleep; yet would our own Sins, if they continue unmortified,
first or last make an Aetna or Vesuvius within us. Nay those Sunbeams of
Eternal Truth, that by us are detained in unrighteousness, would at last in
those hellish vaults of vice and darkness that are within us kindle into an
unquenchable fire. It would be of small benefit to us, That Christ has
triumphed over the principalities and powers of darkness without us, while Hell
and Death, strongly immured in a Fort of our own Sins and Corruptions, should
tyrannize within us: That his Blood should speak peace in heaven, if in the
mean while our own Lusts were perpetually warring and fighting in and against
our own Souls: That he has taken off our guilt and cancelled that handwriting
that was against us, which bound us over to Eternal condemnation; if for all
this we continue fast sealed up in the Hellish dungeon of our own filthy Lusts.
Indeed we could not expect any relief from Heaven out of that misery under
which we lie, were not Gods displeasure against us first pacified and our Sins
remitted: But should the Divine Clemency stoop no lower to us then to a mere
pardon of our sins and an abstract Justification, we should never rise out of
that Misery under which we lie. This is the Signal and Transcendent benefit of
our free Justification through the Blood of Christ, that God's offense justly
conceived against us for our sins (which would have been an eternal bar and
restraint to the Efflux of his Grace upon us) being taken off, the Divine grace
and bounty may freely flow forth upon us. The Fountain of the Divine grace and
love is now unlocked and opened, which our Sins had shut up; and now the
Streams of holiness and true goodness from thence freely flow forth into all
gasping Souls that thirst after them. The warm Sun of the Divine love, whenever
it breaks through and scatters the thick Cloud of our iniquities that had
formerly separated between God and us, it immediately breaks forth upon us with
healing in its wings; it exercises the mighty force of its own light and heat
upon our dark and benumbed Souls, begetting in them a lively sense of God, and
kindling into sparks of Divine goodness within us. This Love, when once it has
chased away the thick Mist of our Sins, it will be as strong as Death upon us,
as potent as the Grave: many Waters will not quench it, nor the Floods drown
it. If we shut not the windows of our Souls against it, it will at last
enlighten all those Regions of darkness that are within us, and lead our Souls
to the Light of Life, Blessedness and Immortality. God pardons men's Sins out of
an Eternal design of destroying them; and whenever the sentence of death is
taken off from a Sinner, it is at the same time denounced against his Sins. God
does not bid us be warmed and be filled, and deny us those necessaries which
our starving and hungry Souls call for. Christ having made peace through the
blood of his cross, the Heavens shall be no more as Iron above us: but we shall
receive freely the vital dew of them, the former and the later Rain in their
season, those Influences from above, which Souls truly sensible of their own
Misery and Imperfection uncessantly gasp after, that Righteousness of God
which drops from above, from the unsealed Spring of Free goodness which makes
glad the city of God. This is that Free Love and Grace which the Souls of Good
men so much triumph in; This is that Justification which begets in them lively
Hopes of an happy Immortality in the present Anticipations thereof which spring
forth from it in this life. And all this is that which we have called sometimes
the Righteousness of Christ, sometimes the Righteousness of God; and here, the
Righteousness which is of Faith. In Heaven it is a not-imputing of sin; in the
Souls of men it is a reconciliation of rebellious Natures to Truth and
Goodness. In Heaven it is the lifting up the light of God's countenance upon
us, which begets a gladsome entertainment in the Souls of men, holy and dear
reflections and reciprocations of Love: Divine Love to us, as it were by a
natural emanation, begetting a Reflex love in us toward God, which, like that
(...) and (...) spoken of by the Ancients, live and thrive together.

CHAP. VI.
How the Gospel-righteousness is conveyed to us by Faith, made to appear from
these two Considerations. 1. The Gospel lays a strong foundation of a cheerful
dependence upon the Grace and Love of God, and affiance in it. This confirmed
by several Gospel-expressions containing plainly in them the most strong
Motives and Encouragements to all ingenuous addresses to God, to all cheerful
dependence on him, and confident expectation of all assistance from him. 2. A
true Evangelical Faith is no lazy or languid thing, but an ardent breathing and
thirsting after Divine grace and righteousness: it looks beyond a mere pardon
of sin, and mainly pursues after an inward participation of the Divine nature.
The mighty power of a living Faith in the Love and Goddness of God, discoursed
of throughout the whole Chapter.

WE come now to the last part of our Discourse, viz. To show the Way by which
this God-like and Gospel-righteousness is conveyed to us; and that is by
Faith. This is that powerful Attractive which by a strong and divine Sympathy
draws down the virtue of Heaven into the Souls of men, which strongly and
forcibly moves the Souls of good men into a conjunction with that Divine
goodness by which it lives and grows: This is that Divine Impress that
invincibly draws and sucks them in by degrees into the Divinity, and so unites
them more and more to the Center of Life and Love: It is something in the
hearts of men which, feeling by an Occult and inward sensation the mighty
insinuations of the Divine goodness, immediately complies with it, and with the
greatest ardency that may be is perpetually rising up into conjunction with it;
and being first begotten and enlivened by the warm Beams of that Goodness, it
always breaths and gasps after it for its constant growth and nourishment. It
is then fullest of life and vivacity, when it partakes most freely of it; and
perpetually languisheth when it is in any measure deprived of that sweet and
pure nourishment it derives from it.

But that we may the more clearly unfold this business, How
Gospel-righteousness comes to be communicated through Faith, we shall lay it
forth in 2 Particulars.

First, The Gospel lays a strong foundation of a cheerful 1.
dependence upon the Grace and Love of God, and affianee in it. We have the
greatest security and assurance that may be given us of God's readiness to
relieve such forlorn and desolate Creatures as we are: That there are no such
dreadful Fates in Heaven as are continually thirsting after the blood of
sinners, insatiably greedy after their prey, never satisfied till they have
devoured the Souls of men. Lest we should by such dreadful apprehensions be
driven from God, we are told of the Blood of sprinkling that speaks better
things for us; of a mighty Favorite soliciting our Cause with perpetual
intercessions in the Court of heaven; of a new and living way to the Throne of
grace and to the Holy of holies which our Savior has consecrated through his
flesh: We are told of a great and mighty Savior able to save to the utmost all
that come to God by him: We hear of the most compassionate and tender Promises
that may be from the Truth it self, that Whosoever comes to him he will in no
wise cast out; that They that believe on him, out of them should flow streams
of living water: We hear of the most gracious invitations that Heaven can make
to all weary and heavyladen sinners to come to Christ, that they may find rest:
The great Secrets of Heaven and the Arcana of Divine Counsels are revealed,
whereby we are acquainted that Glory to God in the highest, Peace on earth,
Good will toward men, are sweetly joined together in Heavens harmony, and
happily combined together in the composure of it is Ditties: That the Glory of
the Deity and Salvation of men are not allaied by their union one with another,
but both exalted together in the most transcendent way, that Divine love and
bounty are the supreme rulers in Heaven and Earth, (...), There is no such
thing as sour Despite and Envy lodged in the bosom of that ever-blessed
Being above, whose name is LOVE, and all whose Dispensations to the Sons of men
are but the dispreadings and distended radiations of his Love, as freely
flowing forth from it through the whole orb and sphere of its creation as the
bright light from the Sun in the firmament, of whose benign influences we are
then only deprived when we hide and withdraw our selves from them. We are
taught that the mild and gentle breathings of the Divine Spirit are moving up
and down in the World to produce life, and to revive and quicken the Souls of
men into a feeling sense of a blessed Immortality. This is that mighty Spirit
that will, if we comply with it, teach us all things, even the hidden things of
God; mortify all the lusts of rebellious Flesh, and seal us up to the day of
redemption. We are taught that with all holy boldness we may in all places lift
up holy hands to God, without wrath or doubting, without any sour thoughts of
God, or fretfull jealousies, or harsh surmises. We can never distrust enough in
our selves, nor ever trust too much in God. This is the great Plerophory, and
that full Confidence which the Gospel every where seems to promote: and should
I run through all the Arguments and Solicitations that are there laid down, to
provoke us to an entertainment hereof, I should then run quite through it from
one end to another: it containing almost nothing else in the whole Complex and
Body of it but strong and forcible Motives to all Ingenuous addresses to God,
and the most effectual Encouragement that may be to all cheerful dependence on
him, and confident expectation of all assistance from him to carry on our poor
endeavors to the atchievment of Blessedness, and that in the most plain and
simple way that may be, sine fraud and fuco, without any double mind or mental
reservation; Heaven is not acquainted so feelingly with our wicked arts and
devices. But it is very strange that where God writes Life so plainly in fair
Capital letters, we are so often apt to read Death; that when he tells us over
and over, that Hell and destruction arise from our selves, that they are the
workmanship of our own hands, we will needs understand their Pedigree to be
from Heaven, and that they were conceived in the Womb of Life and Blessedness.
No, but the Gospel tells us we are not come to Mounts of burning, nor unto
blackness and darkness and tempest, etc. Hebr. 12. v. 18. Certainly a lively
Faith in this Love of God, and a sober converse with his Goodness by a cordial
entertainment and through persuasion of it, would warm and chafe our benumbed
Minds, and thaw our Hearts frozen with Self-love; it would make us melt and
dissolve out of all Self-consistencie, and by a free and noble Sympathy with
the Divine love to yield up our selves to it, and dilate and spread our selves
more fully in it. This would banish away all Atheism and ireful slavish
Superstition; it would cast down every high thought and proud imagination that
swells within us and exalts it self against this sovereign Deity; it would free
us from all those poor, sorry, pinching and particular Loves that here inthrall
the Souls of men to Vanity and Baseness; it would lead us into the true liberty
of the sons of God, filling our Hearts once enlarged with the sense of it with
a more generous and universal love, as unlimited and unbounded as true Goodness
it self is. Thus Moses-like conversing with God in the Mount, and there
beholding his glory shining thus out upon us in the face of Christ, we should
be deriving a Copy of that Eternal beauty upon our own Souls, and our thirsty
and hungry spirits would be perpetually sucking in a true participation and
image of his glory. A true divine Love would wing our Souls, and make them take
their flight swiftly toward Heaven and Immortality. Could we once be thoroughly
possessed and mastered with a full confidence of the Divine love, and God's
readiness to assist such feeble, languishing creatures as we are, in our assays
after Heaven and Blessedness, we should then, finding our selves borne up by an
Eternal and Almighty strength, dare to adventure courageously and confidently
upon the highest designs of Happiness, to assail the kingdom of heaven with a
holy gallantry and violence, to pursue a course of well-doing without
weariness; knowing that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, and that
we shall receive our Reward, if we faint not: We should work out our salvation
in the most industrious manner, trusting in God as one ready to instill
strength and power into all the vital faculties of our Souls: We should press
toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus,
that we may apprehend that for which also we are apprehended of Christ Jesus.
If we suffer not our selves to be robbed of this Confidence and Hope in God as
ready to accomplish the desires of those that seek after him, we may then walk
on strongly in the way to Heaven and not be weary; we may run and not faint.
And the more the Souls of men grow in this blissfull persuasion, the more they
shall mount up like Eagles into a clear Heaven, finding themselves rising higher
and higher above all those filthy mists, those clouds and tempests of a slavish
Fear, Despair, Fretfulness against God, pale Jealousies, wrathful and
embittered Thoughts of him, or any struglings or contests to get from within
the verge of his Power and Omnisciency, which would mantle up their Souls in
black and horrid Night.

I mean not all this while by this holy Boldness and Confidence and Presence of
Mind in a Believer's converse with the Deity, that high pitch of Assurance
that wafts the Souls of good men over the Stygian lake of Death, and brings
them to the borders of life; that here puts them into an actual possession of
Bliss, and reestates and reestablishes them in Paradise: No, That more general
acquaintance which we may have with God's Philanthropy and Bounty, ready to
relieve with the bowels of his tender compassions all those starving Souls
that call upon him, (for surely he will never do less for fainting and
drooping Souls then he does for the young Ravens that cry unto him;) that
converse which we are provoked by the Gospel to maintain with God's unconfined
love, if we understand it aright, will awaken us out of our drowsy Lethargy,
and make us ask of him the way to Sion with our faces thitherward: This will
be digging up fresh fountains for us while we go through the valley of Baca,
whereby refreshing our weary Souls we shall go on from strength to strength
until we see the face of our loving, and ever-to-be-loved, God in Sion. And so
I come to the next Particular wherein we shall further unfold how this God-like
righteousness, we have spoken of, is conveyed to us by Faith: and that is
this,

A true Gospel-faith is no lazy or languid thing, but a 2.
strong ardent breathing for and thirsting after divine Grace and
Righteousness: it does not only pursue an ambitious project of raising the Soul
immaturely to the condition of a darling Favorite with Heaven, while it is
unripe for it, by procuring a mere empty Pardon of sin; it desires not only to
stand upon clear terms with Heaven by procuring the crossing of all the
Debt-books of our sins there; but it rather pursues after an Internal
participation of the Divine nature. We often hear of a Saving Faith; and that,
where it is, is not content to wait for Salvation till the world to come; it is
not patient of being an Expectant in a Probationership for it until this
Earthly body resignes up all it is worldly interest, that so the Soul might then
come into its room: No, but it is here perpetually gasping after it, and
effecting of it in a way of serious Mortification and Self-denial: it enlarges
and dilates it self as much as may be according to the vast dimensions of the
Divine love, that it may comprehend the height and depth, the length and
breadth thereof, and fill the Soul, where it is seated, with all the fullness
of God: it breeds a strong and unsatiable appetite where it comes after true
Goodness. Were I to describe it, I should do it no otherwise then in the
language of the Apostle; It is that whereby we live in Christ, and whereby he
lives in us; or, in the dialect of our Savior himself, Something so powerfully
sucking in the precious influences of the Divine Spirit, that the Soul where it
is, is continually flowing with living waters issuing out of it self. A John 7.
38.
truely-believing Soul by an ingenuous affiance in God and an eager thirst
after him is always sucking from the full breasts of the Divine love; thence
it will not part, for there, and there only, is its life and nourishment; it
starves and faints away with grief and hunger, whenever it is pulled away
from thence; it is perpetually hanging upon the arms of Immortal Goodness, for
there it finds its great strength lies; and as much as may be arms it self
with the mighty Power of God, by which it goes forth like a Giant refreshed
with wine to run that race of Grace and Holiness that leads to the true Elysium
of Glory, and that heavenly Canaan which is above. And whenever it finds it
self enfeebled in its difficult Conflict with those fierce and furious
Corruptions, those tall sons of Anak, which arising from our terrene and
sensual affections do here encounter it in the Wilderness of this world; then
turning it self to God, and putting it self under the conduct of the Angel of
his presence, it finds it self presently out of weakness to become strong,
enabled from above to put to flight those mighty armies of the aliens. True
Faith, (if you would know its rise and pedigree) it is begotten of the Divine
bounty and fullness manifesting it self to the Spirits of men, and it is
conceived and brought forth by a deep and humble sense of Self-indigency and
Poverty. Faith arises out of Self-examination, seating and placing it self in
view of the Divine plenitude and Allsufficiency; and thus (that I may borrow
those words of S. Paul) we received the sentence of death in our selves, that
we should not trust in our selves but in him. The more this Sensual, Brutish
and Self-Central life thrives and prospers, the more divine Faith languisheth;
and the more that decays, and all Self-feeling, Self-love, and Self-sufficiency
pine away, the more is true Faith fed and nourished, it grows more vigorous:
and as Carnal life wastes and consumes, so the more does Faith suck in a true
divine and spiritual life from the true (...) who has life in himself, and
freely bestows it to all those that heartily seek for it. When the Divinity
united it self to Humane nature in the person of our Savior, he then gave
mankind a pledge and earnest of what he would further do therein, in assuring
of it into as near a conjunction as might be with Himself, and in dispensing
and communicating himself to Man in a way as far correspondent and agreeable as
might be to that first Copy. And therefore we are told of Christ being formed
in us, and the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us; of our being made conformable
to him, of having fellowship with him, of being as he was in this world, of
living in him and his living in us, of dying, and rising again, and ascending
with him into Heaven, and the like: because indeed the same Spirit that dwelt
in him, derives it self in its mighty Virtue and Energy through all believing
Souls, shaping them more and more into a just resemblance and conformity to
him as the first Copy and Pattern: Whence it is that we have so many ways of
unfolding the Union between Christ and all Believers set forth in the Gospel.
And all this is done for us by degrees through the efficacy of the Eternal
spirit, when by a true Faith we deny our selves and our own Wills, submit our
seves in a deep sense of our own folly and weakness to his Wisdom and Power,
comply with his Will, and by a holy affiance in him subordinate our selves to
his pleasure: for these are the Vital acts of a Gospel-Faith.

And according to this which has been said I suppose we may fairly gloss upon
S. Paul's Discourses which so much prefer Faith above Works. We must not think
in a Gyant-like pride to scale the walls of Heaven by our own Works, and by
force thereof to take the strong Fort of Blessedness, and wrest the Crown of
Glory out of God's hands whether he will or no. We must not think to commence a
suit in Heaven for Happiness upon such a poor and weak plea as our own External
compliance with the Old Law is. We must not think to deal with God in the
Method of Commutative Justice, and to challenge Eternal life as the just Reward
of our great Merits, and the hire due to us for our labor and toil we have
took in God's Vineyard. No, God resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble: it must be an humble and Self-denying address of a Soul dissolved into
a deep and piercing sense of its own Nothingness and unprofitableness, that can
be capable of the Divine bounty: he fills the hungry with good things, but the
rich he sends empty away. They are the hungry and thirsty Souls, always
gasping after the living springs of Divine grace, as the parched ground in the
desert does for the dew of Heaven, ready to drink them in by a constant
dependence upon God; Souls that by a living, watchful and diligent Faith
spreading forth themselves in all obsequious reverence and love of him, wait
upon him as the Eyes of an handmaid wait on the hand of her Mistress: These are
they that he delights to satiate with his goodness. Those that being mastered
by a strong sense of their own indigency, their pinching and pressing poverty,
and his All-sufficient fullness, trust in him as an Almighty Savior, and in the
most ardent manner pursue after that Perfection which his grace is leading them
to; those that cannot satisfy themselves in a bare performance of some
External acts of righteousness, or an External observance of a Law without
them, but with the most greedy and fervent ambition pursue after such an
acquaintance with his Divine Spirit as may breath an inward life through all
the powers of their Souls, and beget in them a vital form and soul of Divine
goodness; These are the spiritual seed of faithful Abraham, the sons of the
Freewoman and heirs of the promises, to whom all are made Yea and Amen in
Christ Jesus; These are they which shall abide in the house for ever, when the
sons of the Bondwoman, those that are only Arabian proselytes, shall be cast
out.

CHAP. VII.
An Appendix to the foregoing Discourse; How the whole business and Undertaking
of Christ is eminently available both to give full relief and ease to our Minds
and Hearts, and also to encourage us to Godliness or a God-like righteousness,
briefly represented in sundry Particulars.

FOR the further illustration of some things especially in the latter part of
this Discourse, it may not be amiss in some Particulars (which might easily be
enlarged) to show How the Undertaking of Christ (that Great Object of Faith) is
greatly advantageous and available to the giving full relief and ease to our
Minds and Hearts, and also to the encouraging us to Godliness, or a true
God-like righteousness.

In the General therefore we may consider, That full and evident assurance is
given hereby to the world, That God does indeed seek the saving of that which
is lost; and men are no longer to make any doubt or scruple of it. Now what can
we imagine more available to carry on a Design of Godliness, and to rouse dull
and languid Souls to an effectual minding of their own Salvation, then to have
this News sounding in their Ears by men that (at the first promulgation
thereof) durst tell them roundly in the Name of God, that God required them
every where to repent, for that his Kingdom of grace was now apparent; and
that he was not only willing, but it was his gracious design to save and
recover lost Sinners who had forsaken his Goodness?

Particularly, That the whole business of Christ is very advantageous for this
purpose, and highly accommodate thereto, may appear thus:

We are fully assured that God has this forementioned 1.
design upon lost men, because here is one (viz. Christ) that partakes every
way of Humane Nature, whom the Divinity magnifies it self in, and carries
through this world in Humane infirmities and Sufferings to Eternal glory: a
clear manifestation to the World that God had not cast off Humane Nature, but
had a real mind to exalt and dignifie it again.

The way into the Holy of holies or to Eternal happiness 2.
is laid as open as may be by Christ, in his Doctrine, Life, and Death: in all
which we may see with open face what Humane Nature may attain to, and how it
may by Humility, Self-denial and divine Love, a Christ-like life, rise up above
all visible heavens into a state of Immortal glory and bliss.

Here is a manifestation of Love given, enough to thaw all the iciness of men's
hearts which Self-love had 3.
quite frozen up: For here is One who in Humane Nature most heartily every
where denying himself, is ready to do any thing for the good of Mankind, and
at last gives up his life for the same pupose; and that according to the good
will and pleasure of that Eternal love which so loved the World, that he gave
this beloved and his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life.

Whereas every Penitent Sinner carries a sense of Guilt upon his own
Conscience, is apt to shrink with 4.
cold chill fears of offended Majesty, and to dread the thoughts of violated
Justice: He is assured that Christ has laid down his life, and thereby made
propitiation and atonement for sin; That He has laid down his life for the
Redemption of him; and so in Christ we have Redemption through his blood, even
the forgiveness of sins. Thus may the Hearts of all Penitents, troubled at
first with sense of their own guilt, be quieted, and fully established in a
living Faith and Hope in an Eternal goodness; seeing how their Sins are
remitted through the blood of Jesus that came to die for them and save them,
and through his blood they may have free access unto God.

Seeing Sin and Guilt are apt continually to beget a 5.
jealousy of God's Majesty and Greatness, from whom the Sinner finds himself
at a vast distance, he is made acquainted with a Mediator through whom he may
address himself to God without this jealousy or doubting; for that this
Mediator likewise is one of Humane Nature, that is highly beloved and accepted
of God, he having so highly pleased God by performing his Will in all things.
Certainly it is very decorous and much for the Ease of a Penitent's mind, (as
it makes also for the disparagement of Sin) that our Addresses to God should be
through a Mediator. The Platonists wisely observed that between the Pure
Divinity and Impure Sinners as there is no Union, so no Communion: it is very
agreeable every way and upon all accounts, that they who in themselves are
altogether unworthy and under demerit, should come to God by a Mediator.

Thus the Scripture every where seems to represent and hold forth Christ in the
forenamed Particulars, (without descending into Niceties and Subtilties, such
as the Schoolmen and others from them have troubled the World with) in a very
full and ample manner, that so the Minds of true Believers (that are willing to
comply with the Purpose of God for their own Eternal peace) might in all Cases
find something in Christ for their relief, and make use of him as much as may
be to encourage and help on Godliness: for by this whole Undertaking of Christ
manifested in the Gospel God would have to be understood Full relief of Mind
and Ease of Conscience, as also all Encouragement to Godliness, and
Disparagement of Sin. And indeed the whole business of Christ is the greatest
Blow to Sin that may be; For the World is taught hereby, that there is no
Sinning upon cheap and easy terms: men may see that God will not return so
easily into favor with Sinners; but he will have his Righteousness
acknowledged, and likewise their own Demerit. And this Acknowledgment he is
once indeed pleased to accept of in the person of our Savior: yet if men will
not now turn to him, and accept his favor, they must know that there is no
other Sacrifice for Sin.

By these Particulars we have briefly touched upon (to name no more) it may
appear, That when we look into the Gospel, we are taught to believe that Christ
has done, according to the good pleasure of God, every thing for us that may
truly relieve our Minds, and encourage us to Godliness, a God-like
Righteousness far exceeding the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.

A Discovery of The SHORTNESS and VANITY Of A Pharisaick Righteousness: OR, An
Account of the False Grounds upon which Men are apt vainly to conceit
themselves to be Righteous.

Luke 16. 15. And he said unto the Pharisees, Ye are they which justify your
selves before men; but God knows your Hearts: for that which is highly
esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God.

Epiphanius in Haeres. 59. (...). (...).

Renatus Des Carts in Epistol. ad Princ. Elizabetham. Nulli facilius ad magnam
Pietatis famam perveniunt, quam Superstitiosi vel Hypocritae.

THE SHORTNESS and VANITY OF A Pharisaick Righteousness, Discovered in a
Discourse upon
MATTHEW 19. 20, 21. The young man says unto him, All these things have I kept
from my youth up: what lack I yet?

Jesus says unto him, If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and
give it to the Poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven: and come and
follow me.


CHAP. I.
A General account of men's Mistakes about Religion. Men are no where more lazy
and sluggish, and more apt to delude themselves, then in matters of Religion.
The Religion of most men is but an Image and Resemblance of their own Fancies.
The Method propounded for discoursing upon those words in S. Matthew. 1. To
discover some of the Mistakes and False Notions about Religion. 2. To discover
the Reason of these Mistakes. A brief Explication of the Words.

AS there is no kind of Excellency more generally pretended to then Religion,
so there is none less known, or wherein men are more apt to delude themselves.
Every one is ready to lay claim, and to plead a Right in it; (like the Bat in
the Jewish fable, that pretended the Light was hers, and complained of the
unjust detainment thereof from her;) but few there are that understand the true
worth and pretiousness of it. There are some Common Notions and a Natural
instinct of Devotion seated in the Minds of men, which are ever and anon roving
after Religion; and as they casually and fortuitously start up any Models and
Ideas of it, they are presently prone to believe themselves to have found out
this only Pearl of price: the Religion of most men being indeed nothing else
but such a Strain and Scheme of Thoughts and Actions, as their Natural
propensions, swayed by nothing else but an Inbred belief of a Deity,
accidentaily run into; nothing else but an Image and Resemblance of their own
Fancies which are ever busy in painting out themselves; which is the reason
why there are as many Shapes and Features of Religion painted forth in the
Minds of men, as there are various Shapes of Faces and Fancies. Thus men are
wont to fashion and limne out their Religion to themselves in a strange and
uncouth manner, as the Imaginations of men in their Dreams are wont to
represent monstrous and hideous shapes of things that no where else appear but
there. And though some may seem to themselves to have ascended up above this
Low region, this Vulgar state of Religion; yet I doubt they may still be wrapped
up in Clouds and darkness, they may still be but in a Middle region, like
wandering Meteors that have not yet shak'd off that gross and earthly Nature
which will at last force them again downwards. There may be some who may arrive
at that Book-skill and learning in Divine Mysteries, that with a Pharisaick
pride looking down upon the rude and vulgar sort of men, may say, John 7.
This people that knows not the Law are cursed; who themselves yet converse
only with an aerie Ghost and shadow of Religion: though the Light of divine
truth may seem to shine upon them, yet by reason of their dark and opacous
hearts, it shines not into them: They may, like this dark and dull Earth, be
superficially gilded, and warmed too, with its beams, and yet the impressions
thereof do not pierce quite through them. There may be many fair Semblances of
Religion where the Substance and Power of it is not. We shall here endeavor to
discover some of them which may seem most specious, and with which the weak
Understandings of men (which are no where more lazy and sluggish then in
matters of Religion) are most apt to be deluded; and then discover the Reason
of these Mistakes.

For which purpose we have made choice of these Words, wherein we find a young
Pharisee beginning to swell with a vain conceit of his good estate toward God,
looking upon himself as being already upon the Borders of Perfection, having
from his youth up kept on a constant course in the way of God's Commandments;
he could not now be many miles from the land of Canaan, if he were not already
passed over Jordan; he thought himself to be already in a state of Perfection,
or at least within sight of it: and therefore making account he was as lovely
in our Saviors eyes as he was in his own, asks him, What lack I yet?

For the understanding of which we must know the Jews were wont to distinguish
Righteous men into two sorts, (...) and (...), to which this Quere of his seems
to refer, as if he had said, Having kept all God's commandments, sure my Good
deeds cannot only overbalance my Evil, no, but they rather fill both the
scales of the Divine balance; I have no Evil deeds to weigh against them: what
therefore can I want of the end and scope of the Divine Law, which is to make
men perfect, seeing I have guided my whole life from my youth up by the
Precepts of it? To which our Savior replies; If thou will be perfect, go and
sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven: and come and follow me. Which words I can neither think to be spoken as
Consilium perfectionis in the Papal sense, nor yet only as a particular and
special Precept; but rather by way of Conviction: So that the full sense and
importance of our Saviors speech seems to be this, viz. A mere Conformity of
the Outward man to the Law of God is not sufficient to bring a man to Eternal
life; but the Inward man also must deeply receive in the stamp and impression
of the Divine Law, so as to be made like to God. True Perfection is not
consistent with any Terrene loves or Worldly affections: This Mundane life and
spirit which acts so strongly and impetuously in this lower world, must be
crucified: The Soul must be wholly dissolved from this Earthy body which it is
so deeply immerst in, while it endeavors to enlarge its sorry Tabernacle upon
this material Globe, and by a holy abstraction from all things that pinion it
to Mortality, withdraw it self and retire into a Divine solitude. If thou
therefore were in a state of Perfection, thou would be able at the first
call from God to resign up all Interest here below, to quitt all claim, and to
dispose of thy self and all worldly enjoyments according to his pleasure
without any reluctance; and come and follow me. And this I think was the true
Scope of our Saviors answer; which proved a real Demonstration, as it appears
in the sequel of the Story, that this confident Pharisee had not yet attained
to those mortified affections which are requisite in all the Candidates of true
Blessedness; but only cheated his own Soul with a bare External appearance of
Religion, which was not truly seated in his Heart: and I doubt not but many are
ready upon as slight Grounds, and with as much confidence, to take up his
Quere, What lack I yet?

We shall therefore in the first place, according to what we promised, inquire
into some of those false Pretenses which men are apt to make to Happiness, and
show in four Particulars how Religion is mistaken.

CHAP. II.
An Account of men's Mistakes about Religion in 4 Particulars. 1. A Partial
obedience to some Particular Precepts. The False Spirit of Religion spends it
self in some Particulars, is confined, is overswayed by some prevailing Lust.
Men of this spirit may by some Book-skill, and a zeal about the Externals of
Religion, loose the sense of their own Guiltiness, and of their deficiencies in
the Essentials of Godliness, and fansy themselves nearly related to God. Where
the true Spirit of Religion is it informs and actuates the whole man, it will
not be confined, but will be absolute within us, and not suffer any corrupt
Interest to grow by it.

THE First is, A Partial obedience to some Particular 1.
Precepts of Gods law. That arrogant Pharisee that could lift up a bold face to
heaven, and thank God he was no Extortioner, nor unjust, nor guilty of any
Publican-sins, found it easy to persuade himself that God justified him as
much as he did himself.

It was a vulgar Rule given by the Jewish Doctors, which I fear too many live
by, That men should single out some one Commandment out of Gods law, and
therein especially exercise themselves, that so they might make God their
friend by that, lest in others they should too much displease him. Thus men are
content (...), to pay God their Decimae, and Septimae of their lives too, if
need be, so that they may without fear of sacrilege, or purloining, as they
suppose, from him, enjoy all the rest to themselves: But they are not willing
to consecrate their whole lives to him, they are afraid lest Religion should
incroach too much upon them, and too busily invade their own rights and
liberties, as their Selfish Spirit calls them.

There are such that it may be think themselves willing that God should have
his due, so be it he will also let them enjoy their own without any let or
molestation; but they are very jealous lest he should incroach too much upon
them, and are careful to maintain a Meum and Tuum with Heaven it self, and to
set bounds to God's prerogative over them, lest it should swell too much, and
grow too mighty for them to maintain their own Privileges under it. They would
fain understand themselves to be freeborn under the dominion of God himself,
and therefore ought not to be compelled to yield obedience to any such laws of
his as their own private seditious Lusts and Passions will not suffer them to
give their consent unto.

There be such who persuade themselves they are well-affected to God, and
willing to obey his Commandments, but yet think they must not be uncivil to
the World; nor so base and cowardly as not to maintain their own credit and
reputation, with a due revenge upon those that seem to impair it; or so much
forget themselves, as not to comply with the guise and fashion of this world so
far as it may make for their own emolument or preferment. Such as these, that
are no fast friends to Religion, can easily find some Posterndore to slip out
by into this World: and while they either do some constant homage to Heaven in
the exercise and performance of some Duties of Religion, or abstain from such
Vices as the common opinions of men brand with infamy, or can fancy
themselves to be marked out with some of those Characters which they have
learned from Books or Pulpit-discourses to be the Notes of God's Children and
justified persons; they grow big with Self-conceit, and can easily find out
some handsome piece of Sophistry and cunning Topic to delude themselves by, in
indulging some beloved Lust or other: They can sometimes beat down the price of
other men's religion, to inhance the value of their own; or it may be by a
burning and fiery zeal against the Opinions and deportments of others that are
not of their own Sect, they may loose the sense of all their own guiltiness.
The Disciples themselves had almost forgotten the mild and gentle Spirit of
Religion, in an overhasty heat calling for Fire down from heaven upon those
whom they deemed their Master's enemies.

Sometimes a Partial spirit in Religion, that spends it self only in some
Particulars, mistakes the fair complexions of Good nature for the true face of
Virtue; and a good Bodily temperament will serve it, as a flattering glass, to
bestow beauty upon a deformed and misshapen Mind, that it may seem virtuous.
But it is not a true Spirit of Religion, whatsoever those wanton wits may call
it, that is thus Particular and confined. No, that is of a subtle and working
nature, it will be searching through the whole man, and leave nothing
uninformed by it self: as it is with the Soul that runs through all the
portions of Matter and every member of the Body. Sin and Grace cannot lodge
together, they cannot divide and share out between them two several Dominions
in one Soul.

What is commonly said of Truth in general, we may say more especially of true
Goodness, magna est, and praevalebit: it will lodge in the Souls of men, like
that mighty, though gentle, Heat which is entertained in the Heart, that
always dispenses warm Blood and Spirits to all the members in the Body: it
will not suffer any other Interest to grow by it: it will be so absolute as to
swallow up all our carnal freedom, and crush down all our fleshly liberty: as
Moses his Serpent did eat up all the Serpents of the Egyptian Magicians, so
will it devour all that viperous brood of iniquity, which our Magical Self-will
by her witchcraft and enchantments begets within us: like a strong and vehement
Flame within us, it will not only singe the hair, or scorch and blister the
skin, but it will go on to consume this whole Body of death: it is compared by
our Savior to Leaven that will ferment the whole mass in which it is wrapped
up: it will enter into us like the Refiner's fire, and the Fuller's Soape: like
the Angel of God's presence that he promised to send along with the Israelites
in their journey to Canaan, it will not pardon our iniquities, nor indulge any
darling lust whatsoever: it will narrowly pry into all our actions, and be
spying out all those back-waies and doors whereby Sin and Vice may enter.

That Religion that runs out only in Particularities, and is overswayed by the
prevailing power of any Lust, is but only a dead carcass, and not indeed that
true living Religion which comes from Heaven, and which will not suffer it self
to be confined; that will not indent with us, or article upon our terms and
conditions, but Sampson like will break all those bonds which our fleshly and
harlot-like wills would tie it with, and become every way absolute within us.
And so I pass to the Second thing wherein men are apt to delude themselves in
taking an Estimate of their own Religion, viz.

CHAP. III.
The Second Mistake about Religion, viz. A mere compliance of the Outward man
with the Law of God. True Religion seats it self in the Center of men's Souls,
and first brings the Inward man into Obedience to the Law of God: the
Superficial Religion intermeddles chiefly with the Circumference and Outside of
men; or rests in an outward abstaining from some Sins. Of Speculative and the
most close and Spiritual wickedness within. How apt men are to sink all
Religion into Opinions and External Forms.

A Mere compliance of the Outward man with the Law 2.
of God. There is an (...) and an (...) that Philosophy has acknowledged as
well as our Christian Divinity: and when Religion seats it self in the Center
of men's Souls, it acts there most strongly upon the Vital powers of it, and
first brings the Inward man into a true and cheerful obedience to the law of
God, before all the seditious and rebellious motives of the External or Animal
man be quite subdued. But a Superficial Religion many times intermeddles only
with the Circumference and Outside of men, it only lodges in the suburbs and
storms the outworks, but enters not the main Fort of men's Souls, which is
strongly defended by inward Pride, Self-will, particular and mundane Loves,
fretting and self-consuming Envy, Popularity and Vainglory, and such other
Mental vices, that when they are beaten out of the visible behaviors and
conversations of men by Divine threats or promises (which may be too potent to
be controlled) retreat and secure themselves here as in a strong Castle. There
may be many who dare not pursue Revenge, and yet are not willing to forgive
injuries; who dare not murder their enemy, that yet cannot love him; who dare
not seek for preferment by Bribery, who yet are not mortified to these and many
other mundane and base-born affections: they are not willing that the Divine
prerogative should extend it self beyond the Outward man, and that Religion
should be too busy with their Inward thoughts and passions: if they may not by
proud boasting set off their own sorry commodities upon the public stage, and
there read out their own Panegyricks; yet they will inwardly applaud
themselves, and commit wanton dalliance with their own Parts and Perfections;
and not feeling the mighty power of any Higher good, they will endeavor to
preserve an unhallowed Autaesthesie and feeling sense of themselves; and by a
sullen melancholy Stoicisme, when Religion would deprive and bereave them of
the sinful glory and pleasures of this Outward world, they then retire and
shrink themselves up into a Center of their own, they collect and contract
themselves into themselves. Thus when this low life of men's Souls is chased out
of the External vices and vanities of this World by the chastisements of their
own Consciences, or many times by bodily oppressions, it presently retires into
it self, and by a Self-feeling begins more to grasp and dearly embrace it self.
When these External loves begin to be starved and cooled, yet men may then fall
into love with and courting of themselves by Arrogance, Self-confidence and
dependence, Self-applause and gratulations, Admiration of their own
perfections; and so feed that dying life of theirs with this Speculative
wantonness, that it may as strongly express it self within them, as before it
did without themselves. Men may by inward braving of themselves sacrilegiously
steal God's glory from him, and erect a Self-supremacy within, exerting it self
in Self-will and particular loves, and so become Corrivals with God for the
Crown of Blessedness and Self-sufficiency, as I doubt many of the Stoics
endeavored with a Giant-like ambition to do.

But alas, I doubt we generally arrive not to this pitch of Religion, to deny
the world, and all the pomp and glory of this largely-extended train of Vanity;
but we easily content our selves with some External forms of Religion. We are
too apt to look at a garish dress and attire of Religion, or to be enamoured
rather with some more specious and seemingly-spiritual Forms, then with the
true Spirit and Power of Godliness and Religion it self. We are more taken
commonly with the several new fashions that the luxuriant Fancies of men are
apt to contrive for it, then with the real power and simplicity thereof: and
while we think our selves to be growing in our knowledge, and moving on toward
a state of Perfection, we do but turn up and down from one kind of Form to
another; we are as apt still to draw it down into as low, worldly and mundane
Rites and Ordinances, as ever it was before our Savior made that glorious
Reformation therein, which took away these Material crutches made up of carnal
Observances which Earthly minds lean so much upon, and are fain to underprop
their Religion with, which else would tumble down and fall to nothing: except
we can cast it into such a certain Set of duties and System of Opinions, that
we may see it altogether from one end to another, we are afraid lest it should
become too abstruse a thing and vanish away from us.

I would not be misunderstood to speak against those Duties and Ordinances
which are necessary means appointed by God to promote us in the ways of Piety:
But I fear we are too apt to sink all our Religion into these, and so to embody
it, that we may as it were touch and feel it, because we are so little
acquainted with the high and spiritual nature of it, which is too subtle for
gross and carnal minds to converse with. I fear our vulgar sort of Christians
are wont so to look upon such kind of Models of Divinity and Religious
performances, which were intended to help our dull minds to a more lively sense
of God and true Goodness, as those things that claim the whole of their
Religion: and therefore are too apt to think themselves absolved from it,
except at some solemn times of more especial addresses to God; and that this
wedding garment of holy Thoughts and divine Affections is not for every days
wearing, but only then to be put on when we come to the Marriage Feast and
Festivals of Heaven; as if Religion were fast locked and bound up in some
sacred Solemnities, and so incarcerated and incorporated into some divine
Mysteries, as the superstitious Heathen of old thought, that it might not stir
abroad and wander too far out of these hallowed Cloisters, and grow too busy
with us in our Secular imploiments. We have learned to distinguish too subtily
I doubt in our lives and conversations inter sacrum and profanum, our Religious
approaches to God and our Worldly affairs. I know our conversation and
demeanor in this world is not, nor can well be, all of a piece, and there will
be several degrees of Sanctity in the lives of the best men, as there were once
in the land of Canaan; but yet I think a Good man should always find himself
upon Holy ground, and never depart so far into the affairs of this life, as to
be without either the call or compass of Religion; he should always think
wheresoever he is, etiam ibi Dii sunt, that God and the blessed Angels are
there, with whom he should converse in a way of Purity. We must not think that
Religion serves to paint our Faces, to reform our Looks, or only to inform our
Heads, or instruct and tune our Tongues; no, nor only to tie our Hands, and
make our Outward man more demure, and bring our Bodies and bodily actions into
a better decorum: But its main business is to purge and reform our Hearts and
all the Elicit actions and motions thereof. And so I come to a Third particular
wherein we are apt to misjudge our selves in matters of Religion.

CHAP. IV.
The Third Mistake about Religion, viz. A constrained and forced Obedience to
God's Commandments. The Religion of many (some of whom would seem most
abhorrent from Superstition) is nothing else but Superstition properly so
called. False Religionists, having no inward sense of the Divine Goodness,
cannot truly love God: Yet their sour and dreadful apprehensions of God
compel them to serve him. A slavish spirit in Religion may be very prodigal in
such kind of serving God as does not pinch their Corruptions; but in the great
and weightier matters of Religion, in such things as prejudice their beloved
Lusts, it is very needy and sparing. This servile Spirit has low and mean
thoughts of God, but an high opinion of its Outward services, as conceiting
that by such cheap things God is gratified and becomes indebted to it. The
different Effects of Love and Slavish fear in the truly, and in the falsely,
Religious.

ANother Particular wherein men mistake Religion, is A constrained and forced
obedience to God's Commandments. 3.
That which many men (amongst whom some would seem to be most abhorrent from
Superstition) call their Religion, is indeed nothing else but a (...) See the
Tract of Superstition.
, that I may use the word in its ancient and proper sense, as it imports such
an apprehension of God as renders him grievous to men; and so destroys all free
and cheerful converse with him, and begets in stead thereof a forced and dry
devotion, void of inward Life and Love. Those Servile spirits which are not
acquainted with God and his Goodness, may be so haunted by the frightfull
thoughts of a Deity, as to scare and terrify them into some worship and
observance of him. They are apt to look upon him as one clothed with austerity,
or, as the Epicurean Poet has too truly painted out their thoughts, as a savus
Dominus, that is, in the language of the unprofitable servant in the Gospel, an
hard Master; and therefore they think something must be done to please him, and
to mitigate his severity toward them: and though they cannot truly love him,
having no inward sense of his Loveliness, yet they cannot but serve him so far
as these rigorous apprehensions lie upon them; though notwithstanding such as
these are very apt to persuade themselves that they may pacify him and
purchase his favor with some cheap services, as if Heaven it self could become
guilty of Bribery, and an Immutable Justice be flattered into Partiality and
Respect of persons. Because they are not acquainted with God, and know him not
as he is in himself, therefore they are ready to paint him forth to themselves
in their own shape: and because they themselves are full of Peevishness and
Self-will, arbitrarily imposing and prescribing to others without sufficient
evidence of Reason, and are easily enticed by Flatteries; they are apt to
represent the Divinity also to themselves in the same form, and think they view
the true pourtraiture and draught of their own Genius in it; and therefore that
they might please this angry Deity of their own making, they care not sometimes
to be lavish in such a kind of Service of him as does not much pinch their own
corruptions; nay and it may be too, will seem to part with them sometimes, and
give them a weeping farewell, if God and their own awakened Consciences seem to
frown upon them; though all their Obedience arise from nothing else but the
Compulsions and necessities which their own sour and dreadful apprehensions
of God lay upon them: and therefore in those things which more nearly touch
their own beloved Lusts, they will be as scant and sparing as may be; here they
will be as strict with God as may be, that he may have no more then his due, as
they think, like that Unprofitable servant in the Gospel, that, because his
Master was an austere man, reaping where he had not sown, and gathering where
he had not scattered, was content and willing he should have his own again, but
would not suffer him to have any more.

This Servile spirit in Religion is always illiberal and needy in the Magnalia
Legis, the great and weightier matters of Religion, and here weighs out
Obedience by drams and scruples: it never finds it self more shrivelled and
shrunk up, then when it is to converse with God; like those creatures that are
generated of slime and mud, the more the Summer-sun shines upon them, and the
nearer it comes to them, the more is all their vital strength dried up and
spent away: their dreadful thoughts of God, like a cold Eastern wind, blasts
all their blossoming affections, and nips them in the bud: these exhaust their
native vigor, and make them weak and sluggish in all their motions toward God.
Their Religion is rather a Prison or a piece of Penance to them, then any
voluntary and free compliance of their Souls with the Divine will: and yet
because they bear the burden and heat of the day, they think, when the evening
comes, they ought to be more liberally rewarded; such slavish spirits being
ever apt inwardly to conceit that Heaven receives some emolument or other by
their hard labors, and so becomes indebted to them, because they see no true
gain and comfort accruing from them to their own Souls; and so because they do
God's work and not their own, they think they may reasonably expect a fair
compensation, as having been profitable to him. And this I doubt was the first
and vulgar foundation of Merit: though now the world is ashamed to own it.

But alas, such an ungodlike Religion as this can never be owned by God: the
Bondwoman and her son must be cast out. The Spirit of true Religion is of a
more free, noble, ingenuous and generous nature, arising out of the warm beams
of the Divine love which first hatched it and brought it forth, and therefore
is it afterward perpetually bathing it self in that sweetest love that first
begot it, and is always refreshed and nourished by it. This Love casts out
fear, fear which has torment in it, and is therefore more apt to chase away
Souls once wounded with it from God, rather then to allure them to God. Such
fear of God always carries in it a secret Antipathy against him, as being
(...), as Plutarch speaks, one that is so troublesome that there is no quiet or
peaceable living with him. Whereas Love by a strong Sympathy draws the Souls of
men, when it has once laid hold upon them by its powerful insinuation, into
the nearest conjunction that may be with the Divinity; it thaws all those
frozen affections which a Slavish fear had congealed and locked up, and makes
the Soul most cheerful, free, and nobly resolved in all its motions after God.
It was well observed of old by Pythagoras, (...), we are never so well as when
we approach to God; when in a way of Religion we make our addresses to God,
then are our Souls most cheerful. True Religion and an Inward acquaintance
with God discovers nothing in him but pure and sincere Goodness, nothing that
might breed the least distaste or disaffection, or carry in it any semblance of
displeasingness; and therefore the Souls of good men are never pinching and
sparing in their affections: then the Torrent is most full and swells highest,
when it empties it self into this unbounded Ocean of the Divine Being. This
makes all the Commandments of God light and easy and far from being grievous.
There needs no Quis legem det amantibus? Major Lex Amor est sibi. Boethius l. 3.
de Consol. Philos.
Law to compel a Mind acted by the true spirit of divine love to serve God or
to comply with his Will. It is the choice of such a Soul to endeavor to
conform it self to him, and draw from him as much as may be an Imitation of
that Goodness and Perfection which it finds in him. Such a Christian does not
therefore obey his Commands only because it is God's Will he should do so, but
because he sees the Law of God to be truly perfect, as David speaks: his nature
being reconciled to God finds it all holy, just and good, as S. Paul speaks,
and such a thing as his Soul loves, sweeter then the honey or the honey-combe;
and he makes it his meat and drink to do the Will of God, as our Lord and
Savior did. And so I pass to the Fourth and last Particular wherein Religion
is sometimes mistaken.

CHAP. V.
The Fourth and last Mistake about Religion, When a mere Mechanical and
Artificial Religion is taken for that which is a true Impression of Heaven upon
the Souls of men, and which moves like a new Nature. How Religion is by some
made a piece of Art, and how there may be specious and plausible Imitations of
the Internals of Religion as well as of the Externals. The Method and Power of
Fancy in contriving such Artificial imitations. How apt men are in these to
deceive both themselves and others. The Difference between those that are
governed in their Religion by Fancy, and those that are actuated by the Divine
Spirit and in whom Religion is a Living Form. That True Religion is no Art, but
a new Nature. Religion discovers it self best in a Serene and clear Temper of
Mind, in deep Humility, Meekness, Self-denial, Universal love of God and all
true Goodness.

THE Fourth and last Particular wherein men misjudge 4.
themselves, is, When a mere Mechanical and Artificial Religion is taken for
that which is a true Impression of Heaven upon the Souls of men, and which
moves like an Inward nature. True Religion will not stoop to Rules of Art, nor
be confined within the narrow compass thereof: No, where it is, we may cry out
with the Greek Philosopher, (...) God has there kindled as it were his own
Life which will move and act only according to the Laws of Heaven. But there
are some Mechanical Christians that can frame and fashion out Religion so
cunningly in their own Souls by that Book-skill they have got of it, that it
may many times deceive themselves, as if it were a true living thing. We often
hear that mere Pretenders to Religion may go as far in all the External acts of
it as those that are best acquainted with it: I doubt not also but many times
there may be Artificial imitations drawn of that which only lives in the Souls
of good Men, by the powerful and wily Magic of exalted Fancies; as we read of
some Artificers that have made such Images of living creatures, wherein they
have not only drawn forth the outward shape, but seem almost to have copied out
the life too in them. Men may make an Imitation as well of those things which
we call the Internals of Religion, as of the Externals. There may be a
Semblance of inward Joy in God, of Love to him and his Precepts, of Dependence
upon him, and a filial Reverence of him; which by the contrivance and power of
Fancy may be represented in a Masque upon the Stage of the Animal part of a
man's Soul. Those Christians that fetch all their Religion from pious Books and
Discourses, hearing of such and such Signs of Grace and Evidences of Salvation,
and being taught to believe they must get those, that so they may go to Heaven;
may presently begin to set themselves on work, and in an Apish imitation cause
their Animal Powers and Passions to represent all these; and Fancy being well
acquainted with all those several Affections in the Soul that at any time
express themselves toward Outward things, may, by the power it has over the
Passions, call them all forth in the same Mode and fashion, and then conjoin
with them some Thoughts of God and Divine things, which may serve thus put
together for a handsome Artifice of Religion wherein these Mechanics may much
applaud themselves.

I doubt not but there may be such who to gain credit with themselves, and that
glorious name of being the Children of God (though they know nothing more of it
but that it is a Title that sounds well) would use their best skill to appear
such to themselves, so qualified and molded as they are told they must be. And
as many times Credit and Reputation among men may make them pare off the
Ruggedness of their Outward man, and polish that; so to gain their own good
opinion, and a reputation with their own Consciences which look more inwardly,
they may also endeavor to make their Inward man look at some times more smooth
and comely: and it is no hard matter for such Chamaeleon-like Christians to
turn even their insides into whatsoever hue and color shall best please them,
and then Narcissus-like to fall in love with themselves: a strong and nimble
Fancy having such command over the Animal spirits, that it can send them forth
in full troops which way soever it pleases, and by their aid call forth and
raise any kind of Passion it lists, and when it lists allay it again, as
the Poets say Aeolus can do with the Winds. As they say of the force of
Imagination, that Vis Imaginativa signat foetum; so Imagination may stamp any
Idea that it finds within itself upon the Passions, and turn them as it pleases
to what Seal it will set upon them, and mold them into any likeness; and a man
looking down and taking a view of the Plot as it is acted upon the Stage of the
Animal powers, may like and approve it as a true Platform of Religion. Thus may
they easily deceive themselves, and think their Religion to be some Mighty
thing within them, that runs quite through them and makes all these
transformations within them; whereas the Rise and Motion of it may be all in
the Animal and Sensitive powers of the Soul; and a wise observer of it may see
whence it comes and whither it goes: it being indeed a thing which is from the
earth, earthy, and not like that true Spirit of Regeneration which comes from
Heaven, and begets a Divine life in the Souls of good men, and is not under the
command of any such Charms as these are, neither will it move according to
those Laws, and Times, and Measures that we please to set to it: but we shall
find it manifesting its mighty supremacy over the Highest powers of our Souls.
Whereas we may truly say of all Mechanics in Religion, and our Mimical
Christians, that they are not so much actuated and informed by their Religion,
as they inform that; the power of their own Imagination deriving that Force to
it which bears it up and guides all its motions and operations. And therefore
they themselves having the power over it, can new mold it as themselves,
please, according to any new Pattern which shall like them better then the
former: they can furnish this domestic Scene of theirs with any kind of matter
which the history of other men's religion may afford them; and if need be, act
over all the Experiences of that sect of men to which they most addict
themselves so to the life, that they may seem to themselves as well experienced
Christians as any others; and so, it may be, soar so aloft in Self-conceit, as
if they had already made their nests amongst the stars, and had viewed their
own mansion in Heaven. What was observed by the Stoic concerning the vulgar
sort of men, (...), may as truly be said of this sort of Christians, their life
is nothing else but a strong Energy of Fancy and Opinion.

But besides, lest their Religion might too grossly discover it self to be
nothing else but a piece of Art, there may be sometimes such Extraordinary
motions stirred up within them which may prevent all their own Thoughts, that
they may seem to be a true operation of the Divine life; when yet all this is
nothing else but the Energy of their own Self-love touched with some Fleshly
apprehensions of Divine things, and excited by them. There are such things in
our Christian Religion that, when a Carnal and unhallowed mind takes the Chair
and gets the expounding of them, may seem very delicious to the fleshly
appetites of men: Some doctrines and notions of Free Grace and Justification;
the magnificent Titles of Sons of God and Heirs of Heaven; ever-flowing streams
of Joy and Pleasure that blessed Souls shall swim in to all eternity; a
glorious Paradise in the world to come, always springing up with well-sented and
fragrant Beauties; a New Jerusalem paved with Gold and bespangled with Stars,
comprehending in its vast circuit such numberless varieties, that a busy
curiosity may spend it self about to all eternity. I doubt not but that
sometimes the most fleshly and earthly men, that fly their ambition to the pomp
of this world, may be so ravished with the conceits of such things as these,
that they may seem to be made partakers of the powers of the world to come; I
doubt not but that they may be as much exalted with them, as the Souls of
crazed and distracted persons seem to be sometimes, when their Fancies play
with those quick and nimble Spirits which a distempered frame of Body and
unnatural heat in their Heads beget within them. Thus may these blazing Comets
rise up above the Moon, and climb higher then the Sun; which yet, because they
have no solid consistencie of their own, and are of a base and earthly allay,
will soon vanish and fall down again, being only born up by an External force.
They may seem to themselves to have attained higher then those noble Christians
that are gently moved by the natural force of true Goodness; they may seem to
be pleniores Deo then those that are really informed and actuated by the Divine
Spirit, and do move on steddily and constantly in the way toward Heaven; as
the Seed that was sown in the thorny ground, grew up and lengthened out its
blade faster then that which was sown in the good and fruitful soil. And as
the Motions of our Sense, Fancy and Passions, while our Souls are in this
mortal condition sunk down deeply into the Body, are many times more vigorous
and make stronger impressions upon us then those of the Higher powers of the
Soul, which are more subtle and remote from these mixed and Animal perceptions;
that Devotion which is there seated may seem to have more Energy and life in it
then that which gently and with a more delicate kind of touch spreads it self
upon the Understanding, and from thence mildly derives it self through our
Wills and Affections. But howsoever the Former may be more boisterous for a
time, yet This is of a more consistent, spermatical and thriving nature: For
that proceeding indeed from nothing else but a Sensual and Fleshly apprehension
of God and true Happiness, is but of a flitting and fading nature; and as the
Sensible powers and faculties grow more languid, or the Sun of Divine light
shines more brightly upon us, these earthly devotions like our Culinary fires
will abate their heat and servour. But a true Celestial warmth will never be
extinguished, because it is of an Immortal nature; and being once seated
vitally in the Souls of men, it will regulate and order all the motions of it
in a due manner, as the natural Heat radicated in the Hearts of living
creatures has the dominion and Economy of the whole Body under it, and sends
forth warm Blood and Spirits and Vital nourishment to every part and member of
it. True Religion is no piece of artifice; it is no boiling up of our
Imaginative powers nor the glowing heats of Passion; though these are too often
mistaken for it, when in our juglings in Religion we cast a mist before our own
eyes: But it is a new Nature informing the Souls of men; it is a God-like frame
of Spirit, discovering it self most of all in Serene and Clear minds, in deep
Humility, Meekness, Self-denial, Universal love of God and all true Goodness,
without Partiality and without Hypocrisy; whereby we are taught to know God,
and knowing him to love him, and conform our selves as much as may be to all
that Perfection which shines forth in him.

THUS far the First part of this Discourse, which was designed (according to
the Method propounded) to give a particular account of men's Mistakes about
Religion. The other part was intended to discover the reason of these Mistakes.
But whether the Author did finish that Part, it appears not by any Papers of
his which yet came to my hands. If he did, and the Papers should be in others
hands (for the Author was communicative) if they (or any other Papers of the
Authors) be sent to Mr William Morden, Bookseller in Cambridge, the like care
shall be taken for the publishing of them as has been for this Collection.

THE EXCELLENCY and NOBLENESS OF TRUE RELIGION,

1. In its Rise and Original. 2. In its Nature and Essence. 3. In its
Properties and Operations. 4 In its Progress. 5. In its Term and End.
Psalm 16. 3. To the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in
whom is all my delight.

Greg. Nazianzenus in Orat. 11. (...) Divinae imaginis.
(...).

Idem in Orat. 23. (...).

Hieronymus ad Celantiam Ep. 14. Nescit Religio nostra personas accipere, nec
conditiones hominum sed animos inspicit singulorum; Servum and Nobilem de
moribus pronunciat. Sola apud Deum Libertas est non servire peccatis: Summa
apud Deum est Nobilitas clarum esse virtutibus.

THE EXCELLENCY and NOBLENESS OF TRUE RELIGION.
Proverbs 15. 24. The Way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from
hell beneath.
The Introduction.
IN this whole Book of the Proverbs we find Solomon, one of the Eldest Sons of
Wisdom, always standing up and calling her blessed: his Heart was both
enlarged and filled with the pure influences of her beams, and therefore was
perpetually adoring that Sun which gave him light. Wisdom is justified of all
her Children; though the brats of darkness and children of folly see no beauty
nor comeliness in her, that they should desire her, as they said of Christ,
Esaias 53. (...); That Mind which is not touched with an inward sense of Divine
Wisdom, cannot estimate the true Worth of it. But when Wisdom once displays its
own excellencies and glories in a purified Soul, it is entertained there with
the greatest love and delight, and receives its own image reflected back to it
self in sweetest returns of Love and Praise. We have a clear manifestation of
this sacred Sympathy in Solomon, whom we may not unfitly call Sapientiae
Organum, an Instrument which Wisdom herself had tuned to play her divine
Lessons upon: his words were Eccles. 12.
(...), every where full of Divine sweetness matched with strength and beauty,
(...) or, as himself phraseth it, like apples of gold in pictures of Silver.
The Proverbs 25.
mind of a Proverb is to utter Wisdom in a Mystery, as the Apostle sometime
speaks, and to wrap up Divine Truth in a kind of Aenigmatical way, though in
vulgar expressions. Which method of delivering Divine doctrine (not to mention
the Writings of the ancient Philosophers) we find frequently pursued in the
Holy Scripture, thereby both opening and hiding at once the Truth which is
offered to us. A Proverb or Parable being once unfolded, by reason of its
affinity with the Fancy, the more sweetly insinuates it self into that, and is
from thence with the greater advantage transmitted to the Understanding. In
this state we are not able to behold Truth in its own Native beauty and luster;
but while we are veiled with mortality, Truth must vail it self too, that it
may the more freely converse with us. S. Austin has well assigned the reason
why we are so much delighted with Metaphors, Allegories, etc. because they are
so much proportioned to our Senses, with which our Reason has contracted an
intimacy and familiarity. And therefore God to accommodate his Truth to our
weak capacities, does as it were embody it in Earthly expressions; according to
that ancient Maxim of the Cabbalists, Lumen Supernum nunquam descendit fine
indumento; agreeable to which is that of Dionysius Areop. not seldom quoted by
the Schoolmen, Impossible est nobis aliter lucere radium Divinum, nisi
varietate sacrorum velaminum circumvelatum. His words in the Greek are these,
In lib. de Caelest. Hicrar. cap. 1.
(...).

Thus much by way of Preface or Introduction to these words, being one of
Solomon's excellent Proverbs, viz. The way of life is above to the wise.
Without any mincing or mangling of the Words, or running out into any Critical
curiosities about them, I shall from these Words take occasion to set forth The
Nobleness and Generous Spirit of True Religion, which I suppose to be meant
here by [The way of life.] The word (...) here rendered [above] may signify
that which is divine and heavenly, high and excellent, as the word (...) does
in the New Testament, (...), Phil. 3. 14. (...), Col. 3. 2. S. Austin supposes
the things of Religion to be meant by the (...), superna, for this reason, quod
merito excellentiae long superant res terrenas. And in this sense I shall
consider it, my purpose being from hence to discourse of the Excellent and
Noble spirit of true Religion (whether it be taken in abstracto, as it is in it
self; or in concreto, as it becomes an inward Form and Soul to the Minds and
Spirits of Good men;) and this in opposition to that low and base-born spirit
of Irreligion, which is perpetually sinking from God, till it couches to the
very Center of misery, (...), the lowermost Hell.

In discoursing upon this Argument, I shall observe this Method; viz. I shall
consider the Excellency and Nobleness of True Religion

1. In its Rise and Original. 2. In its Nature and Essence. 3. In its
Properties and Operations. 4. In its Progress. 5. In its Term and End.
CHAP. I.
1. The Nobleness of Religion in regard of its Original and Fountain: it comes
from Heaven and moves toward Heaven again. God the First Excellency and
Primitive Perfection. All Perfections and Excellencies in any kind are to be
measured by their approach to, and Participation of, the First Perfection.
Religion the greatest Participation of God: none capable of this Divine
Communication but the Highest of created Beings: and consequently Religion is
the greatest Excellency. A twofold Fountain in God whence Religion flows, viz.
1. His Nature. 2. His Will. Of Truth Natural and Revealed. Of an Outward and
Inward Revelation of God's Will.

WE begin with the First, viz. True Religion is a 1.
Noble thing in its Rise and Original, and in regard of its Descent. True
Religion derives its pedigree from Heaven, is (...) it comes from Heaven, and
constantly moves toward Heaven again: it is a Beam from God, as every good and
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom
is no variableness nor shadow of turning, as S. James speaks. God is the First
Truth and Primitive Goodness: True Religion is a vigorous Efflux and Emanation
of Both upon the Spirits of men, and therefore is called 2 Peter 1.
a participation of the divine Nature. Indeed God has copyed out himself in
all created Being, having no other Pattern to frame any thing by but his own
Essence; so that all created Being is umbratilis similitudo entis increati, and
is, by some stamp or other of God upon it, at least remotely allied to him: But
True Religion is such a Communication of the Divinity, as none but the Highest
of created Beings are capable of. On the other side Sin and Wickedness is of
the basest and lowest Original, as being nothing else but a perfect
degeneration from God and those Eternal Rules of Goodness which are derived
from him. Religion is an Heaven-born thing, the Seed of God in the Spirits of
men, whereby they are formed to a similitude and likeness of himself. A true
Christian is every way of a most noble Extraction, of an heavenly and divine
pedigree, being born (...) from above, as it is expressed Joh. 3. The line of
all earthly Nobility, if it were followed to the beginning, would lead to Adam,
where all the lines of descent meet in One; and the Root of all Extractions
would be found planted in nothing else but Genesis 2.
Adamah, red Earth: But a Christian derives his line from Christ, who is the
Only-begotten Son of God, the shining forth of his glory, and the Character of
his person, as he is styled Heb. 1. We may truly say of Christ and Christians,
as Zebah and Zalmunna said of Gideon's brethren, As he is, so are they
(according to their Judges 8.
capacity,) each one resembling the children of a king. Titles of Worldly
honor in Heavens heraldry are but only Tituli nominales; but Titles of Divine
dignity signify some Real thing, some Real and Divine Communications to the
Spirits and Minds of men. All Perfections and Excellencies in any kind are to
be measured by their approach to that Primitive Perfection of all, God himself;
and therefore Participation of the Divine nature cannot but entitle a Christian
to the highest degree of dignity: Behold what manner of love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God, 1 Jo. 3. 1.

Thus much for a more general discovery of the Nobleness of Religion as to its
Fountain and Original; We may further and more particularly take notice of this
in reference to that Twofold fountain in God, from whence all true Religion
flows and issues forth, viz. 1. His Immutable Nature. 2. His Will.

1. The Immutable Nature of God. From thence arise all those Eternal Rules of
Truth and Goodness which are the Foundation of all Religion, and which God at
the first Creation folded up in the Soul of man. These we may call the Truths
of Natural inscription; understanding hereby either those Fundamental
principles of Truth which Reason by a naked intuition may behold in God, or
those necessary Corollaries and Deductions that may be drawn from thence. I
cannot think it so proper to say, That God ought infinitely to be loved because
he commands it, as because he is indeed an Infinite and Unchangeable Goodness.
God has stamped a Copy of his own Archetypal Loveliness upon the Soul, that
man by reflecting into himself might behold there the glory of God, intra se
videre Deum, see within his Soul all those Ideas of Truth which concern the
Nature and Essence of God, by reason of its own resemblance of God; and so
beget within himself the most free and generous motions of Love to God. Reason
in man being Lumen de Lumine, a Light flowing from the Fountain and Father of
Lights, and being, as Tully phraseth it, participata similitudo Rationis
aternae (as the Law of Nature, the (...), the Law written in man's Heart, is
participatio Legis aternae in Rationali creatura) it was to enable Man to work
out of himself all those Notions of God which are the true Groundwork of Love
and Obedience to God, and conformity to him: and in modling the inward man into
the greatest conformity to the Nature of God was the Perfection and Efficacy of
the Religion of Nature. But since Man's fall from God, the inward virtue and
vigor of Reason is much abated, the Soul having suffered a (...), as Plato
speaks, a defluvium pennarum: those Principles of Divine truth which were first
engraven upon man's Heart with the finger of God are now, as the Characters of
some ancient Monuments, less clear and legible then at first. And therefore
besides the Truth of Natural inscription

2. God has provided the Truth of Divine Revelation, which issues forth from
his own free Will, and clearly discovers the way of our return to God, from
whom we are fallen. And this Truth, with the Effects and Productions of it in
the Minds of men, the Scripture is wont to set forth under the name of Grace,
as proceeding merely from the free bounty and overflowings of the Divine Love.
Of this Revealed Will is that of the Apostle to be understood, (...), 1 Cor. 2.
11.
None has known the things of God; (...), None, neither Angel nor Man, could
know the Mind of God, could unlock the Breast of God, or search out the
Counsels of his Will. But God out of the infinite riches of his Compassions
toward mankind is pleased to unbosom his Secrets, and most clearly to manifest
the way Hebrews 9. 2 Timothy 1.
into the Holiest of all, and bring to light life and immortality, and in these
last ages to send his Son, who lay in his bosom from all Eternity, to teach us
his Will and declare his Mind to us. When we look unto the Earth, then behold
darkness and dimness of anguish, that I may use those words of the Prophet
Esaias: But when we look toward Heaven, then behold light breaking forth upon
us, like the Eyelids of the Morning, and spreading its wings over the Horizon
of mankind sitting in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide our feet into
the way of peace.

But besides this Outward revelation of God's will to men, there is also an
Inward impression of it on their Minds and Spirits, which is in a more special
manner attributed to God. We cannot see divine things but in a divine light:
God only, who is the true light, and in whom there is no darkness at all, can
so shine out of himself upon our glassy Understandings, as to beget in them a
picture of himself, his own Will and Pleasure, and turn the Soul (as the phrase
is in Job 38.) (...) like wax or clay to the Seal of his own light and love. He
that made our Souls in his own image and likeness, can easily find a way into
them. The Word that God speaks having found a way into the Soul, imprints it
self there as with the point of a diamond, and becomes (...), that I may borrow
Plato's expression. Men may teach the Grammar and Rhetoric, but God teaches
the Divinity. Thus it is God alone that acquaints the Soul with the Truths of
Revelation: and he also it is that does strengthen and raise the Soul to better
apprehensions even of Natural Truth: God being that in the Intellectual world
which the Sun is in the Sensible, ((...)) as some of the ancient Fathers love
to speak, and the ancient Philosophers too, who meant God by their Intellectus
Agens, whose proper work they supposed to be not so much to enlighten the
Object, as the Faculty.

CHAP. II.
2. The Nobleness of Religion in respect of its Nature, briefly discovered in
some Particulars. How a man actuated by Religion 1. lives above the world; 2.
converses with himself, and knows how to love, value and reverence himself, in
the best sense; 3. lives above himself, not being content to enjoy himself,
except he may enjoy God too, and himself in God. How he denies himself for God.
To deny a man's self, is not to deny Right Reason, for that were to deny God, in
stead of denying himself for God. Self-love the only Principle that acts wicked
men. The happy privileges of a Soul united to God.

WE have done with the first Head, and come now 2.
to discourse with the like brevity on another (our purpose being to insist
most upon the third Particular, viz. The Nobleness of Religion in its
Properties, after we have handled the Second) which is The Excellency and
Nobleness of Religion in regard of its Nature, whether it be taken in abstracto
or in concreto; which we shall treat of promiscuously, without any rigid tying
of our selves to exact Rules of Art: and so we shall glance at it in these
following Notions, rising as it were step by step.

1. A Good man, that is actuated by Religion, lives above the World and all
Mundane delights and excellencies. The Soul is a more vigorous and puissant
thing, when it is once restored to the possession of its own Being, then to be
bounded within the narrow Sphere of Mortality, or to be straightened within the
narrow prison of Sensual and Corporeal delights; but it will break forth with
the greatest vehemence, and ascend upwards toward Immortality: and when it
converses more intimately with Religion, it can scarce look back upon its own
converses (though in a lawful way) with Earthly things, without a being
touched with an holy Shame fac'dness and a modest Blushing; and, as Porphyry
speaks of Plotinus, (...), it seems to be ashamed that it should be in the
Body. It is only True Religion that teaches and enables men to dye to this
world and to all Earthly things, and to rise above that vaporous Sphere of
Sensual and Earthly pleasures, which darken the Mind and hinder it from
enjoying the brightness of Divine light; the proper motion of Religion is still
upwards to its first Original. Whereas on the contrary the Souls of wicked men
(...), as Plato somewhere speaks, being moistened with the Exudations of their
Sensual parts become heavy and sink down into Earthly things, and couch as near
as may be to the Center. Wicked men bury their Souls in their Bodies: all their
projects and designs are bounded within the compass of this Earth which they
tread upon. The Fleshly mind never minds any thing but Flesh, and never rises
above the Outward Matter, but always creeps up and down like Shadows upon the
Surface of the Earth: and if it begins at any time to make any faint assays
upwards, it presently finds it self laden with a weight of Sensuality which
draws it down again. It was the Opinion of the Academicks that the Souls of
wicked men after their death could not of a long season depart from the Graves
and Sepulchers where their Mates were buried; but there wandered up and down in
a desolate manner, as not being able to leave those Bodies which they were so
much wedded to in this life.

2. A Good man, one that is actuated by Religion, lives in converse with his
own Reason; he lives at the height of his own Being. This a great Philosopher
makes the Property of a Good man, (...). He knows how to converse with himself,
and truly to love and value himself: he measures not himself, like the Epicure,
by his inferior and Earthly part, but by an Immortal Essence and that of him
which is from above; and so does (...), climb up to the height of that
Immortal principle which is within him. The Stoics thought no man a fit
Auditor of their Ethics, till he were dispossessed of that Opinion, That Man
was nothing but (...), as professing to teach men how to live only (...), as
they speak. Perhaps their Divinity was in some things too rigid; but I am sure
a Good man acts the best of this their doctrine in the best sense, and knows
better how to reverence himself, without any Self-flattery or admiration, then
ever any Stoic did. He principally looks upon himself (...), Simplic. in Epict.
as being what he is rather by his Soul then by his Body: he values himself by
his Soul, that Being which has the greatest affinity with God; and so does not
seek himself in the fading Vanities of this life, nor in those poor and low
delights of his Senses, as wicked men do; but as the Philosopher does well
express it, (...) and when the Soul thus retires into it self, and views its
own worth and Excellency, it presently finds a chaste and Virgin-love stirred up
within it self toward it self, and is from within the more excited and obliged
(...), as Simplicius speaks, to mind the preserving of its own dignity and
glory. To conclude this Particular, A Good man endeavors to walk by Eternal
and Unchangeable Rules of Reason; Reason in a Good man sits in the Throne, and
governs all the Powers of his Soul in a sweet harmony and agreement with it
self: whereas Wicked men live only (...), being led up and down by the foolish
fires of their own Sensual apprehensions. In wicked men there is a Democracy of
wild Lusts and Passions, which violently hurry the Soul up and down with
restless motions. All Sin and Wickedness is (...), a Sedition stirred up in the
Soul by the Sensitive Powers against Reason. It was one of the great Evils that
Solomon saw under the Sun, Servants on horseback, Eccles. 10.
and Princes going as servants upon the ground. We may find the Moral of it in
every wicked man, whose Souls are only as Servants to wait upon their Senses.
In all such men the whole Course of Nature is turned upside down, and the
Cardinal points of Motion in this little world are changed to contrary
positions: But the Motions of a Good man are Methodical, Regular and
Concentrical to Reason. It Is a fond imagination that Religion should extinguish
Reason; whenas Religion makes it more illustrious and vigorous; and they that
live most in the exercise of Religion, shall find their Reason most enlarged. I
might add, that Reason in relation to the capacitating of Man for converse
with God was thought by some to be the Formal Difference of Man. Plutarch after
a large debate whether Brutes had not Reason in them as well as Man, concludes
it negatively upon this ground, Because they had no knowledge and sense of the
Deity, (...). In Tully's account this Capableness of Religion seemed to be
nothing different from Rationality, and therefore he doubts not to give this
for the most proper Characterism of Reason, That it is Vinculum Dei and
Hominis. And so with them (not to name others of the same apprehensions) animal
Rationale and animal capax Religionis seemed to be of the like importance;
Reason as enabling and fitting Man to converse with God by knowing him and
loving him, being a character most unquestionably differencing Man from Brute
creatures.

3. A Good man, one that is informed by True Religion, lives above himself, and
is raised to an intimate Converse with the Divinity. He moves in a larger
Sphere then his own Being, and cannot be content to enjoy himself, except he
may enjoy God too, and himself in God.

This we shall consider two ways.

1. In the Self-denial of Good men; they are content and ready to deny
themselves for God. I mean not that they should deny their own Reason, as some
would have it; for that were to deny a Beam of Divine light, and so to deny
God, in stead of denying our selves for him. It is better resolved by some
Philosophers in this point, that (...) to follow Reason is (...) to follow God;
and again, (...). But by Self-denial I mean, the Soul's quitting all its own
interest in it self, and an entire Resignation of it self to him as to all
points of service and duty: and thus the Soul loves it self in God, and lives
in the possession not so much of its own Being as of the Divinity; desiring
only to be great in God, to glory in his Light, and spread it self in his
Fullness; to be filled always by him, and to empty it self again into him; to
receive all from him, and to expend all for him; and so to live not as its own,
but as God's. The highest ambition of a Good man is to serve the Will of God:
he takes no pleasure in himself nor in any thing within himself further then he
sees a stamp of God upon it. Whereas wicked men are imprisoned within the
narrow circumference of their own Beings, and perpetually frozen into a cold
Self-love which binds up all the Innate vigor of their Souls, that it cannot
break forth or express it self in any noble way. The Soul in which Religion
rules, says as S. Paul did, I live; and yet not I, but Christ lives in me. On
the contrary, a Wicked man swells in his own thoughts, and pleases himself
more or less with the imagination of a Self-sufficiency. The Stoics, seeing
they could not raise themselves up to God, endeavor to bring down God to their
own Model, imagining the Deity to be nothing else but some greater kind of
Animal, and a Wise man to be almost one of his Sapiens cum Diis ex pari vivit,
Deorum socius, non supplex, Sen. in Ep. 52, and 31.
Peers. And this is more or less the Genius of Wicked men, they will be
something in themselves, they wrap up themselves in their own Being, move up
and down in a Sphere of Self-love, live a professed Independency upon God, and
maintain a Meum and Tuum between God and themselves. It Is the Character only of
a Good man to be able to deny and disown himself, and to make a full surrender
of himself unto God; forgetting himself, and minding nothing but the Will of
his Creator; triumphing in nothing more then in his own Nothingness, and in the
Allness of the Divinity. But indeed this his being Nothing is the only way to
be all things; this his having nothing the truest way of possessing all things.

2. As a Good man lives above himself in a way of Self-denial, so he lives also
above himself as he lives in the Enjoyment of God: and this is the very Soul
and Essence of True Religion, to unite the Soul in the nearest intimacy and
conjunction with God, who is (...), as Plotinus speaks. Then indeed the Soul
lives most nobly, when it feels it self to live and move and have its Being in
God; which though the Law of Nature makes the Common condition of all created
Being, yet it is only True Religion that can give us a more feeling and
comfortable sense of it. God is not present to Wicked men, when his Almighty
Essence supports them and maintains them in Being; Plotin. in En. 6. l. 9. c 7.
(...), but he is present to him that can touch him, has an inward feeling
knowledge of God and is intimately united to him; (...), but to him that cannot
thus touch him he is not present.

Religion is Life and Spirit, which flowing out from God who is that (...) that
has life in himself, returns to him again as into its own Original, carrying
the Souls of Good men up with it. The Spirit of Religion is always ascending
upwards, and spreading it self through the whole Essence of the Soul, loosens
it from a Self-confinement and narrowness, and so renders it more capacious of
Divine Enjoyment. God envies not his people any good, but being infinitely
bountiful is pleased to impart himself to them in this life, so far as they
are capable of his Communications: they stay not for all their happiness till
they come to heaven. Religion always carries its reward along with it, and
when it acts most vigorously upon the Mind and Spirit of man, it then most of
all fills it with an inward sense of Divine sweetness. To conclude, To walk
with God is in Scripture made the Character of a Good man, and it is the highest
perfection and privilege of Created Nature to converse with the Divinity.
Whereas on the contrary Wicked men converse with nothing but their Lusts and
the Vanities of this fading life, which here flatter them for a while with
unhallowed delights and a mere Shadow of Contentment; and when these are gone,
they find both Substance and Shadow too to be lost Eternally. But true Goodness
brings in a constant revenue of solid and substantial Satisfaction to the
Spirit of a good man, delighting always to sit by those Eternal Springs that
feed and maintain it: the Spirit of a Good man (as it is well expressed by the
Philosopher) (...), and is always drinking in Fountain-Goodness, and fills it
self more and more, till it be filled with all the fullness of God.

CHAP. III.
3. The Nobleness of Religion in regard of its Properties, etc. of which this
is one, 1. Religion enlarges all the Faculties of the Soul, and begets a true
Ingenuity, Liberty and Amplitude, the most Free and Generous Spirit in the
Minds of Good men. The nearer any Being comes to God, the more large and free;
the further it slides from God, the more straightened. Sin is the sinking of
man's Soul from God into sensual Selfishness. An account when the most Generous
freedom of the Soul is to be taken in its just proportions. How Mechanical and
Formal Christians make an Art of Religion, set it such Bounds as may not exceed
the scant Measure of their Principles; and then fit their own Notions as so
many Examples to it. A Good man finds not his Religion without him, but as a
living Principle within him. God's Immutable and Eternal Goodness the
Unchangeable Rule of his Will. Peevish, Self-willed and Imperious men shape out
such Notions of God as are agreeable to this Pattern of themselves. The Truly
Religious have better apprehensions of God.

HAving discoursed the Nobleness of Religion in its Original and Nature; we
come now to consider the Excellency of Religion in its Properties, its proper
Effects and vital Operations. In treating of this Third Particular we shall,
(as formerly we have done) without tying our selves precisely to any strict
Rules of Art and Method, confound the Notions of Religion in abstracto and in
concreto together, handling them promiscuously. As Religion is a noble thing,
1. in respect of its Original, 2. in respect of its Nature; so also 3. in
respect of its Properties and Effects.

The First Property and Effect of True Religion 1.
whereby it expresses its own Nobleness is this, That it widens and enlarges
all the Faculties of the Soul, and begets a true Ingenuity, Liberty and
Amplitude, the most free and Generous Spirit, in the Minds of Good men. Those
in whom Religion rules are (...), there is a true Generous Spirit within them,
which shows the Nobleness of their Extraction. The Jews have a good Maxim to
this purpose, (...) Pirke Avoth cap. 6.
(...), None truly Noble, but he that applies himself to Religion and a
faithful observance of the Divine Law. Tully could see so much in his Natural
Philosophy as made him say, Scientia Naturae ampliat animum, and ad divina
attollit: But this is most true of Religion, that in an higher sense it does
work the Soul into a true and divine amplitude. There is a living Soul of
Religion in Good men which, spreading it self through all their Faculties,
spirits all the Wheels of motion, and enables them to dilate and extend
themselves more fully upon God and all Divine things, without being pinched or
streightened within themselves. Whereas wicked men are of most narrow and
confined Spirits, they are so contracted by the pinching particularities of
Earthly and created things, so imprisoned in a dark dungeon of Sensuality and
Selfishness, so straightened through their Carnal designs and Ends, that they
cannot stretch themselves nor look beyond the Horizon of Time and Sense.

The nearer any Being comes to God, who is that Infinite fullness that fills
all in all, the more vast and large and unbounded it is; as the further it
slides from him, the more it is straightened and confined; as Plato has long
since concluded concerning the condition of Sensual men, that they live (...),
like a Shel-fish, and can never move up and down but in their own prison, which
they ever carry about with them. Were I to define Sin, I would call it The
sinking of a Man's Soul from God into a Sensual Selfishness. All the Freedom
that wicked men have, is but (like that of banished men) to wander up and down
in the wilderness of this world from one den and cave to another.

The more high and Noble any Being is, so much the deeper radication have all
its Innate virtues and Properties within it, and are by so much the more
Universal in their issues and actings upon other things: and such an inward
living principle of virtue and activity further heightened and united and
informed with Light and Truth, we may call Liberty. Of this truly-noble and
divine Liberty Religion is the Mother and Nurse, leading the Soul to God, and
so impregnating that inward vital principle of activity and vigor that is
embosom'd in it, that it is able without any inward disturbance and resistance
from any controlling Lusts to exercise it self, and act with the greatest
complacency in the most full and ample manner upon that First, Universal and
Unbounded Essence which is God himself. The most generous Freedom can never be
took in its full and just dimensions and proportion, but then when all the
Powers of the Soul exercise and spend themselves in the most large and ample
manner upon the Infinite and Essential Goodness, as upon their own most proper
Object. If we should ask a Good man, when he finds himself best at ease, when
he finds himself most free; his answer would be, When he is under the most
powerful constraints of divine Love. There are a sort of Mechanical Christians
in the world, that not finding Religion acting like a living form within them,
satisfy themselves only to make an Art of it, and rather inform and actuate
it, then are informed by it; and setting it such bounds and limits as may not
exceed the short and scant measures of their own home born Principles, then
they endeavor to fit the Notions of their own Minds as so many Examples to it:
and it being a Circle of their own making, they can either ampliateor contract
it accordingly as they can force their own Minds and Dispositions to agree and
suit with it. But true Religion indeed is no Art, but an inward Nature that
conteins all the laws and measures of its motion within it self. A Good man
finds not his Religion without him, but as a living Principle within him; and
all his Faculties are still endeavoring to unite themselves more and more in
the nearest intimacy with it as with their proper Perfection. There is that
amiableness in Religion, that strong Sympathy between the Soul and it, that it
needs carry no Testimonials or Commendations along with it. If it could be
supposed that God should plant a Religion in the Soul that had no affinity or
alliance with it, it would grow there but as a strange slip. But God when he
gives his Laws to men, does not by virtue of his Absolute dominion dictate any
thing at random, and in such an arbitrarious way as some imagine; but he
measures all by his own Eternal Goodness. Had God himself been any thing else
then the First and Greatest Good of man, then to have loved him with the full
strength of all our Faculties should not have been the First and Greatest
Commandment, as our Savior tells us it is. Some are apt to look upon God as
some Peevish and Self-willed thing, because themselves are such: and seeing
that their own Absolute and naked Wills are for the most part the Rules of all
their actions and the impositions which they lay upon others; they think that
Heaven's Monarchy is such an arbitrary thing too, as being governed by nothing
else but by an Almighty Absolute Will. But the Soul that is acquainted most
intimately with the Divine Will, would more certainly resolve us, That God's
Unchangeable Goodness (which makes the Divinity an Uniform thing and to settle
together upon its own Center, as I may speak with reverence) is also the
Unchangeable Rule of his Will; neither can he any more swerve from it, then he
can swerve from himself. Nor does he charge any Duty upon man without
consulting first of all with his Goodness: which being the Original and
adequate Object of a Good man's Will and affections, it must needs be that all
the issues and effluxes of it be entertained with an answerable complacency and
cheerfulness. This is the hinge upon which all true Religion turns, the proper
Center about which it moves; which taking a fast and sure hold of an innate and
correspondent Principle in the Soul of man, raises it up above the confines of
Mortality, and in the day of its mighty power makes it become a
free-will-Offering unto God.

CHAP. IV.
The Second Property discovering the Nobleness of Relion, viz. That it restores
man to a just power and dominion over himself, enables him to overcome his
Self-will and Passions. Of Self-will, and the many Evils that flow from it.
That Religion does nowhere discover its power and prowess so much, as in
subduing this dangerous and potent Enemy. The Highest and Noblest Victories are
those over our Self-will and Passions. Of Self-denial, and the having power
over our Wills; the Happiness and the Privileges of such a State. How that
Magnanimity and Puissance which Religion begets in Holy Souls differs from and
excells that Gallantry and Puissance which the great Nimrods of this world
boast of.

THE Second Property or Effect of Religion, whereby 2.
it discovers its own Nobleness (and it is somewhat akin to the former
Particular, and will help further to illustrate and enforce it) is this, That
it restores a Good man to a just power and dominion over himself and his own
Will, enables him to overcome himself, his own Self-will and Passions, and to
command himself and all his Powers for God. It Is only Religion that restores
that (...) which the Stoical Philosophy so impotently pretended to; it is this
only that enthrones man's deposed Reason, and establishes within him a just
Empire over all those blind Powers and Passions which so impetuously rend a man
from the possession and enjoiment of himself. Those turbulent and unruly,
uncertain and unconstant Motions of Passion and Self-will that dwell in
degenerate Minds, divide them perpetually from themselves, and are always
molding several factions and tumultuous combinations within them against the
dominion of Reason. And the only way to unite man firmly to himself is by
uniting him to God, and establishing in him a firm amity and agreement with the
First and Primitive Being.

There is nothing in the World so boisterous as a man's own Self-will, which is
never guided by any fixed or steady Rules, but is perpetually hurried to and fro
by a blind and furious impetus of Pride and Passions issuing from within it
self. This is the true source and Spring of all that Envy, Malice, Bitterness
of Spirit, Malecontentedness and Impatiency, of all those black and dark
Passions, those inordinate desires and lusts, that reign in the hearts and
lives of wicked men. A man's own Self-will throws him out of all true enjoyment
of his own Being: therefore it was our Saviors counsel to his disciples, In
patience possess your Souls. We may say of that Self-will which is lodged in
the heart of a wicked man, as the Jews speak of the (...) figmentum malum so
often mentioned in their Writings, that it is (...), the Prince of death and
darkness which is at continual enmity with Heaven, and (...) the filthiness and
poison of the Serpent. This is the Seed of the Evil Spirit which is perpetually
at enmity with the Seed of God and the Heaven-born Nature: It Is design and
scope is with a Giant-like pride to climb up into the Throne of the Almighty,
and to establish an unbounded Tyranny in contradiction to the Will of God,
which is nothing else but the Issue and Efflux of his Eternal and Unbounded
Goodness. This is the very Heart of the old Adam that is within men. This is
the Hellish Spirit of Self-will: it would solely prescribe laws to all things;
it would fain be the source and fountain of all affairs and events; it would
judge all things at its own Tribunal. They in whose Spirits this Principle
rules, would have their own Fancies and Opinions, their perverse and boisterous
Wills to be the just Square and Measure of all Good and Evil; these are the
Plumb-lines they apply to all things to find out their Rectitude or Obliquity.
He that will not submit himself to nor comply with the Eternal and Uncreated
Will, but in stead of it endeavors to set up his own will, makes himself the
most real Idol in the world, and exalts himself against all that is called God
and ought to be worshipped. To worship a graven Image, or to make cakes and
burn incense to the Queen of heaven, is not a worse Idolatry then it is for a
man to set up Self-will, to devote himself to the serving of it, and to give up
himself to a compliance with his own will as contrary to the Divine and Eternal
Will. When God made the World, he did not make it merely for the exercise of
his Almighty power, and then throw it out of his hands, and leave it alone to
subsist by it self as a thing that had no further relation to him: But he
derived himself through the whole Creation, so gathering and knitting up all
the several pieces of it again; that as the first production and the continued
Subsistence of all things is from himself, so the ultimate resolution and
tendency of all things might be to him. Now that which first endeavored a
Divorce between God and his Creation, and to make a Conquest of it, was that
Diabolical Arrogance and Self-will that crept up and wound it self Serpent-like
into apostate Minds and Spirits. This is the true strain of that Hellish
nature, to live independently of God, and to derive the Principles from another
Beginning, and carry on the line of all motions and operations to another End,
then God himself, by whom and to whom and for whom all things subsist.

From what has been said concerning this powerful and dangerous Enemy that
wars against our Souls and against the Divine Will, may the Excellency and
Noble Spirit of True Religion appear, in that it tames the impetuousness and
turbulency of this Self-will. Then indeed does Religion perform the highest and
bravest conquests, then does it display the greatness of its strength and the
excellency of its power, when it overcomes this great Arimanius, that has so
firmly seated himself in the very Center of the Soul. Pirke Avoth cap. 4.
(...), Who is the man of Courage and Valor? (...), it is he that subdues his
Concupiscence, his own Will; it is a Jewish Maxim attributed to Ben Zoma, and
a most undoubted truth. This was the grand Lesson that our great Lord and
Master came to teach us, viz. To deny our own Wills; neither was there any thing
that he endeavored more to promote by his own Example, as he tells us of
himself, John 6. 38.
I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me; and again, Lo, I Psalm 40. Hebrews 10.
come (in the volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God,
yea thy Law is within my heart: and in his greatest agonies, with a clear and
cheerful submission to the Divine will, he often repeats it, Not my will, Luke
22. Mark 14. 36.
but thy will be done: and so he has taught us to pray and so to live. This
indeed is the true life and spirit of Religion, this is Religion in its
Meridian altitude, its just dimensions. A true Christian that has power over
his own Will, may live nobly and happily, and enjoy a perpetually-clear heaven
within the Serenity of his own Mind. When the Sea of this World is most rough
and tempestuous about him, then can he ride safely at Anchor within the haven,
by a sweet compliance of his will with God's Will. He can look about him, and
with an even and indifferent Mind behold the World either to smile or frown
upon him; neither will he abate of the least of his Contentment, for all the
ill and unkind usage he meets withal in this life. He that has got the
Mastery over his own Will, feels no violence from without, finds no contests
within; and like a strong man, keeping his house, he preserves all his Goods in
safety: and when God calls for him out of this state of Mortality, he finds in
himself a power to lay down his own life; neither is it so much taken from him,
as quietly and freely surrendered up by him. This is the highest piece of
prowess, the noblest achievement, by which a man becomes Lord over himself,
and the Master of his own Thoughts, Motions and Purposes. This is the Royal
prerogative, the high dignity conferred upon Good men by our Lord and Savior,
whereby they overcoming this both His and their Enemy, their Self-will and
Passions, are enabled to sit down with him in his Throne, as he overcoming in
another way, is set down with his Father in his Throne; as the phrase is
Revelat. 3.

Religion begets the most Heroic, Free and Generous motions in the Minds of
Good men. There is no where so much of a truly Magnanimous and raised Spirit as
in those who are best acquainted with the power of Religion. Other men are
Slaves and Captives to one Vanity or other: but the truly Religious is above
them all, and able to command himself and all his Powers for God. That bravery
and gallantness which seems to be in the great Nimrods of this world is nothing
else but the swelling of their own unbounded pride and vainglory. It has been
observed of the greatest Monarchs of the world, that in the midst of their
Triumphs they themselves have been led Captives to one Vice or another. All the
Gallantry and Puissance which the Bravest Spirits of the world boast of, is but
a poor confined thing, and extends it self only to some Particular Cases and
Circumstances: But the Valor and Puissance of a Soul impregnated by Religion
has in a sort an Universal Extent, as S. Paul speaks of himself, I can do all
things through Christ which strengthens me; it is not determined to this or
that Particular Object or Time or Place, but (...) all things whatsoever belong
to a Creature fall under the level thereof. Religion is by S. Paul described to
be (...) the Spirit of power in opposition to the Spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1. as
all Sin is by Simplicius well described to be (...) impotency and weakness. Sin
by its deadly infusions into the Soul of man wastes and eats out the innate
vigor of the Soul, and casts it into such a deep Lethargy, as that it is not
able to recover it self: But Religion, like that Balsamum vitae, being once
conveyed into the Soul, awakens and enlivens it, and makes it renew its
strength like an Eagle, and mount strongly upwards toward Heaven; and so
uniting the Soul to God, the Center of life and strength, it renders it
undaunted and invincible. Who can tell the inward life and vigor that the Soul
may be filled with, when once it is in conjunction with an Almighty Essence?
There is a latent and hidden virtue in the Soul of man which then begins to
discover it self when the Divine Spirit spreads forth its influences upon it.
Every thing the more Spiritual it is, and the higher and nobler it is in its
Being, the more active and vigorous it is; as the more any thing falls and
sinks into Matter, the more dull and sluggish and unwieldy it is. The
Platonists were wont to call all things that participated most of Matter (...)
Now nothing does more purify, more sublimate and exalt the Soul then Religion,
when the Soul suffers God to sit within it as a refiner and purifier of Silver,
and when it abides the day of his coming; for he is like a refiner's fire and
like fullers soap, Mal. 3. Thus the Soul being purified and spiritualliz'd, and
changed more and more into the glorious Image of God, is able to do all
things, out of weakness is made strong, gives proof of its Divine vigor and
activity, and shows it self to be a Noble and Puissant Spirit, such as God did
at first create it.

CHAP. V.
The Third Property or Effect discovering the Nobleness of Religion, viz. That
it directs and enables a man to propound to himself the Best End, viz. The
Glory of God, and his own becoming like unto God. Low and Particular Ends and
Interests both debase and streighten a man's Spirit: The Universal, Highest and
Last End both ennobles and enlarges it. A man is such as the End is he aims at.
The great power the End has to mold and fashion man into its likeness.
Religion obliges a man (not to seek himself, nor to drive a trade for himself;
but) to seek the Glory of God, to live wholly to him; and guides him steddily
and uniformly to the One Chief Good and Last End. Men are prone to flatter
themselves with a pretended aiming at the Glory of God. A more full and
distinct explication of what is meant by a man's directing all his actions to
the Glory of God. What it is truly and really to glorify God. God's seeking
his Glory in respect of us is the flowing forth of his Goodness upon us: Our
seeking the Glory of God is our endeavoring to partake more of God, and to
resemble him (as much as we can) in true Holiness and every Divine Virtue. That
we are not nicely to distinguish between the Glory of God and our own
Salvation. That Salvation is nothing else for the main but a true Participation
of the Divine Nature. To love God above our selves, is not to love him above
the Salvation of our Souls; but above our particular Beings and above our
sinful affections, etc. The Difference between Things that are Good
relatively, and those that are Good absolutely and Essentially: That in our
conformity to these God is most glorified, and we are made most Happy.

THE Third Property or Effect whereby Religion discovers its own Excellency, is
this, That it directs 3.
and enables a man to propound to himself the Best End and Scope of life, viz.
The Glory of God the Highest Being, and his own assimilation or becoming like
unto God.

That Christian in whom Religion rules powerfully, is not so low in his
ambitions as to pursue any of the things of this world as his Ultimate End: his
Soul is too big for earthly designs and interests; but understanding himself
to come from God, he is continually returning to him again. It is not worth the
while for the Mind of Man to pursue any Perfection lower then its own, or to
aim at any End more ignoble then it self is. There is nothing that more
streightens and confines the freeborn Soul then the particularity, indigency
and penury of that End which it pursues: when it complies most of all with this
lower world, (...), as is well observed by an excellent Philosopher, the true
Nobleness and Freedom of it is then most disputable, and the Title it holds to
true Liberty becomes most litigious. It never more slides and degenerates from
it self, then when it becomes enthralled to some Particular interest: as on the
other side it never acts more freely or fully, then when it extends it self
upon the most Universal End. Every thing is so much the more Noble, quo
longiores habet fines, as was well observed by Tully. As low Ends debase a man's
spirit, supplant and rob it of its birthright; so the Highest and Last End
raises and ennobles it, and enlarges it into a more Universal and comprehensive
Capacity of enjoying that one Unbounded Goodness which is God himself: it makes
it spread and dilate it self in the Infinite Sphere of the Divine Being and
Blessedness, it makes it live in the Fullness of Him that fills all in all.

Every thing is most properly such as the End is which is aimed at: the Mind of
man is always shaping it self into a conformity as much as may be to that
which is his End; and the nearer it draws to it in the achievement thereof,
the greater likeness it bears to it. There is a Plastic Virtue, a Secret
Energy issuing forth from that which the Mind propounds to itself as its End,
to mold and fashion it according to its own Model. The Soul is always stamped
with the same Characters that are engraven upon the End it aims at; and while
it converses with it, and sets it self before it, it is turned as Wax to the
Seal, to use that phrase in Job. Man's Soul conceives all its Thoughts and
Imaginations before his End, as Laban's Ewes did Genesis 30.
their young before the Rods in the watering troughs. He that pursues any
worldly interest or earthly thing as his End, becomes himself also (...)
Earthly: and the more the Soul directs it self to God, the more it becomes
(...) God-like, deriving a print of that glory and beauty upon it self which it
converseth with, as it is excellently set forth by the Apostle, But we all with
2 Corinthians. 3.
open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image, from glory to glory. That Spirit of Ambition and Popularity that so
violently transports the Minds of men into a pursuit of Vainglory, makes them
as vain as that Popular air they live upon: the Spirit of this world that draws
forth a man's designs after worldly interests, makes him as unstable,
unconstant, tumultuous and perplexed a thing as the world is. On the contrary,
the Spirit of true Religion steering and directing the Mind and Life to God,
makes it an Uniform, Stable and quiet thing, as God himself is: it is only true
Goodness in the Soul of man guiding it steddily and uniformly toward God,
directing it and all its actions to the one Last End and Chief Good, that can
give it a true consistency and composedness within it self.

All Self-seeking and Self-love do but imprison the Soul, and confine it to its
own home: the Mind of a Good man is too Noble, too Big for such a Particular
life; he has learned to despise his own Being in comparison of that Uncreated
Beauty and Goodness which is so infinitely transcendent to himself or any
created thing; he reckons upon his choice and best affections and designs as
too choice and precious a treasure to be spent upon such a poor sorry thing as
himself, or upon any thing else but God himself.

This was the life of Christ, and is in some degree the life of every one that
partakes of the Spirit of Christ. Such Christians seek not their own glory, but
the glory of him that sent them into this world: they know they were brought
forth into this world, not to set up or drive a trade for themselves, but to
serve the will and pleasure of him that made them, and to finish that work he
has appointed them. It were not worth the while to have been born or to live,
had it been only for such a penurious End as our selves are: it is most
God-like and best suits with the Spirit of Religion, for a Christian to live
wholly to God, to live the life of God, having his own life hid with Christ in
God; and thus in a sober sense he becomes Deified. This indeed is such a (...)
Deification as is not transacted merely upon the Stage of Fancy by Arrogance
and Presumption, but in the highest Powers of the Soul by a living and
quickening Spirit of true Religion there uniting God and the Soul together in
the Unity of Affections, Will and End.

I should now pass from this to another Particular; but because many are apt to
misapprehend the Notion of God's glory, and flatter themselves with their
pretended and imaginary aiming at the Glory of God, I think it may be of good
use, a little further and more distinctly to unfold the Design that a
Religious mind drives on in directing it self and all its actions to God. We
are therefore to consider, that this does not consist in some Transient
thoughts of God and his Glory as the End we propound to our selves in any
Undertakings: a man does not direct all his actions to the Glory of God by
forming a Conception in his Mind, or stirring up a strong Imagination upon any
Action, That that must be for the Glory of God: it is not the thinking of God's
glory that is glorifying of him. As all other parts of Religion may be apishly
acted over by Fancy and Imagination, so also may the Internal parts of Religion
many times be acted over with much seeming grace by our Fancy and Passions;
these often love to be drawing the pictures of Religion, and use their best
arts to render them more beautiful and pleasing. But though true Practical
Religion derives its force and beauty through all the Lower Powers of a man's
Soul, yet it has not its rise nor throne there: as Religion consists not in a
Form of Words which signify nothing, so neither does it consist in a Set of
Fancies or Internal apprehensions. Our Joh. 15. 8. Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit.
Savior has best taught what it is to live to God's glory, or to glorify
God, viz. to be fruitful in all holiness, and to live so as that our lives may
shine with his grace spreading it self through our whole man.

We rather glorify God by entertaining the Impressions of his Glory upon us,
then by communicating any kind of Glory to him. Then does a Good man become the
Tabernacle of God wherein the Divine Shechinah does rest, and which the Divine
glory fills, when the frame of his Mind and Life is wholly according to that
Idea and As it is said of the Material Tabernacle, Exodus 25.
Pattern which he receives from the Mount. We best glorify him when we grow
most like to him: and we then act most for his glory, when a true Spirit of
Sanctity, Justice, Meekness, etc. runs through all our actions; when we so live
in the World as becomes those that converse with the great Mind and Wisdom of
the whole World, with that Almighty Spirit that made, supports and governs all
things, with that Being from whence all good flows, and in which there is no
Spot, Stain or Shadow of Evil; and so being captivated and overcome by the
sense of the Divine loveliness and goodness, endeavor to be like him, and
conform our selves as much as may be to him.

When God seeks his own Glory, he does not so much endeavor any thing without
himself. He did not bring this stately fabric of the Universe into Being, that
he might for such a Monument of his mighty Power and Beneficence gain some
Panegyricks or Applause from a little of that fading breath which he had made.
Neither was that gracious contrivance of restoring lapsed men to himself a Plot
to get himself some Eternal Hallelujahs, as if he had so ardently thirsted
after the lays of glorified spirits, or desired a Quire of Souls to sing forth
his praises. Neither was it to let the World see how Magnificent he was. No, it
is his own Internal Glory that he most loves, and the Communication thereof
which he seeks: as Plato sometimes speaks of the Divine love, it arises not out
of Indigency, as created love does, but out of Fullness and Redundancy; it is an
overflowing fountain, and that love which descends upon created Being is a free
Efflux from the Almighty Source of love: and it is well pleasing to him that
those Creatures which he has made should partake of it. Though God cannot seek
his own Glory so as if he might acquire any addition to himself, yet he may
seek it so as to communicate it out of himself. It was a good Maxim of Plato,
(...) which is better stated by * S. James, God gives to all men Chap. (...). 5.
liberally, and upbraideth not. And by that Glory of his which he loves to
impart to his Creatures, I understand those stamps and impressions of Wisdom,
Justice, Patience, Mercy, Love, Peace, Joy, and other Divine gifts which he
bestows freely upon the Minds of men. And thus God triumphs in his own Glory,
and takes pleasure in the Communication of it.

As God's seeking his own Glory in respect of us, is most properly the flowing
forth of his Goodness upon us: so our seeking the Glory of God is most properly
our endeavoring a Participation of his Goodness, and an earnest uncessant
pursuing after Divine perfection. When God becomes so great in our eyes, and
all created things so little, that we reckon upon nothing as worthy of our aims
or ambitions but a serious Participation of the Divine Nature, and the Exercise
of divine Virtues, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Kindness, Goodness, and
the like; When the Soul beholding the Infinite beauty and loveliness of the
Divinity, and then looking down and beholding all created Perfection mantled
over with darkness, is ravished into love and admiration of that never-setting
brightness, and endeavors after the greatest resemblance of God in Justice,
Love and Goodness; When conversing with him (...), by a secret feeling of the
virtue, sweetness and power of his Goodness, we endeavor to assimilate our
selves to him: Then we may be said to glorify him indeed. God seeks no glory
but his own; and we have none of our own to give him. God in all things seeks
himself and his own glory, as finding nothing Better then himself; and when we
love him above all things, and endeavor to be most like him, we declare
plainly that we count nothing Better then He is.

I doubt we are too nice Logicians sometimes in distinguishing between the
Glory of God and our own Salvation. We cannot in a true sense seek our own
Salvation more then the Glory of God, which triumphs most and discovers it self
most effectually in the Salvation of Souls; for indeed this Salvation is
nothing else but a true Participation of the Divine Nature. Heaven is not a
thing without us, nor is Happiness any thing distinct from a true Conjunction
of the Mind with God in a secret feeling of his Goodness and reciprocation of
affection to him, wherein the Divine Glory most unfolds it self. And there is
nothing that a Soul touched with any serious sense of God can more earnestly
thirst after or seek with more strength of affection then This. Then shall we
be happy, when God comes to be all in all in us. To love God above our selves
is not indeed so properly to love him above the salvation of our Souls, as if
these were distinct things; but it is to love him above all our own sinful
affections, and above our particular Beings, and to conform our selves to him.
And as that which is See the Discourse Of the Existence and Nature of God.
Chap. 9.
Good relatively, and in order to us, is so much the Better, by how much the
more it is commensurate and conformed to us: So on the other side, that which
is good absolutely and essentially, requires that our Minds and Affections
should, as far as may be, be commensurate and conformed to it: and herein is
God most glorified, and we made Happy. As we cannot truly love the First and
Highest Good while we serve a design upon it, and subordinate it to our
selves: so neither is our own Salvation consistent with any such sordid,
pinching and particular love. We cannot be completely blessed, till the Idea
Boni, or the Ipsum Bonum, which is God, exercise its Sovereignty over all the
Faculties of our Souls, rendering them as like to it self as may consist with
their proper Capacity.

[See more of this in the Discourse Of the Existence and Nature of God, Chap.
4. and more largely in that Latin Discourse, shortly to be printed, Pietati
studere ex intuitu mercedis non est illicitum.]

CHAP. VI.
The Fourth Property or Effect discovering the Excellency of Religion, viz.
That it begets the greatest Serenity and Composedness of Mind, and brings the
truest Contentment, the purest and most satisfying Joy and Pleasure to every
holy Soul. God, as being that Uniform Chief Good, and the One Last End, does
attract and fix the Soul. Wicked men distracted through a Multiplicity of
Objects and Ends. How the restless appetite of our Wills after some Supreme
Good leads to the knowledge (as of a Deity, so) of the Unity of a Deity. How
the Joys and Delights of Good men differ from and far excel those of the
Wicked. The Constancy and Tranquillity of the Spirits of Good men in reference
to External troubles. All Perturbations of the Mind arise from an Inward rather
then an Outward Cause. The Stoics Method for attaining (...) and true rest
examined, and the Insufficiency of it discovered. A further Illustration of
what has been said concerning the Peaceful and Happy State of Good men, from
the contrary State of the Wicked.

THe Fourth Property and Effect of True Religion wherein 4.
it expresses its own Nobleness is this, That it begets the greatest Serenity,
Constancy and Composedness of Mind, and brings the truest Contentment, the most
satisfying Joy and Pleasure, the purest and most divine Sweetness and Pleasure
to the Spirits of Good men. Every Good man, in whom Religion rules, is at peace
and unity with himself, is as a City compacted together. Grace does more and
more reduce all the Faculties of the Soul into a perfect Subjection and
Subordination to it self. The Union and Conjunction of the Soul with God, that
Primitive Unity, is that which is the alone Original and Fountain of all Peace,
and the Center of Rest: as the further any Being slides from God, the more it
breaks into discords within it self, as not having any Center within it self
which might collect and unite all the Faculties thereof to it self, and so knit
them up together in a sweet confederacy amongst themselves. God only is such an
Almighty Goodness as can attract all the Powers in man's Soul to it self, as
being an Object transcendently adequate to the largest capacities of any
created Being, and so unite man perfectly to himself in the true enjoyment of
one Uniform and Simple Good.

It must be one Last End and Supreme Good that can fix Man's Mind, which
otherwise will be tossed up and down in perpetual uncertainties, and become as
many several things as those poor Particularities are which it meets with. A
wicked man's life is so distracted by a Multiplicity of Ends and Objects, that
it never is nor can be consistent to it self, nor continue in any composed,
settled frame: it is the most intricate, irregular and confused thing in the
world, no one part of it agreeing with another, because the whole is not firmly
knit together by the power of some One Last End running through all. Whereas
the life of a Good man is under the sweet command of one Supreme Goodness and
Last End. This alone is that living Form and Soul, which running through all
the Powers of the Mind and Actions of Life, collects all together into one fair
and beautiful System, making all that Variety conspire into perfect Unity;
whereas else all would fall asunder like the Members of a dead Body when once
the Soul is gone, every little particle flitting each from other. It was a good
Maxim of Pythagoras quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus, (...), Oportet etiam
hominem unum fieri. A divided Mind and a Multiform Life speaks the greatest
disparagement that may be: it is only the intermediation of One Last End that
can reconcile a man perfectly to himself and his own happiness. This is the
best temper and composedness of the Soul, (...), as Plotinus speaks, when by a
Conjunction with One Chief Good and Last End it is drawn up into an Unity and
Consent with it self; when all the Faculties of the Soul with their several
issues and motions, though never so many in themselves, like so many lines meet
together in one and the same Center. It is not one and the same Goodness that
always acts the Faculties of a Wicked man; but as many several images and
pictures of Goodness as a quick and working Fancy can represent to him; which
so divide his affections, that he is no One thing within himself, but tossed
hither and thither by the most independent Principles and Imaginations that may
be. But a Good man has singled out the Supreme Goodness, which by an
Omnipotent sweetness draws all his affections after it, and so makes them all
with the greatest complacency conspire together in the pursuit and embraces of
it. Were there not some Infinite and Self-sufficient Goodness, and that
perfectly One, (...), (as Simplicius does phrase it) Man would be a most
miserably-distracted creature. As the restless appetite within Man after some
Infinite and Sovereign Good (without the enjoyment of which it could never be
satisfied) does commend unto us the Notion of a Deity: so the perpetnal
distractions and divisions that would arise in the Soul upon a Plurality of
Deities, may seem no less to evince the Unity of that Deity. Were not this
Chief Good perfectly One, were there any other equal to it; man's Soul would
hang in aequilibrio, equally poised, equally desiring the enjoyment of both,
but moving to neither; like a piece of Iron between two Loadstones of equal
virtue. But when Religion enters into the Soul, it charms all its restless rage
and violent appetite, by discovering to it the Universal Fountain-fulness of
One Supreme Almighty Goodness; and leading it out of it self into a conjunction
therewith, it lulls it into the most undisturbed rest and quietness in the lap
of Divine enjoyment; where it meets with full contentment, and rests adequately
satisfied in the fruition of the Infinite, Uniform and Essential Goodness and
Loveliness, the true (...), that is not (...), as a noble Philosopher does well
express it.

The Peace which a Religious Soul is possessed of is such a Peace as passes
all understanding: the Joy that it meets with in the ways of Holiness is
unspeakable and full of Glory. The Delights and Sweetnesses that accompany a
Religious life are of a purer and more excellent Nature then the Pleasures of
Worldly men. The Spirit of a Good man is a more pure and refined thing then to
delight it self in the thick mire of Earthly and Sensual pleasures, which
Carnal men roll and tumble themselves in with so much greediness: Non admittit
ad volatum Accipitrem suum in terra pulverulenta, as the Arabic Proverb has
it. It speaks the degeneration of any Soul whatsoever, that it should desire to
incorporate it self with any of the gross, dreggy, sensual delights here below.
But a Soul purified Religion from all Earthly dreggs, delights to mingle it
self only with things that are most Divine and Spiritual. There is nothing that
can beget any pleasure or sweetness but in some harmonical Faculty which has
some kindred and acquaintance with it. As it is in the Senses, so in every
other Faculty there is such a Natural kind of Science as whereby it can single
out its own proper Object from every thing else, and is better able to define
it to it self then the exactest Artist in the world can; and when once it has
found it out, it presently feels it self so perfectly fitted and matched by it,
that it dissolves into secret joy and pleasure in the entertainment of it. True
Delight and Joy is begotten by the conjunction of some discerning Faculty with
its proper Object. The proper Object. for a Mind and Spirit are Divine and
Immaterial things, with which it has the greatest affinity, and therefore
triumphs most in its converse with them; as it is well observed by In Praefat.
ad l. 1. Not. Quaest.
Seneca, Hoc habet argumentum divinitatis suae, quod illum divina delectant;
nec ut alienis interest, sed ut suis: and when it converseth most with these
high and noble Objects, it behaves it self most gracefully and lives most
becoming it self; and it lives also most deliciously, nor can it any where else
be better provided for, or indeed fare so well. A Good man disdains to be
beholding to the Wit or Art or Industry of any Creature to find him out and
bring him in a constant revenue and maintenance for his Joy and Pleasure: the
language of his Heart is that of the Psalmist, Lord, lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon me. Religion always carries a sufficient Provision of Joy
and Sweetness along with it to maintain it self withal: All the ways of Wisdom
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Religion is no sullen
Stoicisme or oppressing Melancholy, it is no enthralling tyranny exercised
over those noble and vivacious affections of Love and Delight, as those men
that were never acquainted with the life of it may imagine; but it is full of a
vigorous and masculine delight and joy, and such as advances and ennobles the
Soul, and does not weaken or dispirit the life and power of it, as Sensual and
Earthly joys do, when the Soul, unacquainted with Religion, is enforced to
give entertainment to these gross and earthly things, for the want of enjoyment
of some better Good. The Spirit of a Good man may justly behave it self with a
noble disdain to all Terrene pleasures, because it knows where to mend its
fare; it is the same Almighty and Eternal Goodness which is the Happiness of
God and of all Good men. The truly-religious Soul affects nothing primarily and
fundamentally but God himself; his contentment even in the midst of his Worldly
employments is in the Sun of the Divine favor that shines upon him: this is as
the Manna that lies upon the top of all outward blessings which his Spirit
gathers up and feeds upon with delight. Religion consists not in a toilesome
drudgery about some Bodily exercises and External performances; nor is it only
the spending of our selves in such attendances upon God and services to him as
are only accommodated to this life, (though every employment for God is both
amiable and honorable:) But there is something of our Religion that interests
us in a present possession of that joy which is unspeakable and glorious; which
leads us into the Porch of heaven, and to the confines of Eternity. It
sometimes carries up the Soul into a mount of Transfiguration, or to the top of
Pisgah, where it may take a prospect of the promised land; and gives it a Map
or Scheme of its future inheritance: it gives it sometimes some anticipations
of Blessedness, some foretasts of those joys, those rivers of pleasure which
run at God's right hand for evermore.

I might further add as a Mantissa to this present Argument, the Tranquillity
and Composedness of a Good man's spirit in reference to all External
molestations. Religion having made a through-pacification of the Soul within it
self, renders it impregnable to all outward assaults: So that it is at rest and
lives securely in the midst of all those boisterous Storms and Tempests that
make such violent impressions upon the spirits of wicked men. Here the Stoics
have stated the case aright, That all Perturbations of the Mind arise not
properly from an Outward but an Inward cause: it is not any outward Evil but an
inward imagination bred in the womb of the Soul it self, that molests and
grieves it. The more that the Soul is restored to it self, and lives at the
height of it is own Being, the more easily may it disdain and despise any design
or combination against it by the most blustering Giants in the world. A
Christian that enjoys himself in God, will not be beholding to the worlds fair
and gentle usage for the composedness of his mind; No, he enjoys that Peace and
Tranquillity within himself which no creature can bestow upon him, or take from
him.

But the Stoics were not so happy in their notions about the way to true Rest
and Composedness of Spirit. It is not (by their leave) the Souls collecting and
gathering up it self within the Circumference of it is own Essence, nor is it a
rigid restraining and keeping in its own issues and motions within the confines
of its own natural endowments, which is able to confer upon it that (...) and
Composedness of mind which they so much idolize as the supreme and only bliss
of man, and render it free from all kind of perturbations: (For by what we find
in Seneca and others, it appears, that the Stoics seeking an Autarchy within
themselves, and being loath to be beholden to God for their Happiness, but that
each of them might be as God, self-sufficient and happy in the enjoyment of
himself, endeavored by their sour doctrine and a rigid discipline over their
Souls, their severities against Passions and all those restless motions in the
Soul after some Higher Good, to attain a complete (...) and a full contentment
within themselves.) But herein they mistof the true method of finding Rest to
themselves, it being the Union of the Soul with God, that Uniform, Simple and
unbounded Good, which is the sole Original of all true inward Peace. Neither
were it an Happiness worth the having, for a Mind, like an Hermit sequestered
from all things else, by a recession into it self, to spend an Eternity in
self-converse and the enjoyment of such a Diminutive superficial Nothing as it
self is and must necessarily be to it self. It is only peculiar to God to be
happy in himself alone; and God who has been more liberal in his provisions for
man, has created in man such a spring of restless motion, that with the
greatest impatiency forces him out of himself, and violently tosseth him to
and fro, till he come to fix himself upon some solid and Self-subsistent
Goodness. Could a man find himself withdrawn from all terrene and Material
things, and perfectly retired into himself; were the whole World so quiet and
calm about him, as not to offer to make the least attempt upon the
composedness and constancy of his Mind; might he be so well entertained at his
own home, as to find no frowns, no sour looks from his own Conscience; might he
have that security from Heaven, that God would not disquiet his fancied
Tranquillity by embittering his thoughts with any dreadful apprehensions; yet
he should find something within him that would not let him be at rest, but
would rend him from himself, and toss him from his own foundation and
consistency. There is an insatiable appetite in the Soul of man, like a greedy
Lion hunting after his prey, that would render him impatient of his own
pinching penury, and could never satisfy it self with such a thin and spare
diet as he finds at home. There are Two principal faculties in the Soul which,
like the two daughters of the Horsleach, are always crying, Give, Give: these
are those hungry Vultures which, if they cannot find their prey abroad, return
and gnaw the Soul it self: where the carcass is, there will the Eagles be
gathered together. By this we may see how unavailable to the attaining of true
Rest and Peace that conceit of the Stoics was, who supposed the only way and
method hereto was this, To confine the Soul thus Monastically to its own home.
We read in the Gospel of such a Question of our Savior's, What went you out
into the wilderness to see? we may invert it, What do you return within, to
see? A Soul confined within the private and narrow cell of its own particular
Being? Such a Soul deprives it self of all that Almighty and Essential Glory
and Goodness which shines round about it, which spreads it self through the
whole universe; I say it deprives it self of all this, for the enjoying of such
a poor petty and diminutive thing as it self is, which yet it can never enjoy
truly in such a retiredness.

We have seen the Peaceful and Happy state of the truly-religious: But it is
otherwise with wicked and irreligious men. There is no peace to the wicked; but
they are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt; as it is expressed by the Prophet Esaias. The mind of a wicked man is
like the Sea Chap. 57.
when it roares and rages through the striving of several contrary winds upon
it. Furious lusts and wild passions within, as they war against Heaven and
the more noble and divine part of the Soul, so they war amongst themselves,
maintaining perpetual contests, and contending which shall be the greatest:
Scelera dissident. These indeed are the Cadmus-brood rising out of the
Serpent's teeth, ready armed one against another: whence it is that the Soul of
a wicked man becomes a very unhabitable and incommodious place to it self, full
of disquietness and trouble through the many contests and civil commotious
maintained within it. The minds of wicked men are like those disconsolate and
desolate spirits which our Savior speaks of Matthew. 12. which being cast out of
their habitation, wander up and down through dry and desert places, seeking
rest but finding none. The Soul that finds not some solid and self-sufficient
Good to center it self upon, is a boisterous and restless thing: and being
without God, it wanders up and down the world, destitute, afflicted, tormented
with vehement hunger and thirst after some satisfying Good: and as any one
shall bring it tidings, Lo here, or Lo there is Good, it presently goes out
toward it, and with a swift and speedy flight hastens after it. The sense of
an inward indigency does stimulate and enforce it to seek its contentment
without it self, and so it wanders up and down from one creature to another;
and thus becomes distracted by a multiplicity of Objects. And while it cannot
find some One and Only object upon which, as being perfectly adequate to its
capacities, it may wholly bestow it self; while it is tossed with restless and
vehement motions of Desire and Love through a world of painted beauties, false
glozing Excellencies; courting all, but matching nowhere; violently hurried
every whither, but finding nowhere objectum par amori; while it converseth
only with these pinching Particularities here below, and is not yet acquainted
with the Universal Goodness; it is certainly far from true Rest and
Satisfaction, from a fixed, composed temper of spirit: but being distracted by
multiplicity of Objects and Ends, there can never be any firm and stable peace
or friendship at home amongst all its Powers and Faculties: nor can there be a
firm amity and friendship abroad betwixt wicked men themselves, as Aristotle in
his Ethics does conclude, because all Vice is so Multiform and inconsistent a
thing, and so there can be no true concatenation of Affections and Ends between
them. Whereas in all Good men Virtue and Goodness is one Form and Soul to them
all, that unites them together, and there is the One, Simple and Uniform Good,
that guides and governs them all. They are not as a Ship tossed in the
tumultuous Ocean of this world without any Compass at all to stear by; but they
direct their course by the certain guidance of the One Last End, as the true
Pole-starr of all their motion. But while the Soul lies benighted in a thick
Ignorance (as it is with wicked men,) and beholds not some Stable and Eternal
Good to move toward; though it may, by the strength of that Principle of
Activeness within it self, spend it self perpetually with swift and giddy
motions; yet it will be always contesting with secret disturbances, and cannot
act but with many reluctancies, as not finding an object equal to the force
and strength of its vast affections to act upon.

By what has been said may appear the vast difference between the ways of Sin
and of Holiness. Inward distractions and disturbances, tribulation and anguish
upon every Soul that does evil: But to every man that works good, glory,
honor and peace, inward composedness and tranquillity of spirit, pure and
divine joys far excelling all sensual pleasures; in a word, true Contentment
of spirit and full satisfaction in God, whom the pious Soul loves above all
things, and longs still after a nearer enjoyment of him. I shall conclude this
Particular with what Plotinus concludes his Book, That the life of holy and
divine men is (...), a life not touched with these vanishing delights of Time,
but a flight of the Soul alone to God alone.

CHAP. VII.
The Fifth Property or Effect discovering the Excellency of Religion, viz. That
it advances the Soul to an holy boldness and humble familiarity with God, and
to a comfortable confidence concerning the Love of God toward it, and its own
Salvation. Fearfulness, Consternation of Mind and frightfull passions are
consequent upon Sin and Guilt. These together with the most dismal deportments
of Trembling and Amazement are agreeable to the nature of the Devil, who
delights to be served in this manner by his worshippers. Love, Joy and Hope are
most agreeable to the nature of God, and most pleasing to him. The Right
apprehensions of God are such as are apt to beget Love to God, Delight and
Confidence in him. A true Christian is more for a solid and well-grounded Peace
then for high raptures and feelings of joy. How a Christian should endeavor
the Assurance of his Salvation. That he should not importunately expect or
desire some Extraordinary manifestations of God to him, but rather look after
the manifestation of the life of God within him, the foundation or beginning of
Heaven and Salvation in his own Soul. That Self-resignation, and the subduing
of our own Wills, are greatly available to obtain Assurance. The vanity and
absurdity of that Opinion, viz. That in a perfect resignation of our Wills to
God's will, a man should be content with his own Damnation and to be the
subject of Eternal wrath in Hell, if it should so please God.

THe Fifth Property or Effect whereby True Religion 5.
discovers its own Nobleness and Excellency is this, That it advances the Soul
to an holy boldness and humble familiarity with God, as also to a well-grounded
Hope and comfortable Confidence concerning the Love of God toward it, and its
own Salvation. The truly religious Soul maintains an humble and sweet
familiarity with God; and with great alacrity of spirit, without any
Consternation and Servility of spirit, is enabled to look upon the Glory and
Majesty of the most High: But Sin and Wickedness is pregnant with fearfulness
and horror. That Trembling and Consternation of Mind which possesses wicked
men, is nothing else but a brat of darkness, an Empusa begotten in corrupt and
irreligious Hearts. While men walk in darkness, and are of the night, (as the
Apostle speaks,) then it is only that they are vexed with those ugly and ghastly
Mormos that terrify and torment them. But when once the Day breaks, and true
Religion opens her self upon the Soul like the Eyelids of the Morning, then
all those shadows and frightfull Apparitions flee away. As all Light and Love
and Joy descend from above from the Father of lights: so all Darkness and
Fearfulness and Despair are from below; they arise from corrupt and earthly
minds, and are like those gross Vapors arising from this Earthly globe, that
not being able to get up toward heaven, spread themselves about the
circumference of that Body where they were first begotten, infesting it with
darkness and generating into Thunder and Lightning, Clouds and Tempests. But
the higher a Christian ascends (...) above this dark dungeon of the Body, the
more that Religion prevails within him, the more then shall he find himself as
it were in a clear heaven, in a Region that is calm and serene; and the more
will those black and dark affections of Fear and Despair vanish away, and those
clear and bright affections of Love and Joy and Hope break forth in their
strength and luster.

The Devil, who is the Prince of darkness and the great Tyrant, delights to be
served with ghastly affections and the most dismal deportments of trembling and
astonishment; as having nothing at all of amiableness or excellency in him to
commend himself to his worshippers. Slavery and servility (that (...), as
Longinus truly calls it) is the badge and livery of the Devil's religion: hence
those (...) of the Heathens performed with much trembling and horror. But The
words for false Gods and Idols, (...) and (...), import Trouble and Terror and
Frightfull passions in their worshippers.
God, who is the supreme Goodness and Essential both Love and Loveliness,
takes most pleasure in those sweet and delightful affections of the Soul, viz.
Love, Joy and Hope, which are most correspondent to his own nature. The ancient
superstition of the Heathens was always very nice and curious in honoring
every one of their Gods with Sacrifices and Rites most agreeable to their
natures: I am sure there is no Incense, no offering we can present God with, is
so sweet, so acceptable to him as our Love and Delight and Confidence in him;
and when he comes into the Souls of men, he makes these his Throne, his place
of rest, as finding the greatest agreeableness therein to his own Essence. A
Good man that finds himself made partaker of the Divine nature, and transformed
into the image of God, infinitely takes pleasure in God, as being altogether
Lovely, according to that in Cant. 5. (...) Totus ipse est desideria; and his
Meditation of God is sweet unto him, Ps. 104. S. John that lay in the bosom of
Christ who came from the bosom of the Father, and perfectly understood his
Eternal Essence, has given us the fullest description that he could make of
him, when he tells us that God is Love, and he that dwells in God, dwells in
love; and reposing himself in the bosom of an Almighty Goodness, where he
finds nothing but Love and Loveliness, he now displays all the strength and
beauty of those his choiest and most precious affections of Love and Joy and
Confidence; his Soul is now at ease, and rests in peace, neither is there any
thing to make afraid: He is got beyond all those powers of darkness which give
such continual alarms in this lower world, and are always troubling the Earth:
He is got above all fears and despairs; he is in a bright clear region, above
Clouds and Tempests, infra se despicit nubes. There is no frightful
terribleness in the supreme Majesty. That men apprehend God at any time in such
a dismayed manner, it must not at all be made an argument of his nature, but of
our sinfulness and weakness. The Sun in the heavens always was and will be a
Globe of Light and brightness, howsoever a purblind Eye is rather dazzled then
enlightened by it. There is an Inward sense in Man's Soul, which, were it once
awakened and excited with an inward taste and relish of the Divinity, could
better define God to him then all the world else. It is the sincere Christian
that so tastes and sees how good and sweet the Lord is, as none else does: The
God of hope fills him with all joy and peace in believing, so that he abounds
in hope, as the Apostle speaks Romans 15. He quietly reposes himself in God; his
heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; he is more for a solid peace and settled
calm of spirit, then for high Raptures and feelings of Joy or Extraordinary
Manifestations of God to him: he does not passionately desire nor importunately
expect such things; he rather looks after the Manifestations of the Goodness
and Power of God within him, in subduing all in his Soul that is unlike and
contrary to God, and forming him into his image and likeness.

Though I think it worthy of a Christian to endeavor the Assurance of his own
Salvation; yet perhaps it might be the safest way to moderate his curiosity of
prying into God's Book of life, and to stay a while until he sees himself
within the confines of Salvation it self. Should a man hear a Voice from Heaven
or see a Vision from the Almighty, to testify unto him the Love of God toward
him; yet methinks it were more desirable to find a Revelation of all from
within, arising up from the Bottom and Center of a man's own Soul, in the Real
and Internal impressions of a Godlike nature upon his own spirit; and thus to
find the Foundation and Beginning of Heaven and Happiness within himself: it
were more desirable to see the crucifying of our own Will, the mortifying of
the mere Animal life, and to see a Divine life rising up in the room of it, as
a sure Pledge and Inchoation of Immortality and Happiness, the very Essence of
which consists in a perfect conformity and cheerful compliance of all the
Powers of our Souls with the Will of God.

The best way of gaining a well-grounded assurance of the Divine love is this,
for a man to overcome himself and his own Will: To him that overcomes shall be
given Revel. 2.
that white stone, and in it the new name written, which no man knows but he
that receives it. He that beholds the Sun of righteousness arising upon the
Horizon of his Soul with healing in its wings, and chasing away all that misty
darkness of his own Self-will and Passions; such a one desires not now the
Starr-light to know whether it be Day or not, nor cares he to pry into Heaven's
secrets and to search into the hidden rolls of Eternity, there to see the
whole plot of his Salvation; for he views it transacted upon the inward stage
of his own Soul, and reflecting upon himself he may behold a Heaven opened from
within, and a Throne set up in his Soul, and an Almighty Savior sitting upon
it, and reigning within him: he now finds the Kingdom of Heaven within him,
and sees that it is not a thing merely reserved for him without him, being
already made partaker of the sweetness and efficacy of it. What the Jews say
of the Spirit of Prophesy, may not unfitly be applied to the Holy Ghost, the
true Comforter dwelling in the minds of good men as a sure Earnest of their
Eternal inheritance, (...), The Spirit resides not but upon a man of Fortitude,
one that gives proof of this Fortitude in subduing his own Self-will and his
Affections. We read of Elisha, that he was fain to call for a Musical
instrument and one to play before him, to allay the heat of his Passions,
before he could converse with the Prophetical Spirit. The Hely Spirit is too
pure and gentle a thing to dwell in a Mind muddied and disturbed by those
impure dreggs, those thick fogs and mists that arise from our Self-will and
Passions; our prevailing over these is the best way to cherish the Holy Spirit,
by which we may be sealed unto the day of redemption.

To conclude this Particular: It is a venturous and rugged guess and conceit
which some men have, That in a perfect resignation of our Wills to the Divine
will a man should be content with his own Damnation, and to be the Subject of
Eternal Wrath in Hell, if it should so please God. Which is as impossible as it
is for him that infinitely thirsts after a true Participation of the Divine
Nature, and most earnestly endeavors a most inward Union with God in Spirit,
by a denial of himself and his own will, to swell up in Self-love, Pride and
Arrogance against God; the one whereof is the most substantial Heaven, the
other the most real Hell: whereas indeed by conquering our selves we are
translated from Death to Life, and the kingdom of God and Heaven is already
come into us.

CHAP. VIII.
The Sixth Property or Effect discovering the Excellency of Religion, viz. That
it Spiritualizes Material things, and carries up the Souls of Good men from
Sensible and Earthly things to things Intellectual and Divine. There are lesser
and fuller representations of God in the Creatures. To converse with God in the
Creation, and to pass out of the Sensible World into the Intellectual, is most
effectually taught by Religion. Wicked men converse not with God as shining out
in the Creatures; they converse with them in a Sensual and Unspiritual manner.
Religion does spiritualize the Creation to Good men: it teaches them to look at
any Perfections or Excellencies in themselves and others, not so much as Theirs
or That others, but as so many Beams flowing from One and the Same Fountain of
Light; to love them all in God, and God in all; the Universal Goodness in a
Particular Being. A Good man enjoys and delights in whatsoever Good he sees
otherwhere, as if it were his own: he does not fondly love and esteem either
himself or others. The Divine temper and strain of the ancient Philosophy.

THE Sixth Property or Effect wherein Religion discovers 6.
its own Excellency is this, That it Spiritualizes Material things, and so
carries up the Souls of Good men from Earthly things to things Divine, from
this Sensible World to the Intellectual.

God made the Universe and all the Creatures contained therein as so many
Glasses wherein he might reflect his own Glory: He has copied forth himself in
the Creation; and in this Outward World we may read the lovely characters of
the Divine Goodness, Power and Wisdom. In some Creatures there are darker
representations of God, there are the Prints and Footsteps of God; but in
others there are clearer and fuller representations of the Divinity, the Face
and Image of God; according to that known saying of the Schoolmen, Remotiores
Similitudines Creaturae ad Deum dicuntur Vestigium; propinquiores vero Imago.
But how to find God here and feelingly to converse with him, and being affected
with the sense of the Divine Glory shining out upon the Creation, how to pass
out of the Sensible World into the Intellectual, is not so effectually taught
by that Philosophy which professed it most, as by true Religion: that which
knits and unites God and the Soul together, can best teach it how to ascend and
descend upon those golden links that unite as it were the World to God. That
Divine Wisdom that contrived and beautified this glorious Structure, can best
explain her own Art, and carry up the Soul back again in these reflected Beams
to him who is the Fountain of them. Though Good men all of them, are not
acquainted with all those Philosophical notions touching the relation between
Created and the Uncreated Being; yet may they easily find every Creature
pointing out to that Being whose image and superscription it bears, and climb
up from those darker resemblances of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness shining
out in different degrees upon several Creatures, (...), as the Ancients speak,
till they sweetly repose themselves in the bosom of the Divinity: and while
they are thus conversing with this lower World, and are viewing the invisible
things of God in the things that are made, in this visible and outward
Creation, they find God many times secretly flowing into their Souls, and
leading them silently out of the Court of the Temple into the Holy Place. But
it is otherwise with Wicked men; they dwell perpetually upon the dark side of
the Creatures, and converse with these things only in a gross, sensual, earthly
and unspiritual manner; they are so encompassed with the thick and foggy mist
of their own Corruptions, that they cannot see God there where he is most
visible: the Light shines in darkness, but darkness comprehends it not: their
Souls are so deeply sunk into that House of Clay which they carry about with
them, that were there nothing of Body or bulky Matter before them, they could
find nothing to exercise themselves about.

But Religion, where it is in truth and in power, renews the very Spirit of our
Minds, and does in a manner Spiritualize this outward Creation to us, and does
in a more excellent way perform that which the Peripateticks are wont to affirm
of their Intellectus agens, in purging Bodily and Material things from the
feculency and dregs of Matter, and separating them from those circumstantiating
and streightning conditions of Time and Place, and the like; and teaches the
Soul to look at those Perfections which it finds here below, not so much as the
Perfections of This or That Body, as they adorn This or That particular Being,
but as they are so many Rays issuing forth from that First and Essential
Perfection, in which they all meet and embrace one another in the most close
friendship. Every Particular Good is a Blossom of the First Goodness; every
created Excellency is a Beam descending from the Father of lights: and should
we separate all these Particularities from God, all affection spent upon them
would be unchaste, and their embraces adulterous. We should love all things in
God, and God in all things, because he is All in all, the Beginning and
Original of Being, the perfect Idea of their Goodness, and the End of their
Motion. It is nothing but a thick mist of Pride and Self-love that hinders men's
eyes from beholding that Sun which both enlightens them and all things else:
But when true Religion begins once to dawn upon men's Souls, and with its
shining light chases away their black Night of Ignorance; then they behold
themselves and all things else enlightened (though in a different way) by one
and the same Sun, and all the Powers of their Souls fall down before God and
ascribe all glory to him. Now it is that a Good man is no more solicitous
whether This or That good thing be Mine, or whether My perfections exceed the
measure of This or That particular Creature; for whatsoever Good he beholds any
where, he enjoys and delights in it as much as if it were his own, and whatever
he beholds in himself, he looks not upon it as his Property but as a Common
good; for all these Beams come from one and the same Fountain and Ocean of
light in whom he loves them all with an Universal love: when his affections run
along the stream of any created excellencies, whether his own or any ones else,
yet they stay not here, but run on till they fall into the Ocean; they do not
settle into a fond love and admiration either of himself or any others
Excellencies, but he owns them as so many Pure Effluxes and Emanations from
God, and in a Particular Being loves the Universal Goodness. Si sciretur a me
Veritas, sciretur etiam me illud non esse, aut illud non esse meum, nec a me.

Thus may a Good man walk up and down the World as in a Garden of Spices, and
suck a Divine Sweetness out of every flower. There is a Twofold meaning in
every Creature, as the Jews speak of their Law, a Literal, and a Mystical, and
the one is but the ground of the other: and as they say of diverse pieces of
their Law, (...), so a Good man says of every thing that his Senses offer to
him, it speaks to his lower part, but it points out something above to his Mind
and Spirit. It is the drowsy and muddy spirit of Superstition which, being
lulled asleep in the lap of worldly delights, is fain to set some Idol at its
elbow, something that may jogg it and put it in mind of God. Whereas true
Religion never finds it self out of the Infinite Sphere of the Divinity, and
wherever it finds Beauty, Harmony, Goodness, Love, Ingenuity, Wisdom,
Holiness, Justice, and the like, it is ready to say, Here, and There is God:
wheresoever any such Perfections shine out, an holy Mind climbs up by these
Sunbeams, and raises up it self to God.

And seeing God has never thrown the World from himself, but runs through all
created Essence, containing the Archetypal Ideas of all things in himself, and
from thence deriving and imparting several prints of Beauty and Excellency all
the world over; a Soul that is truly (...) God-like, a Mind that is enlightened
from the same Fountain, and has its inward Senses affected with the sweet
relishes of Divine Goodness, cannot but every where behold it self in the midst
of that Glorious Unbounded Being who is indivisibly every where. A Good man
finds every place he treads upon Holy ground; to him the World is God's Temple;
he is ready to say with Jacob, Genesis 28. How dreadful is this place! this is
none other but the House of God.

To conclude, It was a degenerous and unworthy Spirit in that Philosophy which
first separated and made such distances between Metaphysical Truths and the
Truths of Nature; whereas the First and most ancient Wisdom amongst the
Heathens was indeed a Philosophical Divinity, or a Divine Philosophy; which
continued for diverse ages, but as men grew worse, their queazy stomachs began
to loath it: which made the truly-wise Socrates complain of the Sophisters of
that Age which began now to corrupt and debase it; whereas heretofore the
Spirit of Philosophy was more generous and divine, and did more purify and
ennoble the Souls of men, commending Intellectual things to them, and taking
them off from settling upon Sensible and Material things here below, and still
exciting them to endeavor after the nearest resemblance of God the Supreme
Goodness and Loveliness, and an intimate Conjunction with him; which, according
to the strain of that Philosophy, was the true Happiness of Immortal Souls.

CHAP. IX.
The Seventh and last Property or Effect discovering the Excellency of
Religion, viz. That it raises the Minds of Good men to a due observance of and
attendance upon Divine Providence, and enables them to serve the Will of God,
and to acquiesce in it. For a man to serve Providence and the Will of God
entirely, to work with God, and to bring himself and all his actions into a
Compliance with God's Will, his Ends and Designs, is an argument of the truest
Nobleness of Spirit; it is the most excellent and divine life; and it is most
for man's advantage. How the Consideration of Divine Providence is the way to
inward quietness and establishment of Spirit. How wicked men carry themselves
unbecomingly through their impatience and fretfulness under the disposals of
Providence. The beauty and harmony of the various Methods of Providence.

THE Seventh and last Property or Effect wherein True Religion expresses its
own Nobleness and 7.
Excellency, is this, That it raises the Minds of Good men to a due observance
of and attendance upon Divine Providence, and enables them to serve the Will of
God, and to acquiesce in it. Wheresoever God has a Tongue to speak, there they
have Ears to hear; and being attentive to God in the soft and still motions of
Providence, they are ready to obey his call, and to say with Esaias, Behold, here
am I, send me. They endeavor to Esaias 6.
copy forth that Lesson which Christ has set Christians, seriously considering
how that they came into this world by God's appointment, not to do their own
Wills but the Will of him that sent them.

As this Consideration quiets the Spirit of a Good man who is no idle Spectator
of Providence, and keeps him in a calm and sober temper in the midst of all
Storms and Tempests; so it makes him most freely to engage himself in the
service of Providence, without any inward reluctance or disturbance. He cannot
be content that Providence should serve it self of him as it does even of those
things that understand it least; but it is his holy ambition to serve it. It Is
nothing else but Hellish pride and Self-love that makes men serve themselves,
and so set up themselves as Idols against God: But it is indeed an argument of
true Nobleness of Spirit for a man to view himself (not in the narrow Point of
his own Being, but) in the unbounded Essence of the First Cause, so as to be
(...), and to live only as an Instrument in the hands of God who works all
things after the counsel of his own will. Optarem id me esse Deo quod est mihi
manus mea, was the expression of an holy Soul.

To a Good man to serve the Will of God, it is in the truest and best sense to
serve himself, who knows himself to be nothing without or in opposition to God;
Quo minus quid sibi arrogat homo, eo evadit nobilior, clarior, divinior. This
is the most divine life that can be, for a man to act in the world upon Eternal
designs, and to be so wholly devoted to the Will of God, as to serve it most
faithfully and entirely. This indeed bestows a kind of Immortality upon these
flitting and Transient acts of ours, which in themselves are but the Offspring
of a moment. A Pillar or Verse is a poor sorry Monument of any Exploit, which
yet may well enough become the highest of the worlds bravery. But Good men,
while they work with God and endeavor to bring themselves and all their
actions to a unity with God, his Ends and Designs, enroll themselves in
Eternity. This is the proper Character of holy Souls; Their Wills are so fully
resolved into the Divine Will, that they in all things subscribe to it without
any murmurings or debates: they rest well satisfied with, and take complacency
in, any passages of Divine dispensation, * (...), as Epictet. cap. 38.
being ordered and disposed by a Mind and Wisdom above according to the
highest rules of Goodness.

The best way for a man rightly to enjoy himself, is to maintain an universal,
ready and cheerful compliance with the Divine and Uncreated Will in all
things; as knowing that nothing can issue and flow forth from the fountain of
Goodness but that which is good: and therefore a Good man is never offended
with any piece of Divine dispensation, nor has he any reluctance against that
Will that dictates and determines all things by an Eternal rule of Goodness; as
knowing, That there is an unbounded and Almighty Love, that without any disdain
or envy freely communicates it self to every thing he made; that feeds even the
young Ravens that call upon him; that makes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to
fall, both upon the just and unjust; that always enfolds those in his
everlasting arms who are made partakers of his own Image, perpetually
nourishing and cherishing them with the fresh and vital influences of his
Grace; as knowing also, That there is an All-seeing Eye, an unbounded Mind and
Understanding, that derives it self through the whole Universe, and sitting in
all the wheels of motion, guides them all and powerfully governs the most
excentrical motions of Creatures, and carries them all most harmoniously in
their several orbs to one Last End. Who then shall give Law to God? Where is
the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Where is he
that would climb up into that (...), the great Consistory in heaven, and
sitting in consultation with the Almighty, instruct the Infinite and
Incomprehensible Wisdom? Shall vain man be wiser then his maker? This is the
hellish temper of wicked men, they examine and judge of all things by the line
and measure of their own Self-will, their own Opinions and Designs; and
measuring all things by a crooked rule, they think nothing to be straight; and
therefore they fall out with God, and with restless impatience fret and vex
themselves: and this fretfulness and impatiency in wicked men argues a breach
in the just and due constitution of their Minds and Spirits.

But a Good man, whose Soul is restored to that frame and constitution it
should be in, has better apprehensions of the ways and works of God, and is
better affected under the various disposalls of Providence. Indeed to a
superficial observer of Divine Providence many things there are that seem to be
nothing else but Digressions from the main End of all, and to come to pass by a
fortuitous concourse of Circumstances; that come in so abruptly and without any
concatenation or dependence one upon another, as if they were without any Mind
or Understanding to guide them. But a wise man that looks from the Beginning to
the End of things, beholds them all in their due place and method acting that
part which the Supreme Mind and Wisdom that governs all things has appointed
them, and to carry on one and the same Eternal design, while they move
according to their own proper inclinations and measures, and aim at their own
particular Ends. It were not worth the while to live in a world (...) devoid of
God and Providence, as it was well observed by the Stolck: And to be
subservient unto Providence is the holy ambition and great endeavor of a Good
man, who is so perfectly overpowered with the love of the Universal and
Infinite Goodness, that he would not serve any Particular Good whatsoever, no
not himself, so as to set up in the world and trade for himself, as the men of
this world do who are lovers of their own selves, and lovers of pleasures more
then lovers 2 Timothy 3.
of God.

CHAP. X.
4. The Excellency of Religion in regard of its Progress, as it is perpetually
carrying on the Soul toward Perfection. Every Nature has its proper Center
which it hastens to. Sin and Wickedness is within the attractive power of Hell,
and hastens thither: Grace and Holiness is within the Central force of Heaven,
and moves thither. It Is not the Speculation of Heaven as a thing to come that
satisfyes the desires of Religious Souls, but the real Possession of it even
in this life. Men are apt to seek after Assurance of Heaven as a thing to come,
rather then after Heaven it self and the inward possession of it here. How the
Assurance of Heaven rises from the growth of Holiness and the powerful
Progress of Religion in our Souls. That we are not hastily to believe that we
are Christ's, or that Christ is in us. That the Works which Christ does in holy
Souls testify of him, and best evidence Christ's spiritual appearance in them.

WE have considered the Excellency of True Religion 1. in regard of its Descent
and Original; 2. in regard of its Nature; 3. in regard of its Properties and
Effects. We proceed now to a Fourth Particular, and shall show

That Religion is a generous and noble thing in regard of its Progress; it is
perpetually carrying on that Mind 4.
in which it is once seated toward Perfection. Though the First appearance of
it upon the Souls of good men may be but as the Wings of the Morning spreading
themselves upon the Mountains, yet it is still rising higher and higher upon
them, chasing away all the filthy mists and vapors of Sin and Wickedness
before it, till it arrives to its Meridian altitude. There is the Prove. 4. 18.
The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and more unto
the perfect day.
strength and force of the Divinity in it; and though when it first enters into
the Minds of men, it may seem to be sown in weakness, yet it will raise it
self in power. As Christ was in his Bodily appearance, he was still increasing
in wisdom and knowledge and favor with God and man, until he was perfected
in glory: so is he also in his Spiritual appearance in the Souls of men; and
accordingly the New Testament does more then once distinguish of Christ in his
several ages, and degrees of growth in the Souls of all true Christians. Good
men are always walking on from strength to strength, till at last they see God
in Zion. Religion though it has its infancy, yet it has no old age: while it
is in its Minority, it is always in motu; but when it comes to its Maturity and
full age, it will always be in quiet, it is then always the same, and its
years fail not, but it shall endure for ever. Holy and religious Souls being
once touched with an inward sense of Divine Beauty and Goodness, by a strong
impress upon them are moved swiftly after God, and (as the Apostle expresses
himself) forgetting those things which Phil. 3.
are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, they press
toward the Mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; that
so they may attain to the resurrection of the dead.

Where a Spirit of Religion is, there is the Central force of Heaven it self
quickening and enlivening those that are informed by it in their motions toward
Heaven. As on the other side all unhallowed and defiled minds are within the
attractive power of Hell, and are continually hastening their course thither,
being strongly pressed down by the weight of their Wickedness. (...), as
Plutarch has well observed, Every nature in this world has some proper Center
which it is always hastening to. Sin and Wickedness does not hover a little
over the bottomeless pit of Hell, and only flutter about it; but it is
continually sinking lower and lower into it. Neither does true Grace make some
feeble assaies toward Heaven, but by a mighty Energy within it self it is always
soaring up higher and higher into heaven. A good Christian does not only court
his Happiness, and cast now and then a smile upon it, or satisfy himself merely
to be contracted to it, but with the greatest ardours of Love and Desire he
pursues the solemnity of the just Nuptials, that he may be wedded to it and
made one with it. It is not an aerie speculation of Heaven as a thing (though
never so undoubtedly) to come, that can satisfy his hungry desires, but the
real So we read Joh. 6. 54. has eternal life; and 1 Ep. Jo. chapter 5. 11, 13.
possession of it even in this life. Such an Happiness would be less in the
esteem of Good men, that were only good to be enjoyed at the end of this life
when all other enjoyments fail him.

I wish there be not among some such a light and poor esteem of Heaven, as
makes them more to seek after Assurance of Heaven only in the Idea of it as a
thing to come, then after Heaven it self; which indeed we can never well be
assured of, until we find it rising up within our selves and glorifying our
own Souls. When true Assurance comes, Heaven it self will appear upon the
Horizon of our Souls, like a morning light chasing away all our dark and gloomy
doubtings before it. We shall not need then to light up our Candles to seek for
it in corners; no, it will display its own luster and brightness so before us,
that we may see it in its own light, and our selves the true possessours of it.
We may be too nice and vain in seeking for signs and tokens of Christ's
Spiritual appearances in the Souls of men, as well as the Scribes and Pharisees
were in seeking for them at his First appearance in the World. When he comes
into us, let us expect till the works that he shall do within us may testify
of him; and be not over-credulous, till we find that he does those works there
which none other could do. As for a true well-grounded Assurance, say not so
much, Who shall ascend up into heaven, to fetch it down from thence? or who
shall descend into the deep, to fetch it up from beneath? for in the Growth of
true internal Goodness and in the Progress of true Religion it will freely
unfold it self within us. Stay till the grain of Mustard Seed it self breaks
forth from among the clods that buried it, till through the descent of the
heavenly dew it sprouts up and discovers it self openly. This holy Assurance is
indeed the budding and blossoming of Felicity in our own Souls; it is the
inward sense and feeling of the true life, spirit, sweetness and beauty of
Grace powerfully expressing its own Energy within us.

Briefly, True Religion in the Progress of it transforms those Minds in which
it reigns from glory to glory: it goes on and prospers in bringing all enemies
in subjection under their feet, in reconciling the Minds of men fully to God;
and it instates them in a firm possession of the Supreme Good. This is the Seed
of God within holy Souls, which is always warring against the Seed of the
Serpent, till it prevail over it through the Divine strength and influence.
Though Hell may open her mouth wide and without measure, yet a true Christian
in whom the seed of God remains, is in a good and safe condition; he finds
himself born up by an Almighty arm, and carried upwards as upon Eagles wings;
and the Evil one has no power over him, or, as S. John expresses it, (...),
the Evil one touches him not, 1 Ep. chap. 5. v. 18.

CHAP. XI.
5. The Excellency of Religion in regard of its Term and End, viz. Perfect
Blessedness. How unable we are in this state to comprehend and describe the
Full and Perfect state of Happiness and Glory to come. The more Godlike a
Christian is, the better may he understand that State. Holiness and Happiness
not two distinct things, but two several Notions of one and the same thing.
Heaven cannot so well be defined by any thing without us, as by something
within us. The great nearness and affinity between Sin and Hell. The Conclusion
of this Treatise, containing a Serious Exhortation to a diligent minding of
Religion, with a Discovery of the Vanity of those Pretenses which keep men off
from minding Religion.

WE come now to the Fifth and Last Particular, viz. The Excellency of Religion
in the Term and End of it, which is nothing else but Blessedness it self 5.
in its full maturity. Which yet I may not here undertake to explain, for it is
altogether (...), nor can it descend so low as to accommodate it self to any
humane style. Accordingly S. John tells us, it does not yet appear what we
shall be; and yet that he may give us some glimpse of it, he points us out to
God, and tells us, (...), we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
Indeed the best way to get a discovery of it, is to endeavor as much as may be
to be Godlike, to live in a feeling converse with God and in a powerful
exercise and expression of all Godlike dispositions: So shall our inner man be
best enabled to know the breadth and length, the depth and height of that Love
and Goodness which yet passes all knowledge. There is a State of Perfection in
the life to come so far transcendent to any in this life, as that we are not
able from hence to take the just proportions of it, or to form a full and
comprehensive notion of it. We are unable to comprehend the vastness and
fullness of that Happiness which the most purifyed Souls may be raised to, or
to apprehend how far the mighty power and strength of the Divinity deriving it
self into created Being, may communicate a more Transcendent life and
blessedness to it. We know not what latent powers our Souls may here contain
within themselves, which then may begin to open and dilate themselves to let in
the full streams of the Divine Goodness when they come nearly and intimately to
converse with it; or how Blessedness may act upon those Faculties of our Minds
which we now have. We know not what illapses and irradiations there may be from
God upon Souls in Glory, that may raise them into a state of Perfection
surpassing all our imaginations.

As for Corporeal Happiness, there cannot be any thing further added to the
Pleasure of our Bodies or Animal part, then a restoring it from disturbing
Passion and Pain to its just and natural constitution; and therefore some
Philosophers have well disputed against the opinion of the Epicureans that make
Happiness to consist in Bodily pleasure, (...) and when the molestation is
gone, and the just constitution of Nature recovered, Pleasure cease. But the
highest Pleasure of Minds and Spirits does not only consist in the relieving
of them from any antecedent pains or grief, or in a relaxation from some former
molesting Passion: neither is their Happiness a mere Stoical (...) as the
Happiness of the Deity is not a mere Negative thing, rendering it free from all
disturbance or molestation, so that it may eternally rest quiet within it self;
it does not so much consist in Quiet, as in Actu and vigore. A Mind and Spirit
is too full of activity and energy, is too quick and potent a thing to enjoy a
full and complete Happiness in a mere Cessation; this were to make Happiness an
heavy Spiritless thing. The Philosopher has well observed, that (...), there
is infinite power and strength in Divine joy, pleasure and happiness
commensurate to that Almighty Being and Goodness which is the Eternal source of
it.

As Created Beings, that are capable of conversing with God, stand nearer to
God or further off from him, and as they partake more or less of his likeness;
so they partake more or less of that Happiness which flows forth from him, and
God communicates himself in different degrees to them. There may be as many
degrees of Sanctity and Perfection, as there are of States and Conditions of
Creatures: and that is properly Sanctity which guides and orders all the
Faculties and Actions of any Creature in a way suitable and correspondent to
that rank and state which God has placed it in: and while it does so, it
admits no sin or defilement to it self, though yet it may be elevated and
advanced higher; and accordingly true Positive Sanctity comes to be advanced
higher and higher, as any Creature comes more to partake of the life of God,
and to be brought into a nearer conjunction with God: and so the Sanctity and
Happiness of Innocence it self might have been perfected.

Thus we see how True Religion carries up the Souls of Good men above the black
regions of Hell and Death. This indeed is the great (...) of Souls; it is
Religion it self, or a real participation of God and his Holiness, which is
their true restitution and advancement. All that Happiness which Good men shall
be made partakers of, as it cannot be born up upon any other foundation then
true Goodness and a Godlike nature within them; so neither is it distinct from
it. Sin and Hell are so twined and twisted up together, that if the power of
Sin be once dissolved, the bonds of Death and Hell will also fall asunder. Sin
and Hell are of the same kind, of the same lineage and descent: as on the other
side True Holiness or Religion and True Happiness are but two several Notions
of one thing, rather then distinct in themselves. Religion delivers us from
Hell by instating us in a possession of True Life and Bliss. Hell is rather a
Nature then a Place: and Heaven cannot be so truly defined by any thing without
us, as by something that is within us.

Thus have we done with those Particulars wherein we considered the Excellency
and Nobleness of Religion, which is here expressed by (...) The way of life, and
elsewhere is styled by Solomon (...) A tree of life: true Religion being an
inward Principle of life, of a Divine life, the best life, that which is Life
most properly so called: accordingly in the Holy Scripture a life of Religion
is styled Life, as a life of Sin and Wickedness is styled Death. In the ancient
Academical Philosophy it was much disputed whether that Corporeal and Animal
life, which was always drawing down the Soul into Terrene and Material things,
was not more properly to be Styled Death then Life. What sense hereof the
Pythagoreans had may appear by this practice of theirs, They were wont to set
up (...) Empty coffins in the places of those that had forsaken their School
and degenerated from their Philosophy and good Precepts, as being Apostates
from life it self, and dead to Virtue and a good life, which is the true life,
and therefore fit only to be reckoned among the dead.

For a Conclusion of this Discourse; The Use which we shall make of all shall
be this, To awaken and exhort every one to a serious minding of Religion: as
Solomon does earnestly exhort every one to seek after true Wisdom, which is
the same with Religion and Holiness, as Sin is with Folly; Prove. 4. 5. Get
Wisdom, get understanding; and v. 7. Get Wisdom, and with all thy getting
get understanding. Wisdom is the principal thing. This is the sum of all,
the Conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for
this is the whole (duty, business and concernment) of man. Let us not trifle
away our time and opportunities which God has given us, wherein we may lay
hold upon Life and Immortality, in doing nothing, or else pursuing Hell and
Death. Let us awake out of our vain dreams; Wisdom calls upon us, and offers
us the hidden treasures of Life and Blessedness: Let us not perpetually deliver
over our selves to laziness and slumbering. Say not, There is a lion in the
way; say not, Though Religion be good, yet it is unattainable: No, but let us
intend all our Powers in a serious resolved pursuance of it, and depend upon
the assistance of Heaven which never fails those that soberly seek for it. It
is indeed the Levity of men's spirits, their heedlesseness and regardlesseness
of their own lives, that betrays them to Sin and Death. It is the general
practice of men (...), extempore vivere, as the Satyrist speaks; they
ordinarily ponderate and deliberate upon every thing more then how it becomes
them to live, they so live as if their Bodies had swallowed up their Souls:
their lives are but a kind of Lottery: the Principles by which they are guided
are nothing else but a confused multitude of Fancies rudely jumbled together.
Such is the life of most men, it is but a mere Casual thing acted over at
peradventure, without any fair and calm debates held either with Religion, or
with Reason which in it self, as it is not distorted and depraved by corrupt
men, is a true Friend to Religion, and directs men to God and to things good
and just, pure, lovely and praiseworthy; and the directions of this Inward
guide we are not to neglect. Unreasonableness or the smothering and
extinguishing the Candle of the Lord within us is no piece of Religion, nor
advantageous to it: That certainly will not raise men up to God, which sinks
them below men. There had never been such an Apostasy from Religion, nor had
such a Mystery of iniquity (full of deceiveableness and imposture) been
revealed and wrought so powerfully in the Souls of some men, had there not
first come an Apostasy from sober Reason, had there not first been a falling
away and departure from Natural Truth.

It is to be feared our nice speculations about a (...) in Theology have tended
more to exercise men's Wits then to reform their lives, and that they have too
much descended into their practice, and have tended rather to take men off from
minding Religion, then to quicken them up to a diligent seeking after it.
Though the Powers of Nature may now be weakened, and though we cannot produce a
living form of Religion in our own Souls; yet we are not surely resolved so
into a sluggish Passiveness, as that we cannot, or were not in any kind or
manner of way to seek after it. Certainly a man may as well read the Scriptures
as study a piece of Aristotle, or of Natural Philosophy or Mathematics. He
that can observe any thing comely and commendable, or unworthy and base, in
another man, may also reflect upon himself, and see how face answers to face,
as Solomon speaks Proverbs 27. 19. If men would seriously commune with their
hearts, their own Consciences would tell them plainly, that they might avoid
and omit more evil then they do, and that they might do more good then they
do: and that they do not put forth that power which God has given them, nor
faithfully use those Talents nor improve the advantages and means afforded them.

I fear the ground of most men's Misery will prove to be a Second fall, and a
Lapse upon a Lapse. I doubt God will not allow that Proverb, The Fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, as not in respect
of Temporal misery, much less will he allow it in respect of Eternal. It will
not be so much because our First parents incurred God's displeasure, as because
we have neglected what might have been done by us afterward in order to the
seeking of God, his face and favor, while he might be found.

Up then and be doing; and the Lord will be with us. He will not leave us nor
forsake us, if we seriously set our selves about the work. Let us endeavor to
acquaint our selves with our own lives, and the true Rules of life, with this
which Solomon here calls the Way of Life: let us inform our Minds as much as
may be in the Excellency and Loveliness of Practical Religion; that beholding
it in its own beauty and amiableness, we may the more sincerely close with it.
As there would need nothing else to deterr and affright men from Sin but its
own ugliness and deformity, were it presented to a naked view and seen as it
is: so nothing would more effectually commend Religion to the Minds of men,
then the displaying and unfolding the Excellencies of its Nature, then the true
Native beauty and inward luster of Religion it self: (...) neither the Evening
nor the Morning Star could so sensibly commend themselves to our bodily Eyes,
and delight them with their shining beauties, as True Religion, which is an
undefiled Beam of the uncreated light, would to a mind capable of co^versing
with it. Religion, which is the true Wisdom, is (as Chap. 7.
the Author of the Book of Wisdom speaks of Wisdom,) a pure influence
flowing from the glory of the Almighty, the brightness of the Everlasting
light, the unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the image of his
Goodness: She is more beautiful then the Sun, and above all the order of Stars;
being compared with the light, she is found before it.

Religion is no such austere, sour and rigid thing, as to affright men away
from it: No, but those that are acquainted with the power of it, find it to be
altogether sweet and amiable. An holy Soul sees so much of the glory of
Religion in the lively impressions which it bears upon it self, as both wooes
and winns it. We may truly say concerning Religion to such Souls as S. Paul
spoke to the Corinthians, Needs it any Epistles of Commendation to you? Needs
it any thing to court 2 Cor. 3.
your affections? Ye are indeed its Epistle, written not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God.

Religion is not like the Prophet's roll, sweet as honey when it was in his
mouth, but as bitter as gall in his belly. Religion is no sullen Stoicisme, no
sour Pharisaisme; it does not consist in a few Melancholy passions, in some
dejected looks or depressions of Mind: but it consists in Freedom, Love, Peace,
Life and Power; the more it comes to be digested into our lives, the more sweet
and lovely we shall find it to be. Those spots and wrinkles which corrupt Minds
think they see in the face of Religion, are indeed nowhere else but in their
own deformed and misshapen apprehensions. It is no wonder when a defiled Fancy
comes to be the Glass, if you have an unlovely reflection. Let us therefore
labor to purge our own Souls from all worldly pollutions; let us breath after
the aid and assistance of the Divine Spirit, that it may irradiate and
inlighten our Minds, that we may be able to see Divine things in a Divine
light: let us endeavor to live more in a real practice of those Rules of
Religious and Holy living commended to us by our ever-Blessed Lord and Savior:
So shall we know Religion better, and knowing it love it, and loving it be
still more and more ambitiously pursuing after it, till we come to a full
attainment of it, and therein of our own Perfection and Everlasting Bliss.

A CHRISTIANS Conflicts and Conquests.

OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning

The Devil's active Enmity and continual Hostility against Man. The Warfare of
a Christian life. The Certainty of Success and Victory in this Spiritual
Warfare. The Evil and Horridness of Magical Arts and Rites, Diabolical
Contracts, etc.
Siracides Cap. 2. 1. (...).

Cap. 33. in Edit. Vulg. Lat. etc.
Cap. 36. 1. (...).

Cyprianus De Zelo and Livore. Ex^ubandum est, Fratres dilectissimi, atque
omnibus viribus elaborandum, ut ^^i^nico saevienti, and jacula sua in omnes
corporis parts, quibus percuti and vulnerari possumus, dirigenti, sollicita
and plena vigilantia repugnemus -- Quamobrem contra omnes Diaboli vel fallaces
insidias vel apertas minas stare debet instructus animus and armatus, tam
paratus semper ad repugnandum quam est ad impugnandum semper paratus inimicus.

A CHRISTIANS Conflicts and Conquests Represented in a Discourse upon James 4.
7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction, Summarily treating of the perpetual Enmity between God, the
Principle of Good, and the Principle of Evil, the Devil: as also between
Whatsoever is from God and That which is from the Devil. That Wicked men by
destroying what there is from God within them, and devesting themselves of all
that which has any alliance to God or true Goodness, and transforming
themselves into the Diabolical image, fit themselves for correspondence and
converse with the Devil. The Fears and Horrors which infest both the Apostate
Spirits and Wicked men. The weakness of the Devil's kingdom; Christ's success
against it.

IT Has been an ancient Tradition received by the Gentile Philosophers, That
there are Two main Principles that spend and spread their influence through the
whole Universe: The one they called The Principle of Good, the other they
called The Principle of Evil: and that these Two maintain a continual contest
and enmity the one with the other. The Principle of Goodness, which is nothing
else but God himself, who derived himself in clear and lovely stamps and
impressions of Beauty and Goodness through the whole Creation, endeavors still
to assimilate and unite it to himself. And on the other side The Principle of
Evil, the Prince of darkness, having once stained the Original beauty and glory
of the Divine workmanship, is continually striving to mold and shape it more
and more into his own likeness. And as there is such a perpetual and active
Enmity between God and the Evil Spirit: so whatsoever is from God is
perpetually opposing and warring against that which arises from the Devil. The
Divine Goodness has put enmity between whatsoever is born of him or flows
forth from it self, and the Seed of the Serpent. As at the beginning he divided
between the Night and the Day, between Light and Darkness, so that they can
never intermingle or comply one with another, or be reconciled one to the
other: so neither can those Beams of Divine light and love which descend from
God upon the Souls of men be ever reconciled to those foul and filthy Mists of
Sin and Darkness which ascend out of the bottomless pit of Hell and Death. That
Spirit is not from God, who is the Father of lights and in whom there is no
darkness, as the Apostle speaks, which endeavors to compound with Hell, and to
accommodate between God and the Devil. God himself has set the bounds to
darkness and the shadow of death. Divine Truth and Goodness cannot contract
themselves with any thing that is from Hell, or espouse themselves to any Brat
of darkness: as it was set forth in the Emblem under the Old Law, where none of
the Holy seed might marry with the people of any strange God. Though that Rule,
Touch not, taste not, handle not, be abolished in the Symbolical rites, yet it
has an immutable Mystery in it not subject to the laws or changes of Time.

He that will entertain any correspondence with the Devil, or receive upon his
Soul his Image or the number of his name, must first divest and strip himself
of all that which has any alliance to God or true Goodness within him: He must
transform his Mind into the true likeness and similitude of those foul Fiends
of darkness, and abandon all relation to the Highest and Supremest Good. And
yet though some men endeavor to do this, and to smother all those Impressions
of Light and Reason which God has folded up in every man's Being, and destroy
all that which is from God within them, that so they may reconcile themselves
to Sin and Hell; yet can they never make any just peace with them: There is no
peace to the wicked, but they are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt. Those Evil spirits are always turbulent
and restless; and though they maintain continually a War with God and his
kingdom, yet are they always making disquietings and disturbances in their own
kingdom; and the more they contest with God and are deprived of him, the more
full are they of horror and tumultuous commotions within. Nothing can stand
firm and sure, nothing can have any true and quiet establishment, that has not
the Everlasting arms of true Goodness under it to support it. And as those that
deliver over themselves most to the Devil's pleasure, and devote themselves to
his service, cannot do it without a secret inward Antipathy against him or
dreadful thoughts of him: so neither can those impure spirits stand before the
Divine glory; but being filled with trembling and horror continually endeavor
to hide themselves from it, and flee away before it as the Darkness flies away
before the Light. And according as God has in any Places in any Ages of the
world made any manifestations of himself to men, so have those Evil spirits
been vanquished, and forced to quit their former Territories; as is especially
very observable in the ceasing of all the Grecian Oracles soon after the
Gospel was promulged in those parts, when those desolate spirits with horrid
and dismal groans resigned up their habitations, as Plutarch has recorded of
them.

Our Savior has found by good experience, how weak a thing the Devil's
kingdom is, when he spoiled all the Principalities and Powers of darkness, and
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in (or, by) it, that is, his
Cross, as the Apostle speaks: and if we will resolutely follow the Captain of
our salvation, and fight under his banner, as good soldiers of Jesus Christ,
we have full security given us for the same success; Resist the Devil, and he
will flee from you.

CHAP. II.
The First observable, That the Devil is continually busy with us. The Devil
considered under a double notion. 1. As an Apostate Spirit which fell from God.
The great danger of the Devil's activity, not only when he presents himself in
some corporeal shape, but when he is unseen and appears not. The weakness and
folly of those who are afraid of him only when he appears embodyed. That the
Good Spirit of God is active for the Good of Souls. How regardless men are of
the gentle motions of the Divine Spirit; and how unwatchfull and secure under
the Suggestions of the Evil Spirit. How we may discover the Devil in his
Stratagems, and under his several disguises and appearances.

IN these words [Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you] we shall take
notice First of what is evidently 1.
implied, viz. That the Devil is continually busy with us. This may be
considered under a double notion.

1. By the Devil we are to understand that Apostate Spirit which fell from God,
and is always designing to hale down others from God also. The old Dragon
(mentioned in the Revelation) with his tail drew down the third part of the
Stars of heaven and cast them to the Earth. As true Goodness is not content to
be happy alone; so neither can Sin and Wickedness be content to be miserable
alone. The Evil Spirit told God himself what his employment was, viz. To go to
Job 1. 7.
and fro in the earth, and to walk up and down in it: he is always walking up
and down through dry places (where no Divine influences fall to water it) as
our Savior speaks, seeking rest, though always restless. The Philosophy of
the Ancients has observed That every man that comes into this world has a
good and an evil Genius attending upon him. It were perhaps a vain curiosity to
inquire whether the number of Evil spirits exceed the number of Men: but this
is too too certain, that we never want the secret and latent attendance of
them. The Devil is not only a word or a name made to affright and scare
timorous men with; neither are we then only in danger of him, when he presents
himself to us in some Corporeal form: it is nothing else but a superstitious
weakness to be afraid of him only then when he appears embodyed, and to
neglect that unseen and insensible influence which his continual converse with
us as an unbodyed spirit may have upon us. Those Evil spirits are not yet cast
out of the world into outer darkness, though it be prepared for them: the
bottomless pit has not yet shut its mouth upon them. They fell from God not so
much by a Local descent, as by a Mental apostasy and dissimilitude to God: and
they are now in libera custodia, having all this habitable world for their
Rendezvous, and are styled by the Apostle Spiritual wickednesses in high
places. Wheresoever there are any in a disposition to sin against Ephesians. 6.
God, wheresoever there are any capable of a Temptation or Diabolical
impression, here and there are they. A man needs not dig into the chambers of
death, or search among the shadows of darkness to find them; he needs not go
down into hell to seek them, or use any Magical charms to raise them up from
thence: No, those wicked and impure spirits are always wandering up and down
amongst us, seeking whom they may devour. As there is a Good Spirit conversant
in the world, inviting and alluring men to Virtue and Goodness; so there is an
Evil spirit, perpetually tempting and inticeing men to Sin and Vice. Uncloathed
and unbodyed natures may converse with us by secret illapses, while we are not
aware of them. I doubt not but there are many more Divine impressions made upon
the Minds of men, both Good and Bad, from the Good Spirit of God, then are
ordinarily observed; there are many soft and silent impulses, gentle motions,
like our Savior's putting in his hand by the hole of the door, as it is in the
Canticles, soliciting and exciting men to Religion and ch 5.
Holiness; which they many times regard not, and take little notice of.

There are such secret messages often brought from Heaven to the Souls of men
by an unknown and unseen hand, as the Psalmist speaks; Once, yea twice have I
heard it, that power belongs unto God. And as there are such divine
irradiations sliding into the Souls of men from God: so there are no question
many and frequent suggestions to the Fancies and Imaginations of men arising
from the Evil Spirit; and a watchful observer of his own heart and life shall
often hear the voice of Wisdom and the voice of Folly speaking to him: he that
has his eyes opened, may see both the visions of God falling upon him, and
discern the false and foolish fires of Satan that would draw away his mind from
God. This is our unhappiness, that the Devil is so near us and we see him not;
he is conversant with us, and yet we are not aware of him. Those are the most
desperate designs and likeliest to take effect, that are carried on by an
unseen and unappearing enemy: and if we will provide our selves against the
Devil, who never misseth any opportunity that lies in his way to tempt us, nor
is ever failing in any plot, we must then have our Senses exercised to discern
both good and evil; we must get our Minds awakened with clear and evident
Principles of Light; we must get our Judgments and Consciences well informed
with sober and practical Truth, such as tends to make us most like to God, and
to reconcile our natures more perfectly to Divine goodness. Then shall we know
and discover that Apostate Spirit in all his Stratagems whereby he seeks to
bereave us of our happiness: we shall know him as well when he clothes himself
like an Angel of light, as when he appears in his own nakedness and deformity.
It is observed by some, That God never suffered the Devil to assume any humane
shape, but with some Character whereby his Body might be distinguished from the
true Body of a man: and surely the Devil cannot so exactly counterfeit an Angel
of light, but that by a discerning mind he may be distinguished from him; as
they say a Beggar can never act a Prince so cunningly, but that his behavior
sometime sliding into the course way and principles of his Education, will
betray the meannesse of his pedigree to one of a true noble extraction. A bare
Imitation will always fall short of the Copy from whence it is taken; and
though Sin and Error may take up the mantle of Truth and cloth themselves
with it, yet he that is inwardly acquainted with Truth, and an ingenuous lover
and pursuer of it, will be able to find out the Imposture, he will be able to
see through the vail into the naked deformity of them.

CHAP. III.
2. Of the activity of the Devil considered as a Spirit of Apostasy and as a
Degenerate nature in men. That the Devil is not only the name of one
Particular thing, but a Nature. The Difference between the Devil and Wicked men
is rather the Difference of a Name then of Natures. The Kingdom and Tyranny of
the Devil and Hell is chiefly within, in the Qualities and Dispositions of men's
Minds. Men are apt to quarrel with the Devil in the name and notion, and defy
him with their Tongues, while they entertain him in their Hearts, and comply
with all that which the Devil is. The vanity of their pretended Love to God,
and Hatred of the Devil. That there is nothing Better then God himself, for
which we should love him; and to love him for his own Beauty and Excellency is
the best way of loving him. That there is nothing worse then Sin it self, for
which we should hate it; and to hate it for its own deformity is the truest way
of hating it. How Hell and Misery arises from within men. Why Wicked men are so
insensible of their Misery in this life.

2. WHen we say, The Devil is continually busy with us, I mean not only some
Apostate spirit as one particular Being, but that spirit of Apostasy which is
lodged in all men's natures; and this may seem particularly to be aimed at in
this place, if we observe the context: as the Scripture speaks of Christ not
only as a Particular person, but as a Divine Principle in holy Souls.

Indeed the Devil is not only the name of one particular thing, but a nature:
He is not so much one particular Being designed to torment Wicked men in the
world to come, as a hellish and diabolical nature seated in the minds of men.
He is not only one Apostate Spirit fallen down from heaven out of the lap of
Blessedness; but also a Spirit of Apostasy, a degenerate and depraved nature.
Could the Devil change his foul and impure nature, he would neither be a Devil
nor miserable: and so long as any man carries about him a sinful and corrupt
nature, he can neither be in perfect favor with God, nor blessed. Wickedness
is the Form and Entelech of all the wicked spirits: it is the difference of a
name rather then any proper difference of natures that is between the Devil and
Wicked men. Wheresoever we see Malice, Revenge, Pride, Envy, Hatred, Self-will
and Self-love, we may say Here, and There is that Evil spirit. This indeed is
that Venenum Serpentis, the poison and sting too of that Diabolical nature. As
the Kingdom of Heaven is not so much without men as within, as our Savior
tells us: so the Tyranny of the Devil and Hell is not so much in some External
things, as in the Qualities and Dispositions of men's Minds. And as the enjoying
of God and conversing with him consists not so much in a change of place, as in
the participation of the Divine nature, and in our assimilation unto God: so
our conversing with the Devil is not so much by a mutual local presence, as by
an imitation of a wicked and sinful nature derived upon men's own Souls.
Therefore the Jews were wont to style that Original pravity that is lodged in
men's spirits. (...) the Angel of death and fiend of darkness. Those filthy
Lusts and Corruptions which men foment and entertain in their Minds, they are
the noisome Vapors that ascend out of the bottomless pit; they are the thick
Mists and fogs of Hellish darkness arising in their Souls, as a Preface and
Introduction of Hell and Death within. Where we find Uncleanness, Intemperance,
Covetousness, or any such impure or unhallowed behavior, we may say, Here
Satan's throne is.

This sinful and corrupt nature being the true issue of Hell it self, is
continually dragging down men's Souls thither. All Sin and Wickedness in man's
Spirit has the Central force and Energy of Hell in it, and is perpetually
pressing down toward it as toward its own place. There needs no Fatal
necessity or Astral impulses to tumble wicked men down forcibly into Hell: No,
for Sin it self, hastened by the mighty weight of its own nature, carries them
down thither with the most swift and headlong motion. As they say of true
Holiness and Christianity, Christi sacrina pennas habet, Christ's burden, which
is nothing else but true Godliness, is a winged thing, and bravely bears it
self upwards upon its own wings soaring aloft toward God: so we may say of all
Impiety, Diaboli sarcina pondus habet; the Devilish nature is always within
the Central attractions of Hell, and its own weight instigates and accelerates
its motion thither. He that allows himself in any sin, or uses an unnatural
dalliance with any vice, does nothing else in reality then entertain an incubus
Damon; he prostitutes a wanton Soul, and forces it to commit lewdness with the
Devil himself. Sin is nothing better then a Brat of darkness and deformity; it
has no other extraction or pedigree then may be derived from those unclean
spirits that are nestled in Hell. All men in reality converse either with God
or with the Devil, and walk in the Confines either of Heaven or of Hell: They
have their fellowship either with the Father and the Son, as S. John speaks; or
else with the Apostate and evil Angels.

I know these Expressions will seem to some very harsh and unwelcome: But I
would beseech them to consider what they will call that spirit of Malice and
Envy, that spirit of Pride, Ambition, Vainglory, Covetousness, Injustice,
Uncleanness, etc. that commonly reigns so much, and acts so violently in the
Minds and Lives of men. Let us speak the truth, and call things by their own
Names; let us not flatter our selves, or paint our filthy sores: so much as
there is of Sin in any man, so much there is of the old man, so much there is
of the Diabolical nature. Why do we defy the Devil so much with our Tongues,
while we entertain him in our Hearts? But indeed men do but quarrel with him in
the name and notion of him, while yet their Hearts can readily comply with all
that which the Devil is: that Antipathy which is ordinarily expressed against
him, like those natural Antipathies which the Philosophers speak of, being
nothing else but Occult qualities, or Natural instincts, which as they arise
not from any principle of Reason or Understanding, so neither are they guided
or governed by it. As men's Love to God is ordinarily nothing else but the mere
tendencie of their Natures to something that has the notion or name of God put
upon it, without any clear or distinct apprehensions of him; so their Hatred of
the Devil is commonly nothing else but an inward displicency of nature against
something entitled by the Devil's name. Or else at best, Corrupt minds do
nothing else but fashion out a God and a Devil, a Heaven and a Hell, to
themselves, by the power of their own Fancies: and so they are to them nothing
else but their own Creatures, sustained and supported by the force of their own
Imaginations which first raised them. And as they commonly make a God like to
themselves, such a one as they can best comply with and love; so they make a
Devil most unlike to themselves, which may be any thing but what they
themselves are, that so they may most freely spend their Anger and Hatred upon
him: just as they say of some of the Ethiopians, who use to paint the Devil
white, because they themselves are black. This is a strange merry kind of
Madness, whereby men sportingly bereave themselves of the Supremest Good, and
insure themselves as much as may be to Hell and Misery: They may thus cheat
themselves for awhile, but the Eternal foundation of the Divine Being is
immutable and unchangeable. God is but One, and his Name One, as the Zech. 14.
Prophet speaks, (howsoever the several Fancies of men may shape him out
diversely;) and where we find Wisdom, Justice, Loveliness, Goodness, Love and
Glory, in their highest elevations and most unbounded dimensions, That is He:
and where we find any true participations of these, there is a true
Communication of God; and a defection from these is the Essence of Sin and the
Foundation of Hell.

Now if this be rightly considered, I hope there will an Argument strong enough
appear from the Thing it self, to enforce S. James his Exhortation, Resist the
Devil: endeavor to mortify and crucify the Old man with all the corrupt
lusts and affections of the Flesh.

We never so truly hate Sin, as when we hate it for its own Ugliness and
deformity: as we never love God so truly, as when we love him for his own
beauty and excellency. If we calculate aright, as we shall find nothing Better
then God himself, for which we should love him; so neither shall we find any
thing Worse then Sin it self, for which we should hate it. Our assimilation to
God and conformity to him, instates us in a firm possession of true Happiness,
which is nothing else but God himself, who is all Being and Blessedness; and
our dissimilitude to God and Apostasy from him, involves us in our own Misery,
and sets us at the greatest enmity to what our unsatiable desires most of all
crave for, which is the enjoyment of True and Satisfying Good. Sins are those
fiery Snakes which will eternally lash and torment all damned spirits. Every
man's Hell arises from the bottom of his own Soul; as those stinking Mists and
tempestuous Exhalations that infest the Earth, have their first original from
the Earth it self. Those streams of fire and brimstone ordained for the torment
of all damned spirits, are rather the exsudations of their own filthy and
corrupt nature then any external thing. Hell is not so much induced, as educed
out of men's filthy Lusts and Passions. I will not here dispute what external
Appendixes there may be of Heaven or Hell; but methinks I no where find a more
Graphical description of the true Properties and Operations of them, though
under other names, then in those Characters of the Flesh and Spirit, in Galat.
5. ver. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Eternal death is begotten and brought forth out of
the womb of lust, and is little else but Sin consummated and in its full
growth, as S. James intimates chap. 1.

Would wicked men dwell a little more at home, and descend into the bottom of
their own Hearts, they should soon find Hell opening her mouth wide upon them,
and those secret fires of inward fury and displeasure breaking out upon them,
which might fully inform them of the estate of true Misery, as being a short
anticipation of it. But in this life wicked men for the most part elude their
own Misery for a time, and seek to avoid the dreadful sentence of their own
Consciences, by a tergiversation and flying from themselves into a converse
with other things, Ut nemo in sese tentat descendere; else they would soon find
their own home too hot for them. But while men's Minds are perpetually rambling
all the world over in a pursuit of worldly designs, they are unacquainted with
the affairs of their own Souls; and know not how deeply a Self-converse and
reflection upon their own prodigious deformities would pierce their Souls with
anguish: how vastly would they swell with Fury, Rage, Horror, Consternation
and whatsoever is contrary to that ineffable Light and Love and Peace which is
in Heaven, in natures fully reconciled and united to true Goodness? As true
Goodness cannot borrow Beauty from any external thing to recommend it self to
the Minds and Affections of Good men, seeing it self is the very Idea and true
life of all Beauty and Perfection, the source of Bliss and Peace to all that
partake of her: so neither can Sin and Wickedness to an enlightened Soul appear
more Ugly, loathsome and hateful, in any other shape then its own.

CHAP. IV.
The Second Observable, viz. The Warfare of a Christian life. True Religion
consists not in a mere passive capacity and sluggish kind of doing nothing, nor
in a melancholy sitting still or slothful waiting, etc. but it consists in
inward life and power, vigor and activity. A discovery of the dullness and
erroneousness of that Hypothesis, viz. That Good men are wholly Passive, and
unable at any time to move without some External impetus, some impression and
impulse from without upon them: or, That all Motions in Religion are from an
External Principle. Of the Quality and Nature of the true Spiritual Warfare,
and of the Manner and Method of it. That it is transacted upon the inner Stage
of men's Souls, and managed without Noise or pompous Observation; and without
any hindrance or prejudice to the most peaceful, sedate and composed temper of
a religious Soul. This further illustrated from the consideration of the false
and pretended Zeal for God and his Kingdom against the Devil; which though it
be impetuous, and makes a great noise and a fair show in the world, is yet both
impotent and ineffectual.

FRom these words, Resist the Devil, we may take notice of the Warfare of a
Christian life, of that Active 2.
life and valor which Good men express in this world. A true Christian spirit
is masculine and generous; it is no such poor, sluggish, pusillanimous thing as
some men fancy it to be, but active and noble. We fight not, says the
Apostle, against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places. True Religion does not consist in a mere
Passive capacity, in a sluggish kind of doing nothing, that so God himself
might do all; but it consists in life and power within: therefore it is called
by the Apostle, The spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind; it is called
the law of the spirit 2 Timothy 1. Romans 8.
of life, strongly enabling Good men against the law of Sin and Death. True
Wisdom, as the Wise man has well styled it, is the unspotted mirror of the
power of God, and a pure influence flowing from the glory of the Almighty;
neither can any defiled thing enter into it: it goes in and out in the strength
of God himself; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.
Every thing as it partakes more of God, and comes nearer to him, so it becomes
more active and lively, as making the nearer approaches to the Fountain of life
and virtue. A Good man does not only then move, when there is some powerful
impression and impulse upon him; but he has a Spring of perpetual motion
within. When God restores men to a new and divine life, he does not make them
like so many dead Instruments, stringing and fitting them, which yet are able
to yield no sound of themselves; but he puts a living Harmony within them. That
is but a Mechanical religion which moves no longer then some External weights
and Impulses are upon it, whether those be (I think I may safely say) from some
Worldly thing or from God himself, while he acts upon men from without them,
and not from within them. It is not a Melancholy kind of sitting still, and
sloathfull waiting, that speaks men enlivened by the Spirit and power of God.
It is not Religion to stifle and smother those Active powers and principles
which are within us, or to dry up the Fountain of inward life and virtue. How
say some amongst us, That there is no resurrection from the dead? no spirit or
life within; but all our motions in Religion are merely from some assisting
Form without? Good men do not walk up and down the world merely like Ghosts and
Shadows, or like dead Bodies assumed by some Spirit, which are taken up and
laid down again by him at his pleasure: But they are indeed living men, by a
real participation from him who is indeed a quickening Spirit. Were our Religion
so much a Thing without us as some men would seem to fansy it, were we so dead
and liveless as that we could never move but from an External impetus; as our
Religion could never indeed be called Ours, so neither could we ever have the
inward sense of that Bliss and Peace which goes along with it; but must be like
so many heavy loggs or dull pieces of Earth in Heaven and Happiness. That is a
very earthly and flat Spirit in Religion which sinks like the lees to the
bottom; or rather it is like that Terra damnata which the Chemists speak of,
having no vigor, life or activity left in it, is truly dead to God, and is
reprobate to any thing of Heaven. We know the Pedigree of those Exhalations
that arise no higher then a mere external force from the Sun's heat weighs
them up, to be but base and earthly; and therefore having no natural warmth or
energy within themselves imparted to them, they sink down again to the Earth
from whence they came. The Spirit which is from Heaven is always, out of an
inbred Nobleness which bears it up, carried upwards again toward Heaven from
whence it came, powerfully resisting all things that would deprive it of God or
hinder it from returning to its Original: it is always moving upwards in an
even and steady way toward God from whence it came, leaving the dark Regions
of Hell and Death under it: it resists Hell and Darkness by assimilating and
conforming it self to God; it resists Darkness in the armor of light; it
resists Death and destruction by the power of Divine love. It must be something
of Heaven in the Minds of men, which must resist the Devil and Hell.

We do not always resist the Devil then when we bid defiance to him, or when
we declame most zealously against him; neither does our Resisting and Opposing
of Sin and Wickedness consist in the violence of some Feminine passions which
may sometimes be raised by the power of Fancy in the Minds of men against it:
But it consists rather in a mature and sedate resolution against it in our own
Souls, arising from a clear judgment of the foul and hateful nature of Sin it
self, and him who is the Patron of it; in a constant and serious endeavor of
settling the government of our own Souls, and establishing the principality of
Grace and Peace within our selves. There is a pompous and popular kind of
tumult in the world, which sometimes goes for Zeal to God and his kingdom
against the Devil; whenas men's own Pride and Passions disguise themselves under
the notions of a Religious fervencie. Some men think themselves the greatest
Champions for God and his Cause, when they can take the greatest liberty to
quarrel with every thing abroad, and without themselves, which is not shaped
according to the mould of their own Opinions, their own Self-will, Humor and
Interest: Whereas indeed this Spiritual warfare is not so much maintained
against a foreign enemy, as against those domestic rebellions that are within:
neither is it then carried on most successfully, when men make the greatest
noise and most of all raise the dust. That impetuous violence and
tempestuousness with which men are acted in pretensions of Religion arises
ordinarily, I doubt, from unquiet and disturbed Minds within: whereas it is
indeed the inward conflicts and commotions, sin and vice, and not a holy zeal
for God, which discompose the Minds of men. Sin, where it is entertained, will
indeed breed disturbance, and break the peace of a man's own spirit; but a true
resisting and opposing of it is the restoring of the Soul to its just
Consistency, Freedom and Serenity again. As God's kingdom is set up, so the
Devil's kingdom may be pulled down, without the noise of axes and hammers. We
may then attain to the greatest achievements against the gates of Hell and
Death, when we most of all possess our own Souls in patience, and collect our
Minds into the most peaceful, composed and united temper. The motions of true
Practical Religion are most like that of the Heavens, which though most swift,
is yet most silent. As Grace and true Religion is no lazy or sluggish thing,
but in perpetual motion; so all the motions of it are soft and gentle: While it
acts most powerfully within, it also acts most peacefully. The kingdom of
heaven comes not with observation, that men may say, Lo here, or Lo there; it
is not with the devouring fire coming after it, or a whirlwind going before it.
This fight and contest with Sin and Satan is not to be known by the rattling of
the Chariots, or the sound of an alarm: it is indeed alone transacted upon the
inner stage of men's souls and spirits; and is rather a pacifying and quieting
of all those riots and tumults raised there by Sin and Satan; it is rather a
reconciling the minds of men to Truth, Justice and Holiness; it is a
captivating and subjecting all our Powers and Faculties to God and true
Goodness, through the effectual working of a divine Love and Humility: and this
Ressistance is always attended with Victory, and Triumph warts upon this Fight;
which is the Third and last Observation we shall make upon these Words.

CHAP. V.
The Third Observable, viz. The Certainty of Success and victory to all those
that resist the Devil. This grounded upon 1. The Weakness of the Devil and Sin
considered in themselves. 2. God's powerful assisting all faithful Christians
in this warfare. The Devil may allure and tempt, but cannot prevail, except men
consent and yield to his suggestions. The Devil's strength lies in men's
treachery and falseness to their own Souls. Sin is strong, because men oppose
it weakly. The Error of the Manichees about a Principium mali defended by men
in their lives and practices. Of God's readiness to assist Christians in their
spiritual Consticts, his Compassionate regards and the more special respects of
his Providence toward them in such occasions. The Conclusion, discovering the
Evil and Horridness of Magic, Diabolical Contracts, etc.

THe Certainty of Success to all those that resist the Devil; 3.
Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. He cannot stand, when opposed in
the strength of God, he will fall down as swift as lightning; he cannot bear
the glory of God shining in the Souls of men. Here it is no more but Stand, and
Conquer; Resist, and Vanquish.

For First of all, The Devil and Sin in themselves 1.
considered are but weak and impotent; they cannot prevail over that Soul which
yields not to them: the Evil spirit then only prevails over us, when we our
selves consent to his suggestions; all his strength lies in our treachery and
falseness to our own Souls. Though those wicked spirits be perpetually so near
us, yet they cannot bow or bend our Wills: there is a place of defense in the
Souls of men into which they cannot enter: they may stand at a distance, allure
and entice them; but they cannot prevail over them, except they wilfully and
shamefully deliver over their strength into the Enemies hand. It is indeed
nothing else but Hell it self in the Souls of men that gives the Devil such
free entertainment there: the Wills of men stamped with a Diabolical form, and
bearing the Devil's image and inscription upon them, declare his right over
them. Men are therefore so much captivated by him because they voluntarily take
his yoke upon them. Could we, or would we, resist Sin and Satan, they could not
hurt us. Every thing is weak and impotent according to the distance it stands
from God who is the only Fountain of life and power: and therefore it was well
resolved by the Philosopher, (...), Sin in it self is a weak and impotent
thing, and proceeds from weakness; it consists not properly in any native power
and strength which it has within it self, but in an impotency, and privation
of all true Being and Perfection; and therefore wheresoever any thing of God
appears, it will destroy it. He that is born of God, shall overcome the World,
the Devil and Sin; for the seed of God remains in him.

Let us endeavor to get our Minds enlightened with Divine Truth, clear and
Practical Truth, let us earnestly endeavor after a true participation of the
divine nature; and then shall we find Hell and Death to slay always before us.
Let us not impute the fruits of our own sluggishness to the power of the Evil
spirit without, or to God's neglecting of us: Say not, Who shall stand against
those mighty Giants? No; arm thy self with the mind of Christ, a fixed
resolution to serve the will and pleasure of the Almighty; and then fear not
what Sin and Hell can do against thee. Open thy windows, thou Sluggard, and
let in the beams of Divine light that are there waiting upon thee till thou
awake out of thy Slothfulness; then shall thou find the shadows of the night
dispelled and scattered, and the warm beams of Light and Love enfolding of
thee, which the higher they arise upon the Horizon of thy Soul, the more fully
they will display their native strength and beauty upon thee, transforming thee
more and more from darkness to light, from the similitude of Satan into a
participation of the Divine image. The Devil is not to be kept off from us by
setting any Spell about us, or driven away from us by any Magical charms. We
need not go and beat the air to drive away those Evil spirits from about us,
as Herodotus reports the Caunians once to have beaten out the strange Gods from
amongst them: but let us turn within our selves, and beat down that Pride and
Passion, those Holds of Satan there, which are therefore strong, because we
oppose them weakly. Sin is nothing else but a degeneration from true Goodness,
conceived by a dark and cloudy Understanding, and brought forth by a corrupt
Will; it has no consistency in it self, or foundation of its own to support
it. What the Jews have observed of Error is true of all Sin, (...), Mendacium
non habet pedes, it has no feet, no Basis of its own to subsist and rest it
self upon. Let us withdraw our Will and Affections from it, and it will soon
fall into nothing. It was the fond Error of the Manichees, That there was some
solid Principium mali, which having an Eternal existence of its own, had also a
mighty and uncontrollable power from within it self, whereby it could forcibly
enter and penetrate into the Souls of men; and seating it self there, by some
hidden influences irresistablie incline and enforce them to evil: which Error
I wish were as well confuted by the lives and practices of men, as it has been
by the Writings both of Fathers and Philosophers. But it is too apparent that
men maintain that Lie by a compliance with the Diabolical powers: We ourselves
uphold that kingdom of darkness, which else would tumble down and slide into
that nothing from whence it came. All Truth and Goodness are of an Eternal
nature, they are One, and Unchangeable, subsisting upon the strength of
Omnipotency: But all Sin and Vice is our own creature; we only give life to
them which indeed are our death, and would soon wither and fade away did we
substract our concurrence from them.

Secondly, We have a further Ground for our expectation 2.
of Victory in all contests with Sin and Satan, from the powerful assistance of
God himself, who is never wanting to those that seek after him, and never fails
those that engage in his quarrels. While we strive against Sin, we may safely
expect that the Divinity it self will strive with us, and derive that strength
and power into us that shall at last make us more then Conquerors. God has not
forsaken the earth: but as his. Almightyessence runs through all things,
sustaining and upholding the frame of the whole Universe; so more especially
does it bear up in its Almighty arms those things that are more nearly related
to himself, always cherishing them with his own Goodness. Wheresoever God
beholds any breathings after himself, he gives life to them, as those which are
his own breath in them. As he who projects wickedness, shall be sure to find
Satan standing at his right hand ready to assist him in it: so he that pursues
after God and Holiness, shall find God nearer to him then he is to himself, in
the free and liberal communications of himself to him. He that goes out in
God's battles, fighting under our Savior's banner, may look upwards, and
opening his eyes may see the mountains full of horses and chariots of fire
round about him. God has not so much delight in the death and destruction of
men, as to see them struggling and contending for life, and himself stand by as
a looker on. No, but with the most tender and fatherly compassions his bowels
yern over them, and his Almighty arm is stretched forth for them; and in his
strength they shall prevail: they shall be born up, as upon Eagles wings; they
shall walk in the might of his strength who is able to save, and not faint.
Where there is any serious and sober Resolution against Sin, any real motion
toward God, there is the blessing of Heaven in it; he that planted it, will
also water it, and make it to bud and blossom and bring forth fruit.

Wherefore to shut up this Discourse by way of Application, Let us make use of
this as a further Argument to enforce the Apostles Exhortation upon our selves,
Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, and, as the Psalmist
speaks of his Enemies, so let us say of our spiritual Enemies, They compass me
about, they compass me in on every side; but in the name of the Lord I will
destroy them. Let us set our selves with all our might to mortify the old man,
and to crucify all the affections of the Flesh: Let us lay aside every weight,
and the sin which so easily besets us, and run with patience the race that is
set before us; Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who is
set down at the right hand of the throne of God, as a great and mighty
Conqueror, who will declare the perfection of his own power in our weakness,
if we lay hold of his strength. Though we are not able to change our own
natures, or to rise above the source of our Animal and Selfish Beings, by our
own power; yet let us endeavor to subdue all those External vices of Luxury
and Wantonness, of Injustice, Revenge and the like; let us withdraw the fuel
of Pride, Malice, Vainglory and whatsoever else holds us in captivity to Hell,
and with confidence apply our selves to him who is an Almighty Savior; and
when he joins his Almighty strength with us, we need not fear any thing: He
shall tread down Satan under our feet, and we shall one day tread upon the Lion
and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall we trample under our feet: we
shall break the Serpent's head, though he may bruise our heel. Though God may
suffer him so far to serve his own rage and the hellish malice of such as are
in league with him, as to pull down with violence our earthly Tabernacles; yet
while we so suffer by him, we are conquerors over him.

I should now conclude all, and leave you with this General application, but
that the present Occasion has drawn it down for me to a particular case. Did
we not live in a world of professed wickedness, wherein so many men's Sins go
in open view before them to judgment, it might be thought needless to persuade
men to resist the Devil, when he appears in his own colors to make merchandise
of them, and comes in a formal way to bargain with them for their Souls; that
which humane nature (however enthralled to Sin and Satan in a more mysterious
way) abhors, and none admit but those who are quite degenerated from humane
kind. That which I shall further add, shall be by way of Caution only to
suggest two things which are the forerunners to such Diabolical contracts, and
put temptations into the hands of the Tempter.

1. Those Hellish passions of Malice, Envy and Revenge, which are the black
Form and Image of the Devil himself; these when they are once ripened, fit men
for the most Formal converse with the Devil that may be: That nature cannot
easily abhor him, which is so perfectly conformed to him.

2ly. The use of any Arts, Rites or Ceremonies not understood, of which we can
give no Rational or Divine account; this indeed is nothing else but a kind of
Magic which the Devil himself owns, and gives life to, though he may not be
corporeally present, or require presently any further Covenant from the users
of them. The Devil no question is present to all his own Rites and Ceremonies,
though men discern him not; and may upon the use of them secretly produce those
Effects which may gain credit to them. Among these Rites we may reckon
Insignificant forms of words, with their several modes and manner of
pronunciation, Astrelogical arts, and whatsoever else pretends to any strange
Effects which we cannot with good reason either ascribe to God or Nature. As
God will only be conversed withal in a way of Light and Understanding; so the
Devil loves to be conversed with in a way of Darkness and Obscurity.

The End.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr JOHN SMITH late Fellow of Queens
College in Cambridge, who departed this life Aug. 7. 1652.

And lies interred in the Chapel of the same College.

WITH A SHORT ACCOUNT of his Life and Death.

BY SIMON PATRICK, then Fellow of Queens College.

Prove. 10. 7. The memory of the Just is blessed.

2 KINGS, 2. 12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My Father, My Father, the
Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.
WHen I saw the blessed Spirit of our Brother, shall I say? or, our Father,
making have out of that Body which lies before us, these words which I have now
read came into my Mind: And methought I saw the good Genius of this place,
which inspired us with so much sense of Learning and Goodness, taking its
flight and leaving this lower world: At whom my Soul caught, as I fansied
Elisha to have done at Elijah, and I cried out, O my Father, My Father, etc.
Desirous I was (me-thought) that his (...) might have been a little while
deferred; that I might have stayed the wheels of that Triumphant chariot
wherein he seemed to be carried; that we might have kept him a little longer in
this world, till by his holy breathings into our Souls, and the Grace of God,
we had been all made meet to have some share in that inheritance of the Saints
in light: and so he might have gone to Heaven with his Train, taking all his
Friends along with him as Attendants to that Glory and Honor wherewith I make
no doubt he is crowned. It grieved me in my thoughts that there should be so
many Orphans left without a Father, a Society left naked without one of her
best Guardians and Chieftains, her very Chariot and Horsemen; unto whose
instruction and brave conduct not a few of us will acknowledge that they owe
much of their skill and abilities. For I do not fear to say, as Antoninus does
of the Best man, that he was (...), a Priest or Minister of God's who was very
subservient to him in his great work. If he was not a Prophet like Elijah, yet
I am sure he was (...) (as Gr. Nazianzen I think speaks of S. Basil) an
Interpreter of the Spirit, and very well acquainted with his mind; a man sent
down from heaven for our good, and is now gone thither from whence he came,
leaving us behind him here, a company of poor Fatherless children, the Sons of
this Prophet, weeping and crying out, O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

Which sad note would have been most fitly sung just at the Ascension of his
holy Soul: yet give me leave to descant a while upon it, now that we are come
to inter his Body, which was the dark Shadow where that admirable and
illustrious Learning, Wisdom and Godliness, walked up and down and shone
through upon the world.

You will easily see at the first glance that Something will here offer it self
to be said of Elijah, and Something of Elisha: Of Elijah, in that he is called
Father, the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel; of Elisha, in that he applies this
relation to himself, saying, My Father, My Father.

Concerning Elijah we may observe

First, His Superiority, Eminency, and Dignity.

Secondly, His singular Care which he took of others.

Thirdly, His great Usefulness, or the Benefit which his Country enjoyed by him.

Concerning Elisha we may observe the Expression of Three things likewise;

First, Of his great Affection and Love.

Secondly, Of the Sense he felt of his loss.

Thirdly, Of that Honor which he gave him, or that Respect and Regard which he
had unto him.

I shall speak a little of all these, and then parallel our Case as well as I
can to Both.

1. Observe Elijah's Eminency, Superiority, Dignity and Worth; which is both
signified in the word Father, and also in the other Expressions, the Chariot,
and Horsemen of Israel. The Talmudists say of the word Abba, which is near of
kin as can be to this in the Text, (...) Buxtorf. Lex. Talmud.
(...), Abba is a word of honor and glory, even as Rabbi: whence the Latin
Abbas, and our English Abbot, have been derived to denote the greatest person
in a Society. And therefore whom he here calls Father, is called verse 3 and 5.
Master or Lord, Know thou not that Jehovah will take (...) thy Lord, or
Master, from thee today? Elijah was the Head in the Body of the Prophets, the
Dux gregis, a main leading man among the rest. And this was by reason of his
Wisdom, Experience and gray headed Understanding, expressed in the word
Father. He was a Sage and grave person, such an Head as was full of Prudence,
Skill and Advice, wherein were molded many sober and wise Resolutions, many
weighty and mature Determinations, profound and deep Notions, holy and pious
Counsels for the teaching of rawer and greener heads. He was one that did
imitate God the Father of all, and in some sort represent him here below, being
an Oracle among men. And such Instruments God has always in the world, Men of
greater height and stature then others, whom he sets up as torches on an hill
to give light to all the Regions round about; Men of public and universal
influence, like the Sun it self which illuminates all and is not sparing of its
beams; Men whose Souls come into the world (as the Chaldee Oracle speaks) --
(...),
clothed with a great deal of Mind, more impregnated then others with Divine
notions, and having more teeming Wombs to enrich the world with the fruit of
them: Men of wide and capacious Souls that can grasp much; and of enlarged,
open Hearts, to give forth that freely unto men which the (...) the Fatherly
Mind (as the same Oracle calls God) has given unto them; that so in some sort
they may become Fathers in the world in subordination to God. The Sun of
Righteousness Jesus Christ is described with seven stars in his right hand,
Revelat. 1. which were the Angels of the Churches; Men (its like) who were
adorned and beautified with more then ordinary brightness of Mind and
Understanding, and did sparkle with more then common heat of Love and Piety,
and did shine as Lights in the world in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation. Elijah was such an one; and so was the other Elias, John the
Baptist, a burning and a shining light; and so also John 5. 35.
shall we find our Father that is deceased to have been.

2. Take notice of the Care which Elijah took of Elisha, and that first as a
Master of his Scholar, and secondly as a Father of his Son, or if you will have
both in one, as a Fatherly Master. Elisha calls him by this name of Father,
because he was his Scholar; and they used commonly to give this title to their
Masters or Teachers: whence Pirke Avoth among the Jews, Capitula Patrum, is a
Book that contains the wise Sayings and Apophthegms of their Doctors. And so
(...), in the New Testament, that which is received by Tradition 1 Peter 1. 18.
from their Fathers, signifies nothing else but what their Doctors and learned
men in the Law delivered to them; and therefore they are sometimes called the
Traditions of the Elders. Jubal is called the Father of such as handle the
Harp, Genesis 4. 21. which signifies the same with that which is said of his
Brother, verse 22. He was an Instructor of artificers in brass and Iron. And
hence Solomon says so often, My Son, hear the instruction of a Father. So that
(...) my Father, my Father, in the Text is nothing else but (...) my Master, my
Master. Elijah taught and instructed him out of the Law, but with such a care
and Fatherly affection, that Elisha was truly his Son as well as his Scholar,
one whom he loved and tendered, whom he wrapped as a child in his Mantle when he
was following the plough, whom he begot into another shape and made another
man, in whose heart he sowed the seeds of true righteousness and godliness,
that he might do more good in the world. For what God does by Men, that they
many times are said to do. Hence the Apostles call Christians their little
children, and dear children, whom they had travailed in birth withal, till
Christ was formed in them. They lay in Gal. 4.
the Apostles wombs, and they brought them forth Christians, and so were truly
their Spiritual Fathers. And we may still see such noble Souls which God
continues amongst men, whose mouths (as Prove. 10. 11, 20, 21.
Solomon says) are as a well of life, whose lips feed many, and whose tongues
are as choice Silver: Men that are (...) common Fathers, and will embrace every
body as a Son, so they be but willing to be taught; that have the whole World
for their School, and are instilling wholesome notions and rectified
apprehensions into men's Minds, and implanting the Truth which is after
Godliness in their Tit. 1. 1.
hearts: Men that in all meekness, tenderness and Fatherly affection reprove
those that oppose themselves; that endeavor to bring them into their wombs,
that (if it be possible) they may beget the life of God and of his Son Christ
in their Souls: Men who cherish and foster the least gasping, panting life that
is in any Soul; who endeavor to free this life from any obstructions that dull
and oppress it: and so in every sense prove themselves to be the true Fathers
of the Church, Common Fathers (as before I expressed it) neither bound up in
themselves, nor addicted to any particular Sect, but minding the good of all:
Who think that they were not born for themselves, nor to be linked to this or
that Body or party of men; but are to be perfect as their heavenly Father is
perfect, who does good to all, even to the evil and unthankful. A (...) or
natural affection there is in them, which makes them think that every man's
child is their own; and if they could hatch any heavenly life in them, they
would willingly cover them under their wings. Such a person was S. Paul, who
went through fire and water, had a pilgrimage through this world upon nothing
but briers and thorns, out of his great love that he bare to men: The care of
all the Churches lay 2 Cor. 11. 28, 29.
upon him; and no man could be weak, but he was weak also; no man was offended,
but he burned, it put him in a kind of fever: and all this was easy to him,
because he had the bowels of a Father. Such another was S. John, who has every
where in his mouth, My little children. A good old Father he was who breathed
forth nothing but Love to man. And it need be no offense, if I add there was a
Socrates in Athens; who had so much of this kind of Spirit in him, that he
styled himself (...), a Servant of love, and professed that he knew nothing but
how to love. He would often acknowledge himself to be an Ignoramus in all those
things whereinto their wise men used to enquire, and that he could say nothing
in those Controversies that were agitated about the Gods and such like, (as
Max. Tyrius expressly tells us) but he durst not deny himself to have skill in
that (...), in the Art of love, wherein he was continually busied and employed;
instructing of their Youth, amending of their Manners and making them truly
virtuous; which thing the ungrateful wretches of the City called corrupting of
their children. And truly it is very often the Lot of these Fathers, which I am
speaking of, who nourish up Youth in true piety and virtue, to be esteemed by
many the corrupters of the fountain, Pestes rather then Patres of the places
where they live. But they fare no worse then Elijah did, who was accounted the
Troubler of Israel, though he was the Chariot and Horsemen thereof; a man so
useful, that they could not tell how to want him, though they knew not how to
value him. And that is the third thing to which I am to proceed: Only let me
entreat you that you would think within yourselves in my passage, Such an one
was the party deceased.

3. We have here observable the Usefulness of Elijah; he was not only a Father,
but the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel, the Security and Safeguard of the place
where he was. He calls him by this name in an allusion to the Chariot wherein
he was fetched to heaven, and would express by this form of speech the good
service he did for Israel. He was in stead of an Army to them; like David,
worth ten thousand of the people. He ^ Sam. 18. 3.
alone was able to fight with all their enemies, and by his force to break all
their Legions in pieces. And indeed all Good men, especially men of
extraordinary Wisdom and Godliness (such as I have been speaking of) are the
Guard and Defense of the towns where they reside, yea of the Country whereof
they are Members. They are the Tutelar Angels of a Nation, men that can do
more by their prayers and tears, their virtuous and holy actions, then an host
of men, wherein none is of less valor then Samson or the famed Hercules and
Achilles. How had it been with Israel, had it not been for Moses, the meekest
man on earth, and yet terrible as an army with banners? And in what a case had
Samaria often been, if it had not been for this Elisha the son of Elijah, who
was encompassed about with Chariots and horses of fire to fight at his command?
What if I say of such men in the Platonists phrase, That they are (...), the
Keepers of the world, that preserve it from being made like to Sodom and
Gomorrah? And if there had been but Ten of these holy Champions there, they had
shielded their heads from the arrows of the Almighty, and kept the showers of
fire and brimstone from raining upon them Good men are the Lifeguard of the
World, next to God and good Angels they are the Walls and Bulwarks of a nation;
for by their strength they have power with God, as it is said of Hos. 12. 3.
Jacob. And so the Chaldee Paraphrast reads these words of my Text, Thou wast
better to Israel by thy prayers then Chariot and Horsemen. They are the Glory
of the world, and without them it would be but a rude rabble, a Beast with many
heads and no brains, a mere Chaos and Confusion. And it is by reason of them
that it does not run into such disorder as a company of Children would do
without their Father, or as a multitude of mad Soldiers without their skilful
Leader and Commander.

And so I have briefly set before you what Elijah was, what those who are
Eminent for Godliness are, what every good man ought in some measure to be, and
what you shall shortly hear our deceased Father was in an high degree: Men of
worth and great renown, (...) (in a good sense) men of Name, men that may be
taken notice of in the world, that shine by their Wisdom, Justice and
Goodness, that cheer the world by their Love and Fatherly care of all, that
heartily endeavor to do good, and would not for a world see men perish if
they can help it; in a word, men that are as the Soul of the world, without
whom it would be a stinking and unsufferable place.

2. Now let us look a while upon Elisha, and see what he thought of such a man.
And

1. We meet with his great Affections expressed in the very Form of the Words,
My Father, my Father. Methinks I feel within my self with what pure, dear and
ardent love he spoke these words; what a glowing fire there was in his breast
when he thought of his spiritual Father. He burnt in love to him, as if some
spark had fallen from Elijah's fiery Chariot into his Heart: He was all in a
desire, as if the Angels that fetched his Father, had lent him a waft of their
wings, whereby he strove to fly with him to Heaven. There is not a child that
can cry more after the breasts that give it suck and the arms of her that
carried it in her womb, then he calls and cries after his Father, O my Father,
my Father! where shall I find my Father? what will become of me without my
Father? A tender love and kindness there is to be in our Hearts to all men of
what nature or nation soever; no man ought to be (...) a lover of himself, but
(...) a lover of mankind: Yet a more singular cleaving of Souls there should be
to those that are good; but the most unspeakable and greatest adhaesion and
union to those by whom we have profited in Wisdom and Godliness, and whose
lips have dropped the words of life into our Minds. For, as Solomon Prove. 20.
15.
has it, There is Gold, and a multitude of rubies; but the lips of knowledge
are a precious Jewel. We should stand affected to them as the Galatians to Gal.
4. 15.
S. Paul, who would have pulled out their very eyes, and given them unto him.
They ought to be to us oculis chariores, (as the ordinary phrase is) dearer
then our eyes: by which speech God expresses his extraordinary love to his
people Israel, saying that he kept them as the apple of his eye. And indeed it
can scarce be otherwise but that there should be an unknown love between such
persons, there being such a secret fascination in frequent converse and
familiarity, as entices a man's Soul and Heart out of himself. Those Precepts
which we imbibe from another mouth, naturally call forth a strong affection to
flow from us to him; and he who inflames our Souls with love to God, will
certainly enkindle a subordinate love within us to himself. The words of
Wisdom smite an ingenuous Soul (...) as with a dart (if I may use Greg.
Thaumaturgus his expression concerning Origen's Discourses) and cannot but
wound it both with a love to Wisdom and him that shoots those piercing arrows
into its Heart. They bind a tractable Soul (...), as it werein indissoluble
necessities, so that it cannot but love those words and kiss the mouth also
from whence they flow unto it A teachable Mind will hang about a wise man's
neck, and thereby they come to cleave and cling as fast together as the Soul of
Jonathan did unto the Soul of David. So the aforesaid Gregory speaks of himself
and Origin, (...), etc. This David (meaning Origin) has entangled and bound up
my Soul in such necessary fetters of Love, he has so tied and even knit me to
him, that if I would be disengaged, I cannot quit my self. No, (...), though we
depart out of this world, our love cannot die; for I love him even as my own
Soul; and so my affection must remain for ever. The words of the wise (says
Solomon) are as goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies,
Eccles. 12. 11. If a Master fix his Doctrine in his Scholars mind, he nails
himself likewise with the same stroke quasi trabali clavo, by a pin as strong
as a beam, to his Scholars heart: They mingle Souls as they do Notions, and
mutually pass into each other.

2. We have here likewise the Sense which Elisha had of his great loss. For
these Words are Expressions of Sorrow and Lamentation, as appears by the words
following, And he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in pieces: and
also from chap. 13. 14. where we find Joash weeping over this Elisha, and
saying these very words of my Text, O my Father, my Father, the chariot of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. And methinks I see Elisha himself here
bedewing his cheeks with tears, and hear these words sob'd and sighed out of
his Heart, having lost his dear Father, one that took such special care of him
whilst he was in the world. Methinks I see his Heart rent as well as his
Garments, and there I see Elijah graven in letters as great as was his Love.
How could he look on himself and not lament to think that he had lost his Head?
how could he behold Israel unguarded, and not throw off his own clothes as a
token of his Sorrow? It is said of Jehoiakim Jer. 22. 18. That they shall not
lament for him, saying, Ah my Brother, or ah my Sister; they shall not lament
for him, saying, Ah Lord, or ah his Glory: which both shows that this is a Form
of speech to denote sorrow; and that it is an Honor wicked men shall want,
that none shall bemoan their Departure. But the Just shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, they shall die desired; and those who can value them,
will not let them pass away in silence and with dry eyes. No Tears are spent so
well as for the want of God and a good Friend, or a Good man, especially such a
one as i before described. And indeed who can think of his gracious lips, his
profitable and delightful converse, his cordial love, without a sigh and a
tear, without saying, Ah my Father, Ah his Glory? No man will be sooner missed
then such an one as he: Ten thousand others may steal out of the world, and no
body scarce mind or inquire after them; but let Elijah go away, and you shall
have fifty men go three days to seek him, that if it be possible they may
enjoy his company a while longer. We find that Jesus himself wept for his
friend Lazarus Joh. 11. 35. at which the Jews said, Behold how he loved him.
Two Souls joined together in cordial love cannot part without a groan,
especially a Son and his Father, a Scholar and his Master. The Child cannot
hold it self from crying when it wants the Breast that used to feed it; nor can
a Soul thirsty of knowledge but be pained, when the Fountain is stopped that used
to quench it. There are not so many of these men in the world but their loss
will be as soon felt as the want of a stake in a rotten hedge, or of a Buttress
against a bowing wall. He who knows one to have been a Light in the world and a
Lamp unto him, will surely be melancholy and sad, when he sees that Light go
out and himself left in the dark, without that (...), those cheerful and
beloved beams which used to shine upon him, to illuminate and warm his Soul
with a true knowledge and love of all real goodness.

3. We may further take notice of the Honorable thoughts he had of Elijah, of
the Reverence, Worship and Respect which he gave unto him. For so we may look
upon these Words as an Expression of the high Esteem he had of him, and Regard
he bare to him, even after he was gone from this Earth, and could do no more
kindnesses for him. Elisha, who had been a minister to him when he was below,
and used to power water upon his hands, could not but have very reverend
thoughts toward him now that the Angels came to wait upon him, and in Flames of
fire to carry him up above. He could not but honor him as his Elder and
Father, as his Leader and Commander, as the General of the Sons of the
Prophets, as the very Host and Army of Israel. And indeed the Souls of those
men that are as full of God as the name of Elijah is (which includes Two, if
not Three, (...)
of the Divine names in it) cannot but draw our eyes toward them; but then they
so dazzle us with their luster and brightness, they strike us into such
amazement at their Perfections, that the weakness of man's nature has been apt
to give no less then Divine veneration to such persons. It had not been lawful
I know to have worshipped Elijah, though he had been an Angel; but yet methinks
I see Elisha bowing down with some respect to the very Mantle which fell from
his Master, and taking it up as a precious Relic of so holy a man. And I
could very well pass some Civility upon the Gown in which this Holy man
departed used for to walk, out of the great honor which I bear to him. There
was so much of Divinity enshrined in this Excellent man's Soul, that it made
every thing about him to have a kind of Sacredness in it, and will make his
name to be always as a sweet odor unto us. Though we may not extol it with
Divine praises, yet let it never be mentioned by us without the addition of the
Hebrew manner of speech (...) His memory is blessed, or of the Greek (...),
That most Blessed man.

AND so I am fallen unawares in my Meditations upon the Application of what
has been said to Him that is deceased and to our own selves.

Some perhaps will be angry that I should go about to compare him with Elijah,
the Man of God; but I have an Apology ready at hand: They will give me leave I
hope to do the same that Greg. Nyssen does, who in his Oration at the Funeral
of his brother Basil, compares him not only with Elias, but with John the
Baptist, the second Elias, and with S. Paul himself, saying that one should not
err if he should affirm that there was in him and in S. Paul (...) one and the
same measure of divine love. Suffer me then to use some of his words concerning
him of whom we are now to speak. None will require of humane nature to imitate
Elijah in his shutting and opening of heaven, in his fasting so many days, and
going up to God in a fiery chariot; but in other things we will be bold to
compare him with that great man, in his zealous faith, in his Cordial love to
God, in his earnest desire and thirst (...) (as he speaks) after that which
truly is, in an exact and exquisite life, (...), in a Conversation so studied
that it was in all things consonant with it self, in most unaffected gravity,
wonderful simplicity, and a countenance proportionable to the vigor and
strength of his Soul, or, in his own words, he had (...), a look that was not
one key below his intent and eager and sprightly Mind. If you look upon his
care of those things that were hoped for, and neglect of these things that are
seen, on his equal love to poor and rich; in these and such like things He
imitated the Wonders of Elijah. But if any man will needs urge us to strain a
little higher, and compare something in him to his fasting forty days; then
what say you to an every-days temperance? And if there must be something
answerable to his going up to Heaven in a fiery Chariot; then look upon the
other way of ascending thither, which is the best, (...) by an high
transcendent conversation in this world, whereby he made a Chariot of his
Virtues that he might ascend up unto God.

But that I may proceed in this Argument according to our former Method,

1. Let us first look upon him in his Eminency, Dignity and Worth. A very
glorious Star he was, and shone brighter in our eyes then any that he ever
looked upon when he took his view of the heavenly Bodies: and now he shines as
the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever, being wise
and having turned many (I believe) unto Righteousness.

I shall speak nothing of his Earthly parentage save only this, That herein he
was like to John the Baptist, the last Elias, in that he was born after his
Parents had been long childless and were grown aged. Some have observed that
such have proved very famous; for they seem to be sent on purpose by God into
the world to do good, and to be scarce begotten by their Parents. Such are
something like Isaac, who had a great blessing in him, and seem to be intended
by God for some great service and work in the world.

But let us look only at his Heavenly descent, and see how he was allied to God
himself; for, as the Poet says of Aeneas, -- Contingit sanguine Coelum.
I may say of him as Nazianzen says of his Sister, His Country was Heaven, his
Town or City was the Jerusalem which is above, his fellow-Citizens were the
Saints, his Nobility was (...), the retaining of the Divine impressions and
stamps upon his Soul, and being like to God the Archetype and First pattern of
all Goodness. And indeed the preserving of the Heavenly Symbols that are in our
Souls, and especially the purging and scowring of them from the corruption of
Nature, he often spoke of; and his endeavor was that the Divine image might be
fairly reflected in him, and that it might shine brightly in the face of others.

If I should speak much of the Vastness of his Learning (a thing not to be
passed by,) it would seem to say that I knew all he was; which I am not so
arrogant as to assume unto my self: This I will say, That he could do what he
would. He had such a huge, wide capacity of Soul, such a sharp and piercing
Understanding, such a deep reaching Mind, that he set himself about nothing but
he soon grasped it and made himself a full possessour of it. And if we consider
his great Industry and indefatigable pains, his Herculean labors day and night
from his * First April 5. 1636.
coming to the University till the time of his long sickness, joined with his
large Parts, and his frequent Meditation, Contemplation and Abstraction of his
Mind from Sensible things; it must needs be concluded that he was a
Comprehensour of more then I can say or think of; and if I could, it would be
too tedious to give you an account of all.

There is a Discourse which Charidemus (in Dion Chrysostom) makes to his
Friends a little Orat. 30.
before his death, How that this world is God's house, wherein a gallant
sumptuous Feast is prepared, and all men are his Guests: and how that there are
two waiters at the Table which fill out the wine to them that call for it; the
one a Man, the other a Woman; the one call (...) or Mind, from whose hand all
Wise men drink, the other (...) or Intemperance, who fills the cups of the
lovers of this world. In this House our beloved Friend deceased staid between
four and five and thirty years, and I am sure drank most large draughts from
the hand of the former; for he was a Man, he was a Mind, he had nothing of that
Woman in him, and never in the least was known to sipp of her cups. He was a
most laborious searcher after Wisdom, and never gave his Flesh the leisure to
please it self in those entertainments: and therefore we may be confident with
that Charidemus, that God has taken him to be his (...), his Friend and
Companion, to drink of the rivers of his pleasure. In a word, he was (...), In
vita Porphyrii.
as Eunapius speaks of Longinus, A living Library, better then that which he
has given to our College, and a walking Study, that carried his Learning about
with him. I never got so much good among all my Books by a whole days plodding
in a Study, as by an Hours discourse I have got with him. For he was not a
Library locked up, nor a Book clasped, but stood open for any to converse
withal that had a mind to learn. Yea he was a Fountain running over, laboring
to do good to those who perhaps had no mind to receive it. None more free and
communicative then he was to such as desired to discourse with him; nor would
he grudge to be taken off from his studies upon such an occasion. It may be
truly said of him, That a man might always come Better from him; and his
mouth could drop Sentences as easily as an ordinary man's could speak Sense.
And he was no less happy in expressing his Mind, then in conceiving; wherein he
seems to have excelled the famous Philosopher Plotin, of whom Porphyry tells
us, that he was something careless of his words, (...) but was wholly taken up
into his Mind. He of whom we now speak had such a copia verborum, a plenty of
words, and those so full, pregnant and significant, joined with such an active
Phansy, as is very rarely to be found in the company of such a deep
Understanding and Judgment as dwelt in him.

I have done with his Learning, when I have told you, That as he looked upon
Honors, Riches, and the eagerly-pursued things of this world, as Vanities; so
did he look upon this also as a piece, though a more excellent piece, of Vanity
(as he was wont to phrase it) if compared with the higher and more divine
accomplishments of the Soul. For he did not care to value himself by any of
those things which were of a perishing nature, which should fail and cease and
vanish away, but only by those things which were more solid and substantial, of
a Divine and Immortal nature, which he might carry out of the world with him;
to which my Discourse shall not be long before it descend.

He was of very singular Wisdom and great Prudence, of admirable skill and
readiness in the managery of affairs, which I make an account is an Imitation
of that Providence of God that governs the World. His Learning was so
concocted, that it lay not as an Idle notion in his Head, but made him fit for
any imploiment. He was very full and clear in all his Resolutions at any
debates, a most wise Counselor in any difficulties and streights, dextrous in
untying any knot, of great judgment in satisfying any scruple or doubt even in
matters of Religion. He was one that soon saw into the depth of any business
that was before him, and looked it quite through; that would presently turn it
over and over in his Mind and see it on all sides; and he understood things so
well at the First sight, that he did not often need any second thoughts, but
usually stood to the present resolution and determination of his Mind.

And add to this his known Integrity, Uprightness and Faithfulness; his strong
and lively, his waking and truly-tender Conscience, which joined with the
former things I spoke of made him more then a Man, -- (...), as men now go.
He was (as one of the Ancients speaks) (...), an Exemplar of true Christian
Philosophy and Virtue, and as it were the spiritual Rule, Line and Square
thereof: of so poized and even a life, that by his Wisdom and Conscience (were
it not that every man should know for himself) one might live almost at a
venture, walking blindfold through the world, and not miscarry.

He had incorporated, shall I say, or insoul'd all Principles of Justice and
Righteousness, and made them one with himself. So that I may say of him in
Antoninus his phrase, he was (...), dipped into Justice as it were Lib. 3.
over head and ears; he had not a slight superficial tincture, but was dyed
and colored quite through with it; so that wheresoever he had a Soul, there
was Justice and Righteousness. They who knew him, very well know the truth of
all this. And I am persuaded he did as heartily and cordially, as eagerly and
earnestly do what appeared to be Just and Right, without any Self-respect or
particular reflections, as any man living.

Methinks I see how earnest he would be in a good matter which appeared to be
Reasonable and Just, as though Justice her self had been in him, looking out at
his Eyes, and speaking at his Mouth. It was a Virtue indeed that he had a great
affection unto, and which he was very zealous to maintain; in whose quarrel he
was in danger to be angry, and sometimes to break forth into a short passion.

But he was always very urgent upon us that by the Grace of God and the help
of the mighty Spirit of Jesus Christ working in us, we would endeavor to purge
out the corruption of our Natures, and to crucify the Flesh with all the
affections and lusts thereof: yea to subdue as much as it is possible even the
(...) in our Souls, those first motions that are without our consent, and to
labor after Purity of heart, that so we might see God. For his endeavor was
not only to be (...), out of the pollutions of the world through lust, but, as
Plotin speaks, (...), to come to the true likeness of God and his Son, or, in
the Apostles language, to be partaker of the Divine nature. And here now what
words shall I use?

What shall I say of his Love? None that knew him well, but might see in him
(...) (as Nazianzen I think speaks) Love bubling and springing up in his Soul,
and flowing out to all; and that Love unfeigned, without guile, hypocrisy or
dissimulation. I cannot tell you how his Soul was Universaliz'd, how tenderly
he embraced all God's creatures in his arms, more especially Men, and
principally those in whom he beheld the Image of his heavenly Father. There one
might have seen running (...), and he would ever have emptied his Soul into
theirs. Let any that were thoroughly acquainted with him say if I lie. And truly
my Happiness is that I have such a subject to exercise my young and weak
Oratory upon, as will admit of little Hyperbole.

His Patience was no less admirable then his Love, under a lingering and
tedious disease, wherein he never murmured nor complained, but rested quietly
satisfied in the Infinite Unbounded Goodness and Tenderness of his Father, and
the Commiserations of Jesus Christ our merciful High Priest who can be touched
with a feeling of our infirmities. He still resolved with Job, Though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him. (...), says Nazianzen in an Epistle to
Philagrius, O bravely done most noble Soul, who can play the Philosopher, the
Christian, in thy sickness and sufferings; who can not only talk but do, not
only do but suffer! And he told me in his sickness that he hoped he had
learned that for which God sent it, and that he thought God kept him so long in
such a case, under such burdens and pressures, that Patience might have its
perfect work in him. His sickness undoubtedly was (...) (as Nazianzen speaks) a
learned disease and full of true Philosophy, which taught him more of real
Christianity, and made his Soul of a more strong, able, Athletick habit and
temper. For, as S. James says, if Patience have its perfect work, then is a
Soul perfect and entire, wanting nothing. And Chap. 1. 4.
really in his Sickness he showed what Christianity and True Religion is able
to do; what Might, Power and Virtue there is in it to bear up a Soul under the
greatest loads; and that he could through Christ strengthening him do all that
which he so admirably discoursed of in his life.

But for his Humility, it was that which was most apparent and conspicuous. You
might have beheld in him (...), (as the same Father speaks) true humility in a
most eminent degree, and the more eminent, considering how much there was
within him which would have swelled and puffed up another. But from his first
admission into the Universitie (as I am informed by those that knew him) he
sought not great things for himself, but was contented in the condition wherein
he was. He made not have to rise and climb, as youths are apt to do (which we
in these late times too much experience, wherein Youths scarce fledged have
soared to the highest preferments) but proceeded leisurely by orderly steps not
to what he could get, but to what he was fit to undertake. He stayed God's time
of advancement, with all industry and pains following his studies; as if he
rather desired to deserve honor, then to be honored. He shook off all
Idleness and Sloth, the bane of youth, and so had the Blessing of God upon his
endeavors, who gave him great encouragement from diverse persons of worth, and
at last brought him unto this place. And I challenge any one that is impartial
to say, if since he came hither, they ever beheld in him any Pride, Vainglory,
Boasting, Self-conceit, Desire of honor and being famous in the world. No,
there is not the man living that had the eyes ever to discern any thing of this
swollen nature: but on the contrary it was easy to take notice of most profound
Humility and Lowliness of mind, which made him a true Disciple of Jesus Christ,
who took upon him the form of a servant, and made himself of no reputation. And
I dare say our dear friend was as true, as humble a servant (without any
complement) to the good of Mankind, as any person that this day lives. This was
his design in his studies, and if it had pleased the Lord of life to have
prolonged his days, it would have been more of his work: For he was resolved
(as he once told me) very much to lay aside other studies, and to travel in the
salvation of men's Souls, after whose good he most ardently thirsted.

Shall I add (...) (as the Apostle speaks) above, or unto all these, his Faith;
I say, his true, Ephesians 6.
lively and working Faith, his simple, plain-hearted, naked Faith in Christ? It
is likely that it did not busy it self about many fine Notions, Subtilties and
Curiosities, or believing whole Volumes; but be sure it was that which was
firmly set and fixed in the Mercy and Goodness of God through Christ; that also
which brought down Christ into his Soul; which draw'd down Heaven into his
Heart; which sucked in life and strength continually from our Savior; which
made him hearty, serious and constant in all those forenamed Christian Virtues.
His Faith was not without a Soul; but what Isidore says of Faith and Works,
held true of him, (...), His Faith was animated, quickened Lib. 4. Ep. 65.
and actuated by these. It made him God-like, and he lived by Faith in the Son
of God; by it he came to be truly partaker of the Righteousness of Christ, and
had it wrought and formed in his very Soul. For this indeed was the End of his
life, the main design which he carried on, that he might become like to God. So
that if one should have asked him that Question in Antoninus, (...); what is
thy art and Lib. 11.
profession, thy business and imploiment? He would not have answered, To be a
great Philosopher, Mathematician, Historian or Hebrician, (all which he was in
great eminency) To be a Physician, Lawyer, General Linguist; which Names and
many more his General skill deserved: But he would have answered, as he does
there, (...), my Art is to be Good; To be a true Divine is my care and
business, or, in the Christian phrase, To be holy as God is holy, to be perfect
as my heavenly Father is perfect. All that remember the serious behavior and
weighty expressions he used in his Prayers, cannot but call to mind how much
his Heart was set upon the attainment of this true Goodness.

I have transgressed too much my bounds, now it is so late; and trespassed
perhaps too much upon your patience: Yet I hope I should not weary you, if I
should discourse upon his Ingenuity, his Courtesy, his Gentleness and
Sweetness, with many other things of the like nature. And let me say thus much,
that he was far from that Spirit of devouting zeal that now too much rages. He
would rather have been consumed in the service of men, then have called for
fire down from heaven, as Elijah did, to consume them. And therefore though
Elijah excelled him in this, that he ascended up to Heaven in a fiery chariot;
yet herein I may say he was above the spirit of Elijah, that he called for no
fire to descend from heaven upon men, but the fire of Divine love that might
burn up all their Hatreds, Roughness and Cruelty to each other. But as for
Benignity of Mind and Christian kindness, every body that knew him will
remember that he ever had their names in his mouth, and I assure them they were
no less in his heart and life; as knowing that without these Truth it self is
in a faction, and Christ is drawn into a party. And this Graciousness of Spirit
was the more remarkable in him, because he was of a temper naturally Hot and
Choleric, as the greatest Minds most commonly are. He was wiser then to let
any Anger rest in his bosom; much less did he suffer it to burn and boil til it
was turned into gall and bitterness; and least of all would he endure that any
Passion should lodge in him, till it was become a cankered Malice and black
Hatred, which men in these days can scarce hide, but let it appear in their
countenance and in their carriage toward others.

If he was at any time moved unto Anger, it was but a sudden flushing in his
face, and it did as soon vanish as arise; and it used to arise upon no such
occasions as I now speak of. No, whenever he looked upon the fierce and
consuming Fires that were in men's Souls, it made him sad, not angry; and it was
his constant endeavor to inspire men's Souls with more benign and kindly
heats, that they might warm but not scorch their Brethren.

And from this Spirit, together with the rest of Christian Graces that were in
him, there did result a great Serenity, Quiet and Tranquillity in his Soul,
which dwelt so much above, that it was not shaken with any of those Tempests
and Storms which use to unsettle more low and abject Minds. He lived in a
continued sweet enjoyment of God, and so was not disquieted with scruples or
doubts of his Salvation. There was always discernable in him a cheerful sense
of God's goodness, which ceased not in the time of sickness. But we most longed
for to see the motions of his Soul, when he drew near to the Center of his
rest. He that had such a constant feeling of God within him, we might conclude
would have the most strong and powerful sense when he came nearer to a close
conjunction with him. But God was pleased to deny this to us, and by a
Lethargick distemper which seized on his Spirits, he passed the six last days
of his life (if I may call it a life) in a kind of Sleep, and without taking
much notice of any thing he slept in the Lord.

And now have I not described a Person of Worth and Eminency? Have we not
reason to be so sad, as you see our Faces tell you that we are? But alas! half
of that is not told you which your Eyes might have seen, had you been
acquainted with him. I want thoughts and Words to make a lively pourtraiture of
him: my young Experience has not yet seen to the height or the depth of these
things which I have here given you a rude draught of; and so my Conceits and
Expressions must needs fall far below that excellent degree of beauty wherein
they dwelt in him. Let it suffice therefore to say (that I may keep to the word
in the Text) That he was truly a Father, that he wanted Ages only to make him
Reverend; and that if he had lived many Generations ago, and left us the
children of his Mind to posterity, he might by this time have been numbered
among the Fathers of the Church.

I have almost prevented my self already in the Two latter Particulars, His
singular Care, and his great Usefulness; both which must needs be concluded
from the former: His Care I say of others as a Tutor, his Usefullness as a
Fellow of this now mournful Society. Let me speak a word or two of either.

2. All his Pupils (who are now truly Pupilli, Fatherless children) began to
know in his sickness what it was to have and to want a loving Father, a
faithful Tutor; and now they will know it more fully. He was one that did so
constantly mind their good, that instilled such excellent pious Notions into
their Minds, and gave such light in everything a man could desire to know; that
I could have been content, though in this gown, to have been his Pupil. His
Life taught them continual lessons of Justice, Temperance, Prudence, Fortitude
and Masculine virtue; and above all he taught them true Dependence upon God,
and reference of themselves and all their Studies unto him; with true Faith in,
and Imitation of, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: for which end he often
expounded to them out of the Holy Scriptures. And for Humane learning, the many
good Scholars that came from under his hand do witness how dextrous he was at
the training up of Youth in all good Literature. Porphyry tells us of Plotin,
that he was such a careful person, that sundry Noble men and women with diverse
others, when they died, committed both their sons and daughters to his Tuition,
(...), as unto some Tutelar Angel, or a sacred and divine Guardian. Truly those
that come hither, are in a manner without Father and Mother; but they could not
be committed to a more loving Tutor, a more holy and faithful Guardian, that
would bring them up in all true Learning and Piety. If any think that he was
too severe, let me tell them that they are such as find fault with the Lion
(...), because he looks not like an Ape, but with a stern, royal and Kingly
countenance. He both looked and spoke like a man that had drunk into his Soul
such solid, high and generous Principles, as few men are acquainted with, which
made him very zealous not only for Righteousness, Integrity and Holiness, but
for a Decorum in all things. He had a great regard for all those things which
are mentioned by the Apostle, Philip. 4. 8. for whatsoever things were true,
honest, (or rather, comely and grave, seemly and venerable, as (...) does
signify) for all that was just, pure, lovely, of good fame and report; if
there was any praise, or any virtue, he was most earnest and forward in its
behalf.

3. And now what his Usefulness was, and the Benefit we received by him, all
that bear any share in the government of this Society will be made to know by
the want of him. There is not one but will cry out with Elisha, O the Chariot
of this place, and the horsemen thereof: which words seem to express what a
necessary man Elias was, and to be just like that of Horace to Lib. 2. Od. 17.
Maecenas when sick, which we may use concerning him that is now dead, Grande
decus, columenque rerum,
Our great glory, the pillar upon whose shoulders the weight of business of
late lay; O and praesidium and dulce decus meum,
(as he says in another place) O thou who wast both my safeguard and my
ornament! who wast a Society by thy self, a College in brief, what a loss have
we sustained by thy departure? That must not be resolved by me, nor by any one
single person of us, but we must all lay our heads together to tell our loss.
To which of us was not he dear? who is there that was not engaged to him? who
can think himself as wise as he was when we had him?

And this our high and dear Esteem of him when he was with us, leads me to
speak of that Honor and Reverence which we all express to his Name, that
Affection which is in our Hearts to his Memory, the sense that is in us of our
great and unspeakable loss; in Answer to those three foregoing Considerations
about Elisha. But here I must be very brief, and put all together. There is
none that knew his Worth, but honor his very dust. And for my part I honor
him so much, that I wish we might do as the Virgins of Israel did for
Jephtah's daughter, come once a year hither and lament his death; and so at
once we might express all these Three, our Respect, Affection and Sense of our
loss. His name is most worthy to be had in a more especial remembrance, and
highly deserves to be ranked among our Benefactors, he having endowed our
Library with all the Books that he had, and we wanted; and I have reason to
believe that if he had not been so suddenly surprised by those forgetful
Lethargick fits, he intended to bestow more upon us then his Books, which yet
were both many and choice ones, being above six hundred for number, and many of
them large and costly; and for the matter of them, many Hebrew Books, (besides
some Arabic) many Mathematick Books, many Books of History both Ancient and
Modern, as also of Philosophy and Philology both Sacred and Profane.

And whenever we commemorate his Love unto us, let it be with some Encomium:
let us mourn quod talem amiserimus, that we are deprived of such a person; but
let us rejoice and give thanks to God quod talem habuerimus, that we ever had
such an one who has done us so much good: they are the words of S. Hierom to
Nepotian, with a little alteration.

But let me tell you in conclusion of all, that herein would be shown our
greatest Love and Affection which we bare to him, this would be the greatest
Honor of him, if we would but express his life in ours; that others might say
when they behold us, There walks at least a shadow of Mr. Smith. And O that I
might beg with Elisha a double portion among those that I desire should share
in the gifts and graces of this Elijah: This is the highest of my ambition,
that many might but possess the riches that lodged in this one. They disgrace
their Master who have not skill in that which they say he professed; but they
who tread in his steps and excel in his Art, shine back again upon him from
whom first they received their light. Let me seriously therefore exhort every
one of us to imitate this Master in Israel: Imitate him in his Industry, if not
in his Learning; shake off all laziness and sloth; do not (...) embody and
enervate your Souls by Idleness and base neglect; do not emasculate them and
turn them into flesh by drowsiness or vain pleasures. Imitate his Temperance,
his Patience, his Fortitude, his Candor and Ingenuity, his Holiness and
Righteousness, his Faith and Love, his Charity and Humility, his Self-denial
and true Self-resignation to the will of God: in a word, all those Christian
Virtues which lived in him, let them live in us for ever. Let us die to the
world, as he did, before we die: let us separate our Souls from our Bodies and
all bodily things, before the time of our departure and separation come. Let us
take an especial heed lest we do (...), as most men do, lest we suffer this
lower and earthly world; lest we be drawn forcibly into its embraces, and so
held from rising aloft: but let us turn up our Minds continually to Heaven, and
earnestly desire pati Deum, to suffer God; to be mightily and strongly
attracted by him from all Earthy and Sensible delights to an admiration and
love of his Everlasting Beauty and Goodness. Let us labor to be so well
acquainted with Him, and all things of the Higher world, and so much disingaged
in our Affections from this and all that is in it, that when we come to go out
of this world, we may never look back and say, O what goodly things do I leave!
what a brave world am I snatched from! would I might but live a little longer
there! Let us get our Hearts so crucified to the world, that it may be an easy
thing to us to shake hands with, and bid a farewell to, our Friends (the dearest
things we have) our Lands, Houses, Goods and whatsoever is valuable in our
eyes. Let us use the world as though we used it not: let us dye daily, as our
dear Friend did; and so it was easy to him to dye at last. Dye did I say?
shall I use that word, or rather (...), he is flown away, (as Nazianzen speaks)
his Soul has got loose, and now feels her wings; or (...) he has changed his
habitation, he is gone into the other world, as Abraam went out of Ur into
Canaan; or as the same Father says, (...), he has taken his journey into
another country a little before his Body? He has left his Body behind him
awhile to take a sleep in the dust, and when it awakes at the Resurrection, it
shall follow also to the same place. Then shall it be made a Spiritual body,
then shall it have wings given to it also and be lovingly married again to the
Soul, never any more to suffer any separation. And at that time we shall all
meet with our dear Father and Friend again, who now are here remaining crying
out, O my Father, my father, etc. Then shall all tears be wiped away from our
eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither Rev. 21. 4.
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: Then we shall not
need such a Light as he was; for there is no night there, and they need no
candle, neither light of the Sun; for Rev. 22. 5.
the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever.

Amen.
Errata.
Page 53. lin. 27. for Beings read Being p. 57. l. ult. r. (...). p. 155. l. 6.
for lap us r. lap up. p. 245. l. 13. r. (...). p. 304. l. 24. r. (...) p. 340.
l. 5. for Self-examination r. Self-exinanition. l. 22. for assuring r.
assuming. p. 428. l. 32. r. Holy.

Books printed for, and sold by, W. Morden Bookseller in Cambridg.
ORigenes contra Celsum; Ejusdem Philocalia, cum Annotat. Gulielmi Spenceri,
4o. Scheyneri Fundamenta Optic. 4o. Officium Concionatorium, 4o. Medi opuscula.
Epicteti Enchiridion, cnm Cebetis Tabula. Accesserunt Arriani Comment. item
Porphyrius de Abstinentia, and de Vita Pythagorae, Ejusdem item Sentent. and de
Antro Nympharum, Vita deinde and Scripta Porphyrii a L. Holstenio, 8o. Gassendi
Astronomia; Cui accessere Galilaei Galilaei Nuncius Sidereus and Johannis
Kepleri Dioptrice, 8o. Sebast. Castellio. Dialogi 4 de Praedestinatione.
Electione. Libero Arbitrio. Fide and Justificatione.

Angelini Gazaei Pia Hilaria. Accessit Tomus alter cum Indice Philologico, 12.
Mores Antidote against Atheism. Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, or a Discourse of the
Nature, Causes, Kinds and Cures of Enthusiasm. His threefold Cabbal, Literal,
Philosophical, Mystical or Divinely Moral. Immortality of the Soul, 8o.
Billingsly's Idea of Arithmetic, 8o. 2 Sermons of Mr. Clerk, Fellow of
Peter-house.

